<doc id="40400" wikidata="Q34597" url="?curid=40400" title="James A. Garfield">
<text>James Abram Garfield (November 19, 1831 – September 19, 1881) was the 20th president of the United States, serving from March 1881 until his death in September that year after being shot two months earlier. A preacher, lawyer, and Civil War general, Garfield served nine terms in the United States House of Representatives and is the only sitting member of the House to be elected president. Before his candidacy for the presidency, he had been elected to the U.S. Senate by the Ohio General Assemblya position he declined when he became president-elect.

Garfield was born into poverty in a log cabin and grew up in northeastern Ohio. After graduating from Williams College in 1856, he studied law and became an attorney. He was a preacher in the Stone–Campbell Movement and president of the Western Reserve Eclectic Institute, affiliated with the Disciples. Garfield was elected as a Republican member of the Ohio State Senate in 1859, serving until 1861. He opposed Confederate secession, was a major general in the Union Army during the American Civil War, and fought in the battles of Middle Creek, Shiloh, and Chickamauga. He was elected to Congress in 1862 to represent Ohio&#x27;s 19th district. Throughout his congressional service, he firmly supported the gold standard and gained a reputation as a skilled orator. He initially agreed with Radical Republican views on Reconstruction but later favored a Moderate Republican–aligned approach to civil rights enforcement for freedmen. Garfield&#x27;s aptitude for mathematics extended to his own proof of the Pythagorean theorem, which he published in 1876.

At the 1880 Republican National Convention, delegates chose Garfield, who had not sought the White House, as a compromise presidential nominee on the 36th ballot. In the 1880 presidential election, he conducted a low-key front porch campaign and narrowly defeated the Democratic nominee, Winfield Scott Hancock. Garfield&#x27;s accomplishments as president included his assertion of presidential authority against senatorial courtesy in executive appointments, a purge of corruption in the Post Office, and his appointment of a Supreme Court justice. He advocated for agricultural technology, an educated electorate, and civil rights for African Americans. He also proposed substantial civil service reforms, which were passed by Congress in 1883 as the Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act and signed into law by his successor, Chester A. Arthur.

Garfield was a member of the intraparty &quot;Half-Breed&quot; faction who used the powers of the presidency to defy the powerful &quot;Stalwart&quot; Senator Roscoe Conkling from New York. He did this by appointing Blaine faction leader William H. Robertson to the lucrative post of Collector of the Port of New York. The ensuing political battle resulted in Robertson&#x27;s confirmation and the resignations of Conkling and Thomas C. Platt from the Senate.

On July 2, 1881, Charles J. Guiteau, a disappointed and delusional office seeker, shot Garfield at the Baltimore and Potomac Railroad Station in Washington. The wound was not immediately fatal, but an infection caused by his doctors&#x27; unsanitary methods in treating the wound killed Garfield on September 19. Due to his brief tenure in office, historians tend to rank Garfield as a below-average president or omit him entirely from rankings, though he has earned praise for anti-corruption and pro-civil rights stances.

==Childhood and early life==

James Abram Garfield was born the youngest of five children on November 19, 1831, in a log cabin in Orange Township, now Moreland Hills, Ohio. Garfield&#x27;s ancestor Edward Garfield migrated from Hillmorton, Warwickshire, England, to Massachusetts around 1630. James&#x27;s father Abram was born in Worcester, New York, and came to Ohio to woo his childhood sweetheart, Mehitabel Ballou, only to find her married. He instead wed her sister Eliza, who was born in New Hampshire. James was named after an earlier son of Eliza and Abram who had died in infancy.

In early 1833, Abram and Eliza Garfield joined a Stone-Campbell church, a decision that influenced their youngest son&#x27;s life. Abram died later that year, and James was raised in poverty in a household led by his strong-willed mother. He was her favorite child and the two remained close for the rest of his life. Eliza remarried in 1842, but soon left her second husband, Warren (or Alfred) Belden, and a scandalous divorce was awarded in 1850. James took his mother&#x27;s side in the matter and noted Belden&#x27;s 1880 death with satisfaction in his diary. Garfield also enjoyed his mother&#x27;s stories about his ancestry, especially those about his Welsh great-great-grandfathers and an ancestor who served as a knight of Caerphilly Castle.
Poor and fatherless, Garfield was mocked by his peers and became sensitive to slights throughout his life; he sought escape through voracious reading. He left home at age 16 in 1847 and was rejected for work on the only ship in port in Cleveland. Garfield instead found work on a canal boat, managing the mules that pulled it. Horatio Alger later used this labor to good effect when he wrote Garfield&#x27;s campaign biography in 1880.

After six weeks, illness forced Garfield to return home, and during his recuperation, his mother and a local school official secured his promise to forgo canal work for a year of school. In 1848, he began at Geauga Seminary, in nearby Chester Township, Geauga County, Ohio. Garfield later said of his childhood, &quot;I lament that I was born to poverty, and in this chaos of childhood, seventeen years passed before I caught any inspiration... a precious 17 years when a boy with a father and some wealth might have become fixed in manly ways.&quot;

==Education, marriage and early career==
Garfield attended Geauga Seminary from 1848 to 1850 and learned academic subjects for which he had not previously had time. He excelled as a student and was especially interested in languages and elocution. He began to appreciate the power a speaker had over an audience, writing that the speaker&#x27;s platform &quot;creates some excitement. I love agitation and investigation and glory in defending unpopular truth against popular error.&quot; Geauga was coeducational, and Garfield was attracted to one of his classmates, Lucretia Rudolph, whom he later married. To support himself at Geauga, he worked as a carpenter&#x27;s assistant and teacher. The need to go from town to town to find work as a teacher aggravated Garfield, and he developed a dislike of what he called &quot;place-seeking&quot;, which became, he said, &quot;the law of my life.&quot; In later years, he astounded his friends by disregarding positions that could have been his with little politicking. Garfield had attended church more to please his mother than to worship God, but in his late teens he underwent a religious awakening. He attended many camp meetings, which led to his being born again on March 4, 1850, when he was baptized into Christ by being submerged in the icy waters of the Chagrin River.

After he left Geauga, Garfield worked for a year at various jobs, including teaching jobs. Finding that some New Englanders worked their way through college, Garfield determined to do the same and sought a school that could prepare him for the entrance examinations. From 1851 to 1854, he attended the Western Reserve Eclectic Institute (later named Hiram College) in Hiram, Ohio, a school founded by and still affiliated with the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ). While there, he was most interested in the study of Greek and Latin but was inclined to learn about and discuss any new thing he encountered. Securing a position on entry as janitor, he obtained a teaching position while he was still a student there. Lucretia Rudolph also enrolled at the Institute and Garfield wooed her while teaching her Greek. He developed a regular preaching circuit at neighboring churches and, in some cases, earned one gold dollar per service. By 1854, Garfield had learned all the Institute could teach him and was a full-time teacher. Garfield then enrolled at Williams College in Williamstown, Massachusetts, as a third-year student; he received credit for two years&#x27; study at the Institute after passing a cursory examination. Garfield was also impressed with the college president, Mark Hopkins, who had responded warmly to Garfield&#x27;s letter inquiring about admission. He said of Hopkins, &quot;The ideal college is Mark Hopkins on one end of a log with a student on the other.&quot; Hopkins later said of Garfield in his student days, &quot;There was a large general capacity applicable to any subject. There was no pretense of genius, or alternation of spasmodic effort, but a satisfactory accomplishment in all directions.&quot; After his first term, Garfield was hired to teach penmanship to the students of nearby Pownal, Vermont, a post Chester A. Arthur previously held.

Garfield graduated Phi Beta Kappa from Williams in August 1856, was named salutatorian, and spoke at the commencement. His biographer Ira Rutkow writes that Garfield&#x27;s years at Williams gave him the opportunity to know and respect those of different social backgrounds, and that, despite his origin as an unsophisticated Westerner, socially conscious New Englanders liked and respected him. &quot;In short,&quot; Rutkow writes, &quot;Garfield had an extensive and positive first experience with the world outside the Western Reserve of Ohio.&quot;

Upon his return to Ohio, the degree from a prestigious Eastern college made Garfield a man of distinction. He returned to Hiram to teach at the Institute and in 1857 was made its principal, though he did not see education as a field that would realize his full potential. The abolitionist atmosphere at Williams had enlightened him politically, after which he began to consider politics as a career. He campaigned for Republican presidential candidate John C. Frémont in 1856. In 1858, he married Lucretia, and they had seven children, five of whom survived infancy. Soon after the wedding, he registered to read law at the office of attorney Albert Gallatin Riddle in Cleveland, though he did his studying in Hiram. He was admitted to the bar in 1861.

Local Republican leaders invited Garfield to enter politics upon the death of Cyrus Prentiss, the presumptive nominee for the local state senate seat. He was nominated at the party convention on the sixth ballot and was elected, serving from 1860 to 1861. Garfield&#x27;s major effort in the state senate was an unsuccessful bill providing for Ohio&#x27;s first geological survey to measure its mineral resources.

==Civil War==

After Abraham Lincoln&#x27;s election as president, several Southern states announced their secession from the Union to form a new government, the Confederate States of America. Garfield read military texts while anxiously awaiting the war effort, which he regarded as a holy crusade against the Slave Power. In April 1861, the rebels bombarded Fort Sumter, one of the South&#x27;s last federal outposts, beginning the Civil War. Although he had no military training, Garfield knew his place was in the Union Army.

At Governor William Dennison&#x27;s request, Garfield deferred his military ambitions to remain in the legislature, where he helped appropriate the funds to raise and equip Ohio&#x27;s volunteer regiments. When the legislature adjourned Garfield spent the spring and early summer on a speaking tour of northeastern Ohio, encouraging enlistment in the new regiments. Following a trip to Illinois to purchase muskets, Garfield returned to Ohio and, in August 1861, received a commission as a colonel in the 42nd Ohio Infantry regiment. The 42nd Ohio existed only on paper, so Garfield&#x27;s first task was to fill its ranks. He did so quickly, recruiting many of his neighbors and former students. The regiment traveled to Camp Chase, outside Columbus, Ohio, to complete training. During this period, on November 19, 1861, Garfield became a Freemason, at Magnolia Lodge, No. 20 in Columbus, Ohio, receiving the third degree after his military service was completed in 1864. In December, Garfield was ordered to bring the 42nd to Kentucky, where they joined the Army of the Ohio under Brigadier General Don Carlos Buell.

===Buell&#x27;s command===
Buell quickly assigned Garfield the task of driving Confederate forces out of eastern Kentucky, giving him the 18th Brigade for the campaign, which, besides his own 42nd, included the 40th Ohio Infantry, two Kentucky infantry regiments and two cavalry units. They departed Catlettsburg, Kentucky, in mid-December, advancing through the valley of the Big Sandy River. The march was uneventful until Union forces reached Paintsville, Kentucky, on January 6, 1862, where Garfield&#x27;s cavalry engaged the rebels at Jenny&#x27;s Creek. Confederate troops under Brigadier General Humphrey Marshall held the town in numbers roughly equal to Garfield&#x27;s own, but Garfield positioned his troops so as to deceive Marshall into believing the rebels were outnumbered. Marshall ordered his troops to withdraw to the forks of Middle Creek, on the road to Virginia, and Garfield ordered his troops to take up the pursuit. They attacked the rebel positions on January 9, 1862, in the Battle of Middle Creek, the only pitched battle Garfield commanded personally. At the fighting&#x27;s end, the Confederates withdrew from the field and Garfield sent his troops to Prestonsburg to reprovision.
In recognition of his success, Garfield was promoted to brigadier general. After Marshall&#x27;s retreat, Garfield&#x27;s command was the sole remaining Union force in eastern Kentucky and he announced that any men who had fought for the Confederacy would be granted amnesty if they returned to their homes, lived peaceably, and remained loyal to the Union. The proclamation was surprisingly lenient, as Garfield now believed the war was a crusade for eradication of slavery. Following a brief skirmish at Pound Gap, the last rebel units in the area were outflanked and retreated to Virginia.

Garfield&#x27;s promotion gave him command of the 20th Brigade of the Army of the Ohio, which received orders to join Major General Ulysses S. Grant&#x27;s forces as they advanced on Corinth, Mississippi, in early 1862. Before the 20th Brigade arrived, however, Confederate forces under General Albert Sidney Johnston surprised Grant&#x27;s men in their camps, driving them back. Garfield&#x27;s troops received word of the battle and advanced quickly, joining the rest of the army on the second day to drive the Confederates back across the field and into retreat. The action, later known as the Battle of Shiloh, was the bloodiest of the war to date; Garfield was exposed to fire for much of the day, but emerged uninjured. Major General Henry W. Halleck, Grant&#x27;s superior, took charge of the combined armies and advanced ponderously toward Corinth; when they arrived, the Confederates had fled.

That summer, Garfield suffered from jaundice and significant weight loss. He was forced to return home, where his wife nursed him back to health. While he was home, Garfield&#x27;s friends worked to gain him the Republican nomination for Congress, but he refused to campaign with the delegates. He returned to military duty that autumn and went to Washington to await his next assignment. During this period of idleness, a rumor of an extramarital affair caused friction in the Garfields&#x27; marriage until Lucretia eventually chose to overlook it. Garfield repeatedly received tentative assignments that were quickly withdrawn, to his frustration. In the meantime, he served on the court-martial of Fitz John Porter for his tardiness at the Second Battle of Bull Run. He was convinced of Porter&#x27;s guilt and voted with his fellow generals to convict Porter. The trial lasted almost two months, from November 1862 to January 1863, and, by its end, Garfield had procured an assignment as chief of staff to Major General William S. Rosecrans.

===Chief of staff for Rosecrans===

Generals&#x27; chiefs of staff were usually more junior officers, but Garfield&#x27;s influence with Rosecrans was greater than usual, with duties extending beyond communication of orders to actual management of his Army of the Cumberland. Rosecrans had a voracious appetite for conversation, especially when unable to sleep; in Garfield, he found &quot;the first well read person in the Army&quot; and the ideal candidate for discussions that ran deep into the night. They discussed everything, especially religion, and the two became close despite Garfield&#x27;s being 12 years his junior. Rosecrans, who had converted from Methodism to Roman Catholicism, softened Garfield&#x27;s view of his faith.

Garfield recommended that Rosecrans replace wing commanders Alexander McCook and Thomas Crittenden, as he believed they were ineffective, but Rosecrans ignored the suggestion. With Rosecrans, Garfield devised the Tullahoma Campaign to pursue and trap Confederate General Braxton Bragg in Tullahoma. After initial Union success, Bragg retreated toward Chattanooga, where Rosecrans stalled and requested more troops and supplies. Garfield argued for an immediate advance, in line with demands from Halleck and Lincoln. After a council of war and lengthy deliberations, Rosecrans agreed to attack.

At the ensuing Battle of Chickamauga on September 19 and 20, 1863, confusion among the wing commanders over Rosecrans&#x27;s orders created a gap in the lines, resulting in a rout of the right flank. Rosecrans concluded that the battle was lost and fell back on Chattanooga to establish a defensive line. Garfield, however, thought part of the army had held and, with Rosecrans&#x27;s approval, headed across Missionary Ridge to survey the scene. Garfield&#x27;s hunch was correct. Consequently, his ride became legendary and Rosecrans&#x27;s error reignited criticism about the latter&#x27;s leadership. While Rosecrans&#x27;s army had avoided disaster, they were stranded in Chattanooga, surrounded by Bragg&#x27;s army. Garfield sent a telegram to Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton alerting Washington to the need for reinforcements to avoid annihilation. Lincoln and Halleck responded to the request for reinforcements by sending 20,000 troops to Garfield by rail within nine days. In the meantime, Grant was promoted to command of the western armies and quickly replaced Rosecrans with George H. Thomas. Garfield was ordered to report to Washington, where he was promoted to major general. According to historian Jean Edward Smith, Grant and Garfield had a &quot;guarded relationship&quot; since Grant promoted Thomas, rather than Garfield, to command of the Army of the Cumberland after Rosecrans&#x27;s dismissal.

==Congressional career==

===Election in 1862; Civil War years===
While he served in the Army in early 1862, friends of Garfield approached him about running for Congress from Ohio&#x27;s newly redrawn and heavily Republican 19th district. He worried that he and other state-appointed generals would receive obscure assignments, and running for Congress would allow him to resume his political career. That the new Congress would not hold its first regular session until December 1863 allowed him to continue his war service for a time. Home on medical leave, he refused to campaign for the nomination, leaving that to political managers who secured it at the local convention in September 1862 on the eighth ballot. In the October general election, he defeated D.B. Woods by a two-to-one margin for a seat in the 38th Congress.

Days before his Congressional term began, Garfield lost his eldest daughter, three-year-old Eliza, and became anxious and conflicted, saying his &quot;desolation of heart&quot; might require his return to &quot;the wild life of the army.&quot; He also assumed that the war would end before his joining the House, but it had not, and he felt strongly that he belonged in the field, rather than in Congress. He also thought he could expect a favorable command, so he decided to see President Lincoln. During their meeting, Lincoln recommended he take his House seat, as there was an excess of generals and a shortage of administration congressmen, especially those with knowledge of military affairs. Garfield accepted this recommendation and resigned his military commission to do so.

Garfield met and befriended Treasury Secretary Salmon P. Chase, who saw Garfield as a younger version of himself. The two agreed politically and both were part of the Radical wing of the Republican Party. Once he took his seat in December 1863, Garfield was frustrated at Lincoln&#x27;s reluctance to press the South hard. Many radicals, led in the House by Pennsylvania&#x27;s Thaddeus Stevens, wanted rebel-owned lands confiscated, but Lincoln threatened to veto any bill that proposed to do so on a widespread basis. In debate on the House floor, Garfield supported such legislation and, discussing England&#x27;s Glorious Revolution, hinted that Lincoln might be thrown out of office for resisting it. Garfield had supported Lincoln&#x27;s Emancipation Proclamation and marveled at the &quot;strange phenomenon in the world&#x27;s history, when a second-rate Illinois lawyer is the instrument to utter words which shall form an epoch memorable in all future ages.&quot;

Garfield not only favored the abolition of slavery, but also believed the leaders of the rebellion had forfeited their constitutional rights. He supported the confiscation of Southern plantations and even exile or execution of rebellion leaders as a means to ensure a permanent end to slavery. Garfield felt Congress had an obligation &quot;to determine what legislation is necessary to secure equal justice to all loyal persons, without regard to color.&quot; He was more supportive of Lincoln when he took action against slavery.

Garfield showed leadership early in his congressional career; he was initially the only Republican vote to terminate the use of bounties in military recruiting. Some financially able recruits had used the bounty system to buy their way out of service (called commutation), which Garfield considered reprehensible. He gave a speech pointing out the flaws in the existing conscription law: 300,000 recruits had been called upon to enlist, but barely 10,000 had done so, with the remainder claiming exemption, providing money, or recruiting a substitute. Lincoln appeared before the Military Affairs committee on which Garfield served, demanding a more effective bill; even if it cost him reelection, Lincoln was confident he could win the war before his term expired. After many false starts, Garfield, with Lincoln&#x27;s support, procured the passage of a conscription bill that excluded commutation.

Under Chase&#x27;s influence, Garfield became a staunch proponent of a dollar backed by a gold standard, and strongly opposed the &quot;greenback&quot;. He also accepted the necessity of suspension of payment in gold or silver during the Civil War with strong reluctance. He voted with the Radical Republicans in passing the Wade–Davis Bill, designed to give Congress more authority over Reconstruction, but Lincoln defeated it with a pocket veto.

Garfield did not consider Lincoln very worthy of reelection, but there seemed to be no viable alternative. &quot;He will probably be the man, though I think we could do better&quot;, he said. Garfield attended the party convention and promoted Rosecrans as Lincoln&#x27;s running mate, but delegates chose Military Governor of Tennessee Andrew Johnson. Lincoln was reelected, as was Garfield. By then, Chase had left the Cabinet and been appointed Chief Justice, and his relations with Garfield became more distant.

Garfield took up the practice of law in 1865 to improve his personal finances. His efforts took him to Wall Street where, the day after Lincoln&#x27;s assassination, a riotous crowd drew him into an impromptu speech to calm their passions: &quot;Fellow citizens! Clouds and darkness are round about Him! His pavilion is dark waters and thick clouds of the skies! Justice and judgment are the establishment of His throne! Mercy and truth shall go before His face! Fellow citizens! God reigns, and the Government at Washington still lives!&quot; The speech, with no mention or praise of Lincoln, was, according to Garfield biographer Robert G. Caldwell, &quot;quite as significant for what it did not contain as for what it did.&quot; In the following years, Garfield had more praise for Lincoln; a year after Lincoln&#x27;s death, Garfield said, &quot;Greatest among all these developments were the character and fame of Abraham Lincoln,&quot; and in 1878 he called Lincoln &quot;one of the few great rulers whose wisdom increased with his power&quot;.

When in Washington, Garfield attended Vermont Avenue Christian Church, which later became National City Christian Church, a building constructed and funded by the Disciples.

===Reconstruction===
In 1864, the U.S. Senate passed the 13th Amendment, which abolished slavery throughout the Union. The bill failed to pass the House by a two-thirds majority until January 31, 1865, when it was then sent to the states for ratification. The Amendment opened other issues concerning African American civil rights. Garfield asked, &quot;[What] is freedom? Is it the bare privilege of not being chained?...If this is all, then freedom is a bitter mockery, a cruel delusion.&quot;

Garfield supported black suffrage as firmly as he supported abolition. President Johnson sought the rapid restoration of the Southern states during the months between his accession and the meeting of Congress in December 1865; Garfield hesitantly supported this policy as an experiment. Johnson, an old friend, sought Garfield&#x27;s backing and their conversations led Garfield to assume Johnson&#x27;s differences with Congress were not large. When Congress assembled in December (to Johnson&#x27;s chagrin, without the elected representatives of the Southern states, who were excluded), Garfield urged conciliation on his colleagues, although he feared that Johnson, a former Democrat, might join other Democrats to gain political control. Garfield foresaw conflict even before February 1866, when Johnson vetoed a bill to extend the life of the Freedmen&#x27;s Bureau, charged with aiding the former slaves. By April, Garfield had concluded that Johnson was either &quot;crazy or drunk with opium.&quot;
The conflict between Congress and President Johnson was the major issue of the 1866 campaign, with Johnson taking to the campaign trail in a Swing Around the Circle and Garfield facing opposition within the Republican party in his home district. With the South still disenfranchised and Northern public opinion behind the Republicans, they gained a two-thirds majority in both houses of Congress. Garfield, having overcome his challengers at the district nominating convention, won reelection easily.

Garfield opposed the proposed impeachment of Johnson initially when Congress convened in December 1866, but supported legislation to limit Johnson&#x27;s powers, such as the Tenure of Office Act, which restricted Johnson&#x27;s ability to remove presidential appointees. Distracted by committee duties, Garfield spoke about these bills rarely, but was a loyal Republican vote against Johnson.

On January 7, 1867, Garfield voted in support of the resolution that launched the first impeachment inquiry against Johnson (run by the House Committee on the Judiciary). On December 7, 1867, he voted against the unsuccessful resolution to impeach Johnson that the House Committee on the Judiciary had sent the full House. On January 27, 1868, he voted to pass the resolution that authorized the second impeachment inquiry against Johnson (run by the House Select Committee on Reconstruction). Due to a court case, he was absent on February 24, 1868, when the House impeached Johnson, but gave a speech aligning himself with Thaddeus Stevens and others who sought Johnson&#x27;s removal shortly thereafter. Garfield was present on March 2 and 3, 1868, when the House voted on specific articles of impeachment, and voted in support of all 11 articles. During the March 2 debate on the articles, Garfield argued that what he characterized as Johnson&#x27;s attempts to render Ulysses S. Grant, William Tecumseh Sherman, and William H. Emory personal tools of his demonstrated Johnson&#x27;s intent to disregard the law and override the Constitution, suggesting that Johnson&#x27;s trial perhaps could be expedited to last only a day in order to hasten his removal. When Johnson was acquitted in his trial before the Senate, Garfield was shocked and blamed the outcome on the trial&#x27;s presiding officer, Chief Justice Chase, his onetime mentor.

By the time Grant succeeded Johnson in 1869, Garfield had moved away from the remaining radicals (Stevens, their leader, had died in 1868). By this time, many in the Republican Party wanted to remove the &quot;Negro question&quot; from national affairs. Garfield hailed the ratification of the 15th Amendment in 1870 as a triumph and favored Georgia&#x27;s readmission to the Union as a matter of right, not politics. An influential Republican, Garfield said, &quot;[The] Fifteen Amendment confers on the African race the care of its own destiny. It places their fortunes in their own hands.&quot; In 1871, Congress took up the Ku Klux Klan Act, which was designed to combat attacks on African Americans&#x27; suffrage rights. Garfield opposed the act, saying, &quot;I have never been more perplexed by a piece of legislation.&quot; He was torn between his indignation at the Klan, whom he called &quot;terrorists&quot;, and his concern for the power given the president to enforce the act through suspension of habeas corpus.

===Tariffs and finance===

Throughout his political career, Garfield favored the gold standard and decried attempts to increase the money supply through the issuance of paper money not backed by gold, and later, through the free and unlimited coinage of silver. In 1865, he was put on the House Ways and Means Committee, a long-awaited opportunity to focus on financial and economic issues. He reprised his opposition to the greenback, saying, &quot;Any party which commits itself to paper money will go down amid the general disaster, covered with the curses of a ruined people.&quot; In 1868 Garfield gave a two-hour speech on currency in the House, which was widely applauded as his best oratory to that point; in it, he advocated a gradual resumption of specie payments, that is, the government paying out silver and gold, rather than paper money that could not be redeemed.

Tariffs had been raised to high levels during the Civil War. Afterward, Garfield, who made a close study of financial affairs, advocated moving toward free trade, though the standard Republican position was a protective tariff that would allow American industries to grow. This break with his party likely cost him his place on the Ways and Means Committee in 1867, and though Republicans held the majority in the House until 1875, Garfield remained off that committee. Garfield came to chair the powerful House Appropriations Committee, but it was Ways and Means, with its influence over fiscal policy, that he really wanted to lead. One reason he was denied a place on Ways and Means was the opposition of the influential Republican editor Horace Greeley.

Starting in January 1870, Garfield, then chairman of the House Banking Committee, led an investigation into the Black Friday Gold Panic scandal. In 1869, during Grant&#x27;s first term in office, two New York conspirators, Jay Gould and James Fisk, launched a scheme to corner the gold market. The conspiracy was broken on Friday, September 24, 1869, when Grant and Treasury Secretary George Boutwell released gold into the market, causing widespread financial panic. During the investigation, rumors spread that Grant&#x27;s family might have been involved. In order not to force Grant&#x27;s wife to testify, Garfield had a private meeting with Grant at the White House. When Garfield showed Grant testimony about him and his family, Grant thanked Garfield but refused to read it or give a response. Grant personally resented Garfield for investigating Black Friday and his wife Julia concerning possible involvement in the scandal.

Garfield&#x27;s investigation and final majority report, released on September 12, 1870, were thorough but found no indictable offenses and exonerated Grant and Julia of wrongdoing. Garfield thought the scandal was enabled by the greenbacks that financed the speculation. Garfield was not at all enthused about President Grant&#x27;s reelection in 1872—until Greeley, who emerged as the candidate of the Democrats and Liberal Republicans, became the only serious alternative. Garfield said, &quot;I would say Grant was not fit to be nominated and Greeley is not fit to be elected.&quot; Both Grant and Garfield were overwhelmingly reelected.

===Crédit Mobilier scandal; salary grab===
The Crédit Mobilier of America scandal involved corruption in the financing of the Union Pacific Railroad, part of the transcontinental railroad which was completed in 1869. Union Pacific officers and directors secretly purchased control of the Crédit Mobilier of America company, then contracted with it to undertake construction of the railroad. The railroad paid the company&#x27;s grossly inflated invoices with federal funds appropriated to subsidize the project, and the company was allowed to purchase Union Pacific securities at par value, well below the market rate. Crédit Mobilier showed large profits and stock gains, and distributed substantial dividends. The high expenses meant Congress was called upon to appropriate more funds. One of the railroad officials who controlled Crédit Mobilier was also a congressman, Oakes Ames of Massachusetts. He offered some of his colleagues the opportunity to buy Crédit Mobilier stock at par value, well below what it sold for on the market, and the railroad got its additional appropriations.

The story broke in July 1872, in the middle of the presidential campaign. Among those named were Vice President Schuyler Colfax, Massachusetts Senator Henry Wilson (the Republican candidate for vice president), Speaker James G. Blaine of Maine, and Garfield. Greeley had little luck taking advantage of the scandal. When Congress reconvened after the election, Blaine, seeking to clear his name, demanded a House investigation. Evidence before the special committee exonerated Blaine. Garfield had said in September 1872 that Ames had offered him stock but he had repeatedly refused it. Testifying before the committee in January, Ames said he had offered Garfield ten shares of stock at par value, but that Garfield had never taken them or paid for them, though a year passed, from 1867 to 1868, before Garfield had finally refused. Appearing before the committee on January 14, 1873, Garfield confirmed much of this. Ames testified several weeks later that Garfield agreed to take the stock on credit, and that it was paid for by the company&#x27;s huge dividends. The two men differed over $300 that Garfield received and later paid back, with Garfield deeming it a loan and Ames a dividend.

Garfield&#x27;s biographers have been unwilling to exonerate him in the scandal. Allan Peskin writes, &quot;Did Garfield lie? Not exactly. Did he tell the truth? Not completely. Was he corrupted? Not really. Even Garfield&#x27;s enemies never claimed that his involvement in the affair influenced his behavior.&quot; Rutkow writes, &quot;Garfield&#x27;s real offense was that he knowingly denied to the House investigating committee that he had agreed to accept the stock and that he had also received a dividend of $329.&quot; Caldwell suggests Garfield &quot;told the truth [before the committee, but] certainly failed to tell the whole truth, clearly evading an answer to certain vital questions and thus giving the impression of worse faults than those of which he was guilty.&quot; That Crédit Mobilier was a corrupt organization had been a badly kept secret, even mentioned on the floor of Congress, and editor Sam Bowles wrote at the time that Garfield, in his positions on committees dealing with finance, &quot;had no more right to be ignorant in a matter of such grave importance as this, than the sentinel has to snore on his post.&quot;

Another issue that caused Garfield trouble in his 1874 reelection bid was the so-called &quot;Salary Grab&quot; of 1873, which increased the compensation for members of Congress by 50%, retroactive to 1871. As chairman of the Appropriations Committee, Garfield was responsible for shepherding the appropriations bill through the House; during the debate in February 1873, Massachusetts Representative Benjamin Butler offered the increase as an amendment, and despite Garfield&#x27;s opposition, it passed the House and eventually became law. The law was very popular in the House, as almost half the members were lame ducks, but the public was outraged, and many of Garfield&#x27;s constituents blamed him, though he personally refused to accept the increase. In a bad year for Republicans, who lost control of the House for the first time since the Civil War, Garfield had his closest congressional election, winning with only 57% of the vote.

===Floor leader; Hayes administration===

The Democratic takeover of the House of Representatives in 1875 meant the loss of Garfield&#x27;s chairmanship of the Appropriations Committee, though the Democrats did put him on the Ways and Means Committee. With many of his leadership rivals defeated in the 1874 Democratic landslide, and Blaine elected to the Senate, Garfield was seen as the Republican floor leader, and the likely Speaker, should the party regain control of the chamber.

Garfield thought the land grants given to expanding railroads was an unjust practice. He also opposed monopolistic practices by corporations, as well as the power sought by workers&#x27; unions. He supported the proposed establishment of the United States civil service as a means of ridding officials of the annoyance of aggressive office seekers. He especially wished to eliminate the practice of forcing government workers, in exchange for their positions, to kick back a percentage of their wages as political contributions.

As the 1876 presidential election approached, Garfield was loyal to the candidacy of Senator Blaine, and fought for the former Speaker&#x27;s nomination at the 1876 Republican National Convention in Cincinnati. When it became clear, after six ballots, that Blaine could not prevail, the convention nominated Ohio Governor Rutherford B. Hayes. Although Garfield had supported Blaine, he had kept good relations with Hayes, and wholeheartedly supported the governor. Garfield had hoped to retire from politics after his term expired to devote himself full-time to the practice of law, but to help his party, he sought re-election, and won it easily that October. Any celebration was short-lived, as Garfield&#x27;s youngest son, Neddie, fell ill with whooping cough shortly after the congressional election, and soon died.
When Hayes appeared to have lost the presidential election the following month to Democrat Samuel Tilden, the Republicans launched efforts to reverse the results in South Carolina, Louisiana, and Florida, where they held the governorship. If Hayes won all three states, he would take the election by a single electoral vote. Grant asked Garfield to serve as a &quot;neutral observer&quot; of the recount in Louisiana. The observers soon recommended to the state electoral commissions that Hayes be declared the winner—Garfield recommended the entire vote of West Feliciana Parish, which had given Tilden a sizable majority, be thrown out. The Republican governors of the three states certified that Hayes had won their states, to the outrage of Democrats, who had the state legislatures submit rival returns, and threatened to prevent the counting of the electoral vote—under the Constitution, Congress is the final arbiter of the election. Congress then established an Electoral Commission, consisting of eight Republicans and seven Democrats, to determine the winner. Despite his objection to the Commission, Garfield was appointed to it. He felt Congress should count the vote and proclaim Hayes victorious. Hayes emerged the victor by a party line vote of 8–7. In exchange for recognizing Hayes as president, Southern Democrats secured the removal of federal troops from the South, ending Reconstruction.

Although an Ohio Senate seat would be vacated by the resignation of John Sherman to become Treasury Secretary, Hayes needed Garfield&#x27;s expertise to protect him from the agenda of a hostile Congress, and asked him not to seek it. Garfield agreed. As Hayes&#x27;s key legislator in the House, he gained considerable prestige and respect for his role there. When Congress debated the Bland–Allison Act, to have the government purchase large quantities of silver and strike it into legal tender dollar coins, Garfield opposed it as a deviation from the gold standard; it was enacted over Hayes&#x27;s veto in February 1878.

In 1876, Garfield purchased the property in Mentor that reporters later dubbed Lawnfield, where he conducted the first successful front porch campaign for the presidency. Hayes suggested that Garfield run for governor in 1879, seeing that as a road likely to take Garfield to the White House. Garfield preferred to seek election as a U.S. senator. Rivals were spoken of for the seat, such as Secretary Sherman, but he had presidential ambitions (for which he sought Garfield&#x27;s support), and other candidates fell by the wayside. The General Assembly elected Garfield to the Senate in January 1880, though his term was not scheduled to commence until March 4, 1881.

===Legal career and other activities===
In 1865, Garfield became a partner in the law firm of a fellow Disciple of Christ, Jeremiah Black. They had much in common, except politics: Black was an avid Democrat, having served in the cabinet of President James Buchanan. The next year, Black was retained by some pro-Confederate northern civilians who had been found guilty of treason in a military court and sentenced to death. Black saw an opportunity to strike a blow against military courts and the Republicans. He had heard Garfield&#x27;s military speeches, and learned of not only his oratory skills but also his resistance to expansive powers of military commissions. Black assigned the case to Garfield one week before arguments were to be made before the U. S. Supreme Court. When Black warned him of the political peril, Garfield responded, &quot;It don&#x27;t make any difference. I believe in English liberty and English law.&quot; In this landmark case, &quot;Ex parte Milligan,&quot; Garfield successfully argued that civilians could not be tried before military tribunals, despite a declaration of martial law, as long as civil courts were still operating. In his first court appearance, Garfield&#x27;s oral argument lasted over two hours, and though his wealthy clients refused to pay him, he had established himself as a preeminent lawyer.

During Grant&#x27;s first term, Garfield was discontented with public service and in 1872 again pursued opportunities in the law. But he declined a partnership offer from a Cleveland law firm when told his prospective partner was of &quot;intemperate and licentious&quot; reputation. In 1873, after Chase&#x27;s death, Garfield appealed to Grant to appoint Justice Noah H. Swayne Chief Justice, but Grant appointed Morrison R. Waite.

In 1871, Garfield traveled to Montana Territory to negotiate the removal of the Bitterroot Salish tribe to the Flathead Indian Reservation. Having been told that the people would happily move, Garfield expected an easy task. Instead, he found the Salish determined to stay in their Bitterroot Valley homeland. His attempts to coerce Chief Charlo to sign the agreement nearly brought about a military clash. In the end, he convinced two subchiefs to sign and move to the reservation with a few of the Salish people. Garfield never convinced Charlo to sign, although the official treaty document voted on by Congress bore his forged mark.

In 1876, Garfield developed a trapezoid proof of the Pythagorean theorem, which was published in the &quot;New England Journal of Education&quot;. Mathematics historian William Dunham wrote that Garfield&#x27;s trapezoid work was &quot;really a very clever proof.&quot; According to the &quot;Journal&quot;, Garfield arrived at the proof &quot;in mathematical amusements and discussions with other members of congress.&quot;

After his conversion experience in 1850, religious inquiry was a high priority for Garfield. He read widely and moved beyond the confines of his early experience as a member of the Disciples of Christ. His new, broader perspective was rooted in his devotion to freedom of inquiry and his study of history. The intensity of Garfield&#x27;s religious thought was also influenced by his experience in combat and his interaction with voters.

==Presidential election of 1880==
===Republican nomination===

Having just been elected to the Senate with John Sherman&#x27;s support, Garfield was committed to Sherman for the 1880 Republican presidential nomination. Before the convention began, however, a few Republicans, including Wharton Barker of Philadelphia, thought Garfield the best choice for the nomination. Garfield denied any interest in the position, but the attention was enough to make Sherman suspicious of his lieutenant&#x27;s ambitions. Besides Sherman, the early favorites for the nomination were Blaine, former President Grant; several other candidates attracted delegates as well.

The Republican Party at the time was split into two factions: the &quot;Stalwarts&quot;, who supported the existing federal government patronage system, and the &quot;Half-Breeds&quot;, who wanted civil service reform. As the convention began, New York Senator Roscoe Conkling, floor leader for the Stalwarts, who supported former President Ulysses S. Grant, proposed that the delegates pledge to back the eventual nominee in the general election. When three West Virginia delegates declined to be so bound, Conkling sought to expel them from the convention. Garfield rose to defend the men, giving a passionate speech in defense of their right to reserve judgment. The crowd turned against Conkling, and he withdrew the motion. The performance delighted Garfield&#x27;s boosters, who were then convinced he was the only one who could attract a majority of the delegates&#x27; votes.

After speeches in favor of the other front-runners, Garfield rose to place Sherman&#x27;s name in nomination; his speech was well-received, but the delegates mustered little excitement for Sherman as the next president. The first ballot showed Grant leading with 304 votes to Blaine&#x27;s 284, and Sherman&#x27;s 93 votes placed him in a distant third. Subsequent ballots demonstrated a deadlock between Grant and Blaine, with neither having the 379 votes needed for nomination. Jeremiah McLain Rusk, a member of the Wisconsin delegation, and Benjamin Harrison, an Indiana delegate, sought to break the deadlock by shifting a few of the anti-Grant votes to a dark horse candidate—Garfield. Garfield gained 50 votes on the 35th ballot, and a stampede began. Garfield protested to the Ohio delegation that he did not seek the nomination and would not betray Sherman, but they overruled his objections and cast their ballots for him. In the next round of voting, nearly all the Sherman and Blaine delegates shifted their support to Garfield, giving him 399 votes, and the Republican nomination. Most of the Grant forces backed the former president to the end, creating a disgruntled Stalwart minority in the party. To obtain that faction&#x27;s support for the ticket, Chester A. Arthur, a former New York customs collector and member of Conkling&#x27;s political machine, was chosen as the vice presidential nominee.

===Campaign against Hancock===
Even with a Stalwart on the ticket, animosity between the Republican factions carried over from the convention, so Garfield traveled to New York to meet with party leaders. After convincing the Stalwart crowd to put aside their differences and unite for the coming campaign, Garfield returned to Ohio, leaving the active campaigning to others, as was traditional at the time. Meanwhile, the Democrats settled on their nominee, Major General Winfield Scott Hancock of Pennsylvania, a career military officer. Hancock and the Democrats expected to carry the Solid South, while much of the North was considered safe territory for Garfield and the Republicans; most of the campaign focused on a few close states, including New York and Indiana.

Practical differences between the candidates were few, but Republicans began the campaign with the familiar theme of waving the bloody shirt. They reminded Northern voters the Democratic Party was responsible for secession and four years of civil war, and Democrats would reverse the gains of that war, dishonor Union veterans, and pay Confederate veterans pensions out of the federal treasury. Fifteen years had passed since the end of the war, and with Union generals at the head of both tickets, the bloody shirt was of diminishing value in exciting the voters. With a few months to go before the election, the Republicans switched tactics to emphasize the tariff. Seizing on the Democratic platform&#x27;s call for a &quot;tariff for revenue only&quot;, Republicans told Northern workers a Hancock presidency would weaken the tariff protection that kept them in good jobs. Hancock made the situation worse when, attempting to strike a moderate stance, he said, &quot;The tariff question is a local question.&quot; The Republican ploy proved effective in uniting the North behind Garfield. Ultimately, of the more than 9.2million popular votes cast, fewer than 2,000 separated the two candidates. But in the Electoral College, Garfield had an easy victory over Hancock, 214 to 155. The election made Garfield the only sitting member of the House ever to be elected to the presidency.

==Presidency (1881)==


===Cabinet and inauguration===
Before his inauguration, Garfield was occupied with assembling a cabinet that might engender peace between the party&#x27;s Conkling and Blaine factions. Blaine&#x27;s delegates had provided much of the support for Garfield&#x27;s nomination, so the Maine senator received the place of honor as Secretary of State. Blaine was not only the president&#x27;s closest advisor, but he was also obsessed with knowing all that took place in the White House, and allegedly posted spies there in his absence. Garfield nominated William Windom of Minnesota as Secretary of the Treasury, William H. Hunt of Louisiana as Secretary of the Navy, Robert Todd Lincoln as Secretary of War, and Samuel J. Kirkwood of Iowa as Secretary of the Interior. New York was represented by Thomas Lemuel James as Postmaster General. Garfield appointed Pennsylvania&#x27;s Wayne MacVeagh, an adversary of Blaine&#x27;s, as Attorney General. Blaine tried to sabotage the appointment by convincing Garfield to name an opponent of MacVeagh, William E. Chandler, as Solicitor General under MacVeagh. Only Chandler&#x27;s rejection by the Senate forestalled MacVeagh&#x27;s resignation over the matter.

Because Garfield was distracted by cabinet maneuvering, his inaugural address was a &quot;compendium of platitudes&quot; and fell below expectations. At one high point, however, Garfield emphasized the civil rights of African-Americans, saying &quot;Freedom can never yield its fullness of blessings so long as the law or its administration places the smallest obstacle in the pathway of any virtuous citizen.&quot; After discussing the gold standard, the need for education, and an unexpected denunciation of Mormon polygamy, the speech ended. The crowd applauded, but the speech, according to Peskin, &quot;however sincerely intended, betrayed its hasty composition by the flatness of its tone and the conventionality of its subject matter.&quot;

Garfield&#x27;s appointment of James infuriated Conkling, a factional opponent of the Postmaster General, who demanded a compensatory appointment for his faction, such as the position of Secretary of the Treasury. The resulting squabble occupied much of Garfield&#x27;s brief presidency. The feud with Conkling reached a climax when the president, at Blaine&#x27;s instigation, nominated Conkling&#x27;s enemy, Judge William H. Robertson, to be Collector of the Port of New York. This was one of the prize patronage positions below cabinet level and was then held by Edwin A. Merritt. Conkling raised the time-honored principle of senatorial courtesy in an attempt to defeat the nomination, to no avail. Garfield, who believed the practice was corrupt, would not back down and threatened to withdraw all nominations unless Robertson was confirmed, intending to &quot;settle the question whether the president is registering clerk of the Senate or the Executive of the United States.&quot; Ultimately, Conkling and his New York colleague, Senator Thomas C. Platt, resigned their Senate seats to seek vindication but found only further humiliation when the New York legislature elected others in their places. Robertson was confirmed as Collector and Garfield&#x27;s victory was clear. To Blaine&#x27;s chagrin, the victorious Garfield returned to his goal of balancing the interests of party factions and nominated a number of Conkling&#x27;s Stalwart friends to offices.

With his cabinet complete, Garfield had to contend with myriad office seekers. He exclaimed, &quot;My God! What is there in this place that a man should ever get into it.&quot; Garfield&#x27;s family happily settled into the White House, but he found presidential duties exasperating.

===Refinance of national debt===
Garfield ordered Treasury Secretary William Windom to refund (&quot;refinance&quot;) the national debt by calling in outstanding U.S. bonds paying 6% interest. Holders would have the option of accepting cash or new bonds at 3%, closer to the interest rates of the time. Taxpayers were saved an estimated $10 million. By comparison, federal expenditures in 1881 were below $261 million (~$ in ).

===Supreme Court nomination===
In 1880, President Hayes had nominated Stanley Matthews to the Supreme Court but the Senate declined to act on the nomination. In March 1881, Garfield re-nominated Matthews to the Court and the Senate confirmed Matthews by a vote of 24–23. According to &quot;The New York Times&quot;, &quot;opposition to Matthews&#x27;s Supreme Court appointment... stemmed from his prosecution in 1859 of a newspaper editor who had assisted two runaway slaves.&quot; Because Matthews was &quot;a professed abolitionist at the time, the matter was later framed as political expediency triumphing over moral principle.&quot; Matthews served on the Court until his death in 1889.

===Reforms===
Grant and Hayes had both advocated civil service reform, and by 1881 such reform associations had organized with renewed energy across the nation. Garfield sympathized with them, believing the spoils system damaged the presidency and often eclipsed more important concerns. Some reformers became disappointed when Garfield promoted limited tenure only to minor office seekers and gave appointments to his old friends.

Corruption in the post office also cried out for reform. In April 1880, there had been a congressional investigation of corruption in the Post Office Department, where profiteering rings allegedly stole millions of dollars, securing bogus mail contracts on star routes. After obtaining contracts with the lowest bid, costs to run the mail routes would be escalated and profits would be divided among ring members. Shortly after taking office, Garfield received word of postal corruption by an alleged star route ringleader, Assistant Postmaster General Thomas J. Brady. Garfield demanded Brady&#x27;s resignation and ordered prosecutions that ended in trials for conspiracy. When told that his party, including his campaign manager, Stephen W. Dorsey, was involved, Garfield directed that the corruption in the Post Office be rooted out &quot;to the bone&quot;, regardless of where it might lead. Brady resigned and was indicted for conspiracy, though jury trials in 1882 and 1883 found Brady not guilty.

===Civil rights and education===

Garfield believed the key to improving the state of African American civil rights was government supported education. During Reconstruction, freedmen had gained citizenship and suffrage, which enabled them to participate in government, but Garfield believed their rights were being eroded by Southern white resistance and illiteracy, and he was concerned that blacks would become America&#x27;s permanent &quot;peasantry&quot;. He proposed a &quot;universal&quot; education system funded by the federal government. In February 1866, as a congressman from Ohio, Garfield and Ohio School Commissioner Emerson Edward White had drafted a bill for the National Department of Education. They believed that through the use of statistics they could push the US Congress to establish a federal agency for school reform. But by the time of Garfield&#x27;s presidency, Congress and the northern white public had lost interest in African-American rights, and Congress did not pass federal funding for universal education during his term. Garfield also worked to appoint several African Americans to prominent positions: Frederick Douglass, recorder of deeds in Washington; Robert Elliot, special agent to the Treasury; John M. Langston, Haitian minister; and Blanche K. Bruce, register to the Treasury. Garfield believed Southern support for the Republican Party could be gained by &quot;commercial and industrial&quot; interests rather than race issues and began to reverse Hayes&#x27;s policy of conciliating Southern Democrats. He appointed William H. Hunt, a Republican from Louisiana, as Secretary of the Navy. To break the hold of the resurgent Democratic Party in the Solid South, Garfield took patronage advice from Virginia Senator William Mahone of the biracial independent Readjuster Party, hoping to add the independents&#x27; strength to the Republicans&#x27; there.

===Foreign policy and naval reform===
Garfield had little foreign policy experience, so he leaned heavily on Blaine. They agreed on the need to promote freer trade, especially within the Western Hemisphere. Garfield and Blaine believed increasing trade with Latin America would be the best way to keep the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland from dominating the region. And by encouraging exports, they believed they could increase American prosperity. Garfield authorized Blaine to call for a Pan-American conference in 1882 to mediate disputes among the Latin American nations and to serve as a forum for talks on increasing trade.

At the same time, they hoped to negotiate a peace in the War of the Pacific then being fought by Bolivia, Chile, and Peru. Blaine favored a resolution that would result in Peru yielding no territory, but Chile by 1881 had occupied the Peruvian capital of Lima, and rejected any settlement that restored the previous &quot;status quo&quot;.

Garfield sought to expand American influence in other areas, calling for renegotiation of the Clayton–Bulwer Treaty to allow the United States to construct a canal through Panama without British involvement and attempting to reduce British influence in the strategically located Kingdom of Hawaii. Garfield&#x27;s and Blaine&#x27;s plans for the United States&#x27; involvement in the world stretched even beyond the Western Hemisphere, as he sought commercial treaties with Korea and Madagascar. Garfield also considered enhancing U.S. military strength abroad, asking Navy Secretary Hunt to investigate the navy&#x27;s condition with an eye toward expansion and modernization. In the end, these ambitious plans came to nothing after Garfield was assassinated. Nine countries had accepted invitations to the Pan-American conference, but the invitations were withdrawn in April 1882 after Blaine resigned from the cabinet and Arthur, Garfield&#x27;s successor, cancelled the conference. Naval reform continued under Arthur, on a more modest scale than Garfield and Hunt had envisioned, ultimately ending in the construction of the Squadron of Evolution.

==Assassination==

===Guiteau and shooting===

Charles J. Guiteau had followed various professions in his life, but in 1880 had determined to gain federal office by supporting what he expected would be the winning Republican ticket. He composed a speech, &quot;Garfield vs. Hancock&quot;, and got it printed by the Republican National Committee. One means of persuading the voters in that era was through orators expounding on the candidate&#x27;s merits, but with the Republicans seeking more famous men, Guiteau received few opportunities to speak. On one occasion, according to Kenneth D. Ackerman, Guiteau was unable to finish his speech due to nerves. Guiteau, who considered himself a Stalwart, deemed his contribution to Garfield&#x27;s victory sufficient to justify his appointment to the position of consul in Paris, despite the fact that he spoke no French, nor any foreign language. One medical expert has since described Guiteau as possibly a narcissistic schizophrenic; neuroscientist Kent Kiehl assessed him as a clinical psychopath.

One of Garfield&#x27;s more wearying duties was seeing office-seekers, and he saw Guiteau at least once. White House officials suggested to Guiteau that he approach Blaine, as the consulship was within the Department of State. Blaine also saw the public regularly, and Guiteau became a regular at these sessions. Blaine, who had no intention of giving Guiteau a position he was unqualified for and had not earned, simply said the deadlock in the Senate over Robertson&#x27;s nomination made it impossible to consider the Paris consulship, which required Senate confirmation. Once the New York senators had resigned, and Robertson had been confirmed as Collector, Guiteau pressed his claim, and Blaine told him he would not receive the position.

Guiteau came to believe he had lost the position because he was a Stalwart. He decided the only way to end the Republican Party&#x27;s internecine warfare was for Garfield to die—though he had nothing personal against the president. Arthur&#x27;s succession would restore peace, he felt, and lead to rewards for fellow Stalwarts, including Guiteau.

The assassination of Abraham Lincoln was deemed a fluke due to the Civil War, and Garfield, like most people, saw no reason the president should be guarded; his movements and plans were often printed in the newspapers. Guiteau knew Garfield would leave Washington for a cooler climate on July 2, 1881, and made plans to kill him before then. He purchased a gun he thought would look good in a museum, and followed Garfield several times, but each time his plans were frustrated, or he lost his nerve. His opportunities dwindled to one—Garfield&#x27;s departure by train for New Jersey on the morning of July 2.

Guiteau concealed himself by the ladies&#x27; waiting room at the Sixth Street Station of the Baltimore and Potomac Railroad, from where Garfield was scheduled to depart. Most of Garfield&#x27;s cabinet planned to accompany him at least part of the way. Blaine, who was to remain in Washington, came to the station to see him off. The two men were deep in conversation and did not notice Guiteau before he took out his revolver and shot Garfield twice, once in the back and once in the arm. Guiteau attempted to leave the station but was quickly captured. As Blaine recognized him, Guiteau was led away, and said, &quot;I did it. I will go to jail for it. I am a Stalwart and Arthur will be President.&quot; News of his motivation to benefit the Stalwarts reached many with the news of the shooting, causing rage against that faction.

===Treatment and death===

Garfield was struck by two shots: one glanced off his arm while the other pierced his back, shattering a rib and embedding itself in his abdomen. &quot;My God, what is this?&quot; he exclaimed. Among those at the station was Robert Todd Lincoln, who was deeply upset, thinking back to when his father Abraham Lincoln was assassinated 16 years earlier. Garfield was taken on a mattress upstairs to a private office, where several doctors examined him. At his request, Garfield was taken back to the White House, and his wife, then in New Jersey, was sent for. Blaine sent word to Vice President Arthur in New York City, who received threats against his life because of his animosity toward Garfield and Guiteau&#x27;s statements.

Although Joseph Lister&#x27;s pioneering work in antisepsis was known to American doctors, few of them had confidence in it, and none of his advocates were among Garfield&#x27;s treating physicians. The physician who took charge at the depot and then at the White House was Doctor Willard Bliss. A noted physician and surgeon, Bliss was an old friend of Garfield, and about a dozen doctors, led by Bliss, were soon probing the wound with unsterilized fingers and instruments. Garfield was given morphine for the pain, and asked Bliss to frankly tell him his chances, which Bliss put at one in a hundred. &quot;Well, Doctor, we&#x27;ll take that chance.&quot;

Over the next few days, Garfield made some improvement, as the nation viewed the news from the capital and prayed. Although he never stood again, he was able to sit up and write several times, and his recovery was viewed so positively that a steamer was fitted out as a seagoing hospital to aid with his convalescence. He was nourished on oatmeal porridge (which he detested) and milk from a cow on the White House lawn. When told that Indian chief Sitting Bull, a prisoner of the army, was starving, Garfield said, &quot;Let him starve...&quot; initially, but a few moments later said, &quot;No, send him my oatmeal.&quot;

X-ray imaging, which could have assisted physicians in precisely locating the bullet in Garfield&#x27;s body, would not be invented for another 14 years. Alexander Graham Bell tried to locate the bullet with a primitive metal detector, but was unsuccessful, though the device had been effective when tested on others. But Bliss limited its use on Garfield, ensuring he remained in charge. Because Bliss insisted the bullet rested someplace it did not, the detector could not locate it. Bell shortly returned after adjusting his device, which emitted an unusual tone in the area where Bliss believed the bullet was lodged. Bliss took this as confirmation that the bullet was where he declared it to be. Bliss recorded the test as a success, saying it was: now unanimously agreed that the location of the ball has been ascertained with reasonable certainty, and that it lies, as heretofore stated, in the front wall of the abdomen, immediately over the groin, about five inches [] below and to the right of the navel.

One means of keeping Garfield comfortable in Washington&#x27;s summer heat was one of the first successful air conditioning units: air propelled by fans over ice and then dried reduced the temperature in the sickroom by . Engineers from the navy and other scientists worked together to develop the unit, though there were problems to solve, such as excessive noise and increased humidity.

On July 23, Garfield took a turn for the worse when his temperature increased to ; doctors, concerned by an abscess at the wound, inserted a drainage tube. This initially helped, and the bedridden Garfield held a brief cabinet meeting on July 29; members were under orders from Bliss to discuss nothing that might excite Garfield. Doctors probed the abscess, hoping to find the bullet; they likely made the infections worse. Garfield performed only one official act in August, signing an extradition paper. By the end of the month, he was much feebler than he had been, and his weight had decreased from to .

Garfield had long been anxious to escape hot, unhealthy Washington, and in early September the doctors agreed to move him to Elberon, part of Long Branch, New Jersey, where his wife had recovered earlier in the summer. He left the White House for the last time on September 5, traveling in a specially cushioned railway car; a spur line to the Francklyn Cottage, a seaside mansion given over to his use, was built in a night by volunteers. After arriving in Elberon the next day, Garfield was moved from the train car to a bedroom where he could see the ocean as officials and reporters maintained what became (after an initial rally) a death watch. Garfield&#x27;s personal secretary, Joe Stanley Brown, wrote forty years later, &quot;to this day I cannot hear the sound of the low slow roll of the Atlantic on the shore, the sound which filled my ears as I walked from my cottage to his bedside, without recalling again that ghastly tragedy.&quot;
On September 18, Garfield asked Colonel A.F. Rockwell, a friend, if he would have a place in history. Rockwell assured him he would and told Garfield he had much work still before him. But his response was, &quot;No, my work is done.&quot; The following day, Garfield, then suffering also from pneumonia and hypertension, marveled that he could not pick up a glass despite feeling well and went to sleep without discomfort. He awoke that evening around 10:15 p.m. complaining of great pain in his chest to his chief of staff General David Swaim, who was watching him, as he placed his hand over his heart. The president then requested a drink of water from Swaim. After finishing his glass, Garfield said, &quot;Oh Swaim, this terrible pain—press your hand on it.&quot; As Swaim put his hand on Garfield&#x27;s chest, Garfield&#x27;s hands went up reflexively. Clutching his heart, he exclaimed, &quot;Oh, Swaim, can&#x27;t you stop this? Oh, oh, Swaim!&quot; Those were Garfield&#x27;s last words. Swaim ordered another attendant to send for Bliss, who found Garfield unconscious. Despite efforts to revive him, Garfield never awoke, and he was pronounced dead at about 10:30 p.m. Learning from a reporter of Garfield&#x27;s death the following day, Chester A. Arthur took the presidential oath of office administered by New York Supreme Court Justice John R. Brady.

According to some historians and medical experts, Garfield might have survived his wounds had the doctors attending him had at their disposal today&#x27;s medical research, knowledge, techniques, and equipment. Standard medical practice at the time dictated that priority be given to locating the path of the bullet. Several of his doctors inserted their unsterilized fingers into the wound to probe for the bullet, a common practice in the 1880s. Historians agree that massive infection was a significant factor in Garfield&#x27;s demise. Biographer Peskin said medical malpractice did not contribute to Garfield&#x27;s death; the inevitable infection and blood poisoning that would ensue from a deep bullet wound resulted in damage to multiple organs and spinal fragmentation. Rutkow, a professor of surgery at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, has argued that starvation also played a role. Rutkow suggests &quot;Garfield had such a nonlethal wound. In today&#x27;s world, he would have gone home in a matter of two or three days.&quot; The conventional narrative regarding Garfield&#x27;s post-shooting medical condition was challenged by Theodore Pappas and Shahrzad Joharifard in a 2013 article in &quot;The American Journal of Surgery&quot;. They argued that Garfield died from a late rupture of a splenic artery pseudoaneurysm, which developed secondary to the path of the bullet adjacent to the splenic artery. They also argued that his sepsis was actually caused by post-traumatic acute acalculous cholecystitis. Based on the autopsy report, the authors speculate that his gallbladder subsequently ruptured, leading to the development of a large bile-containing abscess adjacent to the gallbladder. Pappas and Joharifard say this caused the septic decline in Garfield&#x27;s condition that was visible starting from July 23, 1881. Pappas and Joharifard also state that they don&#x27;t believe that Garfield&#x27;s doctors could have saved him even if they had been aware of his cholecystitis, since the first successful cholecystectomy (surgical removal of the gallbladder) was performed a year after Garfield&#x27;s death.

Guiteau was indicted on October 14, 1881, for the murder of the president. During his trial, Guiteau declared that he was not responsible for Garfield&#x27;s death, admitting to the shooting but not the killing. In his defense, Guiteau wrote: &quot;General Garfield died from malpractice. According to his own physicians, he was not fatally shot. The doctors who mistreated him ought to bear the odium of his death, and not his assailant. They ought to be indicted for murdering James A. Garfield, and not me.&quot; After a chaotic trial in which Guiteau often interrupted and argued, and in which his counsel used the insanity defense, the jury found him guilty on January 25, 1882, and he was sentenced to death by hanging. Guiteau may have had neurosyphilis, a disease that causes physiological mental impairment. He was executed on June 30, 1882.

==Funeral, memorials and commemorations==

Garfield&#x27;s funeral train left Long Branch on the same special track that had brought him there, traveling over tracks blanketed with flowers and past houses adorned with flags. His body was transported to the Capitol and then continued on to Cleveland for burial. Shocked by his death, Marine Band leader John Philip Sousa composed the march &quot;In Memoriam&quot;, which was played when Garfield&#x27;s body was received in Washington, D.C. More than 70,000 citizens, some waiting over three hours, passed by Garfield&#x27;s coffin as his body lay in state from September 21 to 23, 1881, at the United States Capitol rotunda; on September 25, in Cleveland, Garfield&#x27;s casket was paraded down Euclid Avenue from Wilson Avenue to Public Square, with those in attendance including former presidents Grant and Hayes, and Generals William Sherman, Sheridan and Hancock. More than 150,000—a number equal to the city&#x27;s population—likewise paid their respects, and Sousa&#x27;s march was again played. Garfield&#x27;s body was temporarily interred in the Schofield family vault in Cleveland&#x27;s Lake View Cemetery until his permanent memorial was built.

Memorials to Garfield were erected across the country. On April 10, 1882, seven months after Garfield&#x27;s death, the U.S. Post Office Department issued a postage stamp in his honor. In 1884, sculptor Frank Happersberger completed a monument on the grounds of the San Francisco Conservatory of Flowers. In 1887, the James A. Garfield Monument was dedicated in Washington. Another monument, in Philadelphia&#x27;s Fairmount Park, was erected in 1896. In Victoria, Australia, Cannibal Creek was renamed Garfield in his honor.

On May 19, 1890, Garfield&#x27;s body was permanently interred, with great solemnity and fanfare, in a mausoleum in Lake View Cemetery. Attending the dedication ceremonies were former President Hayes, President Benjamin Harrison, and future president William McKinley. Treasury Secretary William Windom also attended. Harrison said Garfield was always a &quot;student and instructor&quot; and that his life works and death would &quot;continue to be instructive and inspiring incidents in American history&quot;. Three panels on the monument display Garfield as a teacher, Union major general, and orator; another shows him taking the presidential oath, and a fifth shows his body lying in state at the Capitol rotunda in Washington, D.C.

Garfield&#x27;s murder by a deranged office-seeker awakened public awareness of the need for civil service reform legislation. Senator George H. Pendleton, a Democrat from Ohio, launched a reform effort that resulted in the Pendleton Act in January 1883. This act reversed the &quot;spoils system&quot; where office seekers paid up or gave political service to obtain or keep federally appointed positions. Under the act, appointments were awarded on merit and competitive examination. To ensure the reform was implemented, Congress and Arthur established and funded the Civil Service Commission. The Pendleton Act, however, covered only 10% of federal government workers. For Arthur, previously known for having been a &quot;veteran spoilsman&quot;, civil service reform became his most noteworthy achievement.

A marble statue of Garfield by Charles Niehaus was added to the National Statuary Hall Collection in the Capitol in Washington D.C., a gift from the State of Ohio in 1886.

Garfield is honored with a life-size bronze sculpture inside the Cuyahoga County Soldiers&#x27; and Sailors&#x27; Monument in Cleveland, Ohio.

On March 2, 2019, the National Park Service erected exhibit panels in Washington to mark the site of his assassination.

==Political views==
While serving as president, Garfield opposed labor unions and sided with the Republican Party&#x27;s hard-money wing. He was also suspicious of cooperative farm programs that were supported by the Grange, a farmer’s organization he called &quot;communism in disguise&quot;. But Garfield also opposed corporate monopoly and advocated a federal education department along with increased federal support for the education of African-Americans in southern states.

Another study has said of Garfield:

No man could be in politics as long as Garfield had been without forming some opinions of the nature of presidential leadership, and his, by and large, were negative. Philosophically, as has been noted, he was a believer in laissez faire, and he had been suspicious of presidential power from the time when he fought Andrew Jackson.

Garfield&#x27;s successor as president, Chester A. Arthur, shared his laissez-faire views.

==Legacy and historical view==
For a few years after his assassination, Garfield&#x27;s life story was seen as an exemplar of the American success story—that even the poorest boy might someday become President of the United States. Peskin wrote: &quot;In mourning Garfield, Americans were not only honoring a president; they were paying tribute to a man whose life story embodied their own most cherished aspirations.&quot; As the rivalry between Stalwarts and Half-Breeds faded from the scene in the late 1880s and after, so too did memories of Garfield. In the 1890s, Americans became disillusioned with politicians, and looked elsewhere for inspiration, focusing on industrialists, labor leaders, scientists, and others as their heroes. Increasingly, Garfield&#x27;s short time as president was forgotten.
The 20th century saw no revival for Garfield. Thomas Wolfe deemed the presidents of the Gilded Age, including Garfield, &quot;lost Americans&quot; whose &quot;gravely vacant and bewhiskered faces mixed, melted, swam together&quot;. The politicians of the Gilded Age faded from the public eye, their luster eclipsed by those who had influenced America outside of political office during that time; the robber barons, the inventors, those who had sought social reform, and others who had lived as America rapidly changed. Current events and more recent figures occupied America&#x27;s attention. According to Ackerman, &quot;the busy Twentieth Century has made Garfield&#x27;s era seem remote and irrelevant, its leaders ridiculed for their very obscurity.&quot;

Garfield&#x27;s biographers, and those who have studied his presidency, tend to think well of him, and that his presidency saw a promising start before its untimely end. Historian Justus D. Doenecke, while deeming Garfield a bit of an enigma, chronicles his achievements: &quot;by winning a victory over the Stalwarts, he enhanced both the power and prestige of his office. As a man, he was intelligent, sensitive, and alert, and his knowledge of how government worked was unmatched.&quot; Doenecke criticizes Garfield&#x27;s dismissal of Merritt in Robertson&#x27;s favor, and wonders if the president was truly in command of the situation even after the latter&#x27;s confirmation. In 1931, Caldwell wrote: &quot;If Garfield lives in history, it will be partly on account of the charm of his personality—but also because in life and in death, he struck the first shrewd blows against a dangerous system of boss rule which seemed for a time about to engulf the politics of the nation. Perhaps if he had lived he could have done no more.&quot; Rutkow writes that &quot;James Abram Garfield&#x27;s presidency is reduced to a tantalizing &#x27;what if.

In 2002, historian Bernard A. Weisberger said, &quot;[Garfield] was, to some extent, a perfect moderate. He read widely (and unobtrusively) without its visibly affecting his Christianity, his Republicanism, or his general laissez-faire orthodoxy. He was not so much a scholar in politics as a politic scholar.&quot; Peskin believes Garfield deserves more credit for his political career than he has received: &quot;True, his accomplishments were neither bold nor heroic, but his was not an age that called for heroism. His stormy presidency was brief, and in some respects, unfortunate, but he did leave the office stronger than he found it. As a public man he had a hand in almost every issue of national importance for almost two decades, while as a party leader he, along with Blaine, forged the Republican Party into the instrument that would lead the United States into the twentieth century.&quot;

==See also==
* List of presidents of the United States
* List of presidents of the United States by previous experience

==Notes==
==References==
==Works cited==
===Books===
* 
* 
* scholarly review and response by Calhoun at 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Pletcher, David M. &quot;The Awkward Years: American Foreign Relations under Garfield and Arthur&quot; (U of Missouri Press, 1962). online
* 
* 

===Periodicals===
* 

===Online===
* 


==Further reading==
* Goodyear, C. W. (2023). &quot;President Garfield: From Radical to Unifier&quot;. New York, New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.
* Graff Henry F., ed. &quot;The Presidents: A Reference History&quot; (3rd ed. 2002) online
* Houdek, John Thomas. &quot;James A. Garfield and Rutherford B. Hayes: A Study in State and National Politics&quot; (PhD dissertation, Michigan State University; Proquest Dissertations Publishing, 1970. 7111871).
* Menke, Richard. &quot;Media in America, 1881: Garfield, Guiteau, Bell, Whitman.&quot; &quot;Critical Inquiry&quot; 31.3 (2005): 638–664.
* North, Ira Lutts. &quot;A rhetorical criticism of the speaking of James Abram Garfield, 1876-1880&quot; (PhD dissertation, Louisiana State University; ProQuest Dissertations Publishing, 1953. DP69446).
* Rushford, Jerry Bryant. &quot;Political Disciple: The Relationship Between James A. Garfield And The Disciples Of Christ&quot; (PhD dissertation, University of California, Santa Barbara; ProQuest Dissertations Publishing, 1977. 7807029).
* Skidmore, Max J. &quot;James A. Garfield and Chester A. Arthur.&quot; in &quot;Maligned Presidents: The Late 19th Century&quot; (Palgrave Macmillan, New York, 2014) pp. 63–79.
* Sutton, Thomas C. &quot;James A. Garfield.&quot; in &quot;The Presidents and the Constitution&quot; (Volume One. New York University Press, 2020) pp. 266–275.
* Uhler, Kevin A. &quot;The demise of patronage: Garfield, the midterm election, and the passage of the Pendleton Civil Service Act&quot; (PhD. Diss. The Florida State University, 2011) online.
* Vermilya, Daniel J. &quot;James Garfield and the Civil War: For Ohio and the Union&quot; (Arcadia Publishing, 2015).

==External links==

* Garfield, James Abram, (1831–1881) Congressional Biography
* James Garfield: A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress
* Brief essays on James A. Garfield and his administration from the [[Miller Center of Public Affairs]
* &quot;Life Portrait of James Garfield&quot;, from [[C-SPAN]]&#x27;s &quot;[[American Presidents: Life Portraits]]&quot;, July 26, 1999
* 
* Notable alumni of [[Delta Upsilon]] fraternity, including Garfield
* James A. Garfield Personal Manuscripts
* James A. Garfield Collection at Williams College Chapin Library
* James A. Garfield Collection at Williams College Archives and Special Collections
* Official medical bulletins relating to the health of U.S. President James Garfield from the U.S. National Library of Medicine. Contains medical bulletins issued by attending physicians D. Hayes Agnes, J.K. Barnes, D. W. Bliss, Frank H. Hamilton, Robert Reyburn, and J.J. Woodward between July 6 – September 19, 1881.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34597" start="0" end="20" title="James A. Garfield" label="James Abram Garfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="75" end="105" title="president of the United States" label="president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866972" start="137" end="205" title="Assassination of James A. Garfield" label="his death in September that year after being shot two months earlier"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="231" end="240" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="284" end="322" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="460" end="471" title="U.S. Senate" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080820" start="479" end="500" title="Ohio General Assembly" label="Ohio General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467287" start="538" end="553" title="President-elect of the United States" label="president-elect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057945" start="617" end="634" title="Northeast Ohio" label="northeastern Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q49166" start="658" end="674" title="Williams College" label="Williams College"/>
<link wikidata="Q585110" start="748" end="771" title="Stone–Campbell Movement" label="Stone–Campbell Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5769100" start="793" end="827" title="Western Reserve Eclectic Institute" label="Western Reserve Eclectic Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541206" start="849" end="858" title="Christian Church (Disciples of Christ)" label="Disciples"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870609" start="886" end="896" title="History of the Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656259" start="911" end="928" title="Ohio State Senate" label="Ohio State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="969" end="990" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280545" start="998" end="1011" title="Major general (United States)" label="major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="1019" end="1029" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555905" start="1090" end="1102" title="Battle of Middle Creek" label="Middle Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q943277" start="1104" end="1110" title="Battle of Shiloh" label="Shiloh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327790" start="1116" end="1127" title="Battle of Chickamauga" label="Chickamauga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080691" start="1177" end="1202" title="Ohio&amp;#x27;s 19th congressional district" label="Ohio&amp;#x27;s 19th district"/>
<link wikidata="Q173509" start="1266" end="1279" title="gold standard" label="gold standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11833539" start="1350" end="1368" title="Radical Republican" label="Radical Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="1378" end="1392" title="Reconstruction era" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q111181517" start="1413" end="1432" title="Moderate Republicans (Reconstruction era)" label="Moderate Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q841571" start="1482" end="1490" title="freedmen" label="freedmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q852568" start="1545" end="1558" title="Garfield&amp;#x27;s proof of the Pythagorean theorem" label="his own proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q11518" start="1566" end="1585" title="Pythagorean theorem" label="Pythagorean theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945540" start="1623" end="1658" title="1880 Republican National Convention" label="1880 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q699120" start="1786" end="1812" title="1880 United States presidential election" label="1880 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505891" start="1837" end="1857" title="front porch campaign" label="front porch campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q435517" start="1904" end="1926" title="Winfield Scott Hancock" label="Winfield Scott Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450074" start="2030" end="2049" title="senatorial courtesy" label="senatorial courtesy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109672" start="2106" end="2117" title="United States Post Office Department" label="Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057127" start="2184" end="2207" title="agricultural technology" label="agricultural technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689617" start="2237" end="2271" title="Civil rights movement (1865–1896)" label="civil rights for African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863124" start="2302" end="2323" title="Civil service reform in the United States" label="civil service reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162467" start="2370" end="2404" title="Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act" label="Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q35498" start="2443" end="2460" title="Chester A. Arthur" label="Chester A. Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359302" start="2509" end="2519" title="Half-Breeds (politics)" label="Half-Breed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558808" start="2599" end="2607" title="Stalwarts (politics)" label="Stalwart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611358" start="2622" end="2637" title="Roscoe Conkling" label="Roscoe Conkling"/>
<link wikidata="Q111168911" start="2679" end="2693" title="Blaine faction" label="Blaine faction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709913" start="2701" end="2721" title="William H. Robertson" label="William H. Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146211" start="2747" end="2780" title="Collector of the Port of New York" label="Collector of the Port of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q163894" start="2890" end="2905" title="Thomas C. Platt" label="Thomas C. Platt"/>
<link wikidata="Q364232" start="2941" end="2959" title="Charles J. Guiteau" label="Charles J. Guiteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q781376" start="2991" end="3004" title="Spoils system" label="office seeker"/>
<link wikidata="Q15196374" start="3027" end="3065" title="Baltimore and Potomac Railroad Station" label="Baltimore and Potomac Railroad Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q284220" start="3125" end="3181" title="Iatrogenesis" label="infection caused by his doctors&amp;#x27; unsanitary methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243931" start="3291" end="3304" title="Historical rankings of presidents of the United States" label="rank Garfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251732" start="3579" end="3594" title="Orange Township, Cuyahoga County, Ohio" label="Orange Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668987" start="3600" end="3620" title="Moreland Hills, Ohio" label="Moreland Hills, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292286" start="3677" end="3687" title="Hillmorton" label="Hillmorton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23140" start="3689" end="3701" title="Warwickshire" label="Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708771" start="3780" end="3799" title="Worcester, New York" label="Worcester, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q188353" start="4701" end="4706" title="Welsh people" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q682601" start="4774" end="4791" title="Caerphilly Castle" label="Caerphilly Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="5029" end="5038" title="Cleveland, Ohio" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q453251" start="5120" end="5133" title="Horatio Alger" label="Horatio Alger"/>
<link wikidata="Q48976651" start="5438" end="5453" title="Geauga Seminary" label="Geauga Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093734" start="5465" end="5502" title="Chester Township, Geauga County, Ohio" label="Chester Township, Geauga County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q234261" start="6349" end="6365" title="Lucretia Garfield" label="Lucretia Rudolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029878" start="6950" end="6962" title="camp meeting" label="camp meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q613015" start="6988" end="6998" title="Born again (Christianity)" label="born again"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058823" start="7094" end="7107" title="Chagrin River" label="Chagrin River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5769100" start="7412" end="7446" title="Western Reserve Eclectic Institute" label="Western Reserve Eclectic Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5769100" start="7460" end="7473" title="Hiram College" label="Hiram College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620123" start="7478" end="7489" title="Hiram, Ohio" label="Hiram, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541206" start="7541" end="7579" title="Christian Church (Disciples of Christ)" label="Christian Church (Disciples of Christ)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760141" start="7755" end="7762" title="janitor" label="janitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q234261" start="7832" end="7848" title="Lucretia Rudolph" label="Lucretia Rudolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q4193486" start="8025" end="8036" title="gold dollar" label="gold dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q49166" start="8169" end="8185" title="Williams College" label="Williams College"/>
<link wikidata="Q983837" start="8189" end="8216" title="Williamstown, Massachusetts" label="Williamstown, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5956375" start="8223" end="8241" title="Junior (education year)" label="third-year student"/>
<link wikidata="Q6768098" start="8398" end="8410" title="Mark Hopkins (educator)" label="Mark Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940266" start="8940" end="8955" title="Pownal, Vermont" label="Pownal, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q35498" start="8964" end="8981" title="Chester A. Arthur" label="Chester A. Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938003" start="9019" end="9033" title="Phi Beta Kappa" label="Phi Beta Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406322" start="9074" end="9086" title="salutatorian" label="salutatorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054021" start="9105" end="9117" title="Graduation" label="commencement"/>
<link wikidata="Q169390" start="9830" end="9842" title="Abolitionism" label="abolitionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q169011" start="10006" end="10021" title="John C. Frémont" label="John C. Frémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300597" start="10162" end="10170" title="read law" label="read law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418938" start="10197" end="10219" title="Albert Gallatin Riddle" label="Albert Gallatin Riddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="10314" end="10324" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915366" start="10670" end="10687" title="geological survey" label="geological survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="10744" end="10759" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115346" start="10830" end="10839" title="Secession in the United States" label="secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="10885" end="10914" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522748" start="11034" end="11045" title="Slave Power" label="Slave Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q543165" start="11073" end="11094" title="Battle of Fort Sumter" label="bombarded Fort Sumter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="11157" end="11166" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q881449" start="11266" end="11289" title="William Dennison Jr." label="William Dennison&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984198" start="11744" end="11751" title="Colonel (United States)" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637811" start="11759" end="11777" title="42nd Ohio Infantry" label="42nd Ohio Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027060" start="11976" end="11986" title="Camp Chase" label="Camp Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="11996" end="12010" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="12094" end="12103" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemason"/>
<link wikidata="Q689900" start="12314" end="12330" title="Army of the Ohio" label="Army of the Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967196" start="12337" end="12354" title="Brigadier general (United States)" label="Brigadier General"/>
<link wikidata="Q724339" start="12355" end="12371" title="Don Carlos Buell" label="Don Carlos Buell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637491" start="12585" end="12603" title="40th Ohio Infantry" label="40th Ohio Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942981" start="12674" end="12696" title="Catlettsburg, Kentucky" label="Catlettsburg, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q859238" start="12751" end="12766" title="Big Sandy River (Ohio River)" label="Big Sandy River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012330" start="12820" end="12841" title="Paintsville, Kentucky" label="Paintsville, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q548975" start="12978" end="12995" title="Humphrey Marshall (general)" label="Humphrey Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555905" start="13376" end="13398" title="Battle of Middle Creek" label="Battle of Middle Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180286" start="13556" end="13568" title="Prestonsburg, Kentucky" label="Prestonsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235630" start="14091" end="14100" title="Pound Gap" label="Pound Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280545" start="14297" end="14310" title="Major general (United States)" label="Major General"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="14311" end="14327" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992093" start="14362" end="14382" title="Corinth, Mississippi" label="Corinth, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q361140" start="14474" end="14496" title="Albert Sidney Johnston" label="Albert Sidney Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q943277" start="14776" end="14792" title="Battle of Shiloh" label="Battle of Shiloh"/>
<link wikidata="Q504369" start="14919" end="14935" title="Henry W. Halleck" label="Henry W. Halleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q133244" start="15119" end="15127" title="jaundice" label="jaundice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178209" start="15768" end="15801" title="court-martial of Fitz John Porter" label="court-martial of Fitz John Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q233343" start="15827" end="15852" title="Second Battle of Bull Run" label="Second Battle of Bull Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q541708" start="16108" end="16128" title="William S. Rosecrans" label="William S. Rosecrans"/>
<link wikidata="Q689891" start="16383" end="16405" title="Army of the Cumberland" label="Army of the Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="16794" end="16803" title="Methodism" label="Methodism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="16807" end="16824" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383537" start="16931" end="16947" title="Alexander McCook" label="Alexander McCook"/>
<link wikidata="Q175546" start="16952" end="16969" title="Thomas Leonidas Crittenden" label="Thomas Crittenden"/>
<link wikidata="Q860220" start="17084" end="17102" title="Tullahoma Campaign" label="Tullahoma Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q380562" start="17142" end="17155" title="Braxton Bragg" label="Braxton Bragg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3292530" start="17159" end="17168" title="Tullahoma" label="Tullahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q186702" start="17222" end="17233" title="Chattanooga" label="Chattanooga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327790" start="17482" end="17503" title="Battle of Chickamauga" label="Battle of Chickamauga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878895" start="17876" end="17892" title="Missionary Ridge" label="Missionary Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q448803" start="18235" end="18251" title="Edwin M. Stanton" label="Edwin M. Stanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q740330" start="18558" end="18574" title="George H. Thomas" label="George H. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6170610" start="18685" end="18702" title="Jean Edward Smith" label="Jean Edward Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080691" start="19114" end="19127" title="Ohio&amp;#x27;s 19th congressional district" label="19th district"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636059" start="19703" end="19716" title="38th United States Congress" label="38th Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q433051" start="20551" end="20566" title="Salmon P. Chase" label="Salmon P. Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q11833539" start="20671" end="20678" title="Radical Republican" label="Radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353767" start="20882" end="20898" title="Thaddeus Stevens" label="Thaddeus Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="21121" end="21140" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q391358" start="21248" end="21273" title="Emancipation Proclamation" label="Emancipation Proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="21509" end="21529" title="Abolitionism in the United States" label="abolition of slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q173509" start="23004" end="23017" title="gold standard" label="gold standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603663" start="23050" end="23059" title="Greenback (money)" label="greenback"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574951" start="23101" end="23140" title="Specie Payment Resumption Act" label="suspension of payment in gold or silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017633" start="23239" end="23254" title="Wade–Davis Bill" label="Wade–Davis Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="23302" end="23316" title="Reconstruction Era of the United States" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q615305" start="23349" end="23360" title="pocket veto" label="pocket veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555130" start="23573" end="23593" title="1864 National Union National Convention" label="the party convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q8612" start="23700" end="23714" title="Andrew Johnson" label="Andrew Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="23811" end="23824" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="Chief Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971505" start="25023" end="25053" title="National City Christian Church" label="National City Christian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541206" start="25096" end="25105" title="Christian Church (Disciples of Christ)" label="Disciples"/>
<link wikidata="Q175613" start="25165" end="25179" title="Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="13th Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="25409" end="25425" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019598" start="25624" end="25638" title="black suffrage" label="black suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928426" start="26454" end="26476" title="Freedmen&amp;#x27;s Bureau" label="Freedmen&amp;#x27;s Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7658533" start="26754" end="26777" title="Swing Around the Circle" label="Swing Around the Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q105973422" start="27136" end="27167" title="Efforts to impeach Andrew Johnson" label="proposed impeachment of Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589777" start="27289" end="27309" title="Tenure of Office Act (1867)" label="Tenure of Office Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q111442450" start="27587" end="27632" title="first impeachment inquiry against Andrew Johnson" label="the first impeachment inquiry against Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131462" start="27645" end="27677" title="House Committee on the Judiciary" label="House Committee on the Judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q111442439" start="27905" end="27947" title="Second impeachment inquiry against Andrew Johnson" label="second impeachment inquiry against Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q111951440" start="27960" end="28000" title="House Select Committee on Reconstruction" label="House Select Committee on Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149795" start="28060" end="28092" title="Impeachment of Andrew Johnson" label="when the House impeached Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="28483" end="28499" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q188936" start="28501" end="28525" title="William Tecumseh Sherman" label="William Tecumseh Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q780105" start="28531" end="28547" title="William H. Emory" label="William H. Emory"/>
<link wikidata="Q109619944" start="28802" end="28829" title="Impeachment trial of Andrew Johnson" label="his trial before the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q191614" start="29250" end="29264" title="Fifteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="15th Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649437" start="29584" end="29600" title="Ku Klux Klan Act" label="Ku Klux Klan Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q220596" start="29968" end="29981" title="habeas corpus" label="habeas corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500299" start="30208" end="30244" title="free silver" label="free and unlimited coinage of silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q260239" start="30273" end="30303" title="United States House Committee on Ways and Means" label="House Ways and Means Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q10863020" start="31370" end="31400" title="House Appropriations Committee" label="House Appropriations Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q436790" start="31606" end="31620" title="Horace Greeley" label="Horace Greeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q918225" start="31680" end="31703" title="House Banking Committee" label="House Banking Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q843687" start="31735" end="31747" title="Black Friday (1869)" label="Black Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q709595" start="31846" end="31855" title="Jay Gould" label="Jay Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q323705" start="31860" end="31870" title="James Fisk (financier)" label="James Fisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q544561" start="32008" end="32023" title="George Boutwell" label="George Boutwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540796" start="32977" end="32996" title="Liberal Republican Party (United States)" label="Liberal Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191474" start="33249" end="33283" title="Crédit Mobilier of America scandal" label="Crédit Mobilier of America scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="33328" end="33350" title="Union Pacific Railroad" label="Union Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064041" start="33364" end="33389" title="transcontinental railroad" label="transcontinental railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191474" start="33490" end="33516" title="Crédit Mobilier of America" label="Crédit Mobilier of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q975735" start="33782" end="33791" title="par value" label="par value"/>
<link wikidata="Q561829" start="34075" end="34085" title="Oakes Ames" label="Oakes Ames"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="34089" end="34102" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q310852" start="34405" end="34420" title="Schuyler Colfax" label="Schuyler Colfax"/>
<link wikidata="Q313302" start="34444" end="34456" title="Henry Wilson" label="Henry Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q448778" start="34512" end="34527" title="James G. Blaine" label="James G. Blaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7403681" start="36733" end="36744" title="Salary Grab Act" label="Salary Grab"/>
<link wikidata="Q817488" start="37040" end="37055" title="Benjamin Butler (politician)" label="Benjamin Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q948290" start="37252" end="37262" title="lame duck (politics)" label="lame ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q928764" start="37985" end="37997" title="floor leader" label="floor leader"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38093" end="38104" title="Public Land Survey System#Railroad land grants" label="land grants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075260" start="38314" end="38341" title="United States civil service" label="United States civil service"/>
<link wikidata="Q14743875" start="38535" end="38544" title="Kickback (bribery)" label="kick back"/>
<link wikidata="Q72251" start="38609" end="38635" title="1876 United States presidential election" label="1876 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555551" start="38762" end="38797" title="1876 Republican National Convention" label="1876 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q35686" start="38924" end="38943" title="Rutherford B. Hayes" label="Rutherford B. Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q134859" start="39351" end="39365" title="whooping cough" label="whooping cough"/>
<link wikidata="Q281566" start="39514" end="39527" title="Samuel Tilden" label="Samuel Tilden"/>
<link wikidata="Q512993" start="39981" end="40002" title="West Feliciana Parish, Louisiana" label="West Feliciana Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354979" start="40393" end="40413" title="Electoral Commission (United States)" label="Electoral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q445392" start="40901" end="40913" title="John Sherman" label="John Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q635737" start="41219" end="41236" title="Bland–Allison Act" label="Bland–Allison Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785103" start="41329" end="41341" title="Morgan dollar" label="dollar coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q543780" start="41503" end="41509" title="Mentor, Ohio" label="Mentor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128111" start="41538" end="41547" title="James A. Garfield National Historic Site" label="Lawnfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505891" start="41589" end="41609" title="front porch campaign" label="front porch campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q742459" start="42253" end="42267" title="Jeremiah Black" label="Jeremiah Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q12325" start="42381" end="42395" title="James Buchanan" label="James Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383314" start="43100" end="43117" title="Ex parte Milligan" label="Ex parte Milligan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521765" start="43851" end="43865" title="Noah H. Swayne" label="Noah H. Swayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349419" start="43901" end="43918" title="Morrison R. Waite" label="Morrison R. Waite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810689" start="43951" end="43968" title="Montana Territory" label="Montana Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q568625" start="44001" end="44018" title="Bitterroot Salish" label="Bitterroot Salish"/>
<link wikidata="Q503543" start="44032" end="44059" title="Flathead Indian Reservation" label="Flathead Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919062" start="44203" end="44220" title="Bitterroot Valley" label="Bitterroot Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096685" start="44254" end="44266" title="Chief Charlo" label="Chief Charlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q852568" start="44589" end="44604" title="Garfield&amp;#x27;s proof of the Pythagorean theorem" label="trapezoid proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q11518" start="44612" end="44631" title="Pythagorean theorem" label="Pythagorean theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q96384772" start="44666" end="44698" title="New England Journal of Education" label="New England Journal of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568579" start="44728" end="44742" title="William Dunham (mathematician)" label="William Dunham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990697" start="45710" end="45724" title="Wharton Barker" label="Wharton Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="46325" end="46333" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611358" start="46342" end="46357" title="Roscoe Conkling" label="Roscoe Conkling"/>
<link wikidata="Q887084" start="47446" end="47466" title="Jeremiah McLain Rusk" label="Jeremiah McLain Rusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q35678" start="47510" end="47527" title="Benjamin Harrison" label="Benjamin Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914973" start="47626" end="47636" title="dark horse" label="dark horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146211" start="48261" end="48287" title="Collector of the Port of New York" label="New York customs collector"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218690" start="48318" end="48335" title="political machine" label="political machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q435517" start="48855" end="48877" title="Winfield Scott Hancock" label="Winfield Scott Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538559" start="48970" end="48981" title="Solid South" label="Solid South"/>
<link wikidata="Q195594" start="49109" end="49121" title="Swing state" label="close states"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975559" start="49273" end="49296" title="waving the bloody shirt" label="waving the bloody shirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="49816" end="49822" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="50367" end="50384" title="Electoral College (United States)" label="Electoral College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374474" start="51118" end="51132" title="William Windom (politician)" label="William Windom"/>
<link wikidata="Q373146" start="51176" end="51191" title="William H. Hunt" label="William H. Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q435793" start="51231" end="51250" title="Robert Todd Lincoln" label="Robert Todd Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q708401" start="51276" end="51294" title="Samuel J. Kirkwood" label="Samuel J. Kirkwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425815" start="51361" end="51380" title="Thomas Lemuel James" label="Thomas Lemuel James"/>
<link wikidata="Q723978" start="51443" end="51457" title="Wayne MacVeagh" label="Wayne MacVeagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q636207" start="51493" end="51509" title="United States Attorney General" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q926897" start="51608" end="51627" title="William E. Chandler" label="William E. Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298067" start="51632" end="51649" title="United States Solicitor General" label="Solicitor General"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="51987" end="52004" title="African-Americans" label="African-Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459202" start="52279" end="52294" title="Mormon polygamy" label="Mormon polygamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709913" start="52936" end="52956" title="William H. Robertson" label="William H. Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346217" start="53086" end="53102" title="Edwin Atkins Merritt" label="Edwin A. Merritt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450074" start="53150" end="53169" title="senatorial courtesy" label="senatorial courtesy"/>
<link wikidata="Q163894" start="53565" end="53580" title="Thomas C. Platt" label="Thomas C. Platt"/>
<link wikidata="Q507075" start="54776" end="54792" title="Stanley Matthews (judge)" label="Stanley Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q781376" start="55607" end="55620" title="spoils system" label="spoils system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109672" start="55971" end="55993" title="United States Post Office Department" label="Post Office Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985029" start="56090" end="56101" title="star routes" label="star routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791025" start="56386" end="56401" title="Thomas J. Brady" label="Thomas J. Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345172" start="56566" end="56583" title="Stephen W. Dorsey" label="Stephen W. Dorsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q841571" start="57014" end="57022" title="freedman" label="freedmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q838811" start="57284" end="57293" title="peasantry" label="peasantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q215562" start="57981" end="57999" title="Frederick Douglass" label="Frederick Douglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q471264" start="58034" end="58047" title="Robert B. Elliott" label="Robert Elliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701067" start="58080" end="58096" title="John M. Langston" label="John M. Langston"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="58098" end="58103" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q881412" start="58120" end="58136" title="Blanche Bruce" label="Blanche K. Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q373146" start="58405" end="58420" title="William H. Hunt" label="William H. Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q925055" start="58602" end="58616" title="William Mahone" label="William Mahone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134572" start="58645" end="58661" title="Readjuster Party" label="Readjuster Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q181982" start="58929" end="58947" title="Western Hemisphere" label="Western Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="59000" end="59013" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="59048" end="59091" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q152004" start="59442" end="59460" title="War of the Pacific" label="War of the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="59482" end="59489" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="59491" end="59496" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="59502" end="59506" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868" start="59640" end="59644" title="Lima" label="Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q444530" start="59820" end="59841" title="Clayton–Bulwer Treaty" label="Clayton–Bulwer Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="59882" end="59904" title="Panama Canal" label="a canal through Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q156418" start="60005" end="60022" title="Kingdom of Hawaii" label="Kingdom of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179" start="60201" end="60206" title="Joseon Dynasty" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071439" start="60211" end="60221" title="Merina Kingdom" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494423" start="60857" end="60878" title="Squadron of Evolution" label="Squadron of Evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q364232" start="60928" end="60946" title="Charles J. Guiteau" label="Charles J. Guiteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558808" start="61572" end="61580" title="Stalwart (politics)" label="Stalwart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739031" start="61879" end="61889" title="Kent Kiehl" label="Kent Kiehl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025404" start="63030" end="63062" title="assassination of Abraham Lincoln" label="assassination of Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q15196374" start="63704" end="63724" title="Baltimore and Potomac Railroad Station" label="Sixth Street Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410491" start="63732" end="63762" title="Baltimore and Potomac Railroad" label="Baltimore and Potomac Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q435793" start="64726" end="64745" title="Robert Todd Lincoln" label="Robert Todd Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q155768" start="65240" end="65253" title="Joseph Lister, 1st Baron Lister" label="Joseph Lister"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287475" start="65505" end="65525" title="Doctor Willard Bliss" label="Doctor Willard Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q81225" start="65726" end="65734" title="morphine" label="morphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q186817" start="66238" end="66246" title="porridge" label="porridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q43527" start="66340" end="66352" title="Sitting Bull" label="Sitting Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610264" start="66516" end="66529" title="Projectional radiography" label="X-ray imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q34286" start="66670" end="66691" title="Alexander Graham Bell" label="Alexander Graham Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="67640" end="67656" title="air conditioning" label="air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q164655" start="68031" end="68038" title="abscess" label="abscess"/>
<link wikidata="Q986968" start="68658" end="68665" title="Elberon, New Jersey" label="Elberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q995231" start="68675" end="68698" title="Long Branch, New Jersey" label="Long Branch, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q59588852" start="68877" end="68894" title="Charles G. Francklyn" label="Francklyn Cottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q30643741" start="69219" end="69236" title="Joe Stanley Brown" label="Joe Stanley Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233951" start="70016" end="70027" title="David G. Swaim" label="David Swaim"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253764" start="70836" end="70849" title="John R. Brady" label="John R. Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q723758" start="71207" end="71219" title="Asepsis" label="unsterilized"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551717" start="71669" end="71719" title="University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey" label="University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q15762745" start="72084" end="72115" title="The American Journal of Surgery" label="The American Journal of Surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137609" start="72194" end="72208" title="pseudoaneurysm" label="pseudoaneurysm"/>
<link wikidata="Q376666" start="72382" end="72395" title="cholecystitis" label="cholecystitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41482" start="72410" end="72417" title="autopsy" label="autopsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q638774" start="72904" end="72919" title="cholecystectomy" label="cholecystectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40821" start="72921" end="72929" title="surgical" label="surgical"/>
<link wikidata="Q705920" start="73628" end="73644" title="insanity defense" label="insanity defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888578" start="73756" end="73769" title="neurosyphilis" label="neurosyphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550743" start="74195" end="74206" title="United States Marine Band" label="Marine Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q295935" start="74214" end="74231" title="John Philip Sousa" label="John Philip Sousa"/>
<link wikidata="" start="74257" end="74268" title="In Memoriam: President Garfield&amp;#x27;s Funeral March" label="In Memoriam"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="74335" end="74351" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q17157233" start="74455" end="74467" title="lying in state" label="lay in state"/>
<link wikidata="Q918708" start="74506" end="74535" title="United States Capitol rotunda" label="United States Capitol rotunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406097" start="74608" end="74621" title="Euclid Avenue (Cleveland)" label="Euclid Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493255" start="74644" end="74657" title="Public Square, Cleveland" label="Public Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q188936" start="74742" end="74757" title="William Tecumseh Sherman" label="William Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q355452" start="74759" end="74767" title="Philip Sheridan" label="Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535505" start="74968" end="74977" title="Levi Scofield" label="Schofield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372820" start="75011" end="75029" title="Lake View Cemetery" label="Lake View Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994775" start="75274" end="75293" title="Frank Happersberger" label="Frank Happersberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163145" start="75337" end="75374" title="Conservatory of Flowers" label="San Francisco Conservatory of Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q238932" start="75389" end="75415" title="James A. Garfield Monument" label="James A. Garfield Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134498" start="75445" end="75461" title="James Garfield Memorial, Philadelphia" label="Another monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739335" start="75486" end="75500" title="Fairmount Park" label="Fairmount Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="75526" end="75545" title="Victoria, Australia" label="Victoria, Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098327" start="75547" end="75561" title="Garfield, Victoria" label="Cannibal Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494202" start="75701" end="75710" title="James A. Garfield Memorial" label="mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q35041" start="75849" end="75865" title="William McKinley" label="William McKinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859263" start="76196" end="76202" title="orator" label="orator"/>
<link wikidata="Q552459" start="76473" end="76492" title="George H. Pendleton" label="George H. Pendleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162467" start="76562" end="76575" title="Pendleton Act" label="Pendleton Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889614" start="76909" end="76933" title="United States Civil Service Commission" label="Civil Service Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q96782264" start="77153" end="77178" title="Statue of James A. Garfield (U.S. Capitol)" label="marble statue of Garfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2803315" start="77182" end="77197" title="Charles Niehaus" label="Charles Niehaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134223" start="77215" end="77248" title="National Statuary Hall Collection" label="National Statuary Hall Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q54109" start="77256" end="77263" title="United States Capitol" label="Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="77267" end="77282" title="Washington D.C." label="Washington D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="77309" end="77313" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557370" start="77389" end="77446" title="Soldiers&amp;#x27; and Sailors&amp;#x27; Monument (Cleveland)" label="Cuyahoga County Soldiers&amp;#x27; and Sailors&amp;#x27; Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="77490" end="77511" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q35498" start="78481" end="78498" title="Chester A. Arthur" label="Chester A. Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359302" start="78994" end="79005" title="Half-Breeds (politics)" label="Half-Breeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q314256" start="79388" end="79400" title="Thomas Wolfe" label="Thomas Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753636" start="79430" end="79440" title="Gilded Age" label="Gilded Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292195" start="79743" end="79756" title="Robber baron (industrialist)" label="robber barons"/>
<link wikidata="Q22005712" start="80284" end="80302" title="Justus D. Doenecke" label="Justus D. Doenecke"/>
<link wikidata="Q35073" start="82176" end="82215" title="List of presidents of the United States" label="List of presidents of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594910" start="82218" end="82280" title="List of presidents of the United States by previous experience" label="List of presidents of the United States by previous experience"/>
<link wikidata="" start="82640" end="82683" title="President Garfield: From Radical to Unifier" label="President Garfield: From Radical to Unifier"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40402" wikidata="Q72251" url="?curid=40402" title="1876 United States presidential election">
<text>Presidential elections were held in the United States on November 7, 1876. Republican Governor Rutherford B. Hayes of Ohio very narrowly defeated Democrat Governor Samuel J. Tilden of New York. Following President Ulysses S. Grant&#x27;s decision to retire after his second term, U.S. Representative James G. Blaine emerged as frontrunner for the Republican nomination; however, Blaine was unable to win a majority at the 1876 Republican National Convention, which settled on Hayes as a compromise candidate. The 1876 Democratic National Convention nominated Tilden on the second ballot.

The election was among the most contentious in American history, and was only resolved by the Compromise of 1877, where Hayes agreed to end Reconstruction in exchange for recognition of his presidency. On March 2, 1877, the House and Senate confirmed Hayes as president. Tilden won 184 electoral votes to Hayes&#x27;s 165 in the first count, with the 20 votes from Florida, Louisiana, South Carolina, and Oregon disputed. To address this constitutional crisis, Congress established the Electoral Commission, which awarded all twenty votes and thus the presidency to Hayes in a strict partyline vote. Some Democratic representatives filibustered the commission&#x27;s decision, hoping to prevent Hayes&#x27;s inauguration; their filibuster was ultimately ended by party leader Samuel J. Randall.

It was the second of five U.S. presidential elections in which the winner did not win a plurality of the national popular vote, after the 1824 election. Although Tilden defeated Hayes in the official popular vote tally, the election involved substantial electoral fraud, voter intimidation by paramilitary groups like the Red Shirts, and disenfranchisement of black Republicans. The election had the highest voter turnout of the eligible voting-age population in American history, at 82.6%. Tilden&#x27;s 50.9% is the largest share of the popular vote received by a candidate who was not elected to the presidency, and was the only presidential election in U.S. history in which the losing candidate won a majority of the popular vote. Tilden was also the last person to win a majority of the popular vote until William McKinley in 1896. As of 2024, this marks the only presidential election in which both candidates were sitting governors.

==Nominations==

=== Republican Party nomination ===



It was widely assumed during the year 1875 that incumbent President Ulysses S. Grant would run for a third term as president despite the poor economic conditions, the numerous political scandals that had developed since he assumed office in 1869, and despite a longstanding tradition set by George Washington not to stay in office for more than two terms. Grant&#x27;s inner circle advised him to go for a third term and he almost did so, but on December 15, 1875, the House, by a sweeping 233–18 vote, passed a resolution declaring that the two-term tradition was to prevent a dictatorship. Later that year, Grant ruled himself out of running in 1876. He instead tried to persuade Secretary of State Hamilton Fish to run for the presidency, but the 67-year-old Fish declined since he believed himself too old for that role. Grant nonetheless sent a letter to the convention imploring them to nominate Fish, but the letter was misplaced and never read to the convention. Fish later confirmed that he would have declined the presidential nomination even if it had been offered to him.

When the Sixth Republican National Convention assembled in Cincinnati, Ohio, on June 14, 1876, James G. Blaine appeared to be the presidential nominee. On the first ballot, Blaine was just 100 votes short of a majority. His vote began to slide after the second ballot, however, as many Republicans feared that Blaine could not win the general election. Anti-Blaine delegates could not agree on a candidate until his total rose to 41% on the sixth ballot. Leaders of the reform Republicans met privately and considered alternatives. They chose the reforming Ohio Governor Rutherford B. Hayes, who had been gradually building support during the convention until he finished second on the sixth ballot. On the seventh ballot, Hayes was nominated for president with 384 votes, compared to 351 for Blaine and 21 for Benjamin Bristow. New York Representative William A. Wheeler was nominated for vice president by a much larger margin (366–89) over his chief rival, Frederick Theodore Frelinghuysen, who later served as a member of the Electoral Commission, which awarded the election to Hayes.



===Democratic Party nomination===

Democratic candidates:
* Samuel J. Tilden, governor of New York
* Thomas A. Hendricks, governor of Indiana
* Winfield Scott Hancock, United States Army major general from Pennsylvania
* William Allen, former governor of Ohio
* Thomas F. Bayard, U.S. senator from Delaware
* Joel Parker, former governor of New Jersey

The Democratic Party&#x27;s failure to nominate its own ticket in the previous presidential election, in which they had instead endorsed the Liberal Republican candidacy of Horace Greeley, had resulted in much debate about the party&#x27;s viability. Any doubts about the party&#x27;s future were dispelled firstly by the collapse of the Liberal Republicans in the aftermath of that election, and secondly by significant Democratic gains in the 1874 mid-term elections, which saw them take control of the House of Representatives for the first time in sixteen years.

The 12th Democratic National Convention assembled in St. Louis, Missouri, in June 1876, which was the first political convention ever held by one of the major American parties west of the Mississippi River. There were 5000 people jammed inside the auditorium in St. Louis amid hopes for the Democratic Party&#x27;s first presidential victory in 20 years. The platform called for immediate and sweeping reforms in response to the scandals that had plagued the Grant administration. Tilden won more than 400 votes on the first ballot and the presidential nomination by a landslide on the second.

Tilden defeated Thomas A. Hendricks, Winfield Scott Hancock, William Allen, Thomas F. Bayard, and Joel Parker for the presidential nomination. Tilden overcame strong opposition from &quot;Honest John&quot; Kelly, the leader of New York&#x27;s Tammany Hall, to obtain the presidential nomination. Thomas Hendricks was nominated for vice president since he was the only person to put forward for that position.

The Democratic platform pledged to replace the corruption of the Grant administration with honest, efficient government and to end &quot;the rapacity of carpetbag tyrannies&quot; in the South. It also called for treaty protection for naturalized United States citizens visiting their homelands, restrictions on Asian immigration, tariff reform, and opposition to land grants for railroads. It has been claimed that the voting Democrats received Tilden&#x27;s presidential nomination with more enthusiasm than any leader since Andrew Jackson.
Source: &quot;Official proceedings of the National Democratic convention, held in St. Louis, Mo., June 27th, 28th and 29th, 1876&quot;. (September 3, 2012).

Source: &quot;Official proceedings of the National Democratic convention, held in St. Louis, Mo., June 27th, 28th and 29th, 1876&quot;. (September 3, 2012).
Source: &quot;Official proceedings of the National Democratic convention, held in St. Louis, Mo., June 27th, 28th and 29th, 1876&quot; (September 3, 2012).

===Greenback Party nomination===

Greenback candidates:
* Peter Cooper, U.S. philanthropist from New York
* Andrew Curtin, former governor of Pennsylvania
* William Allen, former governor of Ohio
* Alexander Campbell, U.S. representative from Illinois

====Candidates gallery====
The Greenback Party had been organized by agricultural interests in Indianapolis, Indiana, in 1874 to urge the federal government to inflate the economy through the mass issuance of paper money called greenbacks. Its first national nominating convention was held in Indianapolis in the spring of 1876. Peter Cooper was nominated for president with 352 votes to 119 for three other contenders. The convention nominated Anti-Monopolist Senator Newton Booth of California for vice president. After Booth declined to run, the national committee chose Samuel Fenton Cary as his replacement on the ticket.

===Prohibition Party nomination===

The Prohibition Party, in its second national convention in Cleveland, nominated Green Clay Smith as its presidential candidate and Gideon T. Stewart as its vice presidential candidate.

===American National Party nomination===
This small political party used several different names, often with different names in different states. It was a continuation of the Anti-Masonic Party that met in 1872 and nominated Charles Francis Adams, Sr., for president. When Adams declined to run, the party did not contest the 1872 election.

The convention was held from June 8 to 10, 1875 in Liberty Hall, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. B.T. Roberts of New York served as chairman, and Jonathan Blanchard was the keynote speaker.

The platform supported the Reconstruction Amendments to the Constitution, international arbitration, the reading of the scriptures in public schools, specie payments, justice for Native Americans, abolition of the Electoral College, and prohibition of the sale of alcoholic beverages. It declared the first day of the week to be a day of rest for the United States. The platform opposed secret societies and monopolies.

The convention considered three potential presidential candidates: Charles F. Adams, Jonathan Blanchard, and James B. Walker. When Blanchard declined to run, Walker was unanimously nominated for president. The convention then nominated Donald Kirkpatrick of New York unanimously for vice president.

==General election==
===Campaign===


Tilden, who had prosecuted machine politicians in New York and sent the political boss William M. Tweed to jail, ran as a reform candidate against the background of the corruption of the Grant administration. Both parties backed civil service reform. Both sides mounted mudslinging campaigns, with Democratic attacks on Republican corruption being countered by Republicans raising the Civil War issue, a tactic that was ridiculed by Democrats, who called it &quot;waving the bloody shirt.&quot; Republicans chanted, &quot;Not every Democrat was a rebel, but every rebel was a Democrat.&quot;

Hayes was a virtual unknown outside his home state of Ohio, where he had served two terms as a US Representative and then two terms as governor. Henry Adams called Hayes &quot;a third-rate nonentity whose only recommendations are that he is obnoxious to no one&quot;. Hayes had served in the Civil War with distinction as colonel of the 23rd Ohio Regiment and was wounded several times, which made him marketable to veterans. He had later been brevetted as a major-general. His most important asset was his help to the Republican ticket in carrying Ohio, a crucial swing state. On the other side, the newspaperman John D. Defrees described Tilden as &quot;a very nice, prim, little, withered-up, fidgety old bachelor, about one-hundred and twenty-pounds avoirdupois, who never had a genuine impulse for many nor any affection for woman&quot;.

The Democratic strategy for victory in the South relied on paramilitary groups such as the Red Shirts and the White League. These groups saw themselves as the military wing of the Democrats. Using the strategy of the Mississippi Plan, they actively suppressed both black and white Republican voting. They violently disrupted meetings and rallies, attacked party organizers, and threatened potential voters with retaliation for voting Republican. 

Because it was considered improper for a candidate to pursue the presidency actively, neither Tilden nor Hayes appeared publicly during the campaign. Speaking and leading rallies were left to their surrogates.

===Colorado===
Colorado was admitted to the Union as the 38th state on August 1, 1876; this was the first presidential election in which the state sent electors. There was insufficient time or money to organize a presidential election in the new state. Therefore, Colorado&#x27;s state legislature selected the state&#x27;s three Electoral College electors. The Republican Party held a slim majority in the state legislature following a closely contested election on October 3, 1876. Many of the seats in that election had been decided by only a few hundred votes. On November 7, 1876, in a 50 to 24 vote, the state legislature chose Otto Mears, William Hadley, and Herman Beckurts to serve as the state&#x27;s electors for president. All three of the state electors cast their votes for Hayes. This was the last election in which any state chose electors through its state legislature, rather than by popular vote.

==Electoral disputes and Compromise of 1877==

Florida (with four electoral votes) and Louisiana (with eight) reported returns that favored Tilden, while Hayes led in South Carolina (with seven). However, the elections in each state were marked by electoral fraud and threats of violence against Republican voters. The most extreme case was in South Carolina, where an impossible 101 percent of all eligible voters in the state had their votes counted, and an estimated 150 Black Republicans were murdered. One of the points of contention revolved around the design of ballots. At the time, parties would print ballots or &quot;tickets&quot; to enable voters to support them in the open ballots. To aid illiterate voters, the parties would print symbols on the tickets, and in this election, many Democratic ballots were printed with the Republican symbol of Abraham Lincoln on them. The Republican-dominated state electoral commissions subsequently rejected enough Democratic votes to award their electoral votes to Hayes.

In two Southern states, the governor recognized by the United States had signed the Republican certificates; the Democratic certificates from Florida were signed by the state attorney-general and the newly elected Democratic governor. Those from Louisiana were signed by the Democratic gubernatorial candidate and those from South Carolina by no state official. The Tilden electors in South Carolina claimed that they had been chosen by the popular vote although they were rejected by the state election board.

Meanwhile, in Oregon, the vote of a single elector was disputed. The statewide result clearly favored Hayes, but the state&#x27;s Democratic governor, La Fayette Grover, claimed that one of the Republican electors, Ex-Postmaster John Watts, was ineligible under Article II, Section 1, of the United States Constitution since he had been a &quot;person holding an office of trust or profit under the United States.&quot; Grover substituted a Democratic elector in Watts&#x27;s place.

The two Republican electors dismissed Grover&#x27;s action and reported three votes for Hayes. However, the Democratic elector, C. A. Cronin, reported one vote for Tilden and two votes for Hayes. The two Republican electors presented a certificate signed by the secretary of state of Oregon, and Cronin and the two electors whom he appointed (Cronin voted for Tilden while his associates voted for Hayes) presented a certificate signed by the governor and attested by the secretary of state.

Ultimately, all three of Oregon&#x27;s votes were awarded to Hayes, who had a majority of one in the Electoral College. The Democrats claimed fraud, and suppressed excitement pervaded the country. Threats were even muttered that Hayes would never be inaugurated. In Columbus, Ohio, a shot was fired at Hayes&#x27;s residence as he sat down to dinner. After supporters marched to his home to call for the President, Hayes urged the crowd that &quot;it is impossible, at so early a time, to obtain the result&quot;. Grant quietly strengthened the military force in and around Washington.

The Constitution provides that &quot;the President of the Senate shall, in presence of the Senate and House of Representatives, open all the [electoral] certificates, and the votes shall then be counted.&quot; The Republicans held that the power to count the votes lay with the President of the Senate, with the House and Senate being mere spectators. The Democrats objected to that construction, since the President Pro Tempore of the Senate, the Republican Thomas W. Ferry, could then count the votes of the disputed states for Hayes.

The Democrats insisted that Congress should continue the practice followed since 1865: no vote objected to should be counted except by the concurrence of both houses. Since the House had a solid Democratic majority, rejecting the vote of one state, therefore, would elect Tilden.

Facing an unprecedented constitutional crisis, the Congress passed a law on January 29, 1877, to form a 15-member Electoral Commission, which would settle the result. Five members were selected from each house of Congress, and they were joined by five members of the United States Supreme Court, with William M. Evarts serving as counsel for the Republican Party. 
The majority party in each house named three members and the minority party two members. As the Republicans controlled the Senate and the Democrats controlled the House of Representatives, that yielded five Democratic and five Republican members of the commission. Of the Supreme Court justices, two Republicans and two Democrats were chosen, with the fifth to be selected by those four.

The justices first selected the independent Justice David Davis. According to one historian, &quot;No one, perhaps not even Davis himself, knew which presidential candidate he preferred.&quot; Just as the Electoral Commission Bill was passing Congress, the Illinois Legislature elected Davis to the Senate, and Democrats in the legislature believed that they had purchased Davis&#x27;s support by voting for him. However, they had miscalculated, as Davis promptly excused himself from the commission and resigned as a Justice to take his Senate seat. As all of the remaining available Justices were Republicans, Republican Justice Joseph P. Bradley, who was considered the most impartial remaining member of the court was selected. That selection proved decisive.
Since it was drawing perilously near to Inauguration Day, the commission met on January 31. Each of the disputed state election cases (Florida, Louisiana, Oregon, and South Carolina) was respectively submitted to the commission by Congress. Eminent counsel appeared for each side, and there were double sets of returns from every one of the states named.

The commission first decided not to question any returns that were &quot;prima facie&quot; lawful. Bradley then joined the other seven Republican committee members in a series of 8–7 votes that gave all 20 disputed electoral votes to Hayes, which gave Hayes a 185–184 electoral vote victory. The commission adjourned on March 2. Hayes privately took the oath of office the next day and was publicly sworn into office on March 5, 1877, and Hayes was inaugurated without disturbance.

The Compromise of 1877 might be a reason for the Democrats accepting the Electoral Commission. During intense closed-door meetings, Democratic leaders agreed reluctantly to accept Hayes as president in return for the withdrawal of federal troops from the last two Southern states that were still occupied: South Carolina and Louisiana. Republican leaders in return agreed on a number of handouts and entitlements, including federal subsidies for a transcontinental railroad line through the South. Although some of the promises were not kept, particularly the railroad proposal, that was enough for the time being to avert a dangerous standoff.

The returns accepted by the Commission put Hayes&#x27;s margin of victory in South Carolina at 889 votes, the second-closest popular vote margin in a decisive state in U.S. history, after the election of 2000, which was decided by 537 votes in Florida. In 2000, the margin of victory in the Electoral College for George W. Bush was five votes, as opposed to Hayes&#x27; one vote.

Upon his defeat, Tilden said, &quot;I can retire to public life with the consciousness that I shall receive from posterity the credit of having been elected to the highest position in the gift of the people, without any of the cares and responsibilities of the office.&quot;

Congress would eventually enact the Electoral Count Act in 1887 to provide more detailed rules for the counting of electoral votes, especially in cases of multiple slates of electors being received from a single state.

==Results==
37.1% of the voting age population and 82.6% of eligible voters participated in the election. According to the commission&#x27;s rulings, of the 2,249 counties and independent cities making returns, Tilden won in 1,301 (57.9%), and Hayes carried only 947 (42.1%). One county (&lt;0.1%) in Nevada split evenly between Tilden and Hayes.

The Greenback ticket did not have a major impact on the election&#x27;s outcome by attracting slightly under one percent of the popular vote; nonetheless, Cooper had the strongest performance of any third-party presidential candidate since John Bell in 1860. The Greenbacks&#x27; best showings were in Kansas, where Cooper earned just over six percent of the vote, and in Indiana, where he earned 17,207 votes, which far exceeded Tilden&#x27;s margin of victory of roughly 5,500 votes over Hayes in that state.

The election of 1876 was the last one held before the end of the Reconstruction era, which sought to protect the rights of African Americans in the South, who usually voted for Republican presidential candidates. No antebellum slave state would be carried by a Republican again until the 1896 realignment, which saw William McKinley carry Delaware, Maryland, West Virginia, and Kentucky. This is the closest electoral college result in American history, and the second-closest victory in the tipping point state with South Carolina being decided by 889 votes (only the 2000 election in Florida was closer). 

No Republican presidential candidate until Warren G. Harding in 1920 would carry any states that seceded and joined the Confederacy. That year, he carried Tennessee, which had never experienced a long period of occupation by federal troops and had been completely &quot;reconstructed&quot; well before the first presidential election of the Reconstruction period (1868). None of the Southern states that experienced long periods of occupation by federal troops was carried by a Republican again until Herbert Hoover in 1928, when he won Texas, Florida, North Carolina, and Virginia. 1876 proved to be the last election until 1956 in which the Republican nominee carried Louisiana, as well as the last in which the Republican won South Carolina until 1964. Both states would not defect from the Democratic ticket again until 1948, when they backed the &quot;Dixiecrat&quot; candidate Strom Thurmond.

18.33% of Hayes&#x27; votes came from the eleven states of the former Confederacy, with him taking 40.40% of the vote in that region. Although 1876 marked the last competitive two-party election in the South before the Democratic dominance of the South until 1948 and of the Border States until 1896, it was also the last presidential election (as of 2020) in which the Democrats won the wartime Unionist Mitchell County, North Carolina; Wayne County, Tennessee; Henderson County, Tennessee; and Lewis County, Kentucky. Hayes was also the only Republican president ever to be elected who failed to carry Indiana, and the first to win without Connecticut.
 



===Geography of results===

====Cartographic gallery====
===Results by state===
Source: Data from Walter Dean Burnham, &quot;Presidential ballots, 1836–1892&quot; (Johns Hopkins University Press, 1955) pp 247–57.

===States that flipped from Republican to Democratic===
*Alabama
*Arkansas
*Connecticut
*Delaware
*Indiana
*Mississippi
*New Jersey
*New York
*North Carolina
*Virginia
*West Virginia

===Close states===
Margin of victory less than 1% (7 electoral votes):
# &quot;South Carolina, 0.5% (889 votes) (tipping point state)&quot;

Margin of victory less between 1% and 5% (164 electoral votes):
#Ohio, 1.1% (7,516 votes)
#Indiana, 1.3% (5,515 votes)
#California, 1.8% (2,798 votes)
#Florida, 2.0% (922 votes)
#Pennsylvania, 2.4% (17,980 votes)
#Connecticut, 2.4% (2,894 votes)
#Wisconsin, 2.4% (6,141 votes)
#New York, 3.2% (32,742 votes)
#Louisiana, 3.3% (4,807 votes)
#Oregon, 3.5% (1,057 votes)
#Illinois, 3.5% (19,621 votes)
#New Hampshire, 3.8% (3,030 votes)

Margin of victory between 5% and 10% (33 electoral votes):
#Nevada, 5.5% (1,075 votes)
#New Jersey, 5.7% (12,445 votes)
#North Carolina, 7.2% (16,943 votes)
#Michigan, 7.9% (25,216 votes)

==Cultural references==
*The presidential election of 1876 is a major theme of Gore Vidal&#x27;s novel &quot;1876&quot;.

==See also==
* American election campaigns in the 19th century
* History of the United States (1865–1918)
* Inauguration of Rutherford B. Hayes
* 1876–77 United States House of Representatives elections
* 1876–77 United States Senate elections
* Third Party System
* Contested elections in American history

==References==
==Works cited==
* 

==Sources==
* John Bigelow, Author, Edited by, Nikki Oldaker, &quot;The Life of Samuel J. Tilden.&quot; (2009 Revised edition-retype-set-new photos). 444 pages, original 1895 edition
* Holt, Michael F. &quot;By One Vote: The Disputed Presidential Election of 1876.&quot; (2008). 304 pages, 
* Foley, Edward. 2016. &quot;Ballot Battles: The History of Disputed Elections in the United States&quot;. Oxford University Press.
* 
* Huntzicker, William E. &quot;Thomas Nast, Harper&#x27;s Weekly, and the Election of 1876.&quot; in &quot;After The War&quot; (Routledge, 2017) pp. 53–68.
* 
* , popular account
* Summers, Mark Wahlgren.&quot;The Press Gang: Newspapers and Politics, 1865–1878&quot; (1994)
* Summers, Mark Wahlgren. &quot;The Era of Good Stealings&quot; (1993), covers corruption 1868–1877
*Richard White, &quot;Corporations, Corruption, and the Modern Lobby: A Gilded Age Story of the West and the South in Washington, D.C.&quot; &quot;Southern Spaces&quot;, April 16, 2009


==Further reading==

* Calhoun, Charles W. &quot;Conceiving a New Republic: The Republican Party and the Southern Question, 1869–1900&quot; (University Press of Kansas, 2006) .
* Clendenen, Clarence C. &quot;President Hayes&#x27;&quot; Withdrawal&quot; of the Troops: An Enduring Myth.&quot; &quot;South Carolina Historical Magazine&quot; 70.4 (1969): 240–250. online
* De Santis, Vincent P. &quot; Rutherford B. Hayes and the Removal of the Troops and the End of Reconstruction,&quot; in &quot;Region, Race, and Reconstruction: Essays in Honor of C. Vann Woodward&quot; .ed by Morgan Kousser and James McPherson, (Oxford University Press, 1982) 417–451.
* Flynn, James Joseph.   &quot;The Disputed Election of 1876&quot; (PhD dissertation, Fordham University; ProQuest Dissertations Publishing, 1953. 10992419).
* Holt, Michael F. &quot;By one vote: the disputed presidential election of 1876&quot; (University Press of Kansas, 2008) online
* Palen, Marc-William. &quot;Election of 1876/Compromise of 1877.&quot; in &quot;A Companion to the Reconstruction Presidents 1865–1881&quot; (2014): 415–430. 
* Peskin, Allan. &quot;Was there a Compromise of 1877.&quot; &quot;Journal of American History&quot; 60.1 (1973): 63–75. online
** Woodward, C. Vann. &quot;Yes, there was a Compromise of 1877.&quot; &quot;Journal of American History&quot; 60#2 (1973): 215–23.
* Shofner, Jerrell H. &quot;Fraud and Intimidation in the Florida Election of 1876.&quot; &quot;Florida Historical Quarterly&quot; 42.4 (1964): 321–330. online
* Simpson, Brooks D. &quot;Ulysses S. Grant and the Electoral Crisis of 1876–77.&quot; &quot;Hayes Historical Journal&quot; . 11 (1992): 5–17.
* Sternstein, Jerome L. &quot;The Sickles Memorandum: Another Look at the Hayes-Tilden Election-Night Conspiracy.&quot; &quot;Journal of Southern History&quot; (1966): 342–357. online
* Zuczek, Richard. &quot;The last campaign of the Civil War: South Carolina and the revolution of 1876.&quot; &quot;Civil War History&quot; 42.1 (1996): 18–31. excerpt

===Primary sources===

* &quot;Appleton&#x27;s Annual Cyclopedia ...for 1876&quot; (1885), comprehensive state-by-state coverage
* Chester, Edward W &quot;A guide to political platforms&quot; (1977) online
* Porter, Kirk H. and Donald Bruce Johnson, eds. &quot;National party platforms, 1840–1964&quot; (1965) online 1840–1956

== External links ==
* Hayes Presidential Library with essays by historians
* Presidential Election of 1876: A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress
* Rutherford B. Hayes On The Election of 1876: Original Letter Shapell Manuscript Foundation
* 1876 popular vote by counties
* Hayes vs. Tilden: The Electoral College Controversy of 1876–1877
* Election of 1876 in Counting the Votes </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q47566" start="0" end="22" title="United States presidential election" label="Presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="40" end="53" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="75" end="85" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q35686" start="95" end="114" title="Rutherford B. Hayes" label="Rutherford B. Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="146" end="154" title="Democrat Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q281566" start="164" end="180" title="Samuel J. Tilden" label="Samuel J. Tilden"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="214" end="230" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q448778" start="300" end="315" title="James G. Blaine" label="James G. Blaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555551" start="422" end="457" title="1876 Republican National Convention" label="1876 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555536" start="513" end="548" title="1876 Democratic National Convention" label="1876 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983570" start="683" end="701" title="Compromise of 1877" label="Compromise of 1877"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="729" end="743" title="Reconstruction era" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="875" end="890" title="Electoral College (United States)" label="electoral votes"/>
<link wikidata="Q54322565" start="954" end="961" title="1876 United States presidential election in Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q58433538" start="963" end="972" title="1876 United States presidential election in Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q39046689" start="974" end="988" title="1876 United States presidential election in South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q96359727" start="994" end="1000" title="1876 United States presidential election in Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q380552" start="1027" end="1048" title="constitutional crisis" label="constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354979" start="1075" end="1095" title="Electoral Commission (United States)" label="Electoral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q624036" start="1221" end="1231" title="filibuster" label="filibuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q942678" start="1365" end="1382" title="Samuel J. Randall" label="Samuel J. Randall"/>
<link wikidata="Q24963437" start="1439" end="1511" title="List of United States presidential elections in which the winner lost the popular vote" label="in which the winner did not win a plurality of the national popular vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q618127" start="1523" end="1536" title="1824 United States presidential election" label="1824 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q692209" start="1639" end="1654" title="electoral fraud" label="electoral fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q692209" start="1656" end="1674" title="voter intimidation" label="voter intimidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305032" start="1707" end="1717" title="Red Shirts (United States)" label="Red Shirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282172" start="1723" end="1762" title="Disfranchisement after the Reconstruction era" label="disenfranchisement of black Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339847" start="1793" end="1806" title="voter turnout" label="voter turnout"/>
<link wikidata="Q24963437" start="1903" end="1998" title="List of United States presidential elections in which the winner lost the popular vote" label="largest share of the popular vote received by a candidate who was not elected to the presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q35041" start="2197" end="2213" title="William McKinley" label="William McKinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q699201" start="2217" end="2221" title="1896 United States presidential election" label="1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="2451" end="2467" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="2674" end="2691" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q685992" start="3084" end="3097" title="Hamilton Fish" label="Hamilton Fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="3527" end="3537" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q448778" start="3563" end="3578" title="James G. Blaine" label="James G. Blaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q310835" start="4321" end="4339" title="William A. Wheeler" label="William A. Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q709453" start="4428" end="4460" title="Frederick Theodore Frelinghuysen" label="Frederick Theodore Frelinghuysen"/>
<link wikidata="Q281566" start="4620" end="4636" title="Samuel J. Tilden" label="Samuel J. Tilden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="4650" end="4658" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q310843" start="4661" end="4680" title="Thomas A. Hendricks" label="Thomas A. Hendricks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="4694" end="4701" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q435517" start="4704" end="4726" title="Winfield Scott Hancock" label="Winfield Scott Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="4728" end="4746" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="4766" end="4778" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q880659" start="4781" end="4794" title="William Allen (governor)" label="William Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="4815" end="4819" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q708034" start="4822" end="4838" title="Thomas F. Bayard" label="Thomas F. Bayard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="4858" end="4866" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q886702" start="4869" end="4880" title="Joel Parker (politician)" label="Joel Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="4901" end="4911" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540796" start="5054" end="5072" title="Liberal Republican Party (United States)" label="Liberal Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q436790" start="5086" end="5100" title="Horace Greeley" label="Horace Greeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="5534" end="5543" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="5669" end="5686" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q310843" start="6092" end="6111" title="Thomas A. Hendricks" label="Thomas A. Hendricks"/>
<link wikidata="Q435517" start="6113" end="6135" title="Winfield Scott Hancock" label="Winfield Scott Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q880659" start="6137" end="6150" title="William Allen (governor)" label="William Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q708034" start="6152" end="6168" title="Thomas F. Bayard" label="Thomas F. Bayard"/>
<link wikidata="Q886702" start="6174" end="6185" title="Joel Parker (politician)" label="Joel Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q612955" start="6258" end="6287" title="John Kelly (New York politician)" label="&amp;quot;Honest John&amp;quot; Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q432139" start="6319" end="6331" title="Tammany Hall" label="Tammany Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="7012" end="7026" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q935291" start="7558" end="7570" title="Peter Cooper" label="Peter Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q185733" start="7577" end="7591" title="philanthropist" label="philanthropist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="7597" end="7605" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q504966" start="7608" end="7621" title="Andrew Curtin" label="Andrew Curtin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="7642" end="7654" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q880659" start="7657" end="7670" title="William Allen (governor)" label="William Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="7691" end="7695" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659983" start="7698" end="7716" title="Alexander Campbell (Illinois politician)" label="Alexander Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="7743" end="7751" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q475261" start="7784" end="7799" title="Greenback Party" label="Greenback Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="7848" end="7860" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550749" start="7981" end="7991" title="United States notes" label="greenbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q935291" start="8082" end="8094" title="Peter Cooper" label="Peter Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774232" start="8198" end="8213" title="Anti-Monopoly Party" label="Anti-Monopolist"/>
<link wikidata="Q880628" start="8222" end="8234" title="Newton Booth" label="Newton Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218239" start="8327" end="8345" title="Samuel Fenton Cary" label="Samuel Fenton Cary"/>
<link wikidata="Q515856" start="8421" end="8438" title="Prohibition Party" label="Prohibition Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="8477" end="8486" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544581" start="8498" end="8514" title="Green Clay Smith" label="Green Clay Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559669" start="8549" end="8566" title="Gideon T. Stewart" label="Gideon T. Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q574701" start="8779" end="8797" title="Anti-Masonic Party" label="Anti-Masonic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q75174" start="8829" end="8855" title="Charles Francis Adams, Sr." label="Charles Francis Adams, Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="9011" end="9021" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6272606" start="9086" end="9104" title="Jonathan Blanchard (abolitionist)" label="Jonathan Blanchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="9310" end="9326" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353450" start="9977" end="9993" title="William M. Tweed" label="William M. Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241112" start="10077" end="10097" title="Grant administration" label="Grant administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975559" start="10354" end="10377" title="waving the bloody shirt" label="waving the bloody shirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q458390" start="10628" end="10639" title="Henry Adams" label="Henry Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6228131" start="11097" end="11112" title="John D. Defrees" label="John D. Defrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305032" start="11418" end="11428" title="Red Shirts (Southern United States)" label="Red Shirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2516642" start="11437" end="11449" title="White League" label="White League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879249" start="11544" end="11560" title="Mississippi Plan" label="Mississippi Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="12001" end="12009" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="13762" end="13777" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q884129" start="14591" end="14608" title="La Fayette Grover" label="La Fayette Grover"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="14732" end="14758" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="15683" end="15697" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503195" start="16463" end="16478" title="Thomas W. Ferry" label="Thomas W. Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q380552" start="16847" end="16868" title="constitutional crisis" label="constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354979" start="16937" end="16957" title="Electoral Commission (United States)" label="Electoral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="17090" end="17117" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q709167" start="17124" end="17141" title="William M. Evarts" label="William M. Evarts"/>
<link wikidata="Q374427" start="17629" end="17640" title="David Davis (Supreme Court justice)" label="David Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587475" start="18208" end="18225" title="Joseph P. Bradley" label="Joseph P. Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q837138" start="18770" end="18781" title="prima facie" label="prima facie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6013791" start="19136" end="19157" title="Inauguration of Rutherford B. Hayes" label="Hayes was inaugurated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983570" start="19184" end="19202" title="Compromise of 1877" label="Compromise of 1877"/>
<link wikidata="Q327959" start="20018" end="20034" title="2000 United States presidential election" label="election of 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="20139" end="20153" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q98114083" start="20519" end="20538" title="Electoral Count Act" label="Electoral Count Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="21004" end="21010" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349142" start="21291" end="21300" title="John Bell (Tennessee politician)" label="John Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q698842" start="21304" end="21308" title="1860 United States presidential election" label="1860"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573058" start="21790" end="21801" title="slave states and free states" label="slave state"/>
<link wikidata="Q699201" start="21851" end="21855" title="1896 United States presidential election" label="1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q35041" start="21879" end="21895" title="William McKinley" label="William McKinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q35286" start="22215" end="22232" title="Warren G. Harding" label="Warren G. Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q699343" start="22236" end="22240" title="1920 United States presidential election" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q698955" start="22536" end="22540" title="1868 United States presidential election" label="1868"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="22673" end="22687" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q699380" start="22691" end="22695" title="1928 United States presidential election" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q699567" start="22797" end="22801" title="1956 United States presidential election" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q699646" start="22922" end="22926" title="1964 United States presidential election" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q568973" start="22996" end="23000" title="1948 United States presidential election" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231756" start="23029" end="23038" title="Dixiecrat" label="Dixiecrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q324719" start="23055" end="23069" title="Strom Thurmond" label="Strom Thurmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q506337" start="23477" end="23508" title="Mitchell County, North Carolina" label="Mitchell County, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q494970" start="23510" end="23533" title="Wayne County, Tennessee" label="Wayne County, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q495031" start="23535" end="23562" title="Henderson County, Tennessee" label="Henderson County, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q498072" start="23568" end="23590" title="Lewis County, Kentucky" label="Lewis County, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964664" start="23830" end="23849" title="Walter Dean Burnham" label="Walter Dean Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="24003" end="24010" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="24012" end="24020" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="24022" end="24033" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="24035" end="24043" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="24045" end="24052" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="24054" end="24065" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="24067" end="24077" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="24079" end="24087" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="24089" end="24103" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="24105" end="24113" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="24115" end="24128" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q167821" start="24973" end="24983" title="Gore Vidal" label="Gore Vidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555538" start="25003" end="25007" title="1876 (novel)" label="1876"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745452" start="25031" end="25078" title="American election campaigns in the 19th century" label="American election campaigns in the 19th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q2188756" start="25081" end="25121" title="History of the United States (1865–1918)" label="History of the United States (1865–1918)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6013791" start="25124" end="25159" title="Inauguration of Rutherford B. Hayes" label="Inauguration of Rutherford B. Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511338" start="25162" end="25218" title="1876–77 United States House of Representatives elections" label="1876–77 United States House of Representatives elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348074" start="25221" end="25259" title="1876–77 United States Senate elections" label="1876–77 United States Senate elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784926" start="25262" end="25280" title="Third Party System" label="Third Party System"/>
<link wikidata="Q115822889" start="25283" end="25322" title="Contested elections in American history" label="Contested elections in American history"/>
<link wikidata="Q960376" start="25373" end="25385" title="John Bigelow" label="John Bigelow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329939" start="26160" end="26173" title="Richard White (historian)" label="Richard White"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40405" wikidata="Q314399" url="?curid=40405" title="George Whitefield">
<text>George Whitefield (; 30 September 1770), also known as George Whitfield, was an English Anglican minister and preacher who was one of the founders of Methodism and the evangelical movement. Born in Gloucester, he matriculated at Pembroke College, Oxford in 1732. There, he joined the &quot;Holy Club&quot; and was introduced to John and Charles Wesley, with whom he would work closely in his later ministry. Unlike the Wesleys, he embraced Calvinism.

Whitefield was ordained after receiving his Bachelor of Arts degree. He immediately began preaching, but he did not settle as the minister of any Church of England parish; rather, he became an itinerant preacher and evangelist. In 1740, Whitefield traveled to British North America where he preached a series of Christian revivals that became part of the First Great Awakening. His methods were controversial, and he engaged in numerous debates and disputes with other clergymen.

Whitefield received widespread recognition during his ministry; he preached at least 18,000 times to perhaps ten million listeners in the British Empire. Whitefield could enthrall large audiences through a potent combination of drama, religious eloquence, and patriotism. He used the technique of evoking strong emotion, then using the vulnerability of his enthralled audience to preach.

==Early life==

Whitefield was born on at the Bell Inn, Southgate Street, Gloucester. Whitefield was the fifth son (seventh and last child) of Thomas Whitefield and Elizabeth Edwards, who kept an inn at Gloucester. His father died when George was only two years old, and he subsequently helped his mother with the inn. At an early age, he found that he had a passion and talent for acting in the theatre, a passion that he would carry on with the very theatrical re-enactments of Bible stories he told during his sermons. He was educated at The Crypt School in Gloucester and at Pembroke College, Oxford.

Because business at the inn had diminished, Whitefield did not have the means to pay for his tuition. He therefore came up to the University of Oxford as a servitor, the lowest rank of undergraduates. Granted free tuition, he acted as a servant to fellows and fellow-commoners; duties including teaching them in the morning, helping them bathe, cleaning their rooms, carrying their books, and assisting them with work. But, Whitfield would later confess that though he did good works and tried to obey the law of God, he was not yet truly converted to Christ. It was Henry Scougal&#x27;s book, &quot;The Life of God in the Soul of Man&quot;, that Whitfield says opened his eyes to the Gospel and led to his conversion. It was that book, he said, that God used to show him that he was still lost despite all his attempts to gain the favor of God by means of good works. Only by God&#x27;s grace can a person realize they have offended God and realize also their need for Jesus Christ, God&#x27;s Son, and His righteousness imputed to them by faith. Henry Scougal&#x27;s book showed him the need for a man to be born of God from above, and that this is a supernatural work of the Holy Spirit creating a new heart and a new nature within that wants to serve God, not in order to be saved, but because one has been already graciously and undeservedly saved. In 1736, after Whitfield&#x27;s conversion, the Bishop of Gloucester ordained him a deacon of the Church of England.

==Evangelism==

Whitefield preached his first sermon at St Mary de Crypt Church in his home town of Gloucester, a week after his ordination as deacon. The Church of England did not assign him a church, so he began preaching in parks and fields in England on his own, reaching out to people who normally did not attend church. 

In 1738 he went to Christ Church in Savannah, Province of Georgia, in the American colonies which had been founded by John Wesley while he was in Savannah. While there Whitefield decided that one of the great needs of the area was an orphan house. He decided this would be his life&#x27;s work. In 1739 he returned to England to raise funds, as well as to receive priest&#x27;s orders. While preparing for his return, he preached to large congregations. At the suggestion of friends he preached to the miners of Kingswood, outside Bristol, in the open air. Because he was returning to Georgia he invited John Wesley to take over his Bristol congregations and to preach in the open air for the first time at Kingswood and then at Blackheath, London.

Whitefield, like many other 18th-century Anglican evangelicals such as Augustus Toplady, John Newton, and William Romaine, accepted a plain reading of Article 17—the Church of England&#x27;s doctrine of predestination—and disagreed with the Wesley brothers&#x27; Arminian views on the doctrine of the atonement. However, Whitefield finally did what his friends hoped he would not do—hand over the entire ministry to John Wesley. Whitefield formed and was the president of the first Methodist conference, but he soon relinquished the position to concentrate on evangelistic work.

Three churches were established in England in his name—one in Penn Street, Bristol, and two in London, in Moorfields and in Tottenham Court Road—all three of which became known by the name of &quot;Whitefield&#x27;s Tabernacle&quot;. The society meeting at the second Kingswood School at Kingswood was eventually also named Whitefield&#x27;s Tabernacle. Whitefield acted as chaplain to Selina, Countess of Huntingdon, and some of his followers joined the Countess of Huntingdon&#x27;s Connexion, whose chapels were built by Selina, where a form of Calvinistic Methodism similar to Whitefield&#x27;s was taught. Many of Selina&#x27;s chapels were built in the English and Welsh counties, and one, Spa Fields Chapel, was erected in London.

==Bethesda Orphanage==
Whitefield&#x27;s endeavour to build an orphanage in Georgia was central to his preaching. The Bethesda Orphanage and his preaching comprised the &quot;two-fold task&quot; that occupied the rest of his life. On 25 March 1740, construction began. Whitefield wanted the orphanage to be a place of strong Gospel influence, with a wholesome atmosphere and strong discipline. Having raised the money by his preaching, Whitefield &quot;insisted on sole control of the orphanage&quot;. He refused to give the trustees a financial accounting. The trustees also objected to Whitefield&#x27;s using &quot;a wrong method&quot; to control the children, who &quot;are often kept praying and crying all the night&quot;.

In 1740 he engaged Moravian Brethren from Georgia to build an orphanage for negro children on land he had bought in the Lehigh Valley of Pennsylvania. Following a theological disagreement, he dismissed them and was unable to complete the building, which the Moravians subsequently bought and completed. This now is the Whitefield House in the center of the Moravian borough of Nazareth, Pennsylvania.

==Revival meetings==
Beginning in 1740, Whitefield preached nearly every day for months to large crowds as large as eighty thousand people as he travelled throughout the colonies, especially New England. His journey on horseback from New York City to Charleston, South Carolina, was at that time the longest in North America ever documented. Like Jonathan Edwards, he developed a style of preaching that elicited emotional responses from his audiences. But Whitefield had charisma, and his loud voice, his small stature, and even his cross-eyed appearance (which some people took as a mark of divine favor) all served to help make him one of the first celebrities in the American colonies. Like Edwards, Whitefield preached staunchly Calvinist theology that was in line with the &quot;moderate Calvinism&quot; of the Thirty-nine Articles. While explicitly affirming God&#x27;s sole agency in salvation, Whitefield freely offered the Gospel, saying at the end of his sermons: &quot;Come poor, lost, undone sinner, come just as you are to Christ.&quot;

To Whitefield &quot;the gospel message was so critically important that he felt compelled to use all earthly means to get the word out.&quot; Thanks to widespread dissemination of print media, perhaps half of all colonists eventually heard about, read about, or read something written by Whitefield. He employed print systematically, sending advance men to put up broadsides and distribute handbills announcing his sermons. He also arranged to have his sermons published. Much of Whitefield&#x27;s publicity was the work of William Seward, a wealthy layman who accompanied Whitefield. Seward acted as Whitefield&#x27;s &quot;fund-raiser, business co-ordinator, and publicist&quot;. He furnished newspapers and booksellers with material, including copies of Whitefield&#x27;s writings.

When Whitefield returned to England in 1742, an estimated crowd of 20–30,000 met him. One such open-air congregation took place on Minchinhampton Common, Gloucestershire. Whitefield preached to the &quot;Rodborough congregation&quot;—a gathering of 10,000 people—at a place now known as &quot;Whitefield&#x27;s tump&quot;. Whitefield sought to influence the colonies after he returned to England. He contracted to have his autobiographical &quot;Journals&quot; published throughout America. These &quot;Journals&quot; have been characterized as &quot;the ideal vehicle for crafting a public image that could work in his absence.&quot; They depicted Whitefield in the &quot;best possible light&quot;. When he returned to America for his third tour in 1745, he was better known than when he had left.

==Slaveholder==
Whitefield was a plantation owner and slaveholder and viewed the work of slaves as essential for funding his orphanage&#x27;s operations. John Wesley denounced slavery as &quot;the sum of all villainies&quot; and detailed its abuses. However, defenses of slavery were common among 18th-century Protestants, especially missionaries who used the institution to emphasize God&#x27;s providence. Whitefield was at first conflicted about slaves. He believed that they were human and was angered that they were treated as &quot;subordinate creatures&quot;. Nevertheless, Whitefield and his friend James Habersham played an important role in the reintroduction of slavery to Georgia. Slavery had been outlawed in the young colony of Georgia in 1735. In 1747, Whitefield attributed the financial woes of his Bethesda Orphanage to Georgia&#x27;s prohibition of black people in the colony. He argued that &quot;the constitution of that colony [Georgia] is very bad, and it is impossible for the inhabitants to subsist&quot; while blacks were banned.

===Advocate of slavery===
Between 1748 and 1750, Whitefield campaigned for the legalisation of African-American emigration into the colony because the trustees of Georgia had banned slavery. Whitefield argued that the colony would never be prosperous unless slaves were allowed to farm the land. Whitefield wanted slavery legalized for the prosperity of the colony as well as for the financial viability of the Bethesda Orphanage. &quot;Had Negroes been allowed&quot; to live in Georgia, he said, &quot;I should now have had a sufficiency to support a great many orphans without expending above half the sum that has been laid out.&quot; Whitefield&#x27;s push for the legalization of slave emigration to Georgia &quot;cannot be explained solely on the basics of economics&quot;. It was also his hope for their adoption and for their eternal salvation.

Black slaves were permitted to live in Georgia in 1751. Whitefield saw the &quot;legalization of (black residency) as part personal victory and part divine will&quot;. Whitefield argued a scriptural justification for black residency as slaves. He increased the number of the black children at his orphanage, using his preaching to raise money to house them. Whitefield became &quot;perhaps the most energetic, and conspicuous, evangelical defender and practitioner of the rights of black people&quot;. By propagating such &quot;a theological defense for&quot; black residency, Whitefield helped slaveholders prosper. Upon his death, Whitefield left everything in the orphanage to the Countess of Huntingdon. This included 4,000 acres of land and 49 black slaves.

===On the Excesses of Slavery===
In 1740, during his second visit to America, Whitefield published &quot;an open letter to the planters of South Carolina, Virginia, and Maryland&quot; chastising them for their cruelty to their slaves. He wrote, &quot;I think God has a Quarrel with you for your Abuse of and Cruelty to the poor Negroes.&quot; Furthermore, Whitefield wrote: &quot;Your dogs are caressed and fondled at your tables; but your slaves who are frequently styled dogs or beasts, have not an equal privilege.&quot; However, Whitefield &quot;stopped short of rendering a moral judgment on slavery itself as an institution&quot;.

Whitefield is remembered as one of the first to preach to slaves. Some have claimed that the Bethesda Orphanage &quot;set an example of humane treatment&quot; of black people. Phillis Wheatley (1753–1784), who was a slave, wrote a poem &quot;On the Death of the Rev. Mr. George Whitefield&quot; in 1770. The first line calls Whitefield a &quot;happy saint&quot;.

==Relationship with Benjamin Franklin==
Benjamin Franklin attended a revival meeting in Philadelphia and was greatly impressed with Whitefield&#x27;s ability to deliver a message to such a large group. Franklin had previously dismissed as exaggeration reports of Whitefield preaching to crowds of the order of tens of thousands in England. When listening to Whitefield preaching from the Philadelphia court house, Franklin walked away towards his shop in Market Street until he could no longer hear Whitefield distinctly—Whitefield could be heard over 500 feet. He then estimated his distance from Whitefield and calculated the area of a semicircle centred on Whitefield. Allowing two square feet per person he computed that Whitefield could be heard by over 30,000 people in the open air. After one of Whitefield&#x27;s sermons, Franklin noted the:

Franklin was an ecumenist and approved of Whitefield&#x27;s appeal to members of many denominations but unlike Whitefield was not an evangelical. He admired Whitefield as a fellow intellectual, and published several of his tracts, but thought Whitefield&#x27;s plan to run an orphanage in Georgia would lose money. A lifelong close friendship developed between the revivalist preacher and the worldly Franklin. True loyalty based on genuine affection, coupled with a high value placed on friendship, helped their association grow stronger over time. Letters exchanged between Franklin and Whitefield can be found at the American Philosophical Society in Philadelphia. These letters document the creation of an orphanage for boys named the Charity School. In 1749, Franklin chose the Whitefield meeting house, with its Charity School, to be purchased as the site of the newly-formed Academy of Philadelphia which opened in 1751, followed in 1755 with the College of Philadelphia, both the predecessors of the University of Pennsylvania. A statue of George Whitefield was located in the Dormitory Quadrangle, standing in front of the Morris and Bodine sections of the present Ware College House on the University of Pennsylvania campus. On 2 July 2020, the University of Pennsylvania announced they would be removing the statue because of Whitefield&#x27;s connection to slavery.

==Marriage==

&quot;I believe it is God&#x27;s will that I should marry&quot;, George Whitefield wrote to a friend in 1740. But he was concerned: &quot;I pray God that I may not have a wife till I can live as though I had none.&quot; That ambivalence—believing God willed a wife, yet wanting to live as if without one—brought Whitefield a disappointing love life and a largely unhappy marriage.

On 14 November 1741 Whitefield married Elizabeth (née Gwynne), a widow previously known as Elizabeth James. After their 1744–1748 stay in America, she never accompanied him on his travels. Whitefield reflected that &quot;none in America could bear her&quot;. His wife believed that she had been &quot;but a load and burden&quot; to him. In 1743 after four miscarriages, Elizabeth bore the couple&#x27;s only child, a son. The baby died at four months old. Twenty-five years later, Elizabeth died of a fever on 9 August 1768 and was buried in a vault at the Tottenham Court Road Chapel. At the end of the 19th century the Chapel needed restoration and all those interred there, except Augustus Toplady, were moved to Chingford Mount cemetery in north London; her grave is unmarked in its new location.

Cornelius Winter, who for a time lived with the Whitefields, observed of Whitefield, &quot;He was not happy in his wife.&quot; And, &quot;He did not intentionally make his wife unhappy. He always preserved great decency and decorum in his conduct towards her. Her death set his mind much at liberty.&quot; After Elizabeth&#x27;s death, however, Whitfield said, “I feel the loss of my right hand daily.”

==Death and legacy==
In 1770, the 55-year-old Whitefield continued preaching in spite of poor health. He said, &quot;I would rather wear out than rust out.&quot; His last sermon was preached in a field &quot;atop a large barrel&quot;. The next morning, 30 September 1770, Whitefield died in the parsonage of Old South Presbyterian Church, Newburyport, Massachusetts, and was buried, according to his wishes, in a crypt under the pulpit of this church. A bust of Whitefield is in the collection of the Gloucester City Museum &amp; Art Gallery.
It was John Wesley who preached his funeral sermon in London, at Whitefield&#x27;s request.

Whitefield left almost £1,500 () to friends and family. Furthermore, he had deposited £1,000 () for his wife if he predeceased her and had contributed £3,300 () to the Bethesda Orphanage. &quot;Questions concerning the source of his personal wealth dogged his memory. His will stated that all this money had lately been left him &#x27;in a most unexpected way and unthought of means.&#x27;&quot;

In an age when crossing the Atlantic Ocean was a long and hazardous adventure, he visited America seven times, making 13 ocean crossings in total. (He died in America.) It is estimated that throughout his life, he preached more than 18,000 formal sermons, of which 78 have been published. In addition to his work in North America and England, he made 15 journeys to Scotland—most famously to the &quot;Preaching Braes&quot; of Cambuslang in 1742—two journeys to Ireland, and one each to Bermuda, Gibraltar, and the Netherlands. In England and Wales, Whitefield&#x27;s itinerary included every county.

Whitfield County, Georgia, is named after Whitefield. When the act by the Georgia General Assembly was written to create the county, the &quot;e&quot; was omitted from the spelling of the name to reflect the pronunciation of the name.

George Whitefield College, Whitefield College of the Bible, and Whitefield Theological Seminary are all named after him. The Banner of Truth Trust&#x27;s logo depicts Whitefield preaching.

 summarizes Whitefield&#x27;s legacy.

#&quot;Whitefield was the most influential Anglo-American evangelical leader of the eighteenth century.&quot;
#&quot;He also indelibly marked the character of evangelical Christianity.&quot;
#He &quot;was the first internationally famous itinerant preacher and the first modern transatlantic celebrity of any kind.&quot;
#&quot;Perhaps he was the greatest evangelical preacher that the world has ever seen.&quot;

Mark Galli wrote of Whitefield&#x27;s legacy:

==Relation to other Methodist leaders==

In terms of theology, Whitefield, unlike Wesley, was a supporter of Calvinism. The two differed on eternal election, final perseverance, and sanctification, but were reconciled as friends and co-workers, each going his own way. It is a prevailing misconception that Whitefield was not primarily an organizer like Wesley. However, as Luke Tyerman, a historian of Wesley, states, &quot;It is notable that the first Calvinistic Methodist Association was held eighteen months before Wesley held his first Methodist Conference.&quot; He was a man of profound experience, which he communicated to audiences with clarity and passion. His patronization by Selina Hastings, Countess of Huntingdon, reflected this emphasis on practice.

==Opposition and controversy==
Whitefield welcomed opposition because as he said, &quot;the more I am opposed, the more joy I feel&quot;. He proved himself adept at creating controversy. In his 1740 visit to Charles Town, it &quot;took Whitefield only four days to plunge Charles Town into religious and social controversy.&quot; Whitefield thought he might be martyred for his views. After he attacked the established church he predicted that he would &quot;be set at nought by the Rabbies of our Church, and perhaps at last be killed by them&quot;.

===Clergy===
Whitefield chastised other clergy for teaching only &quot;the shell and shadow of religion&quot; because they did not hold the necessity of a new birth, without which a person would be &quot;thrust down into Hell&quot;. In his 1740–41 visit to North America (as he had done in England), he attacked other clergy (mostly Anglican) calling them &quot;God&#x27;s persecutors&quot;. He said that Edmund Gibson, Bishop of London with supervision over Anglican clergy in America, knew no &quot;more of Christianity, than Mahaomet, or an Infidel&quot;. After Whitefield preached at St. Philip&#x27;s Episcopal Church, Charleston, South Carolina, the Commissary, Alexander Garden, suspended him as a &quot;vagabond clergyman.&quot; After being suspended, Whitefield attacked all South Carolina&#x27;s Anglican clergy in print. Whitefield issued a blanket indictment of New England&#x27;s Congregational ministers for their &quot;lack of zeal&quot;.

In 1740, Whitefield published attacks on &quot;the works of two of Anglicanism&#x27;s revered seventeenth-century authors&quot;. Whitefield wrote that John Tillotson, archbishop of Canterbury (1691–1694), had &quot;no more been a true Christian than had Muhammad&quot;. He also attacked Richard Allestree&#x27;s &quot;The Whole Duty of Man&quot;, one of Anglicanism&#x27;s most popular spiritual tracts. At least once Whitefield had his followers burn the tract &quot;with great Detestation&quot;. In England and Scotland (1741–1744), Whitefield bitterly accused John Wesley of undermining his work. He preached against Wesley, arguing that Wesley&#x27;s attacks on predestination had alienated &quot;very many of my spiritual children&quot;. Wesley replied that Whitefield&#x27;s attacks were &quot;treacherous&quot; and that Whitefield had made himself &quot;odious and contemptible&quot;. However, the two reconciled in later life. Along with Wesley, Whitefield had been influenced by the Moravian Church, but in 1753 he condemned them and attacked their leader, Count Nicolaus Zinzendorf, and their practices. When Joseph Trapp criticized Whitefield&#x27;s &quot;Journals&quot;, Whitefield retorted that Trapp was &quot;no Christian but a servant of Satan&quot;.

English, Scottish, and American clergy attacked Whitefield, often in response to his attacks on them and Anglicanism. Early in his career, Whitefield criticized the Church of England. In response, clergy called Whitefield one of &quot;the young quacks in divinity&quot; who are &quot;breaking the peace and unity&quot; of the church. From 1738 to 1741, Whitefield issued seven &quot;Journals&quot;. A sermon in St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral depicted them as &quot;a medley of vanity, and nonsense, and blasphemy jumbled together&quot;. Trapp called the &quot;Journals&quot; &quot;blasphemous&quot; and accused Whitefield of being &quot;besotted either with pride or madness&quot;. In England, by 1739 when he was ordained priest, Whitefield wrote that &quot;the spirit of the clergy began to be much embittered&quot; and that &quot;churches were gradually denied me&quot;. In response to Whitefield&#x27;s &quot;Journals&quot;, the bishop of London, Edmund Gibson, published a 1739 pastoral letter criticizing Whitefield. Whitefield responded by labelling Anglican clergy as &quot;lazy, non-spiritual, and pleasure seeking&quot;. He rejected ecclesiastical authority claiming that &#x27;the whole world is now my parish&#x27;.

In 1740, Whitefield had attacked Tillotson and Richard Allestree&#x27;s &quot;The Whole Duty of Man&quot;. These attacks resulted in hostile responses and reduced attendance at his London open-air preaching. In 1741, Whitefield made his first visit to Scotland at the invitation of &quot;Ralph and Ebenezer Erskine, leaders of the breakaway Associate Presbytery. When they demanded and Whitefield refused that he preach only in their churches, they attacked him as a &quot;sorcerer&quot; and a &quot;vain-glorious, self-seeking, puffed-up creature&quot;. In addition, Whitefield&#x27;s collecting money for his Bethesda orphanage, combined with the hysteria evoked by his open-air sermons, resulted in bitter attacks in Edinburgh and Glasgow.&quot;

Whitefield&#x27;s itinerant preaching throughout the colonies was opposed by Bishop Benson who had ordained him for a settled ministry in Georgia. Whitefield replied that if bishops did not authorize his itinerant preaching, God would give him the authority. In 1740, Jonathan Edwards invited Whitefield to preach in his church in Northampton. Edwards was &quot;deeply disturbed by his unqualified appeals to emotion, his openly judging those he considered unconverted, and his demand for instant conversions&quot;. Whitefield refused to discuss Edwards&#x27; misgivings with him. Later, Edwards delivered a series of sermons containing but &quot;thinly veiled critiques&quot; of Whitefield&#x27;s preaching, &quot;warning against over-dependence upon a preacher&#x27;s eloquence and fervency&quot;. During Whitefield&#x27;s 1744–1748 visit to America, ten critical pamphlets were published, two by officials of Harvard and Yale. This criticism was in part evoked by Whitefield&#x27;s criticism of &quot;their education and Christian commitment&quot; in his Journal of 1741. Whitefield saw this opposition as &quot;a conspiracy&quot; against him. Whitefield would be derided with names such as &quot;Dr. Squintum&quot;, mocking him for his esotropia.

===Laity===
When Whitefield preached in a dissenting church and &quot;the congregation&#x27;s response was dismal,&quot; he ascribed the response to &quot;the people&#x27;s being hardened&quot; as were &quot;Pharaoh and the Egyptians&quot; in the Bible.

Many New Englanders claimed that Whitefield destroyed &quot;New England&#x27;s orderly parish system, communities, and even families&quot;. The &quot;Declaration of the Association of the County of New Haven, 1745&quot; stated that after Whitefield&#x27;s preaching &quot;religion is now in a far worse state than it was&quot;. After Whitefield preached in Charlestown, a local newspaper article attacked him as &quot;blasphemous, uncharitable, and unreasonable.&quot; After Whitefield condemned Moravians and their practices, his former London printer (a Moravian) called Whitefield &quot;a Mahomet, a Caesar, an imposter, a Don Quixote, a devil, the beast, the man of sin, the Antichrist&quot;.

In the open air in Dublin, Ireland (1757), Whitefield condemned Roman Catholicism, inciting an attack by &quot;hundreds and hundreds of papists&quot; who cursed and wounded him severely and smashed his portable pulpit. On various occasions, a woman assaulted Whitefield with &quot;scissors and a pistol, and her teeth&quot;. &quot;Stones and dead cats&quot; were thrown at him. A man almost killed him with a brass-headed cane. &quot;Another climbed a tree to urinate on him.&quot; In 1760, Whitefield was burlesqued by Samuel Foote in &quot;The Minor&quot;.

===Nobility===
Selina Hastings, Countess of Huntingdon, made Whitefield her personal chaplain. In her chapel, it was noted that his preaching was &quot;more Considered among persons of a Superior Rank&quot; who attended the countess&#x27;s services. Whitefield was humble before the countess saying that he cried when he was &quot;thinking of your Ladyship&#x27;s condescending to patronize such a dead dog as I am&quot;. He now said that he &quot;highly esteemed bishops of the Church of England because of their sacred character&quot;. He confessed that in &quot;many things&quot; he had &quot;judged and acted wrong&quot; and had &quot;been too bitter in my zeal&quot;. In 1763, in a defense of Methodism, Whitefield &quot;repeated contrition for much contained in his &quot;Journals&quot;&quot;.

Among the nobility who heard Whitefield in the Countess of Huntingdon&#x27;s home was Lady Townshend. Regarding the changes in Whitefield, someone asked Lady Townshend, &quot;Pray, madam, is it true that Whitefield has &quot;recanted&quot;?&quot; She replied, &quot;No, sir, he has only &quot;canted&quot;.&quot; One meaning of is &quot;to affect religious or pietistic phraseology, especially as a matter of fashion or profession; to talk unreally or hypocritically with an affectation of goodness or piety&quot;.

==Religious innovation==
In the First Great Awakening, rather than listening demurely to preachers, people groaned and roared in enthusiastic emotion. Whitefield was a &quot;passionate preacher&quot; who often &quot;shed tears&quot;. Underlying this was his conviction that genuine religion &quot;engaged the heart, not just the head&quot;. In his preaching, Whitefield used rhetorical ploys that were characteristic of theater, an artistic medium largely unknown in colonial America. Harry S. Stout refers to him as a &quot;divine dramatist&quot; and ascribes his success to the theatrical sermons which laid foundations to a new form of pulpit oratory. Whitefield&#x27;s &quot;Abraham Offering His Son Isaac&quot; is an example of a sermon whose whole structure resembles a theatrical play.

Divinity schools opened to challenge the hegemony of Yale and Harvard; personal experience became more important than formal education for preachers. Such concepts and habits formed a necessary foundation for the American Revolution. Whitefield&#x27;s preaching bolstered &quot;the evolving republican ideology that sought local democratic control of civil affairs and freedom from monarchial and parliamentary intrusion.&quot;

==Works==
Whitefield&#x27;s sermons were widely reputed to inspire his audience&#x27;s devotion. Many of them, as well as his letters and journals, were published during his lifetime. He was an excellent orator as well, strong in voice and adept at extemporaneity. His voice was so expressive that people are said to have wept just hearing him allude to &quot;Mesopotamia&quot;. His journals, originally intended only for private circulation, were first published by Thomas Cooper. James Hutton then published a version with Whitefield&#x27;s approval. His exuberant and &quot;too apostolical&quot; language were criticised; his journals were no longer published after 1741.

Whitefield prepared a new installment in 1744–45, but it was not published until 1938. 19th-century biographies generally refer to his earlier work, &quot;A Short Account of God&#x27;s Dealings with the Reverend George Whitefield&quot; (1740), which covered his life up to his ordination. In 1747 he published &quot;A Further Account of God&#x27;s Dealings with the Reverend George Whitefield&quot;, covering the period from his ordination to his first voyage to Georgia. In 1756, a vigorously edited version of his journals and autobiographical accounts was published. Whitefield was &quot;profoundly image-conscious&quot;. His writings were &quot;intended to convey Whitefield and his life as a model for biblical ethics ... , as humble and pious&quot;.

After Whitefield&#x27;s death, John Gillies, a Glasgow friend, published a memoir and six volumes of works, comprising three volumes of letters, a volume of tracts, and two volumes of sermons. Another collection of sermons was published just before he left London for the last time in 1769. These were disowned by Whitefield and Gillies, who tried to buy all copies and pulp them. They had been taken down in shorthand, but Whitefield said that they made him say nonsense on occasion. These sermons were included in a 19th-century volume, &quot;Sermons on Important Subjects&quot;, along with the &quot;approved&quot; sermons from the &quot;Works&quot;. An edition of the journals, in one volume, was edited by William Wale in 1905. This was reprinted with additional material in 1960 by the Banner of Truth Trust. It lacks the Bermuda journal entries found in Gillies&#x27; biography and the quotes from manuscript journals found in 19th-century biographies. A comparison of this edition with the original 18th-century publications shows numerous omissions—some minor and a few major.

Whitefield also wrote several hymns and revised one by Charles Wesley. Wesley composed a hymn in 1739, &quot;Hark, how all the welkin rings&quot;; Whitefield revised the opening couplet in 1758 for &quot;Hark! The Herald Angels Sing&quot;.

==Notes==
== References ==
*
*
*
* 
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* 
*
*
*
*
*
*
== Primary sources ==
* .
* Whitefield, George. &quot;Journals&quot;. London: Banner of Truth Trust, 1978. 
* .

== Further reading ==

* Armstrong, John H. &quot;Five Great Evangelists: Preachers of Real Revival&quot;. Fearn (maybe Hill of Fearn), Tain: Christian Focus Publications, 1997. 
* Dallimore, Arnold A. &quot;George Whitefield: The Life and Times of the Great Evangelist of the Eighteenth-Century Revival&quot; (Volume I). Edinburgh or Carlisle: Banner of Truth Trust, 1970. .
* Gibson, William and Morgan-Guy, John (eds), &quot;George Whitefield Tercentenary Essays&quot;. Cardiff: University of Wales Press 2015 
* Johnston, E.A. &quot;George Whitefield: A Definitive Biography&quot; (2 volumes). Stoke-on-Trent: Tentmaker Publications, 2007. .
* Hammond, Geordan and Jones, David Ceri(eds), &quot;George Whitefield: Life, Context, and Legacy&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press, .
* Kenney, William Howland, III. ″Alexander Garden and George Whitefield: The Significance of Revivalism in South Carolina 1738–1741″. &quot;The South Carolina Historical Magazine&quot;, Vol. 71, No. 1 (January 1970), pp. 1–16.
* Kidd, Thomas S. &quot;The Great Awakening: The Roots of Evangelical Christianity in Colonial America&quot;. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2009. 
* .
* Mansfield, Stephen. &quot;Forgotten Founding Father: The Heroic Legacy of George Whitefield&quot;. Nashville: Cumberland House Publishing (acquired by Sourcebooks), 2001. 
* Philip, Robert. &quot;The Life and Times of George Whitefield&quot;. Edinburgh: Banner of Truth Trust, 2007 (reprint) [1837]. 
* Pollock, John. &quot;George Whitefield and the Great Awakening&quot;. Hodder &amp; Stoughton, 1973
* Reisinger, Ernest. &quot;The Founder&#x27;s Journal&quot;, Issue 19/20, Winter/Spring 1995: &quot;What Should We Think of Evangelism and Calvinism?&quot; . Coral Gables: Founders Ministries.
* Schwenk, James L. &quot;Catholic Spirit: Wesley, Whitefield, and the Quest for Evangelical Unity in Eighteenth Century British Methodism&quot; (Scarecrow Press, 2008).
* Smith, Timothy L. &quot;Whitefield and Wesley on the New Birth&quot; (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Francis Asbury Press of Zondervan Publishing House, 1986).
* Streater, David &quot;Whitefield and the Revival&quot; (&quot;Crossway&quot;, Autumn 1993. No. 50) 
* Thompson, D. D. &quot;John Wesley and George Whitefield in Scotland: Or, the Influence of the Oxford Methodists on Scottish Religion&quot; (London: Blackwood and Sons, 1898).
== External links ==
* Bust of Whitefield at Gloucester City Museum &amp; Art Gallery.
* Biographies, Articles, and Books on Whitefield .
* Lesson plan on George Whitefield and the First Great Awakening
* George Whitefield&#x27;s Journals project – Project to publish a complete edition of Whitefield&#x27;s Journals
* George Whitefield at Old South Presbyterian Church, Newburyport, Massachusetts
* George Whitefield preaches to 3000 in Stonehouse Gloucestershire
* 
* Open Library
* Gutenberg</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q314399" start="0" end="17" title="George Whitefield" label="George Whitefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q314399" start="55" end="71" title="George Whitefield" label="George Whitfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="88" end="96" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="150" end="159" title="Methodism" label="Methodism"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="168" end="188" title="Evangelicalism" label="evangelical movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q170497" start="198" end="208" title="Gloucester" label="Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q82606" start="229" end="253" title="Pembroke College, Oxford" label="Pembroke College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885016" start="290" end="299" title="Holy Club" label="Holy Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q213393" start="328" end="332" title="John Wesley" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q349070" start="337" end="351" title="Charles Wesley" label="Charles Wesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="440" end="449" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="496" end="512" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="598" end="615" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137411" start="616" end="622" title="Parish (Church of England)" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6094740" start="645" end="663" title="itinerant preacher" label="itinerant preacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q373069" start="668" end="678" title="Evangalism" label="evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q248452" start="712" end="733" title="British North America" label="British North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146522" start="764" end="781" title="Christian revival" label="Christian revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344888" start="807" end="828" title="First Great Awakening" label="First Great Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="1071" end="1085" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241" start="1193" end="1203" title="patriotism" label="patriotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170497" start="1396" end="1406" title="Gloucester" label="Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728318" start="1863" end="1879" title="The Crypt School" label="The Crypt School"/>
<link wikidata="Q82606" start="1901" end="1925" title="Pembroke College, Oxford" label="Pembroke College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="2058" end="2078" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455910" start="2084" end="2092" title="servitor" label="servitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404101" start="2176" end="2182" title="fellow" label="fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544737" start="2495" end="2508" title="Henry Scougal" label="Henry Scougal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558439" start="3330" end="3350" title="Bishop of Gloucester" label="Bishop of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q161944" start="3366" end="3372" title="deacon" label="deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="3380" end="3397" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q60797" start="3446" end="3452" title="sermon" label="sermon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594622" start="3456" end="3479" title="St Mary de Crypt Church, Gloucester" label="St Mary de Crypt Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q94523148" start="3747" end="3760" title="Christ Church (Savannah, Georgia)" label="Christ Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q83813" start="3764" end="3772" title="Savannah, Georgia" label="Savannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q785035" start="3774" end="3793" title="Province of Georgia" label="Province of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q258532" start="3802" end="3819" title="British America" label="American colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q662862" start="4106" end="4112" title="Holy orders" label="orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247835" start="4240" end="4249" title="Kingswood, South Gloucestershire" label="Kingswood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133281" start="4390" end="4412" title="Open-air preaching" label="preach in the open air"/>
<link wikidata="Q880861" start="4457" end="4475" title="Blackheath, London" label="Blackheath, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="4528" end="4540" title="Evangelicalism" label="evangelicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q712167" start="4549" end="4565" title="Augustus Toplady" label="Augustus Toplady"/>
<link wikidata="Q357301" start="4567" end="4578" title="John Newton" label="John Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017740" start="4584" end="4599" title="William Romaine" label="William Romaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q937617" start="4629" end="4639" title="Thirty-nine Articles" label="Article 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q193203" start="4681" end="4695" title="predestination" label="predestination"/>
<link wikidata="Q13446873" start="4741" end="4749" title="Arminianism" label="Arminian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8451511" start="4779" end="4788" title="Salvation in Christianity" label="atonement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995849" start="5120" end="5140" title="Horfield United Reformed Church, Bristol" label="Penn Street, Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995850" start="5164" end="5174" title="Whitefield&amp;#x27;s Tabernacle, Moorfields" label="Moorfields"/>
<link wikidata="Q19587074" start="5182" end="5202" title="American International Church" label="Tottenham Court Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413785" start="5326" end="5342" title="Kingswood School" label="Kingswood School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995847" start="5382" end="5410" title="Whitefield&amp;#x27;s Tabernacle, Kingswood" label="Whitefield&amp;#x27;s Tabernacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q208762" start="5432" end="5440" title="chaplain" label="chaplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619915" start="5444" end="5474" title="Selina Hastings, Countess of Huntingdon" label="Selina, Countess of Huntingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993469" start="5513" end="5552" title="Countess of Huntingdon&amp;#x27;s Connexion" label="Countess of Huntingdon&amp;#x27;s Connexion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422268" start="5606" end="5627" title="Calvinistic Methodism" label="Calvinistic Methodism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15278837" start="5754" end="5771" title="Spa Fields" label="Spa Fields Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897981" start="5915" end="5933" title="Bethesda Academy" label="Bethesda Orphanage"/>
<link wikidata="Q492807" start="6122" end="6128" title="The gospel" label="Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q159318" start="6546" end="6563" title="Moravian Church" label="Moravian Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q123202" start="6647" end="6660" title="Lehigh Valley" label="Lehigh Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="6664" end="6676" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q16903209" start="6846" end="6862" title="Whitefield House and Gray Cottage" label="Whitefield House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022937" start="6904" end="6926" title="Nazareth, Pennsylvania" label="Nazareth, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="7120" end="7131" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="7163" end="7176" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="7180" end="7206" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q313073" start="7276" end="7292" title="Jonathan Edwards (theologian)" label="Jonathan Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="7663" end="7672" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500262" start="7843" end="7868" title="free offer of the gospel" label="freely offered the Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790386" start="7934" end="7940" title="Christian views on sin" label="sinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="7966" end="7972" title="Jesus" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433985" start="8345" end="8354" title="broadside (printing)" label="broadside"/>
<link wikidata="Q327611" start="8371" end="8380" title="Flyer (pamphlet)" label="handbills"/>
<link wikidata="Q6863354" start="8898" end="8919" title="Minchinhampton Common" label="Minchinhampton Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356450" start="8971" end="8981" title="Rodborough" label="Rodborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686437" start="9805" end="9815" title="Treatment of slaves in the United States" label="its abuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135327" start="10174" end="10189" title="James Habersham" label="James Habersham"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838766" start="10260" end="10285" title="Georgia Experiment" label="Slavery had been outlawed"/>
<link wikidata="Q257911" start="13056" end="13072" title="Phillis Wheatley" label="Phillis Wheatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="13284" end="13301" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="13332" end="13344" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q156112" start="14111" end="14120" title="Ecumenism" label="ecumenist"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="14181" end="14194" title="Christian denomination" label="denominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="15103" end="15129" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q97179885" start="15133" end="15160" title="statue of George Whitefield" label="statue of George Whitefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896075" start="15269" end="15287" title="University of Pennsylvania College Houses" label="Ware College House"/>
<link wikidata="Q17511211" start="16672" end="16688" title="Cornelius Winter" label="Cornelius Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453612" start="17384" end="17413" title="First Presbyterian Church (Newburyport, Massachusetts)" label="Old South Presbyterian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q54134" start="17415" end="17441" title="Newburyport, Massachusetts" label="Newburyport, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q192619" start="17489" end="17494" title="crypt" label="crypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q211775" start="17505" end="17511" title="pulpit" label="pulpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572022" start="17577" end="17617" title="Gloucester City Museum &amp;amp; Art Gallery" label="Gloucester City Museum &amp;amp; Art Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813927" start="17655" end="17669" title="funeral sermon" label="funeral sermon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018505" start="18536" end="18546" title="Cambuslang" label="Cambuslang"/>
<link wikidata="Q491537" start="18711" end="18736" title="Whitfield County, Georgia" label="Whitfield County, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546219" start="18947" end="18972" title="George Whitefield College" label="George Whitefield College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995860" start="18974" end="19005" title="Whitefield College of the Bible" label="Whitefield College of the Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995866" start="19011" end="19042" title="Whitefield Theological Seminary" label="Whitefield Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034842" start="19072" end="19093" title="Banner of Truth Trust" label="Banner of Truth Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q21063210" start="19590" end="19600" title="Mark Galli" label="Mark Galli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080184" start="19777" end="19793" title="Predestination in Calvinism" label="eternal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q769691" start="20179" end="20199" title="Methodist Conference" label="Methodist Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="20613" end="20625" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charles Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="20766" end="20772" title="martyr" label="martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048098" start="21362" end="21375" title="Edmund Gibson" label="Edmund Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="21485" end="21493" title="Muhammad" label="Mahaomet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4501848" start="21545" end="21607" title="St. Philip&amp;#x27;s Church (Charleston, South Carolina)" label="St. Philip&amp;#x27;s Episcopal Church, Charleston, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718919" start="21625" end="21641" title="Alexander Garden (priest)" label="Alexander Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="21850" end="21864" title="Congregationalism" label="Congregational"/>
<link wikidata="Q676049" start="22063" end="22077" title="John Tillotson" label="John Tillotson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774676" start="22230" end="22251" title="The Whole Duty of Man" label="The Whole Duty of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q76336" start="22984" end="23003" title="Nicolaus Zinzendorf" label="Nicolaus Zinzendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q6287480" start="23031" end="23043" title="Joseph Trapp" label="Joseph Trapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048098" start="24125" end="24138" title="Edmund Gibson" label="Edmund Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774676" start="24481" end="24502" title="The Whole Duty of Man" label="The Whole Duty of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q4655901" start="24701" end="24717" title="Ebenezer Erskine" label="Ebenezer Erskine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8563371" start="24744" end="24764" title="First Secession" label="Associate Presbytery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6094740" start="25171" end="25190" title="itinerant preacher" label="itinerant preaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774989" start="25230" end="25243" title="Martin Benson (bishop)" label="Bishop Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q190399" start="26019" end="26027" title="pamphlet" label="pamphlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="26065" end="26072" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="26077" end="26081" title="Yale University" label="Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720759" start="26393" end="26402" title="esotropia" label="esotropia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195178" start="26447" end="26457" title="English Dissenters" label="dissenting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756813" start="27017" end="27028" title="Charlestown, Boston" label="Charlestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q480" start="27286" end="27297" title="Don Quixote" label="Don Quixote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="27377" end="27383" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="27422" end="27439" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q766758" start="27878" end="27890" title="Samuel Foote" label="Samuel Foote"/>
<link wikidata="Q16387030" start="27900" end="27909" title="The Minor (Foote play)" label="The Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q840407" start="29364" end="29376" title="enthusiasm" label="enthusiastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="30242" end="30261" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421795" start="30707" end="30721" title="Extemporaneous speaking" label="extemporaneity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235373" start="31922" end="31934" title="John Gillies (minister)" label="John Gillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424456" start="32994" end="33013" title="hymnwriter" label="wrote several hymns"/>
<link wikidata="Q349070" start="33033" end="33047" title="Charles Wesley" label="Charles Wesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585437" start="33182" end="33210" title="Hark! The Herald Angels Sing" label="Hark! The Herald Angels Sing"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="33364" end="33370" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034842" start="33372" end="33393" title="Banner of Truth Trust" label="Banner of Truth Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098000" start="33527" end="33540" title="Hill of Fearn" label="Hill of Fearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020220" start="33543" end="33547" title="Tain" label="Tain"/>
<link wikidata="Q20877030" start="33549" end="33577" title="Christian Focus Publications" label="Christian Focus Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="33729" end="33738" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010228" start="33742" end="33750" title="Carlisle, Pennsylvania" label="Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034842" start="33752" end="33773" title="Banner of Truth Trust" label="Banner of Truth Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="33880" end="33887" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896557" start="33889" end="33914" title="University of Wales Press" label="University of Wales Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q134902" start="34005" end="34019" title="Stoke-on-Trent" label="Stoke-on-Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="34158" end="34164" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="34166" end="34189" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="34530" end="34539" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q255147" start="34541" end="34562" title="Yale University Press" label="Yale University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609889" start="34577" end="34595" title="Stephen Mansfield" label="Mansfield, Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="34676" end="34685" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034842" start="34831" end="34852" title="Banner of Truth Trust" label="Banner of Truth Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253117" start="34880" end="34893" title="John Pollock (author)" label="Pollock, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q21009752" start="34981" end="34998" title="Ernest Reisinger" label="Reisinger, Ernest"/>
<link wikidata="Q24566914" start="35151" end="35170" title="Founders Ministries" label="Founders Ministries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572022" start="35821" end="35861" title="Gloucester City Museum &amp;amp; Art Gallery" label="Gloucester City Museum &amp;amp; Art Gallery"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40406" wikidata="Q181896" url="?curid=40406" title="Sweyn Forkbeard">
<text>Sweyn Forkbeard ( ; ; 17 April 963 – 3 February 1014) was King of Denmark from 986 until his death, King of England for five weeks from December 1013 until his death, and King of Norway from 999/1000 until 1014. He was the father of King Harald II of Denmark, King Cnut the Great, and Queen Estrid Svendsdatter.

In the mid-980s, Sweyn revolted against his father, Harald Bluetooth, and seized the throne. Harald was driven into exile and died shortly afterwards in November 986 or 987. In 1000, with the allegiance of Eric, Earl of Lade, Sweyn ruled most of Norway. In 1013, shortly before his death, he became the first Danish king of the English after a long effort.

==Life==
Historiographical sources on Sweyn&#x27;s life include the &quot;Anglo-Saxon Chronicle&quot; (where his name is rendered as &quot;Swegen&quot;), Adam of Bremen&#x27;s 11th-century &quot;Deeds of the Bishops of Hamburg&quot;, and Snorri Sturluson&#x27;s 13th-century &quot;Heimskringla&quot;. Conflicting accounts of Sweyn&#x27;s later life also appear in the &quot;Encomium Emmae Reginae&quot;, an 11th-century Latin &quot;encomium&quot; in honour of his son king Cnut&#x27;s queen Emma of Normandy, along with &quot;Chronicon ex chronicis&quot; by Florence of Worcester, another 11th-century author.

According to Adam of Bremen, Sweyn was the son of Harald Bluetooth and a woman named &quot;Gunhild&quot;. When Harald converted to Christianity, Sweyn was baptised &quot;Otto&quot; (in honour of German king Otto I).

Sweyn married the widow of Erik, king of Sweden, named &quot;Gunhild&quot; in some sources, or identified as an unnamed sister of Boleslaus, ruler of Poland.

Historian Ian Howard describes Sweyn as &quot;a competent military commander, politician and diplomat&quot; who made &quot;a formidable and successful king.&quot;

===Revolt and possible exile===
In the mid-980s, Sweyn revolted against his father and seized the throne. Harald was driven into exile and died shortly afterwards in November 986 or 987.

Adam of Bremen depicted Sweyn as a rebellious pagan who persecuted Christians, betrayed his father and expelled German bishops from Scania and Zealand. According to Adam, Sweyn was sent into exile by his father&#x27;s German friends and deposed in favour of king Eric the Victorious of Sweden, whom Adam wrote ruled Denmark until his death in 994 or 995. Sørensen (2001) argues that Adam&#x27;s depiction of Sweyn may be overly negative, as seen through an &quot;unsympathetic and intolerant eye&quot;.
Adam&#x27;s account is thus not seen as entirely reliable; the claimed 14 years&#x27; exile of Sweyn to Scotland does not seem to agree with Sweyn&#x27;s building churches in Denmark throughout the same period, including the churches in Lund and Roskilde. According to Adam, Sweyn was punished by God for leading the uprising which led to king Harald&#x27;s death, and had to spend fourteen years abroad (i.e. 986–1000). The historicity of this exile, or its duration, is uncertain. Adam writes that Sweyn was shunned by all those with whom he sought refuge, but was finally allowed to live for a while in Scotland. Adam also suggests that Sweyn in his youth lived among heathens, and only achieved success as a ruler after accepting Christianity.

===Battle of Svolder===
Harald Bluetooth had already established a foothold in Norway, controlling Viken in . He may have lost control over his Norwegian claims following his defeat against a German army in 974.

Sweyn built an alliance with Swedish king Olof Skötkonung and Eirik Hákonarson, Jarl of Lade, against Norwegian king Olaf Tryggvason.
The Kings&#x27; sagas ascribe the causes of the alliance to Olaf Tryggvason&#x27;s ill-fated marriage proposal to Sigrid the Haughty and his problematic marriage to Thyri, sister of Sweyn Forkbeard. According to the sagas, Sigrid pushed Sweyn into war with Olaf because Olaf had slapped her.

The allies attacked and defeated king Olaf in the western Baltic Sea when he was sailing home from an expedition, in the Battle of Svolder, fought in September 999 or 1000. The victors divided Norway among them. According to the account of the &quot;Heimskringla&quot;, Sweyn regained direct control of Viken district.

King Olaf of Sweden received four districts in Trondheim as well as Møre, Romsdal and Rånrike (the &quot;Fagrskinna&quot;, by contrast, says that the Swedish part consisted of Oppland and a part of Trondheim). He gave these to his son in law, Jarl Svein Hákonarson, to hold as a vassal. The rest of Norway was ruled by Eirik Hákonarson as King Svein&#x27;s vassal.

The Jarls Eirik and Svein proved strong, competent rulers, and their reign was prosperous. Most sources say that they adopted Christianity but allowed the people religious freedom, leading to a backlash against Christianity which undid much of Olaf Tryggvason&#x27;s missionary work.

===Religion===
Sweyn apparently recruited priests and bishops from England, in preference to the Archbishopric of Bremen. In part, this reflected the fact that there were numerous Christian priests of Danish origin in the Danelaw, while Sweyn had few personal connections to Germany. Sweyn&#x27;s preference for the English church may also have had a political motive, because German bishops were an integral part of the state. It has been suggested that Sweyn was seeking to pre-empt any diminution of his independence by German leaders. This may have been a reason for Adam of Bremen&#x27;s apparent hostility in his accounts of Sweyn; by accentuating English ecclesiastical influence in his kingdom, Sweyn was effectively spurning the Archbishop of Bremen.

===Invasions of England===
The &quot;Chronicle of John of Wallingford&quot; (c. 1225–1250) records Sweyn&#x27;s involvement in raids against England during 1002–1005, 1006–1007 and 1009–1012. According to Ashley (1998), Sweyn&#x27;s invasion was partly motivated by the St. Brice&#x27;s Day Massacre in November 1002, where Danes in England were massacred under orders from Æthelred the Unready, in which Sweyn&#x27;s sister and brother-in-law are said to have been killed, but Lund (2001) argues that the main motivation for the raids was more likely the prospect of revenue.

At the outset of the invasions, Sweyn negotiated an agreement with Duke Richard II of Normandy whereby the Danes gained permission to sell their spoils of war in Normandy.

Sweyn campaigned in Wessex and East Anglia in 1003–1004, but a famine forced him to return to Denmark in 1005. Further raids took place in 1006–1007, and in 1009–1012 Thorkell the Tall led a Viking invasion into England. Simon Keynes regards it as uncertain whether Sweyn supported these invasions, but &quot;whatever the case, he was quick to exploit the disruption caused by the activities of Thorkell&#x27;s army&quot;.
Sweyn acquired massive sums of &quot;Danegeld&quot; through the raids. In 1013, he is reported to have personally led his forces in a full-scale invasion of England.

The medieval &quot;Peterborough Chronicle&quot; (part of the &quot;Anglo-Saxon Chronicle&quot;) states:
before the month of August came king Sweyn with his fleet to Sandwich. He went very quickly about East Anglia into the Humber&#x27;s mouth, and so upward along the Trent till he came to Gainsborough. Earl Uchtred and all Northumbria quickly bowed to him, as did all the people of the Kingdom of Lindsey, then the people of the Five Boroughs. He was given hostages from each shire. When he understood that all the people had submitted to him, he bade that his force should be provisioned and horsed; he went south with the main part of the invasion force, while some of the invasion force, as well as the hostages, were with his son Cnut. After he came over Watling Street, they went to Oxford, and the town-dwellers soon bowed to him, and gave hostages. From there they went to Winchester, and the people did the same, then eastward to London.
But the Londoners put up a strong resistance, because King Æthelred and Thorkell the Tall, a Viking leader who had defected to Æthelred, personally held their ground against him in London itself. Sweyn then went west to Bath, where the western thanes submitted to him and gave hostages. The Londoners then followed suit, fearing Sweyn&#x27;s revenge if they resisted any longer. King Æthelred sent his sons Edward and Alfred to Normandy, and himself spent Christmas on the Isle of Wight, and then followed them into exile.

Based in Gainsborough, Lincolnshire, Sweyn began to organise his vast new kingdom, but he died there on 3 February 1014, having ruled England for only five weeks. Sweyn&#x27;s cause of death is unknown. Some theorise that he was killed, whereas other sources say he died after falling off a horse. His embalmed body was returned to Denmark for burial in the church he had built. Tradition locates this church in Roskilde, but it is more plausible that it was actually located in Lund in Scania (now part of Sweden).

===Aftermath===
Sweyn&#x27;s elder son, Harald II, succeeded him as King of Denmark, while his younger son, Cnut, was proclaimed King of England by the people of the Danelaw. However, the English nobility sent for Æthelred, who upon his return from exile in Normandy in early 1014 managed to drive Cnut out of England. Cnut soon returned and became king of all England in 1016, following the deaths of Æthelred and his son Edmund Ironside; he succeeded his brother as King of Denmark in 1019 and eventually also ruled Norway, parts of Sweden, Pomerania and Schleswig.

Cnut and his sons, Harold Harefoot and Harthacnut, ruled England over a combined 26-year period (1016–1042). After Harthacnut&#x27;s death, the English throne reverted to the House of Wessex under Æthelred&#x27;s younger son Edward the Confessor (reigned 1042–1066).

Sweyn&#x27;s daughter, Estrid Svendsdatter, was the mother of King Sweyn II of Denmark. Her descendants continue to reign in Denmark to this day.

==Issue==
The &quot;Chronicon&quot; of Thietmar of Merseburg and the &quot;Encomium Emmae&quot; report Cnut&#x27;s mother as having been Świętosława, a daughter of Mieszko I of Poland. Norse sources of the High Middle Ages, most prominently &quot;Heimskringla&quot; by Snorri Sturluson, also give a Polish princess as Cnut&#x27;s mother, whom they call Gunhild and a daughter of Burislav, the king of Vindland. Since in the Norse sagas the king of Vindland is always Burislav, this is reconcilable with the assumption that her father was Mieszko (not his son Bolesław). Adam of Bremen in &quot;Gesta Hammaburgensis ecclesiae pontificum&quot; is unique in equating Cnut&#x27;s mother (for whom he also produced no name) with the former queen of Sweden, wife of Eric the Victorious and by this marriage mother of Olof Skötkonung. To complicate the matter, Heimskringla and other sagas also have Sweyn marrying Eric&#x27;s widow, but she is distinctly another person in these texts, named Sigrid the Haughty, whom Sweyn married only after Gunhild, the Slavic princess who bore Cnut, had died. Different theories regarding the number and ancestry of Sweyn&#x27;s wives (or wife) have been advanced (see Sigrid the Haughty and Gunhild). But since Adam is the only source to equate the identity of Cnut&#x27;s and Olof Skötkonung&#x27;s mother, this is often seen as an error on Adam&#x27;s part, and it is often assumed that Sweyn had two wives, the first being Cnut&#x27;s mother, and the second being the former Queen of Sweden. Cnut&#x27;s brother Harald was the younger of the two brothers, according to &quot;Encomium Emmae.&quot;

Sweyn had seven children with Sigrid the Haughty and Gunhild of Wenden:
*Harald II of Denmark
*Cnut the Great
*Estrid Svendsdatter
*Gytha
*Gunnhild
*Santslaue
*Thyra

==References==
==External links==

* Sweyn at the official website of the British monarchy
*Northvegr (Scandinavian) – A History of the Vikings (Search) 
*Vikingworld (Danish) – Swein Forkbeard (Svend Tveskæg)
* Sweyn Forkbeard: The Viking King of England on Medieval Archives Podcast</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q181896" start="0" end="15" title="Sweyn Forkbeard" label="Sweyn Forkbeard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273134" start="58" end="73" title="King of Denmark" label="King of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="100" end="115" title="King of England" label="King of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294765" start="171" end="185" title="King of Norway" label="King of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q311011" start="238" end="258" title="Harald II of Denmark" label="Harald II of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q134128" start="265" end="279" title="Cnut the Great" label="Cnut the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981947" start="291" end="310" title="Estrid Svendsdatter" label="Estrid Svendsdatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q201041" start="365" end="381" title="Harald Bluetooth" label="Harald Bluetooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q29017" start="519" end="523" title="Eric of Lade" label="Eric"/>
<link wikidata="Q29239" start="525" end="537" title="Earl of Lade" label="Earl of Lade"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="559" end="565" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064630" start="622" end="648" title="House of Knýtlinga" label="Danish king of the English"/>
<link wikidata="Q212746" start="745" end="766" title="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle" label="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q109244" start="825" end="839" title="Adam of Bremen" label="Adam of Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q698513" start="866" end="897" title="Gesta Hammaburgensis ecclesiae pontificum" label="Deeds of the Bishops of Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q102323" start="909" end="925" title="Snorri Sturluson" label="Snorri Sturluson"/>
<link wikidata="Q215806" start="952" end="964" title="Heimskringla" label="Heimskringla"/>
<link wikidata="Q124898" start="1045" end="1067" title="Encomium Emmae Reginae" label="Encomium Emmae Reginae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551978" start="1103" end="1111" title="encomium" label="encomium"/>
<link wikidata="Q40061" start="1162" end="1178" title="Emma of Normandy" label="Emma of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335364" start="1197" end="1219" title="John of Worcester" label="Chronicon ex chronicis"/>
<link wikidata="Q773982" start="1229" end="1250" title="Florence of Worcester" label="Florence of Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q109244" start="1295" end="1309" title="Adam of Bremen" label="Adam of Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q43915" start="1489" end="1495" title="Otto I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Otto I"/>
<link wikidata="Q318912" start="1526" end="1546" title="Eric the Victorious" label="Erik, king of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q53436" start="1629" end="1655" title="Bolesław I the Brave" label="Boleslaus, ruler of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q180756" start="2142" end="2148" title="Scania" label="Scania"/>
<link wikidata="Q25535" start="2153" end="2160" title="Zealand" label="Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q318912" start="2273" end="2292" title="Eric the Victorious" label="Eric the Victorious"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167" start="2750" end="2754" title="Lund" label="Lund"/>
<link wikidata="Q26563" start="2759" end="2767" title="Roskilde" label="Roskilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q201041" start="3286" end="3302" title="Harald Bluetooth" label="Harald Bluetooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636415" start="3361" end="3366" title="Viken (region)" label="Viken"/>
<link wikidata="Q313436" start="3517" end="3532" title="Olof Skötkonung" label="Olof Skötkonung"/>
<link wikidata="Q29017" start="3537" end="3553" title="Eiríkr Hákonarson" label="Eirik Hákonarson"/>
<link wikidata="Q29239" start="3555" end="3567" title="Earls of Lade" label="Jarl of Lade"/>
<link wikidata="Q213801" start="3592" end="3607" title="Olaf Tryggvason" label="Olaf Tryggvason"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469365" start="3613" end="3630" title="Kings&amp;#x27; sagas" label="Kings&amp;#x27; sagas"/>
<link wikidata="Q242746" start="3723" end="3741" title="Sigrid the Haughty" label="Sigrid the Haughty"/>
<link wikidata="Q459894" start="3774" end="3779" title="Tyra of Denmark" label="Thyri"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="3960" end="3970" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163186" start="4023" end="4040" title="Battle of Svolder" label="Battle of Svolder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636415" start="4205" end="4219" title="Viken (region)" label="Viken district"/>
<link wikidata="Q25804" start="4269" end="4278" title="Trondheim" label="Trondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q50627" start="4290" end="4294" title="Møre og Romsdal" label="Møre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467860" start="4296" end="4303" title="Romsdal" label="Romsdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568218" start="4308" end="4315" title="Rånrike" label="Rånrike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392045" start="4327" end="4337" title="Fagrskinna" label="Fagrskinna"/>
<link wikidata="Q50617" start="4398" end="4405" title="Oppland" label="Oppland"/>
<link wikidata="Q31709" start="4470" end="4486" title="Sweyn Haakonsson" label="Svein Hákonarson"/>
<link wikidata="Q213801" start="4832" end="4847" title="Olaf Tryggvason" label="Olaf Tryggvason"/>
<link wikidata="Q837128" start="4970" end="4993" title="Prince-Archbishopric of Bremen" label="Archbishopric of Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q339271" start="5095" end="5102" title="Danelaw" label="Danelaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q16850561" start="5671" end="5703" title="John of Wallingford (d. 1258)" label="Chronicle of John of Wallingford"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="5775" end="5782" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q377753" start="5904" end="5933" title="St. Brice&amp;#x27;s Day Massacre" label="St. Brice&amp;#x27;s Day Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q183499" start="6008" end="6028" title="Æthelred the Unready" label="Æthelred the Unready"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119819" start="6552" end="6569" title="Thorkell the Tall" label="Thorkell the Tall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519117" start="6606" end="6618" title="Simon Keynes" label="Simon Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q301742" start="6845" end="6853" title="Danegeld" label="Danegeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242458" start="6994" end="7016" title="Peterborough Chronicle" label="Peterborough Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q212746" start="7042" end="7063" title="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle" label="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q26163" start="7140" end="7148" title="Sandwich, Kent" label="Sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q837998" start="7177" end="7188" title="Kingdom of East Anglia" label="East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q550995" start="7198" end="7204" title="Humber" label="Humber"/>
<link wikidata="Q19714" start="7243" end="7248" title="River Trent" label="Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q288082" start="7265" end="7277" title="Gainsborough, Lincolnshire" label="Gainsborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128240" start="7279" end="7283" title="Earl" label="Earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738090" start="7284" end="7291" title="Uhtred the Bold" label="Uchtred"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299" start="7300" end="7311" title="Northumbria" label="Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q886986" start="7363" end="7381" title="Kingdom of Lindsey" label="Kingdom of Lindsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421506" start="7406" end="7419" title="Five Boroughs of the Danelaw" label="Five Boroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q662296" start="7453" end="7458" title="shire" label="shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434239" start="7736" end="7750" title="Watling Street" label="Watling Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="7765" end="7771" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q172157" start="7857" end="7867" title="Winchester" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="7915" end="7921" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119819" start="7995" end="8012" title="Thorkell the Tall" label="Thorkell the Tall"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="8143" end="8147" title="Bath, Somerset" label="Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q130005" start="8330" end="8336" title="Edward the Confessor" label="Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q35618" start="8341" end="8347" title="Alfred Aetheling" label="Alfred"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="8396" end="8409" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q288082" start="8456" end="8482" title="Gainsborough, Lincolnshire" label="Gainsborough, Lincolnshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q26563" start="8859" end="8867" title="Roskilde" label="Roskilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167" start="8926" end="8930" title="Lund" label="Lund"/>
<link wikidata="Q311011" start="9004" end="9013" title="Harald II of Denmark" label="Harald II"/>
<link wikidata="Q134128" start="9072" end="9076" title="Cnut the Great" label="Cnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q188684" start="9387" end="9402" title="Edmund Ironside" label="Edmund Ironside"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520" start="9507" end="9516" title="Pomerania" label="Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q26167" start="9521" end="9530" title="Duchy of Schleswig" label="Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q188627" start="9552" end="9567" title="Harold Harefoot" label="Harold Harefoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q190091" start="9572" end="9582" title="Harthacnut" label="Harthacnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q130005" start="9758" end="9778" title="Edward the Confessor" label="Edward the Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981947" start="9824" end="9843" title="Estrid Svendsdatter" label="Estrid Svendsdatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q246812" start="9868" end="9887" title="Sweyn II of Denmark" label="Sweyn II of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q48198" start="9917" end="9933" title="List of Danish monarchs" label="reign in Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9968" end="9977" title="Thietmar of Merseburg#Thietmar&amp;#x27;s Chronicle" label="Chronicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q275425" start="9987" end="10008" title="Thietmar of Merseburg" label="Thietmar of Merseburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q124898" start="10023" end="10037" title="Encomium Emmae Reginae" label="Encomium Emmae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25173318" start="10085" end="10096" title="Świętosława" label="Świętosława"/>
<link wikidata="Q53435" start="10112" end="10131" title="Mieszko I of Poland" label="Mieszko I of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417288" start="10133" end="10138" title="Old Norse literature" label="Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q212685" start="10154" end="10170" title="High Middle Ages" label="High Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q215806" start="10195" end="10207" title="Heimskringla" label="Heimskringla"/>
<link wikidata="Q102323" start="10217" end="10233" title="Snorri Sturluson" label="Snorri Sturluson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887133" start="10301" end="10308" title="Gunhild of Wenden" label="Gunhild"/>
<link wikidata="Q2315967" start="10327" end="10335" title="Burislav" label="Burislav"/>
<link wikidata="Q158281" start="10349" end="10357" title="Wends" label="Vindland"/>
<link wikidata="Q180494" start="10378" end="10382" title="saga" label="saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q53436" start="10507" end="10515" title="Bolesław I the Brave" label="Bolesław"/>
<link wikidata="Q698513" start="10542" end="10583" title="Gesta Hammaburgensis ecclesiae pontificum" label="Gesta Hammaburgensis ecclesiae pontificum"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="10692" end="10698" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q318912" start="10708" end="10727" title="Eric the Victorious" label="Eric the Victorious"/>
<link wikidata="Q313436" start="10759" end="10774" title="Olof Skötkonung" label="Olof Skötkonung"/>
<link wikidata="Q242746" start="10934" end="10952" title="Sigrid the Haughty" label="Sigrid the Haughty"/>
<link wikidata="Q242746" start="11147" end="11165" title="Sigrid the Haughty" label="Sigrid the Haughty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887133" start="11170" end="11177" title="Gunhild of Wenden" label="Gunhild"/>
<link wikidata="Q311011" start="11494" end="11500" title="Harald II of Denmark" label="Harald"/>
<link wikidata="Q242746" start="11610" end="11628" title="Sigrid the Haughty" label="Sigrid the Haughty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887133" start="11633" end="11650" title="Gunhild of Wenden" label="Gunhild of Wenden"/>
<link wikidata="Q311011" start="11653" end="11673" title="Harald II of Denmark" label="Harald II of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q134128" start="11675" end="11689" title="Cnut the Great" label="Cnut the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981947" start="11691" end="11710" title="Estrid Svendsdatter" label="Estrid Svendsdatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9283247" start="11712" end="11717" title="Gytha (princess)" label="Gytha"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40407" wikidata="Q1310890" url="?curid=40407" title="Harold Furth">
<text>Harold Paul Furth (January 13, 1930 – February 21, 2002) was an Austrian-American physicist who was a pioneer in leading the American efforts to harness thermonuclear fusion for the generation of electricity. He died of a heart ailment on 21 February 2002.

==Early life==
Furth emigrated to the United States in 1941. His father fled a POW camp during WWI, but returned to Vienna a few years later. In his later years, he ran a shoe-making business with his family. He also developed an interest for literature. In the summer of 1939, Harold&#x27;s father had escaped to Switzerland. After studying at the French-speaking École Internationale in Geneva, Harold immigrated to New York City in 1941. He later graduated at the head of his class at The Hill School. He graduated from Harvard University with a bachelor&#x27;s degree in 1951 and received his Ph.D. from Harvard in 1960. His PhD thesis is entitled &quot;Magnetic Analysis of K– Interactions in Emulsion Nuclei&quot;.

==Career==
Furth worked at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory from 1956 to 1967 before going in 1967 to Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory (PPPL) where he would spend the rest of his career working in plasma physics and nuclear fusion. He was also a professor of astrophysics at Princeton University.

In the late 1960s, Furth contributed some important theoretical work on resistive magnetohydrodynamics instabilities in a slightly resistive plasma.

In 1981 Furth became the director at PPPL and led the laboratory until 1990 during record setting magnetic fusion energy experiments on the largest tokamak in the country, the Tokamak Fusion Test Reactor (TFTR).

==Awards==
In 1983, Furth was awarded the James Clerk Maxwell Prize for Plasma Physics by the American Physical Society. In 1992, he was awarded the Delmer S. Fahrney Medal (now known as the Benjamin Franklin Medal in Physics) by the Franklin Institute.

Furth was also a member of the National Academy of Sciences.

==References==
==External links==
*MyHeritage page
*https://physicstoday.scitation.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1310890" start="0" end="17" title="Harold Furth" label="Harold Paul Furth"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="64" end="71" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="82" end="91" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739685" start="746" end="761" title="The Hill School" label="The Hill School"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="781" end="799" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q519826" start="1007" end="1045" title="Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory" label="Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077236" start="1088" end="1123" title="Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory" label="Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q10251" start="1186" end="1200" title="plasma (physics)" label="plasma physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="1205" end="1219" title="nuclear fusion" label="nuclear fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q37547" start="1248" end="1260" title="astrophysics" label="astrophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="1264" end="1284" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549249" start="1369" end="1389" title="magnetohydrodynamics" label="magnetohydrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q939954" start="1535" end="1557" title="Magnetic confinement fusion" label="magnetic fusion energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188589" start="1585" end="1592" title="tokamak" label="tokamak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277174" start="1613" end="1640" title="Tokamak Fusion Test Reactor" label="Tokamak Fusion Test Reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520638" start="1692" end="1736" title="James Clerk Maxwell Prize for Plasma Physics" label="James Clerk Maxwell Prize for Plasma Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q466113" start="1744" end="1769" title="American Physical Society" label="American Physical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q817496" start="1841" end="1864" title="Benjamin Franklin Medal (Franklin Institute)" label="Benjamin Franklin Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q339484" start="1884" end="1902" title="Franklin Institute" label="Franklin Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="1936" end="1964" title="United States National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40410" wikidata="Q80967" url="?curid=40410" title="Outer Hebrides">
<text>The Outer Hebrides ( ) or Western Isles ( , or ; ), sometimes known as the Long Isle or Long Island (), is an island chain off the west coast of mainland Scotland. The islands form part of the archipelago of the Hebrides, separated from the Scottish mainland and from the Inner Hebrides by the waters of the Minch, the Little Minch, and the Sea of the Hebrides. The Outer Hebrides are considered to be the traditional heartland of the Gaelic language. The islands form one of the 32 council areas of Scotland, which since 1998 has used only the Gaelic form of its name, including in English language contexts. The council area is called Na h-Eileanan an Iar (&#x27;the Western Isles&#x27;) and its council is (&#x27;Council of the Western Isles&#x27;).

Most of the islands have a bedrock formed from ancient metamorphic rocks, and the climate is mild and oceanic. The 15 inhabited islands had a total population of in and there are more than 50 substantial uninhabited islands. The distance from Barra Head to the Butt of Lewis is roughly .

There are various important prehistoric structures, many of which pre-date the first written references to the islands by Roman and Greek authors. The Western Isles became part of the Norse kingdom of the &quot;&quot;, which lasted for over 400 years, until sovereignty over the Outer Hebrides was transferred to Scotland by the Treaty of Perth in 1266. Control of the islands was then held by clan chiefs, principal amongst whom were the MacLeods, MacDonalds, and the MacNeils. The Highland Clearances of the 19th century had a devastating effect on many communities, and it is only in recent years that population levels have ceased to decline. Much of the land is now under local control, and commercial activity is based on tourism, crofting, fishing, and weaving.

Sea transport is crucial for those who live and work in the Outer Hebrides, and a variety of ferry services operate between the islands and to mainland Scotland. Modern navigation systems now minimise the dangers, but in the past the stormy seas in the region have claimed many ships. The Gaelic language, religion, music and sport are important aspects of local culture, and there are numerous designated conservation areas to protect the natural environment.

== Etymology ==
The earliest surviving written references relating to the islands were made by Pliny the Elder in his &quot;Natural History&quot;, in which he states that there are 30 &#x27;, and makes a separate reference to &quot;Dumna&quot;, which Watson (1926) concludes is unequivocally the Outer Hebrides. Writing about 80 years later, in 140–150 AD, Ptolemy, drawing on the earlier naval expeditions of , also distinguished between the &#x27;, of which he writes there were only five (and thus possibly meaning the Inner Hebrides) and . &#x27; is cognate with the Early Celtic &quot;dumnos&quot; and means the &quot;deep-sea isle&quot;. Pliny probably took his information from Pytheas of Massilia who visited Britain sometime between 322 and 285 BC. It is possible that Ptolemy did as well, as Agricola&#x27;s information about the west coast of Scotland was of poor quality. Breeze also suggests that might be Lewis and Harris, the largest island of the Outer Hebrides although he conflates this single island with the name &quot;Long Island&quot;. Watson (1926) states that the meaning of Ptolemy&#x27;s &#x27; is unknown and that the root may be pre-Celtic. Murray (1966) claims that Ptolemy&#x27;s &#x27; was originally derived from the Old Norse &#x27;, meaning &quot;isles on the edge of the sea&quot;. This idea is often repeated but no firm evidence of this derivation has emerged.

Other early written references include the flight of the Nemed people from Ireland to &quot;Domon&quot;, which is mentioned in the 12th-century &#x27; and a 13th-century poem concerning , then the heir to the throne of Mann and the Isles, who is said to have &quot;broken the gate of &#x27;&quot;. &quot;&quot; means &quot;the plain of Domhna (or Domon)&quot;, but the precise meaning of the text is not clear.

In Irish mythology the islands were the home of the Fomorians, described as &quot;huge and ugly&quot; and &quot;ship men of the sea&quot;. They were pirates, extracting tribute from the coasts of Ireland and one of their kings was (i.e. Indech, son of the goddess Domnu, who ruled over the deep seas).

== Geography ==


The islands form an archipelago whose major islands are Lewis and Harris, North Uist, Benbecula, South Uist, and Barra. Lewis and Harris has an area of and is the largest island in Scotland and the third-largest in the British Isles, after Great Britain and Ireland. It incorporates Lewis in the north and Harris in the south, both of which are frequently referred to as individual islands, although they are connected by land. The island does not have a single name in either English or Gaelic, and is referred to as &quot;Lewis and Harris&quot;, &quot;Lewis with Harris&quot;, &quot;Harris with Lewis&quot; etc.

The largest islands are deeply indented by arms of the sea such as Loch Ròg, Loch Seaforth and Loch nam Madadh. There are also more than 7,500 freshwater lochs in the Outer Hebrides, about 24% of the total for the whole of Scotland. North and South Uist and Lewis, in particular, have landscapes with a high percentage of fresh water and a maze and complexity of loch shapes. Harris has fewer large bodies of water but has innumerable small lochans. Loch Langavat on Lewis is long, and has several large islands in its midst, including Eilean Mòr. Although Loch Suaineabhal has only 25% of Loch Langavat&#x27;s surface area, it has a mean depth of and is the most voluminous on the island. Of Loch Sgadabhagh on North Uist it has been said that &quot;there is probably no other loch in Britain which approaches Loch Scadavay in irregularity and complexity of outline.&quot; Loch Bì is South Uist&#x27;s largest loch and at long it all but cuts the island in two.

Much of the western coastline of the islands is machair, a fertile low-lying dune pastureland. Lewis is comparatively flat, and largely consists of treeless moors of blanket peat. The highest eminence is Mealisval at in the south west. Most of Harris is mountainous, with large areas of exposed rock and Clisham, the archipelago&#x27;s only Corbett, reaches in height. North and South Uist and Benbecula (sometimes collectively referred to as The Uists) have sandy beaches and wide cultivated areas of machair to the west and virtually uninhabited mountainous areas to the east. The highest peak here is Beinn Mhòr at . The Uists and their immediate outliers have a combined area of . This includes the Uists themselves and the islands linked to them by causeways and bridges. Barra is in extent and has a rugged interior, surrounded by machair and extensive beaches.

The scenic qualities of the islands are reflected in the fact that three of Scotland&#x27;s forty national scenic areas (NSAs) are located here. The national scenic areas are defined so as to identify areas of exceptional scenery and to ensure its protection from inappropriate development, and are considered to represent the type of scenic beauty &quot;popularly associated with Scotland and for which it is renowned&quot;. The three NSA within the Outer Hebrides are:

*South Lewis, Harris and North Uist National Scenic Area covers the mountainous south west of Lewis, all of Harris, the Sound of Harris and the northern part of North Uist.
*An area of the south west coast of South Uist is designated as the &quot;South Uist Machair National Scenic Area&quot;.
*The archipelago of St Kilda is also listed as an NSA, alongside many other conservation designations.

=== Flora and fauna ===

Much of the archipelago is a protected habitat, including both the islands and the surrounding waters. There are 53 Sites of Special Scientific Interest of which the largest are Loch an Duin, North Uist () and North Harris (). South Uist is considered the best place in the UK for the aquatic plant Slender Naiad, which is a European Protected Species.

There has been considerable controversy over hedgehogs on the Uists. Hedgehogs are not native to the islands but were introduced in the 1970s to reduce garden pests. Their spread posed a threat to the eggs of ground-nesting wading birds. In 2003 Scottish Natural Heritage undertook culls of hedgehogs in the area, but these were halted in 2007; trapped animals are now relocated to the mainland.

Nationally important populations of breeding waders are present in the Outer Hebrides, including common redshank, dunlin, lapwing and ringed plover. The islands also provide a habitat for other important species such as corncrake, hen harrier, golden eagle and otter. Offshore, basking shark and various species of whale and dolphin can often be seen, and the remoter islands&#x27; seabird populations are of international significance. St Kilda has 60,000 northern gannets, amounting to 24% of the world population; 49,000 breeding pairs of Leach&#x27;s petrel, up to 90% of the European population; and 136,000 pairs of puffin and 67,000 northern fulmar pairs, about 30% and 13% of the respective UK totals. Mingulay is an important breeding ground for razorbills, with 9,514 pairs, 6.3% of the European population.

The bumblebee &quot;Bombus jonellus&quot; var. &quot;hebridensis&quot; is endemic to the Hebrides and there are local variants of the dark green fritillary and green-veined white butterflies. The St Kilda wren is a subspecies of wren whose range is confined to the islands whose name it bears.

== Population ==

The islands&#x27; total population was 26,502 at the 2001 census, and the 2011 figure was 27,684. During the same period Scottish island populations as a whole grew by 4% to 103,702. The largest settlement in the Outer Hebrides is Stornoway on Lewis, which has a population of about 8,100.

The population estimate for 2019 was 26,720 according to a Comhairle nan Eilean Siar report which added that &quot;the population of the Outer Hebrides is ageing&quot; and that &quot;young adults [...] leave the islands for further education or employment purposes&quot;. Of the total population, 6,953 people reside in the &quot;Stornoway settlement Laxdale (Lacasdal), Sandwick (Sanndabhaig) and Newmarket&quot; with the balance distributed over 280 townships.

In addition to the major North Ford (&quot;&quot;) and South Ford causeways that connect North Uist to Benbecula via the northern of the Grimsays, and another causeway from Benbecula to South Uist, several other islands are linked by smaller causeways or bridges. Great Bernera and Scalpay have bridge connections to Lewis and Harris respectively, with causeways linking Baleshare and Berneray to North Uist; Eriskay to South Uist; , and the southern Grimsay to Benbecula; and the Vatersay Causeway linking Vatersay to Barra. This means that all the inhabited islands are now connected to at least one other island by a land transport route.


== Uninhabited islands ==
There are more than fifty uninhabited islands greater in size than in the Outer Hebrides, including the Barra Isles, Flannan Isles, Monach Islands, the Shiant Islands and the islands of . In common with the other main island chains of Scotland, many of the more remote islands were abandoned during the 19th and 20th centuries, in some cases after continuous habitation since the prehistoric period. More than 35 such islands have been identified in the Outer Hebrides alone. On Barra Head, for example, Historic Scotland have identified eighty-three archaeological sites on the island, the majority being of a pre-medieval date. In the 18th century, the population was over fifty, but the last native islanders had left by 1931. The island became completely uninhabited by 1980 with the automation of the lighthouse.

Some of the smaller islands continue to contribute to modern culture. The &quot;Mingulay Boat Song&quot;, although evocative of island life, was written after the abandonment of the island in 1938 and Taransay hosted the BBC television series &quot;Castaway 2000&quot;. Others have played a part in Scottish history. On 4 May 1746, the &quot;Young Pretender&quot; Charles Edward Stuart hid on with some of his men for four days whilst Royal Navy vessels patrolled the Minch.

Smaller isles and skerries and other island groups pepper the North Atlantic surrounding the main islands. Some are not geologically part of the Outer Hebrides, but are administratively and in most cases culturally, part of . to the west of Lewis lies St Kilda, now uninhabited except for a small military base. A similar distance to the north of Lewis are North Rona and , two small and remote islands. While Rona used to support a small population who grew grain and raised cattle, is an inhospitable rock. Thousands of northern gannets nest here, and by special arrangement some of their young, known as &quot;&quot;, are harvested annually by the men of Ness. The status of Rockall, which is to the west of North Uist and which the Island of Rockall Act 1972 decreed to be a part of the Western Isles, remains a matter of international dispute.

==Settlements==
A 2018 development plan divides the Outer Hebrides settlements into four types: Stornoway core, main settlements, rural settlements and outwith settlements. The main settlements are Tarbert, Lochmaddy, Balivanich, Lochboisdale/Daliburgh, Greater Castlebay and greater Stornoway (excluding Stornoway core).

Combining with data from the National Records of Scotland, the principal settlements are:

The dispersed settlements consisting of rural settlements and outwith settlements account for about two-thirds of the population of the council area, since the total population of the table is about 9,000.

== Geology ==

Most of the islands have a bedrock formed from Lewisian gneiss. These are amongst the oldest rocks in Europe, having been formed in the Precambrian period up to three billion years ago. In addition to the Outer Hebrides, they form basement deposits on the Scottish mainland west of the Moine Thrust and on the islands of Coll and Tiree. These rocks are largely igneous in origin, mixed with metamorphosed marble, quartzite and mica schist and intruded by later basaltic dykes and granite magma. The gneiss&#x27;s delicate pink colours are exposed throughout the islands and it is sometimes referred to by geologists as &quot;The Old Boy&quot;.

Granite intrusions are found in the parish of Barvas in west Lewis, and another forms the summit plateau of the mountain Roineabhal in Harris. The granite here is anorthosite, and is similar in composition to rocks found in the mountains of the Moon. There are relatively small outcrops of Triassic sandstone at Broad Bay near Stornoway. The Shiant Islands and St Kilda are formed from much later tertiary basalt and basalt and gabbros respectively. The sandstone at Broad Bay was once thought to be Torridonian or Old Red Sandstone.

== Climate ==

The Outer Hebrides have a cool temperate climate that is remarkably mild and steady for such a northerly latitude, due to the influence of the North Atlantic Current. The average temperature is 6 °C (44 °F) in January and 14 °C (57 °F) in summer. The average annual rainfall in Lewis is and sunshine hours range from 1,100 to 1,200 per year. The summer days are relatively long and May to August is the driest period. Winds are a key feature of the climate and even in summer there are almost constant breezes. According to the writer W. H. Murray if a visitor asks an islander for a weather forecast &quot;he will not, like a mainlander answer dry, wet or sunny, but quote you a figure from the Beaufort Scale.&quot; There are gales one day in six at the Butt of Lewis and small fish are blown onto the grass on top of 190 metre (620 ft) high cliffs at Barra Head during winter storms.

== Prehistory ==
The Hebrides were originally settled in the Mesolithic era and have a diversity of important prehistoric sites. in on North Uist was constructed around 3200–2800 BC and may be Scotland&#x27;s earliest crannog (a type of artificial island). The Callanish Stones, dating from about 2900 BC, are the finest example of a stone circle in Scotland, the 13 primary monoliths of between one and five metres high creating a circle about in diameter. on South Uist, the only site in the UK where prehistoric mummies have been found, and the impressive ruins of Dun Carloway on Lewis both date from the Iron Age.

== History ==

In Scotland, the Celtic Iron Age way of life, often troubled but never extinguished by Rome, re-asserted itself when the legions abandoned any permanent occupation in 211 AD. Hanson (2003) writes: &quot;For many years it has been almost axiomatic in studies of the period that the Roman conquest must have had some major medium or long-term impact on Scotland. On present evidence that cannot be substantiated either in terms of environment, economy, or, indeed, society. The impact appears to have been very limited. The general picture remains one of broad continuity, not of disruption ... The Roman presence in Scotland was little more than a series of brief interludes within a longer continuum of indigenous development.&quot; The Romans&#x27; direct impact on the Highlands and Islands was scant and there is no evidence that they ever actually landed in the Outer Hebrides.

The later Iron Age inhabitants of the northern and western Hebrides were probably Pictish, although the historical record is sparse. Hunter (2000) states that in relation to King Bridei I of the Picts in the sixth century AD: &quot;As for Shetland, Orkney, Skye and the Western Isles, their inhabitants, most of whom appear to have been Pictish in culture and speech at this time, are likely to have regarded Bridei as a fairly distant presence.&quot; The island of Pabbay is the site of the Pabbay Stone, the only extant Pictish symbol stone in the Outer Hebrides. This 6th century stele shows a flower, V-rod and lunar crescent to which has been added a later and somewhat crude cross.

=== Norse control ===
Viking raids began on Scottish shores towards the end of the 8th century AD and the Hebrides came under Norse control and settlement during the ensuing decades, especially following the success of Harald Fairhair at the Battle of Hafrsfjord in 872. In the Western Isles Ketill Flatnose was the dominant figure of the mid 9th century, by which time he had amassed a substantial island realm and made a variety of alliances with other Norse leaders. These princelings nominally owed allegiance to the Norwegian crown, although in practice the latter&#x27;s control was fairly limited. Norse control of the Hebrides was formalised in 1098 when Edgar, King of Scotland formally signed the islands over to Magnus III of Norway. The Scottish acceptance of Magnus III as King of the Isles came after the Norwegian king had conquered Orkney, the Hebrides and the Isle of Man in a swift campaign earlier the same year, directed against the local Norwegian leaders of the various islands‘ petty kingdoms. By capturing the islands Magnus imposed a more direct royal control, although at a price. His skald Bjorn Cripplehand recorded that in Lewis &quot;fire played high in the heaven&quot; as &quot;flame spouted from the houses&quot; and that in the Uists &quot;the king dyed his sword red in blood&quot;. Thompson (1968) provides a more literal translation: &quot;Fire played in the fig-trees of Liodhus; it mounted up to heaven. Far and wide the people were driven to flight. The fire gushed out of the houses&quot;.

The Hebrides were now part of Kingdom of the Isles, whose rulers were themselves vassals of the Kings of Norway. The Kingdom had two parts: the &#x27; or South Isles encompassing the Hebrides and the Isle of Man; and the &#x27; or North Isles of Orkney and Shetland. This situation lasted until the partitioning of the Western Isles in 1156, at which time the Outer Hebrides remained under Norwegian control while the Inner Hebrides broke out under Somerled, the Norse-Celtic kinsman of the Manx royal house.

Following the ill-fated 1263 expedition of Haakon IV of Norway, the Outer Hebrides along with the Isle of Man, were yielded to the Kingdom of Scotland a result of the 1266 Treaty of Perth. Although their contribution to the islands can still be found in personal and placenames, the archaeological record of the Norse period is very limited. The best known find from this time is the Lewis chessmen, which date from the mid 12th century.

=== Scots rule ===
As the Norse era drew to a close the Norse-speaking princes were gradually replaced by Gaelic-speaking clan chiefs including the MacLeods of Lewis and Harris, the MacDonalds of the Uists and MacNeil of Barra. This transition did little to relieve the islands of internecine strife although by the early 14th century the MacDonald Lords of the Isles, based on Islay, were in theory these chiefs&#x27; feudal superiors and managed to exert some control.

The growing threat that Clan Donald posed to the Scottish crown led to the forcible dissolution of the Lordship of the Isles by James IV in 1493, but although the king had the power to subdue the organised military might of the Hebrides, he and his immediate successors lacked the will or ability to provide an alternative form of governance. The House of Stuart&#x27;s attempts to control the Outer Hebrides were then at first desultory and little more than punitive expeditions. In 1506 the Earl of Huntly besieged and captured Stornoway Castle using cannon. In 1540 James V himself conducted a royal tour, forcing the clan chiefs to accompany him. There followed a period of peace, but all too soon the clans were at loggerheads again.

In 1598 King James VI authorised some &quot;Gentleman Adventurers&quot; from Fife to civilise the &quot;most barbarous Isle of Lewis&quot;. Initially successful, the colonists were driven out by local forces commanded by Murdoch and Neil MacLeod, who based their forces on in . The colonists tried again in 1605 with the same result but a third attempt in 1607 was more successful, and in due course Stornoway became a Burgh of Barony. By this time Lewis was held by the Mackenzies of Kintail, (later the Earls of Seaforth), who pursued a more enlightened approach, investing in fishing in particular. The historian W. C. MacKenzie was moved to write:

The Seaforth&#x27;s royalist inclinations led to Lewis becoming garrisoned during the Wars of the Three Kingdoms by Cromwell&#x27;s troops, who destroyed the old castle in Stornoway and in 1645 Lewismen fought on the royalist side at the Battle of Auldearn. A new era of Hebridean involvement in the affairs of the wider world was about to commence.

=== British era ===
With the implementation of the Treaty of Union in 1707 the Hebrides became part of the new Kingdom of Great Britain, but the clans&#x27; loyalties to a distant monarch were not strong. A considerable number of islandmen &quot;came out&quot; in support of the Jacobite Earl of Mar in the &quot;15&quot; although the response to the 1745 rising was muted. Nonetheless the aftermath of the decisive Battle of Culloden, which effectively ended Jacobite hopes of a Stuart restoration, was widely felt. The British government&#x27;s strategy was to estrange the clan chiefs from their kinsmen and turn their descendants into English-speaking landlords whose main concern was the revenues their estates brought rather than the welfare of those who lived on them. This may have brought peace to the islands, but in the following century it came at a terrible price.

The Highland Clearances of the 19th century destroyed communities throughout the Highlands and Islands as the human populations were evicted and replaced with sheep farms. For example, Colonel Gordon of Cluny, owner of Barra, South Uist and Benbecula, evicted thousands of islanders using trickery and cruelty, and even offered to sell Barra to the government as a penal colony. Islands such as were completely cleared of their populations and even today the subject is recalled with bitterness and resentment in some areas. The position was exacerbated by the failure of the islands&#x27; kelp industry, which thrived from the 18th century until the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815 and large scale emigration became endemic. For example, hundreds left North Uist for Cape Breton, Nova Scotia. The pre-clearance population of the island had been almost 5,000, although by 1841 it had fallen to 3,870 and was only 2,349 by 1931.

The Highland potato famine (Gaiseadh a’ bhuntàta, in Scottish Gaelic), caused by a blight, started in 1846 and had a serious impact, because many islanders were crofters; potatoes were a staple of their diet. Violent riots became common. Charities, encouraged by George Pole and others in the Commissariat (a military agency) encouraged charities to come to the rescue. The Free Church was particularly helpful, &quot;delivering oatmeal to famine-affected families all across the West Highlands and Islands&quot;, according to one report. Another report states that the Church &quot;was prompt in organising an efficient system of private charity across the Hebrides and on the Western seaboard. It cooperated with the Edinburgh and Glasgow Relief Committees&quot;.

An interdenominational charity was in place by early 1847 and took the most significant role in famine relief. Some landowners also provided a great deal of assistance, according to one history of the region: &quot;MacLeod of Dunvegan bought in food for his people, some eight thousand of them&quot; ... MacLean of Ardgour provided food, and introduced new crops into the area - peas, cabbages and carrots ... Sir James Matheson on Lewis spent £329,000 (Equivalent to £37,000,000 in 2024) on improving his lands, hoping to provide a more secure future for his people&quot;. The government of Britain provided some assistance, thanks to Sir Charles Trevelyan, who arranged for food distribution at Portree and Tobermory. The &quot;British Association for the Relief of Distress in Ireland and the Highlands and Islands of Scotland&quot; also helped as did donations received from North America. The blight struck again over the next two years, requiring an extra tax on landowners to help feed the population. The British government began encouraging mass emigration.

For those who remained new economic opportunities emerged through the export of cattle, commercial fishing and tourism. During the summer season in the 1860s and 1870s five thousand inhabitants of Lewis could be found in Wick on the mainland of Scotland, employed on the fishing boats and at the quaysides. Nonetheless emigration and military service became the choice of many and the archipelago&#x27;s populations continued to dwindle throughout the late 19th and 20th centuries. By 2001 the population of North Uist was only 1,271.

The work of the Napier Commission and the Congested Districts Board, and the passing of the Crofting Act of 1886 helped, but social unrest continued. In July 1906 grazing land on Vatersay was raided by landless men from Barra and its isles. Lady Gordon Cathcart took legal action against the &quot;raiders&quot; but the visiting judge took the view that she had neglected her duties as a landowner and that &quot;long indifference to the necessities of the cottars had gone far to drive them to exasperation&quot;. Millennia of continuous occupation notwithstanding, many of the remoter islands were abandoned — Mingulay in 1912, Hirta in 1930, and in 1942 among them. This process involved a transition from these places being perceived as relatively self-sufficient agricultural economies to a view becoming held by both island residents and outsiders alike that they lacked the essential services of a modern industrial economy.

There were gradual economic improvements, among the most visible of which was the replacement of the traditional thatched blackhouse with accommodation of a more modern design. The creation of the Highlands and Islands Development Board and the discovery of substantial deposits of North Sea oil in 1965, the establishment of a unitary local authority for the islands in 1975 and more recently the renewables sector have all contributed to a degree of economic stability in recent decades. The Arnish yard has had a chequered history but has been a significant employer in both the oil and renewables industries. , the local authority, employs 2,000 people, making it the largest employer in the Outer Hebrides. See also the &quot; area plan 2010&quot; and the &#x27;s &quot;Factfile – Economy&quot;.

== Economy ==
Modern commercial activities centre on tourism, crofting, fishing, and weaving including the manufacture of Harris tweed. Crofting remains popular especially on Lewis and Harris (population 21,000) with over 920 active crofters according to a 2020 report: &quot;with crofts ranging in size from as small as a single hectare to having access to thousands of hectares through the medium of community grazing&quot;. Crofters can apply for subsidy grants; some of these are intended to help them find other avenues to supplement their incomes. Some of the funding schemes available to crofters in the Hebrides include the &quot;Basic Payment Scheme, the suckler beef support scheme, the upland sheep support scheme and the Less Favoured Area support scheme and the Crofting Agricultural Grant Scheme (CAGS), as of March 2020.

According to the Scottish Government, &quot;tourism is by far and away the mainstay industry&quot; of the Outer Hebrides, &quot;generating £65m in economic value for the islands, sustaining around 1000 jobs&quot; The report adds that the &quot;islands receive 219,000 visitors per year&quot;.

Some of the larger islands have development trusts that support the local economy and, in striking contrast to the 19th and 20th century domination by absentee landlords, more than two thirds of the Western Isles population now lives on community-owned estates. However the economic position of the islands remains relatively precarious. The Western Isles, including Stornoway, are defined by Highlands and Islands Enterprise as an economically &quot;Fragile Area&quot; and they have an estimated trade deficit of some £163.4 million. Overall, the area is relatively reliant on primary industries and the public sector, and fishing and fish farming in particular are vulnerable to environmental impacts, changing market pressures, and European legislation.

There is some optimism about the possibility of future developments in, for example, renewable energy generation, tourism, and education, and after declines in the 20th century the population has stabilised since 2003, although it is ageing. A 2019 report, using key assumptions, (mortality, fertility and migration) was less optimistic. It predicted that the population is &quot;projected to fall to 22,709 by 2043&quot;; that translates to a 16% decline, or 4,021 people, between 2018 and 2043.

The UK’s largest community-owned wind farm, the 9MW Beinn Ghrideag, a &quot;3 turbine, 9MW scheme&quot; is located outside Stornoway and is operated by Point and Sandwick Trust (PST).

The Isle of Lewis web site states that Stornoway&#x27;s sheltered harbour has been important for centuries; it was named Steering Bay by Vikings who often visited. A December 2020 report stated that a new deep water terminal was to be developed, the Stornoway Deep Water Terminal, using a £49 million investment. The plan included berths for cruise ships as long as 360 meters, berths for large cargo vessels, and a freight ferry berth.

== Politics and local government ==
The local authority is Comhairle nan Eilean Siar, based at the Council Offices in Stornoway. The council is often known locally simply as &quot;the &quot; or &quot;&quot;.

===Administrative history===
After the Scottish crown claimed control of the islands, they were included in Inverness-shire. In 1661 Inverness-shire was split, with the northern parts becoming a new county called Ross-shire. The interests of landowners influenced the boundary of the new county. Kenneth Mackenzie, 3rd Earl of Seaforth, owned extensive lands in Ross on the mainland and also owned the Isle of Lewis. Lewis was therefore included in Ross-shire, whereas the rest of the Outer Hebrides stayed in Inverness-shire (including Harris, despite it being part of the same island as Lewis). In 1889, Ross-shire merged with Cromartyshire to form a new county called Ross and Cromarty.

Local government was reformed in 1975 under the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973, which replaced Scotland&#x27;s counties, burghs and landward districts. In most of Scotland a two-tier structure of upper-tier regions and lower-tier districts was used, but a single-tier structure of island areas was used for Orkney, Shetland and the Outer Hebrides, the latter being named the Western Isles. Further local government reform in 1996 introduced single-tier council areas across all of Scotland. The councils of the three island areas created in 1975, including the Western Isles, continued to provide the same services after 1996, but their areas were redesignated as council areas.

As part of the 1975 reforms the area was also made a lieutenancy area, represented by the Lord Lieutenant of the Western Isles.

In 1998, following the Local Government (Gaelic Names) (Scotland) Act 1997, the Western Isles Council formally changed the English language version of the council area&#x27;s name from Western Isles to &quot;Na h-Eileanan an Iar&quot; (Gaelic for &#x27;the Western Isles&#x27;), and the name of the council to &quot;Comhairle nan Eilean Siar&quot; (&#x27;Council of the Western Isles&#x27;), to be used in both English and Gaelic contexts.

===Wider politics===
The name for the British Parliament constituency covering this area is , the seat being held by Torcuil Crichton MP since 2024, while the Scottish Parliament constituency for the area is , the incumbent being Alasdair Allan MSP.

During the 2014 Scottish independence referendum the area voted against independence by a margin of 53.42% (10,544) to 46.58% (9,195) in favour on a turnout of 86.2%

In 2022, as part of the Levelling Up White Paper, an &quot;Island Forum&quot; was proposed, which would allow local policymakers and residents in the Outer Hebrides to work alongside their counterparts in Shetland, Orkney, Anglesey and the Isle of Wight on common issues, such as broadband connectivity, and provide a platform for them to communicate directly with the government on the challenges island communities face in terms of levelling up.

== Scottish Gaelic language ==
The Outer Hebrides have historically been a very strong Scottish Gaelic (&quot;Gàidhlig&quot;) speaking area. Both the 1901 and 1921 census reported that all parishes were over 75% Gaelic speaking, including areas of high population density such as Stornoway. However, the Education (Scotland) Act 1872 mandated English-only education, and is now recognised as having dealt a major blow to the language. People still living can recall being beaten for speaking Gaelic in school. By 1971 most areas were still more than 75% Gaelic speaking – with the exception of Stornoway, Benbecula and South Uist at 50–74%.

In the 2001 census, each island overall was over 50% Gaelic speaking – South Uist (71%), Harris (69%), Barra (68%), North Uist (67%), Lewis (56%) and Benbecula (56%). With 59.3% of Gaelic speakers or a total of 15,723 speakers, this made the Outer Hebrides the most strongly coherent Gaelic speaking area in Scotland.

Most areas were between 60-74% Gaelic speaking and the areas with the highest density of over 80% are Scalpay near Harris, Newtonferry and Kildonan, whilst Daliburgh, Linshader, Eriskay, Brue, Boisdale, West Harris, Ardveenish, Soval, Ness, and Bragar all have more than 75%. The areas with the lowest density of speakers are Stornoway (44%), Braigh (41%), Melbost (41%), and Balivanich (37%).

The Gaelic Language (Scotland) Act was enacted by the Scottish Parliament in 2005 to provide continuing support for the language. However, by 2011 the overall percentage of Gaelic speakers in the Outer Hebrides had fallen to 52%.

In modern Gaelic the islands are sometimes referred to collectively as &#x27; (the Long Island) or &#x27; (the Outer Isles). &quot;&quot; (islands of the foreigners or strangers) is also heard occasionally, a name that was originally used by mainland Highlanders when the islands were ruled by the Norse.

The individual island and place names in the Outer Hebrides have mixed Gaelic and Norse origins. Various Gaelic terms are used repeatedly:

There are also several islands called &#x27; from the Norse &#x27; meaning &quot;tidal&quot; or &quot;ebb island&quot;.

== Transport ==
Scheduled ferry services between the Outer Hebrides and the Scottish mainland and Inner Hebrides operate on the following routes:

* Oban to Castlebay on Barra
*Oban to Lochboisdale on South Uist (winter only)
*Mallaig to Lochboisdale on South Uist
* Uig on Skye to Tarbert on Harris
* Uig on Skye to Lochmaddy on North Uist
* Ullapool to Stornoway on Lewis
* Tiree to Castlebay, Barra (summer only)

Other ferries operate between some of the islands.

National Rail services are available for onward journeys, from stations at Oban and Mallaig, which has direct services to Glasgow. However, parliamentary approval notwithstanding, plans in the 1890s to lay a railway connection to Ullapool were unable to obtain sufficient funding.

There are scheduled flights from Stornoway, Benbecula and Barra airports both inter-island and to the mainland. Barra&#x27;s airport is claimed to be the only one in the world to have scheduled flights landing on a beach. At high water the runways are under the sea so flight times vary with the tide.
===Bus na Comhairle===
Bus na Comhairle (meaning &quot;Bus of the Council&quot;) is the council-owned local bus company of the Western Isles. The company serves the Broadbay area of Lewis with 7 buses: 6 Optare Solos and 1 ADL Enviro 200.

=== Shipwrecks ===
The archipelago is exposed to wind and tide, and lighthouses are sited as an aid to navigation at locations from Barra Head in the south to the Butt of Lewis in the north. There are numerous sites of wrecked ships, and the Flannan Isles are the location of an enduring mystery that occurred in December 1900, when all three lighthouse keepers vanished without trace.

&quot;Annie Jane&quot;, a three-masted immigrant ship out of Liverpool bound for Montreal, Canada, struck rocks off the West Beach of Vatersay during a storm on Tuesday 28 September 1853. Within ten minutes the ship began to founder and break up, casting 450 people into the sea. In spite of the conditions, islanders tried to rescue the passengers and crew. The remains of 350 men, women and children were buried in the dunes behind the beach and a small cairn and monument marks the site.

The tiny Beasts of Holm off the east coast of Lewis were the site of the sinking of during the first few hours of 1919, one of the worst maritime disasters in United Kingdom waters during the 20th century. Calvay in the Sound of Barra provided the inspiration for Compton Mackenzie&#x27;s novel &quot;Whisky Galore&quot; after the ran aground there with a cargo of single malt whisky in 1941.

==Culture ==
Christianity has deep roots in the Western Isles, but owing mainly to the different allegiances of the clans in the past, the people in the northern islands (Lewis, Harris, North Uist) have historically been predominantly Presbyterian, and those of the southern islands (Benbecula, South Uist, Barra) predominantly Roman Catholic.

At the time of the 2001 Census, 42% of the population identified themselves as being affiliated with the Church of Scotland, with 13% Roman Catholic and 28% with other Christian churches. Many of this last group belong to the Free Church of Scotland, known for its strict observance of the Sabbath. 11% stated that they had no religion. This made the Western Isles the Scottish council area with the smallest percentage of non-religious in the population. There are also small Episcopalian congregations in Lewis and Harris, and the Outer Hebrides are part of the Diocese of Argyll and The Isles in both the Episcopalian and Catholic traditions.

Gaelic music is popular in the islands and the Lewis and Harris Traditional Music Society plays an active role in promoting the genre. Fèis Bharraigh began in 1981 with the aim of developing the practice and study of the Gaelic language, literature, music, drama and culture on the islands of Barra and Vatersay. This two-week festival has inspired 43 other &quot;feisean&quot; throughout Scotland. The Lewis Pipe Band was founded in 1904 and the Lewis and Harris Piping Society in 1977.

Outdoor activities including rugby, football, golf, shinty, fishing, riding, canoeing, athletics, and multi-sports are popular in the Western Isles. The Hebridean Challenge is an adventure race, run in five daily stages, which takes place along the length of the islands and includes hill and road running, road and mountain biking, short sea swims and demanding sea kayaking sections. There are four main sports centres: &quot;Ionad Spors Leodhais&quot; in Stornoway, which has a 25 m swimming pool; Harris Sports Centre; Lionacleit Sports Centre on Benbecula; and Castlebay Sports Centre on Barra. The Western Isles is a member of the International Island Games Association.

South Uist is home to the Askernish Golf Course. The oldest links in the Outer Hebrides, it was designed by Old Tom Morris. Although it was in use until the 1930s, its existence was largely forgotten until 2005 and it is now being restored to Morris&#x27;s original design.

== See also ==
* Constitutional status of Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles
* Hebridean Myths and Legends
* Leod
* List of Category A listed buildings in the Western Isles
* List of places in the Western Isles
* List of rulers of the Kingdom of the Isles
* List of islands of Scotland
* Ljótólfr
* Solar eclipse of 1 May 1185
* 2012 Comhairle nan Eilean Siar election
* Virtual Hebrides

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Sources ==

* Armit, Ian (1998) &quot;Scotland&#x27;s Hidden History&quot;. Tempus (in association with Historic Scotland). 
* Ballin Smith, B. and Banks, I. (eds) (2002) &quot;In the Shadow of the Brochs, the Iron Age in Scotland&quot;. Stroud. Tempus. 
* Ballin Smith, Beverley; Taylor, Simon; Williams, Gareth (eds) (2007) &quot;West Over Sea: Studies in Scandinavian Sea-Borne Expansion and Settlement Before 1300&quot;. Leiden. Koninklijke Brill. 
* Benvie, Neil (2004) &quot;Scotland&#x27;s Wildlife&quot;. London. Aurum Press. 
* Buxton, Ben (1995) &quot;Mingulay: An Island and Its People&quot;. Edinburgh. Birlinn. 
* Downham, Clare (2007) &quot;Viking Kings of Britain and Ireland: The Dynasty of Ívarr to A.D. 1014&quot;. Edinburgh. Dunedin Academic Press. 
* Gillen, Con (2003) &quot;Geology and landscapes of Scotland&quot;. Harpenden. Terra Publishing. 
* Gregory, Donald (1881) &quot;The History of the Western Highlands and Isles of Scotland 1493–1625.&quot; Edinburgh. Birlinn. 2008 reprint – originally published by Thomas D. Morrison. 
* Hanson, William S. &quot;The Roman Presence: Brief Interludes&quot;, in Edwards, Kevin J. &amp; Ralston, Ian B.M. (Eds) (2003) &quot;Scotland After the Ice Age: Environment, Archaeology and History, 8000 BC – AD 1000&quot;. Edinburgh. Edinburgh University Press.
* Haswell-Smith, Hamish. (2004) &quot;The Scottish Islands&quot;. Edinburgh. Canongate. 
* Hunter, James (2000) &quot;Last of the Free: A History of the Highlands and Islands of Scotland&quot;. Edinburgh. Mainstream. 
* Keay, J. &amp; Keay, J. (1994) &quot;Collins Encyclopaedia of Scotland&quot;. London. HarperCollins. 
* McKirdy, Alan Gordon, John &amp; Crofts, Roger (2007) &quot;Land of Mountain and Flood: The Geology and Landforms of Scotland&quot;. Edinburgh. Birlinn. 
* Maclean, Charles (1977) &quot;Island on the Edge of the World: the Story of St. Kilda&quot;. Edinburgh. Canongate. 
* Malhotra, R. (1992) &quot;Anthropology of Development: Commemoration Volume in Honour of Professor I.P. Singh&quot;. New Delhi. Mittal. 
* Li, Martin (2005) &quot;Adventure Guide to Scotland&quot;. Hunter Publishing. Retrieved 19 May 2010.
* Miers, Mary (2008) &quot;The Western Seaboard: An Illustrated Architectural Guide.&quot; The Rutland Press. 
* Murray, W.H. (1966) &quot;The Hebrides&quot;. London. Heinemann.
* Murray, W.H. (1973) &quot;The Islands of Western Scotland: the Inner and Outer Hebrides.&quot; London. Eyre Methuen. 
* Ross, David (2005) &quot;Scotland – History of a Nation&quot;. Lomond. 
* Rotary Club of Stornoway (1995) &quot;The Outer Hebrides Handbook and Guide&quot;. Machynlleth. Kittiwake. 
* Thompson, Francis (1968) &quot;Harris and Lewis, Outer Hebrides&quot;. Newton Abbot. David &amp; Charles. 
* Watson, W. J. (1994) &quot;The Celtic Place-Names of Scotland&quot;. Edinburgh; Birlinn. . First published 1926.
== External links ==


* Stornoway Port Authority 
* Comhairle nan Eilean Siar
* 2001 Census Results for the Outer Hebrides
* MacTV
* Reefnet
* Hebrides.com Photographic website from ex-Eolas Sam Maynard
* www.visithebrides.com Western Isles Tourist Board site from Reefnet
* Virtual Hebrides.com Content from the VH, which went its own way and became Virtual Scotland.
* hebrides.ca Home of the Quebec-Hebridean Scots who were cleared from Lewis to Quebec 1838–1920s</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q80967" start="4" end="18" title="Outer Hebrides" label="Outer Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q80967" start="26" end="39" title="Outer Hebrides" label="Western Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q80967" start="75" end="84" title="Outer Hebrides" label="Long Isle"/>
<link wikidata="Q80967" start="88" end="99" title="Outer Hebrides" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="110" end="122" title="Archipelago" label="island chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="154" end="162" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q123377" start="212" end="220" title="Hebrides" label="Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q81052" start="272" end="286" title="Inner Hebrides" label="Inner Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143789" start="308" end="313" title="Minch" label="Minch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143789" start="319" end="331" title="Little Minch" label="Little Minch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971856" start="341" end="360" title="Sea of the Hebrides" label="Sea of the Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q461231" start="483" end="508" title="council areas of Scotland" label="council areas of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q80967" start="637" end="657" title="Outer Hebrides" label="Na h-Eileanan an Iar"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="809" end="820" title="metamorphic" label="metamorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1732919" start="997" end="1007" title="Barra Head" label="Barra Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499864" start="1015" end="1028" title="Butt of Lewis" label="Butt of Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="1165" end="1180" title="Classical antiquity" label="Roman and Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211290" start="1227" end="1232" title="Norsemen" label="Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456646" start="1372" end="1387" title="Treaty of Perth" label="Treaty of Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q499247" start="1437" end="1441" title="Scottish clan" label="clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094977" start="1482" end="1490" title="Clan MacLeod" label="MacLeods"/>
<link wikidata="Q595667" start="1492" end="1502" title="Clan Donald" label="MacDonalds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975310" start="1512" end="1520" title="Clan MacNeil" label="MacNeils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368217" start="1526" end="1545" title="Highland Clearances" label="Highland Clearances"/>
<link wikidata="Q15094780" start="1780" end="1788" title="crofting" label="crofting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162954" start="2208" end="2237" title="conservation designation" label="designated conservation areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="2370" end="2385" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="2632" end="2639" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81052" start="2797" end="2811" title="Inner Hebrides" label="Inner Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q653649" start="2846" end="2858" title="Proto-Celtic" label="Early Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189971" start="2960" end="2967" title="Pytheas" label="Pytheas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566850" start="2971" end="2979" title="Massilia" label="Massilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q363778" start="3194" end="3210" title="Lewis and Harris" label="Lewis and Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="3524" end="3533" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q27429" start="3731" end="3736" title="Nemed" label="Nemed"/>
<link wikidata="Q459188" start="3893" end="3911" title="Kingdom of Mann and the Isles" label="Mann and the Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471505" start="4089" end="4104" title="Irish mythology" label="Irish mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160687" start="4138" end="4147" title="Fomorians" label="Fomorians"/>
<link wikidata="Q363778" start="4463" end="4479" title="Lewis and Harris" label="Lewis and Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q662158" start="4481" end="4491" title="North Uist" label="North Uist"/>
<link wikidata="Q755739" start="4493" end="4502" title="Benbecula" label="Benbecula"/>
<link wikidata="Q841059" start="4504" end="4514" title="South Uist" label="South Uist"/>
<link wikidata="Q223212" start="4520" end="4525" title="Barra" label="Barra"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="4626" end="4639" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453423" start="4690" end="4695" title="Isle of Lewis" label="Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122196" start="4713" end="4719" title="Harris, Outer Hebrides" label="Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777175" start="5089" end="5097" title="Loch Ròg" label="Loch Ròg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777071" start="5099" end="5112" title="Loch Seaforth" label="Loch Seaforth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738877" start="5117" end="5132" title="Lochmaddy" label="Loch nam Madadh"/>
<link wikidata="Q105119922" start="5472" end="5485" title="Loch Langavat" label="Loch Langavat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349310" start="5558" end="5568" title="Eilean Mòr, Loch Langavat" label="Eilean Mòr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665011" start="5715" end="5730" title="Loch Sgadabhagh" label="Loch Sgadabhagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q662158" start="5734" end="5744" title="North Uist" label="North Uist"/>
<link wikidata="Q28527" start="6034" end="6041" title="Machair (geography)" label="machair"/>
<link wikidata="Q184624" start="6160" end="6164" title="peat" label="peat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122196" start="6230" end="6236" title="Harris, Outer Hebrides" label="Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319861" start="6290" end="6297" title="Clisham" label="Clisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q12012565" start="6327" end="6334" title="Corbett Top" label="Corbett"/>
<link wikidata="Q354289" start="6429" end="6438" title="The Uists" label="The Uists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398006" start="6590" end="6600" title="Beinn Mhòr (South Uist)" label="Beinn Mhòr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978246" start="6953" end="6974" title="national scenic area (Scotland)" label="national scenic areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567818" start="7328" end="7383" title="South Lewis, Harris and North Uist National Scenic Area" label="South Lewis, Harris and North Uist National Scenic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453423" start="7421" end="7426" title="Isle of Lewis" label="Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122196" start="7435" end="7441" title="Harris, Outer Hebrides" label="Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564767" start="7447" end="7462" title="Sound of Harris" label="Sound of Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q662158" start="7488" end="7498" title="North Uist" label="North Uist"/>
<link wikidata="Q841059" start="7536" end="7546" title="South Uist" label="South Uist"/>
<link wikidata="Q166479" start="7641" end="7649" title="St Kilda, Scotland" label="St Kilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q422211" start="7866" end="7902" title="Sites of Special Scientific Interest" label="Sites of Special Scientific Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q841059" start="7977" end="7987" title="South Uist" label="South Uist"/>
<link wikidata="Q164776" start="8049" end="8062" title="Najas flexilis" label="Slender Naiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q573925" start="8075" end="8101" title="European Protected Species" label="European Protected Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q6145" start="8149" end="8157" title="European hedgehog" label="hedgehog"/>
<link wikidata="Q18859" start="8598" end="8613" title="common redshank" label="common redshank"/>
<link wikidata="Q26650" start="8615" end="8621" title="dunlin" label="dunlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25392" start="8623" end="8630" title="Northern lapwing" label="lapwing"/>
<link wikidata="Q26816" start="8635" end="8648" title="ringed plover" label="ringed plover"/>
<link wikidata="Q26017" start="8721" end="8730" title="Corn crake" label="corncrake"/>
<link wikidata="Q25572" start="8732" end="8743" title="hen harrier" label="hen harrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q41181" start="8745" end="8757" title="golden eagle" label="golden eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q29995" start="8762" end="8767" title="European otter" label="otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q185260" start="8779" end="8792" title="basking shark" label="basking shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q166479" start="8938" end="8946" title="St Kilda, Scotland" label="St Kilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q26675" start="8958" end="8973" title="northern gannet" label="northern gannet"/>
<link wikidata="Q211986" start="9043" end="9062" title="Leach&amp;#x27;s storm-petrel" label="Leach&amp;#x27;s petrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q26685" start="9123" end="9129" title="Atlantic puffin" label="puffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26896" start="9141" end="9156" title="northern fulmar" label="northern fulmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533261" start="9211" end="9219" title="Mingulay" label="Mingulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q27102" start="9256" end="9265" title="razorbill" label="razorbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q25407" start="9324" end="9333" title="bumblebee" label="bumblebee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121557" start="9334" end="9390" title="Bombus jonellus" label="&amp;quot;Bombus jonellus&amp;quot; var. &amp;quot;hebridensis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="9394" end="9401" title="endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q67687694" start="9454" end="9475" title="dark green fritillary" label="dark green fritillary"/>
<link wikidata="Q683592" start="9480" end="9498" title="green-veined white" label="green-veined white"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539840" start="9516" end="9529" title="St Kilda wren" label="St Kilda wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q25740" start="9549" end="9553" title="Eurasian wren" label="wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q587046" start="9754" end="9769" title="List of Scottish islands" label="Scottish island"/>
<link wikidata="Q165845" start="9864" end="9873" title="Stornoway" label="Stornoway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546934" start="10525" end="10532" title="Grimsay" label="Grimsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q496364" start="10652" end="10665" title="Great Bernera" label="Great Bernera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167098" start="10670" end="10677" title="Scalpay, Outer Hebrides" label="Scalpay"/>
<link wikidata="Q789357" start="10759" end="10768" title="Baleshare" label="Baleshare"/>
<link wikidata="Q682618" start="10773" end="10781" title="Berneray, North Uist" label="Berneray"/>
<link wikidata="Q602689" start="10797" end="10804" title="Eriskay" label="Eriskay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776198" start="10839" end="10846" title="Grimsay, South East Benbecula" label="Grimsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129181" start="10869" end="10886" title="Vatersay Causeway" label="Vatersay Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q339539" start="10895" end="10903" title="Vatersay" label="Vatersay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811115" start="11162" end="11173" title="Barra Isles" label="Barra Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427154" start="11175" end="11188" title="Flannan Isles" label="Flannan Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606513" start="11190" end="11204" title="Monach Islands" label="Monach Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789795" start="11210" end="11224" title="Shiant Islands" label="Shiant Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q111854" start="11562" end="11579" title="Historic Scotland" label="Historic Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6864815" start="11957" end="11975" title="Mingulay Boat Song" label="Mingulay Boat Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305643" start="12078" end="12086" title="Taransay" label="Taransay"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="12098" end="12101" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049611" start="12126" end="12139" title="Castaway 2000" label="Castaway 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q312581" start="12241" end="12262" title="Charles Edward Stuart" label="Charles Edward Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="12312" end="12322" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q216851" start="12371" end="12379" title="skerry" label="skerries"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="12415" end="12429" title="North Atlantic" label="North Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q166479" start="12605" end="12613" title="St Kilda, Scotland" label="St Kilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q773842" start="12710" end="12720" title="North Rona" label="North Rona"/>
<link wikidata="Q26675" start="12875" end="12890" title="northern gannet" label="northern gannet"/>
<link wikidata="Q151589" start="13011" end="13015" title="Ness, Outer Hebrides" label="Ness"/>
<link wikidata="Q206137" start="13031" end="13038" title="Rockall" label="Rockall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6083590" start="13089" end="13115" title="Island of Rockall Act 1972" label="Island of Rockall Act 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q165845" start="13299" end="13313" title="Stornoway" label="Stornoway core"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121588" start="13401" end="13408" title="Tarbert, Harris" label="Tarbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738877" start="13410" end="13419" title="Lochmaddy" label="Lochmaddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q805000" start="13421" end="13431" title="Balivanich" label="Balivanich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016308" start="13433" end="13445" title="Lochboisdale" label="Lochboisdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777841" start="13446" end="13455" title="Daliburgh" label="Daliburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049581" start="13457" end="13474" title="Castlebay" label="Greater Castlebay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932348" start="13555" end="13583" title="National Records of Scotland" label="National Records of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537363" start="13886" end="13901" title="Lewisian complex" label="Lewisian gneiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q103910" start="13975" end="13986" title="Precambrian" label="Precambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q472078" start="14125" end="14137" title="Moine Thrust Belt" label="Moine Thrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q194451" start="14160" end="14164" title="Coll" label="Coll"/>
<link wikidata="Q511617" start="14169" end="14174" title="Tiree" label="Tiree"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="14244" end="14250" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q237883" start="14252" end="14261" title="quartzite" label="quartzite"/>
<link wikidata="Q15315" start="14266" end="14277" title="mica schist" label="mica schist"/>
<link wikidata="Q662806" start="14309" end="14314" title="Dyke (geology)" label="dykes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250474" start="14530" end="14536" title="Barvas" label="Barvas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8530064" start="14605" end="14615" title="Roineabhal" label="Roineabhal"/>
<link wikidata="Q567788" start="14647" end="14658" title="anorthosite" label="anorthosite"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="14729" end="14733" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="14774" end="14782" title="Triassic" label="Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971845" start="14796" end="14805" title="Broad Bay (Western Isles)" label="Broad Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="14890" end="14896" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q46947" start="14912" end="14918" title="gabbro" label="gabbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250458" start="14984" end="14995" title="Torridonian" label="Torridonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517523" start="14999" end="15016" title="Old Red Sandstone" label="Old Red Sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="15139" end="15147" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q211798" start="15177" end="15199" title="North Atlantic Current" label="North Atlantic Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945655" start="15569" end="15581" title="W. H. Murray" label="W. H. Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q170464" start="15730" end="15744" title="Beaufort Scale" label="Beaufort Scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499864" start="15790" end="15803" title="Butt of Lewis" label="Butt of Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1732919" start="15888" end="15898" title="Barra Head" label="Barra Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="15983" end="15997" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic era"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="16032" end="16043" title="prehistory" label="prehistoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q662158" start="16057" end="16067" title="North Uist" label="North Uist"/>
<link wikidata="Q91759" start="16140" end="16147" title="crannog" label="crannog"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242938" start="16183" end="16199" title="Callanish Stones" label="Callanish Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935728" start="16256" end="16268" title="stone circle" label="stone circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q653208" start="16297" end="16305" title="monolith" label="monolith"/>
<link wikidata="Q841059" start="16383" end="16393" title="South Uist" label="South Uist"/>
<link wikidata="Q43616" start="16437" end="16444" title="mummy" label="mummies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265209" start="16490" end="16502" title="Dun Carloway" label="Dun Carloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="16531" end="16539" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="16581" end="16589" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="17450" end="17458" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q102891" start="17522" end="17526" title="Pict" label="Pict"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588211" start="17619" end="17640" title="Bridei I of the Picts" label="Bridei I of the Picts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666255" start="17962" end="17982" title="Pictish stones" label="Pictish symbol stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q178743" start="18023" end="18028" title="stele" label="stele"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="18151" end="18157" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q206123" start="18348" end="18363" title="Harald I of Norway" label="Harald Fairhair"/>
<link wikidata="Q515561" start="18371" end="18391" title="Battle of Hafrsfjord" label="Battle of Hafrsfjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q610698" start="18421" end="18436" title="Ketill Flatnose" label="Ketill Flatnose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211290" start="18584" end="18589" title="Norsemen" label="Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q332140" start="18792" end="18815" title="Edgar, King of Scotland" label="Edgar, King of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q311996" start="18852" end="18872" title="Magnus III of Norway" label="Magnus III of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="18977" end="18983" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="19006" end="19017" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q947305" start="19240" end="19245" title="skald" label="skald"/>
<link wikidata="Q123377" start="19844" end="19852" title="Hebrides" label="Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="19861" end="19872" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="19918" end="19926" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781786" start="20110" end="20118" title="Somerled" label="Somerled"/>
<link wikidata="Q316039" start="20214" end="20233" title="Haakon IV of Norway" label="Haakon IV of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456646" start="20343" end="20358" title="Treaty of Perth" label="Treaty of Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q217796" start="20555" end="20569" title="Lewis chessmen" label="Lewis chessmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="20666" end="20680" title="Old Norse" label="Norse-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q499247" start="20732" end="20736" title="Scottish clan" label="clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094977" start="20758" end="20766" title="Clan MacLeod" label="MacLeods"/>
<link wikidata="Q595667" start="20792" end="20802" title="Clan Donald" label="MacDonalds"/>
<link wikidata="Q354289" start="20810" end="20814" title="Uist" label="Uist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975310" start="20820" end="20836" title="Clan MacNeil" label="MacNeil of Barra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869930" start="20959" end="20977" title="Lord of the Isles" label="Lords of the Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q273" start="20988" end="20993" title="Islay" label="Islay"/>
<link wikidata="Q137906" start="21210" end="21218" title="James IV of Scotland" label="James IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q179840" start="21429" end="21444" title="House of Stuart" label="House of Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q495961" start="21575" end="21589" title="Marquess of Huntly" label="Earl of Huntly"/>
<link wikidata="Q137814" start="21651" end="21658" title="James V of Scotland" label="James V"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="21835" end="21843" title="James VI of Scotland" label="James VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533712" start="21866" end="21903" title="Fife Adventurers" label="Gentleman Adventurers&amp;quot; from Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998629" start="22241" end="22256" title="Burgh of barony" label="Burgh of Barony"/>
<link wikidata="Q16834186" start="22327" end="22344" title="Earl of Seaforth" label="Earls of Seaforth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577772" start="22561" end="22587" title="Wars of the Three Kingdoms" label="Wars of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="22591" end="22606" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Cromwell&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087452" start="22713" end="22731" title="Battle of Auldearn" label="Battle of Auldearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q682403" start="22877" end="22892" title="Treaty of Union" label="Treaty of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="22937" end="22961" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277359" start="23114" end="23125" title="Earl of Mar" label="Earl of Mar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12130474" start="23133" end="23147" title="Jacobite rising of 1715" label="&amp;quot;15&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049945" start="23177" end="23188" title="Jacobite rising of 1745" label="1745 rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q651919" start="23242" end="23260" title="Battle of Culloden" label="Battle of Culloden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368217" start="23709" end="23728" title="Highland Clearances" label="Highland Clearances"/>
<link wikidata="Q729025" start="23786" end="23807" title="Highlands and Islands" label="Highlands and Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235765" start="23898" end="23904" title="John Gordon (soldier)" label="Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15279294" start="23908" end="23913" title="Cluny Castle" label="Cluny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055316" start="24295" end="24299" title="kelp" label="kelp"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="24367" end="24382" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q188489" start="24476" end="24487" title="Cape Breton" label="Cape Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="24489" end="24500" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066269" start="24641" end="24663" title="Highland potato famine" label="Highland potato famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249693" start="26044" end="26061" title="Sir Charles Trevelyan, 1st Baronet" label="Charles Trevelyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012502" start="26693" end="26697" title="Wick, Highland" label="Wick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986390" start="27024" end="27041" title="Napier Commission" label="Napier Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160465" start="27050" end="27075" title="Congested Districts Board (Scotland)" label="Congested Districts Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140769" start="27100" end="27120" title="Crofters&amp;#x27; Holdings (Scotland) Act 1886" label="Crofting Act of 1886"/>
<link wikidata="Q339539" start="27187" end="27195" title="Vatersay" label="Vatersay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16029321" start="27249" end="27269" title="Emily Gordon Cathcart" label="Lady Gordon Cathcart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533261" start="27620" end="27628" title="Mingulay" label="Mingulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q180045" start="27638" end="27643" title="Hirta" label="Hirta"/>
<link wikidata="Q880313" start="28063" end="28073" title="blackhouse" label="blackhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5759437" start="28138" end="28177" title="Highlands and Islands Development Board" label="Highlands and Islands Development Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998660" start="28223" end="28236" title="North Sea oil" label="North Sea oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q840695" start="28339" end="28356" title="renewable energy in Scotland" label="renewables sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q165845" start="28435" end="28446" title="Arnish yard" label="Arnish yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q15094780" start="28805" end="28813" title="crofting" label="crofting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306943" start="28865" end="28877" title="Harris tweed" label="Harris tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q363778" start="28918" end="28934" title="Lewis and Harris" label="Lewis and Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266787" start="29906" end="29923" title="development trust" label="development trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q5759437" start="30267" end="30299" title="Highlands and Islands Enterprise" label="Highlands and Islands Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="31452" end="31459" title="Vikings" label="Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778400" start="31812" end="31837" title="Comhairle nan Eilean Siar" label="Comhairle nan Eilean Siar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247390" start="32070" end="32085" title="Inverness-shire" label="Inverness-shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q978599" start="32175" end="32185" title="Ross-shire" label="Ross-shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390426" start="32258" end="32297" title="Kenneth Mackenzie, 3rd Earl of Seaforth" label="Kenneth Mackenzie, 3rd Earl of Seaforth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442735" start="32324" end="32328" title="Ross, Scotland" label="Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453423" start="32364" end="32377" title="Isle of Lewis" label="Isle of Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122196" start="32499" end="32505" title="Harris, Outer Hebrides" label="Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140824" start="32591" end="32604" title="Cromartyshire" label="Cromartyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586842" start="32633" end="32650" title="Ross and Cromarty" label="Ross and Cromarty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664037" start="32701" end="32737" title="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973" label="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q254978" start="32780" end="32785" title="burgh" label="burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626641" start="32791" end="32808" title="landward district" label="landward district"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="32966" end="32972" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="32974" end="32982" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q202435" start="33392" end="33408" title="Lieutenancy areas of Scotland" label="lieutenancy area"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679727" start="33429" end="33465" title="Lord Lieutenant of the Western Isles" label="Lord Lieutenant of the Western Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664024" start="33491" end="33542" title="Local Government (Gaelic Names) (Scotland) Act 1997" label="Local Government (Gaelic Names) (Scotland) Act 1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q108790241" start="34026" end="34042" title="Torcuil Crichton" label="Torcuil Crichton"/>
<link wikidata="Q559634" start="34139" end="34153" title="Alasdair Allan" label="Alasdair Allan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458570" start="34171" end="34208" title="2014 Scottish independence referendum" label="2014 Scottish independence referendum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34351" end="34375" title="Levelling up policy of the Boris Johnson government#White paper" label="Levelling Up White Paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="34532" end="34540" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="34542" end="34548" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q168159" start="34550" end="34558" title="Anglesey" label="Anglesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="34567" end="34580" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="34863" end="34878" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28434588" start="35080" end="35109" title="Education (Scotland) Act 1872" label="Education (Scotland) Act 1872"/>
<link wikidata="Q165845" start="35370" end="35379" title="Stornoway" label="Stornoway"/>
<link wikidata="Q755739" start="35381" end="35390" title="Benbecula" label="Benbecula"/>
<link wikidata="Q841059" start="35395" end="35405" title="South Uist" label="South Uist"/>
<link wikidata="Q841059" start="35489" end="35499" title="South Uist" label="South Uist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122196" start="35507" end="35513" title="Harris, Outer Hebrides" label="Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q223212" start="35521" end="35526" title="Barra" label="Barra"/>
<link wikidata="Q662158" start="35534" end="35544" title="North Uist" label="North Uist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453423" start="35552" end="35557" title="Isle of Lewis" label="Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q755739" start="35568" end="35577" title="Benbecula" label="Benbecula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167098" start="35839" end="35858" title="Scalpay, Outer Hebrides" label="Scalpay near Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q13157688" start="35860" end="35871" title="Newtonferry" label="Newtonferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777841" start="35893" end="35902" title="Daliburgh" label="Daliburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q602689" start="35915" end="35922" title="Eriskay" label="Eriskay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3779762" start="35924" end="35928" title="Brue" label="Brue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122196" start="35940" end="35951" title="Harris, Outer Hebrides" label="West Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788319" start="35953" end="35963" title="Ardveenish" label="Ardveenish"/>
<link wikidata="Q151589" start="35972" end="35976" title="Ness, Western Isles" label="Ness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775790" start="35982" end="35988" title="Bragar" label="Bragar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811687" start="36094" end="36101" title="Melbost" label="Melbost"/>
<link wikidata="Q805000" start="36113" end="36123" title="Balivanich" label="Balivanich"/>
<link wikidata="Q973006" start="36136" end="36166" title="Gaelic Language (Scotland) Act 2005" label="Gaelic Language (Scotland) Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="36186" end="36205" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="36614" end="36625" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437490" start="36824" end="36853" title="list of islands called Oronsay" label="several islands called &amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q25653" start="36956" end="36961" title="ferry" label="ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q935702" start="37079" end="37083" title="Oban" label="Oban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049581" start="37087" end="37096" title="Castlebay" label="Castlebay"/>
<link wikidata="Q223212" start="37100" end="37105" title="Barra" label="Barra"/>
<link wikidata="Q935702" start="37107" end="37111" title="Oban" label="Oban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016308" start="37115" end="37127" title="Lochboisdale" label="Lochboisdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q841059" start="37131" end="37141" title="South Uist" label="South Uist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010557" start="37157" end="37164" title="Mallaig" label="Mallaig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016308" start="37168" end="37180" title="Lochboisdale" label="Lochboisdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q841059" start="37184" end="37194" title="South Uist" label="South Uist"/>
<link wikidata="Q515476" start="37197" end="37200" title="Uig, Snizort" label="Uig"/>
<link wikidata="Q107393" start="37204" end="37208" title="Isle of Skye" label="Skye"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121588" start="37212" end="37219" title="Tarbert, Harris" label="Tarbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122196" start="37223" end="37229" title="Harris, Outer Hebrides" label="Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q515476" start="37232" end="37235" title="Uig, Snizort" label="Uig"/>
<link wikidata="Q107393" start="37239" end="37243" title="Isle of Skye" label="Skye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738877" start="37247" end="37256" title="Lochmaddy" label="Lochmaddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q662158" start="37260" end="37270" title="North Uist" label="North Uist"/>
<link wikidata="Q996526" start="37273" end="37281" title="Ullapool" label="Ullapool"/>
<link wikidata="Q165845" start="37285" end="37294" title="Stornoway, Outer Hebrides" label="Stornoway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453423" start="37298" end="37303" title="Isle of Lewis" label="Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q511617" start="37306" end="37311" title="Tiree" label="Tiree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049581" start="37315" end="37324" title="Castlebay" label="Castlebay"/>
<link wikidata="Q223212" start="37326" end="37331" title="Barra" label="Barra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404245" start="37474" end="37478" title="Oban railway station" label="Oban"/>
<link wikidata="Q3967326" start="37483" end="37490" title="Mallaig railway station" label="Mallaig"/>
<link wikidata="Q54869745" start="37605" end="37637" title="Garve and Ullapool Railway" label="a railway connection to Ullapool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667407" start="37714" end="37723" title="Stornoway Airport" label="Stornoway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658886" start="37725" end="37734" title="Benbecula Airport" label="Benbecula"/>
<link wikidata="Q808778" start="37739" end="37744" title="Barra Airport (Scotland)" label="Barra"/>
<link wikidata="Q39715" start="38291" end="38301" title="lighthouse" label="lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427154" start="38465" end="38478" title="Flannan Isles" label="Flannan Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="38671" end="38680" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="38691" end="38707" title="Montreal" label="Montreal, Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934528" start="39308" end="39314" title="Calvay" label="Calvay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122051" start="39366" end="39383" title="Compton Mackenzie" label="Compton Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887604" start="39403" end="39416" title="Whisky Galore (novel)" label="Whisky Galore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940734" start="39467" end="39485" title="single malt whisky" label="single malt whisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="39509" end="39521" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="39731" end="39743" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="39824" end="39838" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="39946" end="39964" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453390" start="40067" end="40090" title="Free Church of Scotland (post 1900)" label="Free Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116511" start="40131" end="40138" title="Sabbath in Christianity" label="Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205829" start="40318" end="40330" title="Scottish Episcopal Church" label="Episcopalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028665" start="40405" end="40436" title="Diocese of Argyll and The Isles (Episcopal)" label="Diocese of Argyll and The Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148439" start="40488" end="40500" title="Gaelic music" label="Gaelic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511508" start="40623" end="40637" title="Fèis Bharraigh" label="Fèis Bharraigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164192" start="40897" end="40906" title="Great Highland Bagpipe" label="Pipe Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378" start="41006" end="41011" title="Rugby football" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="41023" end="41027" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q850256" start="41029" end="41035" title="shinty" label="shinty"/>
<link wikidata="Q520611" start="41293" end="41308" title="mountain biking" label="mountain biking"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41500" end="41510" title="Lionacleit" label="Lionacleit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049581" start="41543" end="41552" title="Castlebay" label="Castlebay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659014" start="41614" end="41652" title="International Island Games Association" label="International Island Games Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q841059" start="41655" end="41665" title="South Uist" label="South Uist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41681" end="41702" title="Askernish Golf Course" label="Askernish Golf Course"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346909" start="41763" end="41777" title="Old Tom Morris" label="Old Tom Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q15916866" start="41947" end="42010" title="Constitutional status of Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles" label="Constitutional status of Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5695963" start="42013" end="42040" title="Hebridean Myths and Legends" label="Hebridean Myths and Legends"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524393" start="42043" end="42047" title="Leod" label="Leod"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566383" start="42050" end="42106" title="List of Category A listed buildings in the Western Isles" label="List of Category A listed buildings in the Western Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633913" start="42109" end="42144" title="List of places in the Western Isles" label="List of places in the Western Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q459174" start="42147" end="42189" title="List of rulers of the Kingdom of the Isles" label="List of rulers of the Kingdom of the Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q587046" start="42192" end="42219" title="List of islands of Scotland" label="List of islands of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661025" start="42222" end="42230" title="Ljótólfr" label="Ljótólfr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4427815" start="42233" end="42260" title="Solar eclipse of 1 May 1185" label="Solar eclipse of 1 May 1185"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151714" start="42263" end="42302" title="2012 Comhairle nan Eilean Siar election" label="2012 Comhairle nan Eilean Siar election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934969" start="42305" end="42321" title="Virtual Hebrides" label="Virtual Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136429" start="43766" end="43779" title="James Hunter (historian)" label="Hunter, James"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147372" start="43932" end="43965" title="Collins Encyclopaedia of Scotland" label="Collins Encyclopaedia of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945655" start="44626" end="44638" title="W. H. Murray" label="Murray, W.H."/>
<link wikidata="Q3200853" start="45106" end="45119" title="William J. Watson" label="Watson, W. J."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40411" wikidata="Q191062" url="?curid=40411" title="Mnemonic">
<text>A mnemonic device ( ) or memory device is any learning technique that aids information retention or retrieval in the human memory, often by associating the information with something that is easier to remember.

It makes use of elaborative encoding, retrieval cues and imagery as specific tools to encode information in a way that allows for efficient storage and retrieval. It aids original information in becoming associated with something more accessible or meaningful—which in turn provides better retention of the information.

Commonly encountered mnemonics are often used for lists and in auditory form such as short poems, acronyms, initialisms or memorable phrases. They can also be used for other types of information and in visual or kinesthetic forms. Their use is based on the observation that the human mind more easily remembers spatial, personal, surprising, physical, sexual, humorous and otherwise &quot;relatable&quot; information rather than more abstract or impersonal forms of information.

Ancient Greeks and Romans distinguished between two types of memory: the &quot;natural&quot; memory and the &quot;artificial&quot; memory. The former is inborn and is the one that everyone uses instinctively. The latter in contrast has to be trained and developed through the learning and practice of a variety of mnemonic techniques.

Mnemonic systems are techniques or strategies consciously used to improve memory. They help use information already stored in long-term memory to make memorization an easier task.

==Etymology==
&quot;Mnemonic&quot; is derived from the Ancient Greek word () which means or . It is related to Mnemosyne, the name of the goddess of memory in Greek mythology. Both of these words are derived from (), . Mnemonics in antiquity were most often considered in the context of what is today known as the art of memory.

==History==
The general name of mnemonics, or &quot;memoria technica&quot;, was the name applied to devices for aiding the memory, to enable the mind to reproduce a relatively unfamiliar idea, and especially a series of dissociated ideas, by connecting it, or them, in some artificial whole, the parts of which are mutually suggestive. Mnemonic devices were much cultivated by Greek sophists and philosophers and are frequently referred to by Plato and Aristotle.

Philosopher Charmadas was famous for his outstanding memory and for his ability to memorize whole books and then recite them.

In later times, the poet Simonides was credited for development of these techniques, perhaps for no reason other than that the power of his memory was famous. Cicero, who attaches considerable importance to the art, but more to the principle of order as the best help to memory, speaks of Carneades (perhaps Charmades) of Athens and Metrodorus of Scepsis as distinguished examples of people who used well-ordered images to aid the memory. The Romans valued such helps in order to support facility in public speaking.

The Greek and the Roman system of mnemonics was founded on the use of mental places and signs or pictures, known as &quot;topical&quot; mnemonics. The most usual method was to choose a large house, of which the apartments, walls, windows, statues, furniture, etc., were each associated with certain names, phrases, events or ideas, by means of symbolic pictures. To recall these, an individual had only to search over the apartments of the house until discovering the places where images had been placed by the imagination.

In accordance with this system, if it were desired to fix a historic date in memory, it was localised in an imaginary town divided into a certain number of districts, each with ten houses, each house with ten rooms, and each room with a hundred quadrates or memory-places, partly on the floor, partly on the four walls, partly on the ceiling. Therefore, if it were desired to fix in the memory the date of the invention of printing (1436), an imaginary book, or some other symbol of printing, would be placed in the thirty-sixth quadrate or memory-place of the fourth room of the first house of the historic district of the town. Except that the rules of mnemonics are referred to by Martianus Capella, nothing further is known regarding the practice until the 13th century.

Among the voluminous writings of Roger Bacon is a tractate &quot;De arte memorativa&quot;. Ramon Llull devoted special attention to mnemonics in connection with his &quot;ars generalis.&quot; The first important modification of the method of the Romans was that invented by the German poet Conrad Celtes, who, in his &quot;Epitoma in utramque Ciceronis rhetoricam cum arte memorativa nova&quot; (1492), used letters of the alphabet for associations, rather than places. About the end of the 15th century, Peter of Ravenna (b. 1448) provoked such astonishment in Italy by his mnemonic feats that he was believed by many to be a necromancer. His &quot;Phoenix artis memoriae&quot; (Venice, 1491, 4 vols.) went through as many as nine editions, the seventh being published at Cologne in 1608.

About the end of the 16th century, Lambert Schenkel (&quot;Gazophylacium&quot;, 1610), who taught mnemonics in France, Italy and Germany, similarly surprised people with his memory. He was denounced as a sorcerer by the University of Louvain, but in 1593 he published his tractate &quot;De memoria&quot; at Douai with the sanction of that celebrated theological faculty. The most complete account of his system is given in two works by his pupil Martin Sommer, published in Venice in 1619. In 1618 John Willis (d. 1628?) published &quot;Mnemonica; sive ars reminiscendi&quot;, containing a clear statement of the principles of topical or local mnemonics. Giordano Bruno included a &quot;memoria technica&quot; in his treatise &quot;De umbris idearum,&quot; as part of his study of the &quot;ars generalis&quot; of Llull. Other writers of this period are the Florentine Publicius (1482); Johannes Romberch (1533); Hieronimo Morafiot, &quot;Ars memoriae&quot; (1602);and B. Porta, &quot;Ars reminiscendi&quot; (1602).

In 1648 Stanislaus Mink von Wennsshein revealed what he called the &quot;most fertile secret&quot; in mnemonics—using consonants for figures, thus expressing numbers by words (vowels being added as required), in order to create associations more readily remembered. The philosopher Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz adopted an alphabet very similar to that of Wennsshein for his scheme of a form of writing common to all languages.

Wennsshein&#x27;s method was adopted with slight changes afterward by the majority of subsequent &quot;original&quot; systems. It was modified and supplemented by Richard Grey (1694–1771), a priest who published a &quot;Memoria technica&quot; in 1730. The principal part of Grey&#x27;s method is briefly this:
Wennsshein&#x27;s method is comparable to a Hebrew system by which letters also stand for numerals, and therefore words for dates.

To assist in retaining the mnemonical words in the memory, they were formed into memorial lines. Such strange words in difficult hexameter scansion, are by no means easy to memorise. The vowel or consonant, which Grey connected with a particular figure, was chosen arbitrarily.

A later modification was made in 1806 Gregor von Feinaigle, a German monk from Salem near Constance. While living and working in Paris, he expounded a system of mnemonics in which (as in Wennsshein) the numerical figures are represented by letters chosen due to some similarity to the figure or an accidental connection with it. This alphabet was supplemented by a complicated system of localities and signs. Feinaigle, who apparently did not publish any written documentation of this method, travelled to England in 1811. The following year one of his pupils published &quot;The New Art of Memory&quot; (1812), giving Feinaigle&#x27;s system. In addition, it contains valuable historical material about previous systems.

Other mnemonists later published simplified forms, as the more complicated mnemonics were generally abandoned. Methods founded chiefly on the so-called laws of association (cf. Mental association) were taught with some success in Germany.

==Types==

; 1. Music mnemonics
: Songs and jingles can be used as a mnemonic. A common example is how children remember the alphabet by singing the ABCs. Another example are book tunes.

; 2. Name mnemonics (acronym)
: The first letter of each word is combined into a new word. For example: VIBGYOR (or ROY G BIV) for the colours of the rainbow or HOMES (Lake Huron, Lake Ontario, Lake Michigan, Lake Erie, Lake Superior) the Great Lakes.

; 3. Acrostic mnemonics
: The first letter of each word is combined to form a phrase or sentence – e.g. &quot;Richard of York gave battle in vain&quot; for the colours of the rainbow.

; 4. Model mnemonics
: A model is used to help recall information. Applications of this method involve the use of diagrams, cycles, graphs, and flowcharts to help understand or memorize an idea. e.g. Freytag&#x27;s Pyramid to show the different parts of a five-act dramatic structure.

; 5. Ode mnemonics
: The information is placed into a poem or doggerel, – e.g. &quot;Note socer, gener, liberi, and Liber god of revelry, like puer these retain the &#x27;e (most Latin nouns of the second declension ending in -er drop the -e in all of the oblique cases except the vocative, these are the exceptions).

; 6. Note organization mnemonics
: The method of note organization can be used as a memorization technique. Applications of this method involve the use of flash cards and lists. Flash cards are used by putting a question or word on one side of a paper and the answer or definition on the other side of the paper. Lists involve the organization of data from broad to detailed. e.g. Earth → Continent → Country.

; 7. Image mnemonics
: The information is constructed into a picture.

; 8. Connection mnemonics
: New knowledge is connected to knowledge already known.

; 9. Visualization mnemonics
: Techniques such as the method of loci allow the user to create unique associations in an imagined space.

==Applications and examples==

A wide range of mnemonics are used for several purposes. The most commonly used mnemonics are those for lists, numerical sequences, foreign-language acquisition, and medical treatment for patients with memory deficits.

===For lists===
A common mnemonic technique for remembering a list is to create an easily remembered acronym. Another is to create a memorable phrase with words which share the same first letter(s) (i.e.: the same initialism) as the list members. Mnemonic techniques can be applied to most memorization of novel materials.
Some common examples for first-letter mnemonics:
*Mnemonics for spelling &quot;mnemonic&quot; include &quot;memory needs every method of nurturing its capacity&quot; and &quot;maybe not every mnemonic oozes nuisance intensely concentrated&quot;.
* To memorize the metric prefixes after giga, think of the candy, and this mnemonic. &quot;Tangiest Pez? Yellow!&quot; TPEZY: tera, peta, exa, zetta, yotta.
* The order of sharps in key signature notation is F, C, G, D, A, E and B, giving the mnemonic &quot;Father Charles goes down and ends battle&quot;. The order of flats is the reverse: B♭, E♭, A♭, D♭, G♭, C♭ and F♭ (&quot;Battle ends and down goes Charles&#x27;s father&quot;).
* The colours of the rainbow in &quot;Richard of York gave battle in vain&quot;, &quot;Run over your granny because it&#x27;s violent&quot; or the fictional name &quot;Roy G. Biv&quot; (red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet).
* The acronym HOMES for the North American Great Lakes: Huron, Ontario, Michigan, Erie, and Superior
* Electronic colour codes are remembered with a wide range of mnemonic phrases, owing to multiple colours beginning with &quot;b&quot; and &quot;g&quot; and shifts from sexist phrases once common in traditionally male-dominated professions.
* For effects of an inductor or capacitor in alternating current circuits, the phrase &quot;Eli the iceman&quot; or &quot;Eli on ice&quot; has been used by electrical engineers. With an inductor present (the symbol &quot;L&quot; indicating inductance), the peak value of voltage (&quot;E&quot;) precedes the peak value of the current (&quot;I&quot;), so &quot;E&quot; precedes &quot;I&quot; in &quot;Eli&quot;. With a capacitor present (the symbol &quot;C&quot; indicating capacitance), the peak current leads the peak voltage, with &quot;I&quot; leading &quot;E&quot; when &quot;C&quot; is present in &quot;ice&quot;. Another common mnemonic is &quot;civil&quot;: in a capacitor (C) current (I) leads voltage (V), while voltage leads current in a inductor (L).
* For redox chemical reactions, where oxidation and reduction can be confused, the phrase &quot;Leo says ger&quot; (lose electron oxidation, gain electron reduction) or acronym &quot;oil rig&quot; (oxidation is losing, reduction is gaining) can be used. 
* Planetary mnemonics include: &quot;My very educated mother just served us nachos&quot; or &quot;my very easy method just speeds up naming planets&quot; (Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, [Pluto]).
* The sequence of stellar classification: &quot;Oh, be a fine girl [or guy], kiss me!&quot; – where O, B, A, F, G, K, M are categories of stars.
* For the layers of the OSI Model: &quot;Please do not teach students pointless acronyms&quot; (physical, data link, network, transport, session, presentation, application).
* Taxonomy mnemonics include &quot;Do kings play chess on funny glass stairs?&quot; and &quot;Do kindly please come over for green soup.&quot; (domain, kingdom, phylum, class, order, family, genus, species)
* For diatomic elements: BrINClHOF (pronounced &#x27;brinkelhoff&#x27;) or &quot;have no fear of ice cold beer&quot;.
* For adjective order in English grammar: OPSHACOM (opinion, shape, age, colour, origin, material).
* For the British English spelling of &quot;diarrhoea&quot;: &quot;Dash in a real rush! Hurry, or else accident!&quot;
* For the parts of the brain associated with memory: &quot;herds of animals cause panic&quot; (hippocampus, amygdala, cerebellum, prefrontal cortex)
* For types of memory encoding: SAVE (semantic, acoustic, and visual encoding)
*For parts of the digestive system: &quot;mother eats squirrel guts because she is living in rural Arkansas&quot; (mouth, esophagus, stomach, gall bladder, small intestine, large intestine, rectum, anus)

===For numerical sequences and mathematical operations===
Mnemonic phrases or poems can be used to encode numeric sequences by various methods, one common one is to create a new phrase in which the number of letters in each word represents the according digit of pi. For example, the first 15 digits of the mathematical constant pi (3.14159265358979) can be encoded as &quot;Now I need a drink, alcoholic of course, after the heavy lectures involving quantum mechanics&quot;; &quot;Now&quot;, having 3 letters, represents the first number, 3. Piphilology is the practice dedicated to creating mnemonics for pi.

Another is used for &quot;calculating&quot; the multiples of 9 up to 9 × 10 using one&#x27;s fingers. Begin by holding out both hands with all fingers stretched out. Now count left to right the number of fingers that indicates the multiple. For example, to figure 9 × 4, count four fingers from the left, ending at your left-hand index finger. Bend this finger down and count the remaining fingers. Fingers to the left of the bent finger represent tens, fingers to the right are ones. There are three fingers to the left and six to the right, which indicates 9 × 4 = 36. This works for 9 × 1 up through 9 × 10.

For remembering the rules in adding and multiplying two signed numbers, Balbuena and Buayan (2015) made the letter strategies LAUS (like signs, add; unlike signs, subtract) and LPUN (like signs, positive; unlike signs, negative), respectively.

 (&#x27;thresher&#x27;) is a Finnish mnemonic regarding electricity: the first and last three letters can be arranged into the equations formula_1 and formula_2. (The letter &quot;M&quot; is ignored, which can be explained with another, politically incorrect mnemonic.)

===For foreign-language acquisition===
Mnemonics may be helpful in learning foreign languages, for example by transposing difficult foreign words with words in a language the learner knows already, also called &quot;cognates&quot; which are very common in Romance languages and other Germanic languages. A useful such technique is to find linkwords, words that have the same pronunciation in a known language as the target word, and associate them visually or auditorially with the target word.

For example, in trying to assist the learner to remember (), the Hebrew word for &quot;tent&quot;, the linguist Ghil&#x27;ad Zuckermann proposes the memorable sentence &quot;&quot;Oh hell&quot;, there&#x27;s a raccoon in my &quot;tent&quot;&quot;. The memorable sentence &quot;There&#x27;s a &quot;fork&quot; in &quot;Ma&#x27;s leg&quot;&quot; helps the learner remember that the Hebrew word for &quot;fork&quot; is &#x27; (). Similarly, to remember the Hebrew word &#x27; (), meaning &quot;house&quot;, one can use the sentence &quot;that&#x27;s a lovely &quot;house&quot;, I&#x27;d like to &quot;buy it&quot;.&quot; The linguist Michel Thomas taught students to remember that &quot;&quot; is the Spanish word for &quot;to be&quot; by using the phrase &quot;to be a star&quot;.

Another Spanish example is by using the mnemonic &quot;Vin Diesel Has Ten Weapons&quot; to teach irregular command verbs in the you () form. Spanish verb forms and tenses are regularly seen as the hardest part of learning the language. With a high number of verb tenses, and many verb forms that are not found in English, Spanish verbs can be hard to remember and then conjugate. The use of mnemonics has been proven to help students better learn foreign languages, and this holds true for Spanish verbs. A particularly hard verb tense to remember is command verbs. Command verbs in Spanish are conjugated differently depending on who the command is being given to. The phrase, when pronounced with a Spanish accent, is used to remember &quot;Ven Di Sal Haz Ten Ve Pon Sé&quot;, all of the irregular Spanish command verbs in the you () form. This mnemonic helps students attempting to memorize different verb tenses.
Another technique is for learners of gendered languages to associate their mental images of words with a colour that matches the gender in the target language. An example here is to remember the Spanish word for &quot;foot&quot;, &quot;,&quot; [pee-eh] with the image of a foot stepping on a pie, which then spills blue filling (blue representing the male gender of the noun in this example).

For French verbs which use être as an auxiliary verb for compound tenses: DR and MRS VANDERTRAMPP: descendre, rester, monter, revenir, sortir, venir, arriver, naître, devenir, entrer, rentrer, tomber, retourner, aller, mourir, partir, passer.

Masculine countries in French (le): &quot;Neither can a breeze make a sane Japanese chilly in the USA.&quot; (les) Netherlands (Pays-Bas), Canada, Brazil (Brésil), Mexico (Mexique), Senegal, Japan (Japon), Chile (Chili), &amp; (les) USA (États-Unis d&#x27;Amérique).

===For patients with memory deficits===

Mnemonics can be used in aiding patients with memory deficits that could be caused by head injuries, strokes, epilepsy, multiple sclerosis and other neurological conditions.

In a study conducted by Doornhein and De Haan, the patients were treated with six different memory strategies including the mnemonics technique. The results concluded that there were significant improvements on the immediate and delayed subtest of the RBMT, delayed recall on the Appointments test, and relatives rating on the MAC from the patients that received mnemonics treatment. However, in the case of stroke patients, the results did not reach statistical significance.

==Effectiveness==
Academic study of the use of mnemonics has shown their effectiveness. In one such experiment, subjects of different ages who applied mnemonic techniques to learn novel vocabulary outperformed control groups that applied contextual learning and free-learning styles.

Mnemonics were seen to be more effective for groups of people who struggled with or had weak long-term memory, like the elderly. Five years after a mnemonic training study, a research team followed-up 112 community-dwelling older adults, 60 years of age and over. Delayed recall of a word list was assessed prior to, and immediately following mnemonic training, and at the 5-year follow-up. Overall, there was no significant difference between word recall prior to training and that exhibited at follow-up. However, pre-training performance gains scores in performance immediately post-training and use of the mnemonic predicted performance at follow-up. Individuals who self-reported using the mnemonic exhibited the highest performance overall, with scores significantly higher than at pre-training. The findings suggest that mnemonic training has long-term benefits for some older adults, particularly those who continue to employ the mnemonic.

This contrasts with a study from surveys of medical students that approximately only 20% frequently used mnemonic acronyms.

In humans, the process of aging particularly affects the medial temporal lobe and hippocampus, in which the episodic memory is synthesized. The episodic memory stores information about items, objects, or features with spatiotemporal contexts. Since mnemonics aid better in remembering spatial or physical information rather than more abstract forms, its effect may vary according to a subject&#x27;s age and how well the subject&#x27;s medial temporal lobe and hippocampus function.

This could be further explained by one recent study which indicates a general deficit in the memory for spatial locations in aged adults (mean age 69.7 with standard deviation of 7.4 years) compared to young adults (mean age 21.7 with standard deviation of 4.2 years). At first, the difference in target recognition was not significant.

The researchers then divided the aged adults into two groups, aged unimpaired and aged impaired, according to a neuropsychological testing. With the aged groups split, there was an apparent deficit in target recognition in aged impaired adults compared to both young adults and aged unimpaired adults. This further supports the varying effectiveness of mnemonics in different age groups.

Moreover, different research was done previously with the same notion, which presented with similar results to that of Reagh et al. in a verbal mnemonics discrimination task.

Studies (notably &quot;The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two&quot;) have suggested that the short-term memory of adult humans can hold only a limited number of items; grouping items into larger chunks such as in a mnemonic might be part of what permits the retention of a larger total amount of information in short-term memory, which in turn can aid in the creation of long-term memories.

==See also==

* List of mnemonics
* List of visual mnemonics
* Earworm
* Memory sport
* Method of loci
* Mnemonic dominic system
* Mnemonic goroawase system
* Mnemonic link system
* Mnemonic major system
* Mnemonic peg system
* Mnemonics in assembler programming languages
* Mnemonic effect (advertising)
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q191062" start="2" end="17" title="Mnemonic" label="mnemonic device"/>
<link wikidata="Q191062" start="25" end="38" title="Mnemonic" label="memory device"/>
<link wikidata="Q133500" start="46" end="54" title="learning" label="learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q492" start="123" end="129" title="memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q25113063" start="228" end="248" title="elaborative encoding" label="elaborative encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q821413" start="596" end="604" title="auditory system" label="auditory"/>
<link wikidata="Q173287" start="618" end="629" title="Acrostic" label="short poems"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="631" end="638" title="acronym" label="acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q558363" start="735" end="741" title="visual" label="visual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129066" start="745" end="756" title="kinesthetic" label="kinesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18601" start="1475" end="1491" title="long-term memory" label="long-term memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354775" start="1500" end="1512" title="memorization" label="memorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1585" end="1598" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q102884" start="1641" end="1650" title="Mnemosyne" label="Mnemosyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="1689" end="1704" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q13461032" start="1844" end="1857" title="art of memory" label="art of memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="2237" end="2242" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3750514" start="2243" end="2250" title="sophist" label="sophist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="2256" end="2267" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="2303" end="2308" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="2313" end="2322" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q255275" start="2337" end="2346" title="Charmadas" label="Charmadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q273003" start="2477" end="2486" title="Simonides" label="Simonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="2611" end="2617" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q284994" start="2741" end="2750" title="Carneades" label="Carneades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="2774" end="2780" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333843" start="2785" end="2806" title="Metrodorus of Scepsis" label="Metrodorus of Scepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="2895" end="2901" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758418" start="2994" end="3013" title="Method of loci" label="system of mnemonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300585" start="3740" end="3747" title="quadrat" label="quadrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q348408" start="4179" end="4196" title="Martianus Capella" label="Martianus Capella"/>
<link wikidata="Q171677" start="4304" end="4315" title="Roger Bacon" label="Roger Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193660" start="4362" end="4373" title="Ramon Llull" label="Ramon Llull"/>
<link wikidata="Q60625" start="4561" end="4574" title="Conrad Celtes" label="Conrad Celtes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9779" start="4694" end="4702" title="alphabet" label="alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q324701" start="4776" end="4792" title="Peter of Ravenna" label="Peter of Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="4833" end="4838" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q337935" start="4898" end="4909" title="necromancer" label="necromancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="4951" end="4957" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="5044" end="5051" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5097" end="5113" title="Lambert Schenkel" label="Lambert Schenkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="5173" end="5179" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="5191" end="5198" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="5266" end="5274" title="Magician (paranormal)" label="sorcerer"/>
<link wikidata="Q693380" start="5282" end="5303" title="Old University of Leuven" label="University of Louvain"/>
<link wikidata="Q193826" start="5369" end="5374" title="Douai" label="Douai"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="5536" end="5542" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q36330" start="5717" end="5731" title="Giordano Bruno" label="Giordano Bruno"/>
<link wikidata="Q193660" start="5876" end="5881" title="Ramon Llull" label="Llull"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="5920" end="5930" title="Florence" label="Florentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010490" start="5949" end="5966" title="Johannes Romberch" label="Johannes Romberch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5975" end="5993" title="Hieronimo Morafiot" label="Hieronimo Morafiot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180483" start="6087" end="6117" title="Stanislaus Mink von Wennsshein" label="Stanislaus Mink von Wennsshein"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="6361" end="6386" title="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz" label="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430812" start="6667" end="6679" title="Richard Grey (priest)" label="Richard Grey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6858" end="6871" title="Hebrew alphabet#Numeric values of letters" label="Hebrew system"/>
<link wikidata="Q109548" start="7075" end="7084" title="hexameter" label="hexameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q36244" start="7133" end="7138" title="vowel" label="vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q38035" start="7142" end="7151" title="consonant" label="consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116313" start="7263" end="7283" title="Gregor von Feinaigle" label="Gregor von Feinaigle"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="7294" end="7298" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q557718" start="7304" end="7309" title="Salem, Baden-Württemberg" label="Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4127" start="7315" end="7324" title="Lake Constance" label="Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="7354" end="7359" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="7731" end="7738" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6885897" start="7954" end="7963" title="mnemonist" label="mnemonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809834" start="8125" end="8143" title="Mental association" label="Mental association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943151" start="8363" end="8372" title="book tune" label="book tune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721981" start="8480" end="8502" title="ROYGBIV" label="VIBGYOR (or ROY G BIV)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383" start="8537" end="8538" title="Lake Huron" label="H"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062" start="8538" end="8539" title="Lake Ontario" label="O"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169" start="8539" end="8540" title="Lake Michigan" label="M"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492" start="8540" end="8541" title="Lake Erie" label="E"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066" start="8541" end="8542" title="Lake Superior" label="S"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383" start="8544" end="8554" title="Lake Huron" label="Lake Huron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062" start="8556" end="8568" title="Lake Ontario" label="Lake Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169" start="8570" end="8583" title="Lake Michigan" label="Lake Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492" start="8585" end="8594" title="Lake Erie" label="Lake Erie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066" start="8596" end="8609" title="Lake Superior" label="Lake Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="8615" end="8626" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721981" start="8739" end="8774" title="ROYGBIV" label="Richard of York gave battle in vain"/>
<link wikidata="Q552136" start="9014" end="9036" title="Freytag&amp;#x27;s Pyramid" label="Freytag&amp;#x27;s Pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030485" start="9162" end="9170" title="doggerel" label="doggerel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9081" start="9933" end="9942" title="knowledge" label="knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758418" start="10039" end="10053" title="method of loci" label="method of loci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863790" start="10155" end="10178" title="list of mnemonics" label="wide range of mnemonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="10474" end="10481" title="acronym" label="acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="10587" end="10597" title="initialism" label="initialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131299" start="10960" end="10973" title="metric prefix" label="metric prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500277" start="11042" end="11045" title="Pez" label="Pez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542618" start="11114" end="11120" title="Sharp (music)" label="sharps"/>
<link wikidata="Q845391" start="11124" end="11137" title="key signature" label="key signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7001368" start="11261" end="11266" title="flat (music)" label="flats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052" start="11397" end="11404" title="rainbow" label="rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q133028" start="11414" end="11429" title="Richard III of England" label="Richard of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="11656" end="11667" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6618772" start="11760" end="11792" title="List of electronic color code mnemonics" label="a wide range of mnemonic phrases"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11961" end="11996" title="Power factor#Mnemonics" label="effects of an inductor or capacitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q124164" start="12000" end="12019" title="alternating current" label="alternating current"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="12723" end="12728" title="redox" label="redox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201248" start="12974" end="12992" title="Planetary mnemonic" label="Planetary mnemonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="13218" end="13240" title="stellar classification" label="stellar classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q93312" start="13369" end="13378" title="OSI Model" label="OSI Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074128" start="13521" end="13538" title="Taxonomy mnemonic" label="Taxonomy mnemonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751859" start="13732" end="13749" title="diatomic molecule" label="diatomic elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q879" start="13751" end="13753" title="Bromine" label="Br"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103" start="13753" end="13754" title="Iodine" label="I"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="13754" end="13755" title="Nitrogen" label="N"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="13755" end="13757" title="Chlorine" label="Cl"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="13757" end="13758" title="Hydrogen" label="H"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="13758" end="13759" title="Oxygen" label="O"/>
<link wikidata="Q650" start="13759" end="13760" title="Fluorine" label="F"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13850" end="13865" title="Adjective#Order" label="adjective order"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="13988" end="13997" title="diarrhoea" label="diarrhoea"/>
<link wikidata="Q9649" start="14309" end="14325" title="digestive system" label="digestive system"/>
<link wikidata="Q167" start="14825" end="14827" title="pi" label="pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470609" start="15039" end="15050" title="Piphilology" label="Piphilology"/>
<link wikidata="Q506839" start="15973" end="15981" title="threshing machine" label="thresher"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="16021" end="16032" title="electricity" label="electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="16492" end="16509" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="16520" end="16538" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554435" start="16575" end="16583" title="linkword" label="linkword"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="16797" end="16803" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q469925" start="16844" end="16867" title="Ghil&amp;#x27;ad Zuckermann" label="Ghil&amp;#x27;ad Zuckermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q662771" start="17363" end="17376" title="Michel Thomas" label="Michel Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q178166" start="17567" end="17577" title="Vin Diesel" label="Vin Diesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="18466" end="18484" title="Grammatical gender" label="gendered languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q860959" start="18504" end="18516" title="mental image" label="mental image"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920572" start="19462" end="19475" title="head injuries" label="head injuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="19477" end="19484" title="strokes" label="strokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="19486" end="19494" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="19496" end="19514" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165194" start="20267" end="20286" title="contextual learning" label="contextual learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q18601" start="20407" end="20423" title="long-term memory" label="long-term memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q744385" start="21445" end="21465" title="medial temporal lobe" label="medial temporal lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48360" start="21470" end="21481" title="hippocampus" label="hippocampus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18646" start="21496" end="21511" title="episodic memory" label="episodic memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818443" start="22322" end="22348" title="neuropsychological testing" label="neuropsychological testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542532" start="22798" end="22841" title="The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two" label="The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q18599" start="22873" end="22890" title="short-term memory" label="short-term memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863790" start="23188" end="23205" title="List of mnemonics" label="List of mnemonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644845" start="23208" end="23232" title="List of visual mnemonics" label="List of visual mnemonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q555631" start="23235" end="23242" title="Earworm" label="Earworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497658" start="23245" end="23257" title="Memory sport" label="Memory sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758418" start="23260" end="23274" title="Method of loci" label="Method of loci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237535" start="23277" end="23300" title="Mnemonic dominic system" label="Mnemonic dominic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755287" start="23303" end="23328" title="Mnemonic goroawase system" label="Mnemonic goroawase system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6885884" start="23331" end="23351" title="Mnemonic link system" label="Mnemonic link system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886129" start="23354" end="23375" title="Mnemonic major system" label="Mnemonic major system"/>
<link wikidata="Q140593" start="23378" end="23397" title="Mnemonic peg system" label="Mnemonic peg system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23400" end="23444" title="Assembly language#Opcode mnemonics and extended mnemonics" label="Mnemonics in assembler programming languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751825" start="23447" end="23462" title="Mnemonic effect" label="Mnemonic effect"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40412" wikidata="Q79719" url="?curid=40412" title="License">
<text>A license (American English) or licence (Commonwealth English) is an official permission or permit to do, use, or own something (as well as the document of that permission or permit).

A license is granted by a party (licensor) to another party (licensee) as an element of an agreement between those parties. In the case of a license issued by a government, the license is obtained by applying for it. In the case of a private party, it is by a specific agreement, usually in writing (such as a lease or other contract). The simplest definition is &quot;A license is a promise not to sue&quot;, because a license usually either permits the licensed party to engage in an illegal activity, and subject to prosecution, without the license (e.g. fishing, driving an automobile, or operating a broadcast radio or television station), or it permits the licensed party to do something that would violate the rights of the licensing party (e.g. make copies of a copyrighted work), which, without the license, the licensed party could be sued, civilly, criminally, or both.

In particular, a license may be issued by authorities, to allow an activity that would otherwise be forbidden. It may require paying a fee or proving a capability (or both). The requirement may also serve to keep the authorities informed on a type of activity, and to allow them to set conditions and limitations.

A licensor may grant a license under intellectual property laws to authorize a use (such as copying software or using a patented invention) to a licensee, sparing the licensee from a claim of infringement brought by the licensor. A license under intellectual property commonly has several components beyond the grant itself, including a term, territory, renewal provisions, and other limitations deemed vital to the licensor.

Term: many licenses are valid for a particular length of time. This protects the licensor should the value of the license increase, or market conditions change. It also preserves enforceability by ensuring that no license extends beyond the term of the agreement.

Territory: a license may stipulate what territory the rights pertain to. For example, a license with a territory limited to &quot;North America&quot; (Mexico/United States/Canada) would not permit a licensee any protection from actions for use in Kyrgyzstan.

Again, a shorthand definition of a license is &quot;a promise by the licensor not to sue the licensee&quot;. That means without a license any use or exploitation of intellectual property by a third party would amount to copying or infringement. Such copying would be improper and could, by using the legal system, be stopped if the intellectual property owner wanted to do so.

Intellectual property licensing plays a major role in business, academia and broadcasting. Business practices such as franchising, technology transfer, publication and character merchandising entirely depend on the licensing of intellectual property. Land licensing (proprietary licensing) and IP licensing.

== Real property licenses ==
A license provides one party with the authority to act on another&#x27;s land, when such action would typically amount to trespass absent that license. A key distinction between licenses and leases is that a license grants the licensee a revocable non-assignable privilege to act upon the land of the licensor, without granting any possessory interest in the land. Once a license is agreed upon, the licensee may occupy the land only so far as is necessary to complete the act. Another key distinction between a license and a lease is that leases are generally required to be in writing, where the statute of frauds requires it, while licenses can be made orally.

=== Creation ===
A license is generally created by an express or implied agreement. The licensor must agree to the license which can be shown in writing or the licensors acquiescence in its exercise. Furthermore, unlike many other contractual agreements, a license does not require consideration, a license can be created with or without it. Moreover, whether an agreement is held to be a &quot;license&quot; and not a lease will depend on three essential characteristics of a license: (1) a clause allowing the licensor to revoke &quot;at will&quot;; (2) the retention by the licensor of absolute control over the premises; and (3) the licensor&#x27;s supplying to the licensee all of the essential services required for the licensee&#x27;s permitted use of the premises.

=== Termination ===
Under a pure licensing agreement, the licensor, under its terms and by common-law, can cancel the agreement at will and without cause, unless it is coupled with an interest or made irrevocable by contract. A license that has been coupled with an interest is not revocable by the licensor without exposure to liability and potential damages. In the event a license is coupled with an interest, the licensor must provide reasonable time for the licensee to remove that interest from the property prior to termination. Additionally, because a license does not confer any possessory interest in the licensee, in the event of a sale of the property, the license is terminated and cannot be enforced against the new owners of that property. Moreover, the death of either the licensee or licensor will terminate the agreement.

=== Remedies ===
If a license is revocable at will by the licensor, courts will be unable to grant specific performance in favor of the licensee. A licensee would be unsuccessful in bringing forcible entry claims or a detainer proceeding because the licensee was never granted any possessory interest. The Licensee would also not be able to recover damages for money spent unless they are able to show detrimental reliance on the license. In certain cases, however, licenses can be made irrevocable, and specific performance may be granted. Where a license is made with a set term period and valid consideration is transferred, revocation of the license prior to the terms expiration may raise breach of contract claims that could provide damages against the licensor. Furthermore, once the licensor terminates or revokes the license, notice is statutorily required prior to the commencement of any special proceeding to recover possession of the property (e.g., in NY that requirement is 10 days).

== Mass licensing of software ==

Mass distributed software is used by individuals on personal computers under license from the developer of that software. Such license is typically included in a more extensive end-user license agreement (EULA) entered into upon the installation of that software on a computer.
Typically, a license is associated with a unique code, that when approved grants the end user access to the software in question.

Under a typical end-user license agreement, the user may install the software on a limited number of computers.

The enforceability of end-user license agreements is sometimes questioned.

As of 2020, there are various ways to license software with different kinds of licensing models, which allow software vendors to profit from their product offerings in flexible ways.

== Patent licensing ==

Like other intellectual property, patent owners may grant permission to others to engage in conduct that would otherwise be within the scope of a patent. For example, a patent owner may authorize a licensee to make, use, sell, offer for sale, or import a patented product. Such agreements are typically referred to as a patent license agreement or a covenant not to sue. These agreements can last for a specific period of time (such as five years) or for the entire life of the patent (&quot;i.e.,&quot; until the patent expires). Patent license agreements may also be exclusive (&quot;i.e.,&quot; the licensee is the only person or entity that is allowed to sell, make, use, offer to sell, or import the patented invention) or non-exclusive (&quot;i.e.,&quot; the licensee is simply one of several entities who has rights under the patent). Finally, any rights given under the agreement may be limited to a particular &quot;field of use&quot; (&quot;e.g.,&quot; a licensee may be able to practice an invention in the field of consumer electronics, but not in the field of industrial electronics).

Often, patent owners will require a licensee to pay money in exchange for granting a patent license. Such payments are referred to as royalty payments and come primarily in two forms: lump sum or running royalty. A lump sum royalty involves an upfront, one-time payment, while a running royalty typically involves periodic payments (&quot;e.g.,&quot; quarterly or annual) based on the number of patented products sold or imported.

== Trademark and brand licensing ==

A licensor may grant permission to a licensee to distribute products under a trademark. With such a license, the licensee may use the trademark without fear of a claim of trademark infringement by the licensor.
The assignment of a license often depends on specific contractual terms. The most common terms are, that a license is only applicable for a particular geographic region, just for a certain period of time or merely for a stage in the value chain. Moreover, there are different types of fees within the trademark and brand licensing. The first form demands a fee independent of sales and profits, the second type of license fee is dependent on the productivity of the licensee.

For example, McDonald&#x27;s licenses their trademark such as the &quot;Golden Arches&quot; or the &quot;Big Mac&quot;, but the licenses gives McDonald&#x27;s a right to impose strict quality standards to their franchisees as they can take back the right to the trademark if they do not meet McDonald&#x27;s standards.

When a licensor grants permission to a licensee to not only distribute, but manufacture a patented product, it is known as licensed production.

==Artwork and character licensing==

A licensor may grant a permission to a licensee to copy and distribute copyrighted works such as &quot;art&quot; (e.g., Thomas Kinkade&#x27;s painting &quot;Dawn in Los Gato&quot;) and characters (e.g., Mickey Mouse). With such license, a licensee need not fear a claim of copyright infringement brought by the copyright owner.

Artistic license is, however, not related to the aforementioned license. It is a euphemism that denotes freedom of expression, the ability to make the subject appear more engaging or attractive, by fictionalizing part of the subject.

==Academia== 
:&quot;National examples of the licentiate are listed at licentiate (degree)&quot;

A licentiate is an academic degree that traditionally conferred the license to teach at a university or to practice a particular profession. The term survived despite the fact that nowadays a doctorate is typically needed in order to teach at a university. The term is also used for a person who holds a licentiate. In English, the degree has never been called a license. In France, the &quot;licence&quot; is the first degree awarded in Universities.

In Sweden, Finland, and in some other European university systems, a &#x27;licentiate&#x27; is a postgraduate degree between the master&#x27;s degree and the doctorate. The licentiate is a popular choice in those countries where a full doctoral degree would take five or more years to achieve.

==Vehicle licensing==

A vehicle license is required in most countries to legally drive a vehicle on public roads. This typically involves obtaining a driver&#x27;s license, which is granted based on an individual&#x27;s ability to operate specific types of vehicles. The requirements and processes for obtaining a driver&#x27;s license vary from country to country and may depend on the type of vehicle one intends to drive.

===How it works in various countries===

* In the United States, each state has its own system for issuing driver&#x27;s licenses, which usually involves passing both a written test and a road test. The classes of licenses differ by the type of vehicle, such as standard passenger vehicles, motorcycles, commercial trucks, and buses. A commercial driver&#x27;s license (CDL) is required for large vehicles like trucks and buses, while a motorcycle endorsement is required to ride a motorcycle. 

* In the United Kingdom, the system is centralized and managed by the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA). A person must first obtain a provisional license and then take a driving theory test followed by a practical driving test. There are different categories of licenses depending on the type of vehicle, including a Category B for cars, Category A for motorcycles, and Category C for larger vehicles such as trucks.

* In Germany, the process for obtaining a driver&#x27;s license is handled through a series of steps that include enrolling in driving school, passing both a theoretical test and a practical driving test, and meeting a minimum age requirement. Germany has a highly structured system for vehicle licenses, with licenses divided into categories such as Class B for cars, Class A for motorcycles, and Class C for trucks. The process is often more stringent, requiring thorough training and examinations.

* In India, the licensing system is governed by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH). An individual must first obtain a learner&#x27;s license before taking the driving test for a permanent driver&#x27;s license. There are separate licenses for motorcycles, cars, and heavy vehicles. Road safety and traffic regulations are major components of the testing process.

===License classes===
Licensing classifications differ by country but typically include categories for:

* Private vehicles – Standard cars and motorcycles.
* Commercial vehicles – Buses, trucks, and vehicles used for freight transport.
* Specialized vehicles – Taxis, ambulances, and other vehicles requiring additional qualifications.
* Endorsements – In many countries, additional endorsements are needed to operate specialized vehicles, such as vehicles with trailers or public transportation vehicles.

===International driving permits===
For individuals traveling abroad, an International Driving Permit (IDP) can be obtained. This is a translation of the individual&#x27;s domestic driver&#x27;s license and is required by some countries for foreigners to drive within their borders.

==Criminal law==

In the United Kingdom prisoners serving a determinate sentence (a fixed time in prison) will be released prior to the completion of their full sentence &quot;on licence&quot;. The licence is the prisoner&#x27;s agreement to maintain certain conditions, such as periodic reporting in to a probation officer and only living at an approved address, in exchange for their early release. If they break the conditions of the licence, they can be &quot;recalled&quot; (returned to prison).

Offenders serving determinate sentences are released automatically at a set point in their sentence, whereas prisoners serving indeterminate sentences (e.g. life imprisonment) can only be released by the parole board.

==Economic theory==
Patent licensing has been studied in formal economic models in the field of industrial organization. In particular, Katz and Shapiro (1986) have explored the optimal licensing strategy of a research lab selling to firms who are competitors on the product market. It turns out that (compared to the welfare-maximizing solution) the licensor&#x27;s incentives to develop innovations may be excessive, while the licensor&#x27;s incentives to disseminate the innovation are typically too low. Subsequently, the seminal work of Katz and Shapiro (1986) has been extended in several directions. For example, Bhattacharya, Glazer, and Sappington (1992) have taken into account that the firms acquiring licenses must make further investments in order to develop marketable products. Schmitz (2002, 2007) has shown that asymmetric information due to adverse selection or moral hazard may lead the research lab to sell more licenses than it would do under complete information. Antelo and Sampayo (2017) have studied the optimal number of licenses in a signalling model.

==Criticism==
The provision of licenses and the agencies that mandate them are often criticised by American libertarians like Milton Friedman for creating an anticompetitive environment for occupations, which creates a barrier to entry for more qualified and skilled individuals who may not have the resources to obtain the necessary licences. According to Friedman, licenses and permits have become so burdensome due to legislation that favors the current establishment of wealthy occupants that they decrease the supply of such occupations, which raises prices for the average consumer. Libertarians and the anti-authoritarian left (anarcho-communists) view competing guilds and other voluntary communes as being more beneficial for disseminating the skills and education required to perform a specified career.

==See also==
== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79719" start="2" end="9" title="License" label="license"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="11" end="27" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q79719" start="32" end="39" title="License" label="licence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378587" start="41" end="61" title="Commonwealth English" label="Commonwealth English"/>
<link wikidata="Q716894" start="495" end="500" title="lease" label="lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q941871" start="743" end="750" title="Fishing license" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q205647" start="752" end="773" title="Driver&amp;#x27;s license" label="driving an automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993167" start="790" end="827" title="Broadcast license" label="broadcast radio or television station"/>
<link wikidata="Q647578" start="955" end="971" title="Copyright infringement" label="copyrighted work"/>
<link wikidata="Q131257" start="1419" end="1440" title="intellectual property" label="intellectual property"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="1502" end="1508" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963602" start="1574" end="1586" title="Intellectual property infringement" label="infringement"/>
<link wikidata="Q79719" start="1719" end="1723" title="License" label="term"/>
<link wikidata="Q79719" start="1725" end="1734" title="License" label="territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q79719" start="1736" end="1743" title="License" label="renewal"/>
<link wikidata="Q79719" start="1809" end="1814" title="License" label="Term:"/>
<link wikidata="Q79719" start="2074" end="2084" title="License" label="Territory:"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="2204" end="2217" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="2321" end="2331" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q171947" start="2830" end="2841" title="franchising" label="franchising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061910" start="2843" end="2862" title="technology transfer" label="technology transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325044" start="2880" end="2903" title="Copyright protection for fictional characters" label="character merchandising"/>
<link wikidata="Q725920" start="6541" end="6567" title="end-user license agreement" label="end-user license agreement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6949" end="6959" title="Software license agreement#Enforceability of EULAs in the United States" label="questioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q207621" start="7000" end="7016" title="Software license" label="license software"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8403" end="8419" title="Royalty payment#Patents" label="royalty payments"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="8815" end="8824" title="trademark" label="trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165703" start="9003" end="9020" title="contractual terms" label="contractual terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q646107" start="9182" end="9193" title="value chain" label="value chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q194189" start="9325" end="9330" title="sales" label="sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q15209696" start="9335" end="9342" title="profit (accounting)" label="profits"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="9439" end="9454" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q8203794" start="9498" end="9511" title="Golden Arches" label="Golden Arches"/>
<link wikidata="Q506796" start="9531" end="9538" title="Big Mac" label="Big Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q19818012" start="9869" end="9888" title="licensed production" label="licensed production"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="9999" end="10008" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q724181" start="10048" end="10062" title="Thomas Kinkade" label="Thomas Kinkade"/>
<link wikidata="Q11934" start="10131" end="10143" title="Mickey Mouse" label="Mickey Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q922131" start="10257" end="10273" title="Artistic license" label="Artistic license"/>
<link wikidata="Q83464" start="10338" end="10347" title="euphemism" label="euphemism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8253" start="10455" end="10469" title="fiction" label="fictionalizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q749020" start="10563" end="10582" title="licentiate (degree)" label="licentiate (degree)"/>
<link wikidata="Q749020" start="10592" end="10602" title="Licentiate (degree)" label="licentiate"/>
<link wikidata="Q189533" start="10609" end="10624" title="academic degree" label="academic degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="10782" end="10791" title="doctorate" label="doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q861619" start="11046" end="11052" title="Education in Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="11279" end="11294" title="doctorate" label="doctoral degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q68676" start="15022" end="15039" title="life imprisonment" label="life imprisonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357120" start="15069" end="15081" title="parole" label="parole board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411783" start="15180" end="15203" title="industrial organization" label="industrial organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q380037" start="15944" end="15961" title="adverse selection" label="adverse selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q44454" start="15965" end="15977" title="moral hazard" label="moral hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262595" start="16146" end="16156" title="Signalling (economics)" label="signalling"/>
<link wikidata="Q47426" start="16291" end="16306" title="Milton Friedman" label="Milton Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163938" start="16384" end="16400" title="barrier to entry" label="barrier to entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q188670" start="16800" end="16818" title="anarcho-communists" label="anarcho-communists"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40413" wikidata="Q1240136" url="?curid=40413" title="Perfectae Caritatis">
<text>Perfectae Caritatis, the Decree on the Adaptation and Renewal of Religious Life, is the document issued by the Second Vatican Council which deals specifically with institutes of consecrated life in the Roman Catholic Church. One of the shorter documents of the Council, the decree was approved by a vote of 2,321 to 4 of the assembled bishops, and promulgated by Pope Paul VI on 28 October 1965. As is customary for Church documents, the title is taken from the first words (incipit) of the decree: &quot;of Perfect Charity&quot; in Latin.

==Content==
The Second Vatican Council had already given an exposition of the nature of religious life in chapter 6 of the Constitution &quot;Lumen gentium&quot;, and &quot;Perfectae Caritatis&quot; reflected the principles of religious life as established therein. This chapter described the essential form of religious life as a life &quot;consecrated by the profession of the evangelical counsels&quot; (n. 44). The Decree &quot;Perfectae Caritatis&quot; was published in order to &quot;treat of the life and discipline of those institutes whose members make profession of chastity, poverty and obedience and to provide for their needs in our time&quot; (&quot;Perfectae Caritatis&quot; n. 1). Containing 25 numbered paragraphs, the Decree established five general principles to guide the renewal of these institutes. Because of the broad variety of religious communities with their different histories, characteristics, customs, and missions, the Council did not give specific indications, and left to each individual community the authority to determine what needed to be changed in accord with the spirit of their founders, the needs of modern life, and the situations where they lived and worked.

==Aftermath==
On August 6, 1966 Pope Paul VI issued &quot;Ecclesiae Sanctae&quot;, an apostolic letter on the implementation of certain conciliar documents, including &quot;Perfectae Caritatis&quot;.

The period that followed the promulgation of &quot;Perfectae Caritatis&quot; was marked by a huge amount of experimentation in religious life. Many institutes replaced their traditional habits with more modern attire, experimented with different forms of prayer and community life, and adapted obedience to a superior to a form of consultation and discussion. A great number of religious left religious life entirely, and in subsequent decades there was a large drop the number of religious vocations in the Western World. It is not clear how much of this change was due to the documents of the Second Vatican Council. Historians note that western society as a whole was going through social turmoil caused by the sexual revolution.

==External links==
* The full text in English is available from the Holy See&#x27;s website

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1240136" start="25" end="79" title="Perfectae Caritatis" label="Decree on the Adaptation and Renewal of Religious Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="111" end="133" title="Second Vatican Council" label="Second Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="202" end="223" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975" start="363" end="375" title="Pope Paul VI" label="Pope Paul VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161138" start="475" end="482" title="incipit" label="incipit"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="533" end="538" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q167847" start="629" end="643" title="religious life" label="religious life"/>
<link wikidata="Q750388" start="683" end="696" title="Lumen gentium" label="Lumen gentium"/>
<link wikidata="Q541943" start="920" end="940" title="evangelical counsels" label="evangelical counsels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885209" start="1804" end="1821" title="Ecclesiae Sanctae" label="Ecclesiae Sanctae"/>
<link wikidata="Q465467" start="2661" end="2678" title="sexual revolution" label="sexual revolution"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40414" wikidata="Q1238764" url="?curid=40414" title="Optatam Totius">
<text>Optatam totius, the Decree on Priestly Training, is a document which was produced by the Second Vatican Council. Approved by a vote of 2,318 to 3 of the bishops assembled at the council, the decree was promulgated by Pope Paul VI on 28 October 1965. The Latin title means &quot;desired renewal of the whole [church]&quot;.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1238764" start="20" end="47" title="Optatam Totius" label="Decree on Priestly Training"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="89" end="111" title="Second Vatican Council" label="Second Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975" start="217" end="229" title="Pope Paul VI" label="Pope Paul VI"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40415" wikidata="Q492555" url="?curid=40415" title="Jean Baptiste Point du Sable">
<text>Jean Baptiste Point du Sable (; also spelled Point de Sable, Point au Sable, Point Sable, Pointe DuSable, or Pointe du Sable; before 1750 – August 28, 1818) is regarded as the first permanent non-Native settler of what would later become Chicago, Illinois, and is recognized as the city&#x27;s founder. The site where he settled near the mouth of the Chicago River around the 1780s is memorialized as a National Historic Landmark, now located in Pioneer Court.

Point du Sable was of African descent, but little else is known of his early life prior to the 1770s. During his career, the areas where he settled and traded around the Great Lakes and in the Illinois Country changed hands several times between France, Britain, Spain and the United States. Described as handsome and well educated, Point duSable married a Potawatomi Native American woman, &quot;Kitihawa&quot;, and they had two children. In 1779, during the American Revolutionary War, he was arrested by the British on suspicion of being an American Patriot sympathizer. In the early 1780s he worked for the British lieutenant-governor of Michilimackinac on an estate at what is now St. Clair, Michigan.

Point du Sable is first recorded as living at the mouth of the Chicago River in a trader&#x27;s journal of early 1790. By then he had established an extensive and prosperous trading settlement in what later became the City of Chicago. He sold his Chicago River property in 1800 and moved to the river port of St. Charles, where he was licensed to run a ferry across the Missouri River. Point duSable&#x27;s successful role in developing the Chicago River settlement was little recognized until the mid-20th century.

In Chicago, a school, museum, harbor, park, bridge, and road have been named in du Sable&#x27;s honor.

==Biography==
===Early life===
There are no records of Point du Sable&#x27;s life prior to the 1770s. Though it is known from sources during his life that he was of African descent, his birth date, place of birth, and parents are unknown. Juliette Kinzie, another early pioneer of Chicago, never met Point duSable but said in her 1856 memoir that he was &quot;a native of St.Domingo&quot; (the island of Hispaniola). This became generally accepted as his place of birth. Historian Milo Milton Quaife regarded Kinzie&#x27;s account of Point duSable as &quot;largely fictitious and wholly unauthenticated&quot;, later putting forward a theory that he was of African and French-Canadian origin. A historical novel published in 1953 helped to popularize the claim that Point du Sable was born in 1745 in Saint-Marc in Saint-Domingue (later known as Haiti). If he was born outside continental North America, there are competing accounts as to whether he entered as a trader or from the north through French Canada, or from the south through French Louisiana.

===Illinois Country===
Point du Sable married a Potawatomi woman named Kitihawa (Christianized to Catherine) on 27October 1788, in a Catholic ceremony in Cahokia in the Illinois Country, a longtime French colonial settlement on the east side of the Mississippi River. It is likely that this couple was married earlier in the 1770s in a Native American tradition. They had a son named Jean and a daughter named Susanne. Point duSable supported his family as a frontier trader (&quot;voyageur&quot; or &quot;coureur des bois&quot;) and settler during a period of great upheaval for the former southern dependencies of French Canada and in the Illinois Country, where the regions changed hands several times over the course of half a century.

In a footnote to a poem titled &quot;Speech to the Western Indians&quot;, Arent DePeyster, British commandant from 1774 to 1779 at Fort Michilimackinac (a former French fort in what was then the British province of Quebec), noted that &quot;Baptist Point deSaible&quot; was &quot;a handsome negro&quot;, &quot;well educated&quot;, and &quot;settled in Eschecagou&quot;. When he published this poem in 1813, DePeyster presented it as a speech that he had made at the village of Arbrecroche (now Harbor Springs, Michigan) on 4July 1779. This footnote has led many scholars to assume that Point duSable had settled in Chicago by 1779. But letters written by other traders in the late 1770s suggest that Point duSable was at this time settled at the mouth of Trail Creek (&quot;Rivière duChemin&quot;) at what is now Michigan City, Indiana.

In August 1779, during the American Revolutionary War, Point duSable was arrested as a suspected American Patriot at Trail Creek by British troops and imprisoned briefly at Fort Michilimackinac. An officer&#x27;s report following his arrest noted that Point du Sable had many friends who vouched for his good character. The following year, Point du Sable was ordered transported to the Pinery on the St. Clair River north of Detroit. From the summer of 1780 until May 1784, Point duSable managed the Pinery, a tract of woodlands owned by British officer Lt.Patrick Sinclair, on the St. Clair River in eastern Michigan. This may have been a choice given by him from the British, offering him release from his imprisonment to manage the Pinery. Point duSable with his family lived in a cabin at the mouth of the Pine River in what is now the city of St. Clair.
At some time in the 1780s, after the U.S. achieved independence, Point du Sable settled on the north bank of the Chicago River close to its mouth. The earliest known record of Point duSable living in Chicago is an entry that Hugh Heward made in his journal on 10May 1790, during a journey from Detroit across Michigan and through Illinois. Heward&#x27;s party stopped at Point duSable&#x27;s house enroute to the Chicago portage; they swapped their canoe for a pirogue that belonged to Point duSable, and they bought bread, flour, and pork from him. Perrish Grignon, who visited Chicago in about 1794, described Point duSable as a large man and wealthy trader. Point du Sable&#x27;s granddaughter, Eulalie Pelletier, was born at his Chicago River settlement in 1796.

In 1800 Point duSable sold his farm to John Kinzie&#x27;s frontman, Jean La Lime, for 6,000 livres. The bill of sale, which was rediscovered in 1913 in an archive in Detroit, detailed all of the property Point duSable owned, as well as many of his personal effects. This included a house, two barns, a horse-drawn mill, a bakehouse, a poultry house, a dairy, and a smokehouse. The house was a log cabin filled with fine furniture and paintings.

===Missouri River and burial===
After Point du Sable sold his property in Chicago, he moved to St. Charles, west of St. Louis, which at that time was still part of Spanish Louisiana. He was commissioned by the colonial governor to operate a ferry across the Missouri River. In St.Charles, he may have lived for a time with his son, and later with his granddaughter&#x27;s family. Late in life, he may have sought public or charitable assistance. He died on 28 August 1818 and was buried in an unmarked grave in St.Charles Borromeo Cemetery. His entry in the parish burial register does not mention his origins, parents, or relatives; it simply describes him as &quot;nègre&quot; (French for &quot;negro&quot;).

The St.Charles Borromeo Cemetery was moved twice in the 19thcentury. Oral tradition and records of the Archdiocese of St. Louis suggested that Point duSable&#x27;s remains were also moved. On 12October 1968, the Illinois Sesquicentennial Commission erected a granite marker at the site believed to be Point duSable&#x27;s grave in the third St.Charles Borromeo Cemetery.

In 2002 an archaeological investigation of the grave site was initiated by the African Scientific Research Institute at the University of Illinois at Chicago. Researchers using a combination of ground-penetrating radar, surveys, and excavation of a area did not find any evidence of any burials at the supposed grave site, leading the archaeologists to conclude that Point duSable&#x27;s remains may not have been reinterred from one of the two previous cemeteries.

==Theories and legends==

===Origins===
Though there is little historical evidence regarding Point duSable&#x27;s life before the 1770s, there are several theories and legends that give accounts of his early life. Writing in 1933, Quaife identified a French immigrant to Canada, Pierre Dandonneau, who acquired the title &quot;Sieur deSable&quot; and whose descendants were known by both the names &quot;Dandonneau&quot; and &quot;DuSable&quot;. Quaife was unable to find a direct link to Point duSable, but he identified descendants of Pierre Dandonneau as living around the Great Lakes region in Detroit, Mackinac, and St.Joseph. He speculated that Point duSable&#x27;s father may have been a member of this family, while his mother was likely an enslaved woman.

In 1951, Joseph Jeremie, a native of Haiti, published a pamphlet in which he said he was the great-grandson of Point duSable. Based on family recollections and tombstone inscriptions, he claimed that Point duSable was born in Saint-Marc in what was then Saint Domingue, studied in France, and returned to the island to deal in coffee before traveling to French Louisiana. Historian and Point duSable biographer John F. Swenson has called these claims &quot;elaborate, undocumented assertions... in a fanciful biography&quot;.

====Fiction====
In 1953, Shirley Graham drew from the work of Quaife and Jeremie in a historical novel about Point duSable. She described it as &quot;not accurate history nor pure fiction&quot;, but rather &quot;an imaginative interpretation of all the known facts&quot;. This book presented Point duSable as the son of the mate on a pirate ship, the &quot;Black Sea Gull&quot;, and a freedwoman called Suzanne. Despite lack of evidence and the continued debate about Point duSable&#x27;s early life, parentage, and birthplace, this popular story has been repeated and widely presented as being definitive.

===Peoria===
In 1815, a land claim that had been submitted by Nicholas Jarrot to the land commissioners at Kaskaskia, Illinois Territory, was approved. In the claim Jarrot asserted that a &quot;Jean Baptiste Poinstable&quot; had been &quot;head of a family at Peoria in the year 1783, and before and after that year&quot;, and that he &quot;had a house built and cultivated land between the Old Fort and the new settlement in the year 1780&quot;. This document has been taken by Quaife and other historians as evidence that Point duSable lived at Peoria on the Illinois River prior to going north to settle in Chicago. However, other records demonstrate that Point duSable was living and working under the British at the Pinery in Michigan in the early 1780s. The Kaskaskia land commissioners identified many fraudulent land claims, including two previously submitted in the name of Point duSable. Nicholas Jarrot, the claimant, was involved in many false claims, and Swenson suggests that this one was also fraudulent, made without Point duSable&#x27;s knowledge. Although perhaps in conflict with some of the above information, other historical records suggest that Point duSable bought land in Peoria from J.B. Maillet on 13March 1773 and sold it to Isaac Darneille in 1783, before he became the first &quot;permanent&quot; resident of Chicago.

===Departure from Chicago===
Point du Sable left Chicago in 1800. He sold his property to Jean La Lime, a trader from Quebec, and moved to the Missouri River valley, at that time part of Spanish Louisiana. The reason for his departure is unknown. By 1804, John Kinzie, another early Chicago settler, had bought the former du Sable house. Kinzie&#x27;s daughter-in-law, Juliette Magill Kinzie, suggested in her 1852 memoir that &quot;perhaps he [du Sable] was disgusted at not being elected to a similar dignity [great chief] by the Pottowattamies&quot;.

In 1874, Nehemiah Matson elaborated on this story, claiming that Point duSable was a slave from Virginia who had moved with his master to Lexington, Kentucky, in 1790. According to Matson, Point duSable became a zealous Catholic in order to convince a Jesuit missionary to declare him chief of the local Native Americans, but after they refused to accept him as their chief, he left Chicago. Quaife dismisses both of these stories as being fictional.

In her 1953 novel, Graham suggests that Point du Sable left Chicago because he was angered that the US government wanted him to buy the land on which he had lived and called his own for the previous two decades. The 1795 Treaty of Greenville, which ended the Northwest Indian War, and the subsequent westward migration of Native Americans away from the Chicago area might also have influenced his decision.

==Legacy and honors==

===Founder of Chicago===
The French came to the North American mid-continent region in the 17thcentury. Though probably not the first Europeans to visit the area, Louis Jolliet and Jacques Marquette were the first noted in the written record to have crossed the Chicago Portage and traveled along the Chicago River, as part of their 1673 Mississippi Valley expedition. Over the following years, visits by the French continued and occasional intermittent posts were established, including those by René LaSalle, Henri de Tonti, Pierre Liette and the four-year Mission of the Guardian Angel. Point duSable&#x27;s residence in the 1780s is recognized as the establishment of the first continuous settlement, which ultimately grew to become the city of Chicago. He is therefore widely regarded as the first permanent resident of Chicago and has been given the appellation &quot;Founder of Chicago&quot;.

===Memorials===

By the 1850s, historians of Chicago recognized Point duSable as the city&#x27;s earliest non-Native permanent resident, but for a long time the city did not honor him in the same manner as other pioneers. Point du Sable was generally forgotten during the 19thcentury; instead, the Scots-Irish trader John Kinzie from Quebec, who had bought his property, was often credited for the settlement. A plaque was erected by the city in 1913 at the corner of Kinzie and Pine Streets to commemorate the Kinzie homestead. In the planning stages of the 1933–1934 Century of Progress International Exposition, several African-American groups campaigned for Point duSable to be honored at the fair. At the time, few Chicagoans had even heard of Point duSable, and the World&#x27;s Fair organizers presented the 1803 construction of Fort Dearborn as the city&#x27;s historical beginning. The campaign was partially successful, however, with a replica of Point duSable&#x27;s cabin being presented as part of the &quot;background of the history of Chicago&quot;.

In 1965, a plaza called Pioneer Court was built on the site of Point duSable&#x27;s homestead as part of the construction of the Equitable Life Assurance Society of America building. The Jean Baptiste Point Du Sable Homesite was designated as a National Historic Landmark on 11 May 1976 as a site deemed to have &quot;exceptional value to the nation&quot;. Pioneer Court is located at what is now 401N.Michigan Avenue in the Michigan–Wacker Historic District. At this site in 2009, the City of Chicago and a private donor, Haitian-born Lesly Benodin, erected a large bronze bust of Point duSable by Chicago-born sculptor Erik Blome.

In October 2010, the Michigan Avenue Bridge was renamed DuSable Bridge. Previously, a small street with the alternative spelling DeSaible Street had been named after him. In 2021, Lake Shore Drive in Chicago was renamed in honor of Point du Sable.

Several institutions have been named in his honor. DuSable High School opened in Bronzeville, Chicago, in 1934. The DuSable campus today houses the Daniel Hale Williams Prep School of Medicine and the Bronzeville Scholastic Institute.
Margaret Taylor-Burroughs, a prominent African-American artist and writer, taught at the school for twenty-three years. She and her husband co-founded the DuSable Black History Museum and Education Center, located on Chicago&#x27;s South Side. DuSable Hall, built in 1968, on the campus of Northern Illinois University is also named for him.

DuSable Harbor is located in the heart of downtown Chicago at the foot of Randolph Street. Directly across the Chicago River from the harbor, DuSable Park is a urban park in Chicago currently awaiting redevelopment. The project was originally announced in 1987 by Mayor Harold Washington; following years of remediation of the site initial development began in early 2024. A park is also named after Point du Sable in St. Charles, his other notable place of residence. The US Postal Service honored Point duSable with the issue of a Black Heritage Series 22-cent postage stamp on 20 February 1987.

==See also==
* History of Chicago
* List of African-American firsts
* Antoine Ouilmette

==Notes and references==
===Notes===
===References===
===References cited===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* DuSable Heritage Association
* The story of his life is retold in the 1949 radio drama &quot;The Man Who Owned Chicago&quot;, a presentation from &quot;Destination Freedom&quot;, written by Richard Durham</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q492555" start="0" end="28" title="Jean Baptiste Point du Sable" label="Jean Baptiste Point du Sable"/>
<link wikidata="Q492555" start="45" end="59" title="Jean Baptiste Point du Sable" label="Point de Sable"/>
<link wikidata="Q492555" start="61" end="75" title="Jean Baptiste Point du Sable" label="Point au Sable"/>
<link wikidata="Q492555" start="77" end="88" title="Jean Baptiste Point du Sable" label="Point Sable"/>
<link wikidata="Q492555" start="90" end="104" title="Jean Baptiste Point du Sable" label="Pointe DuSable"/>
<link wikidata="Q492555" start="109" end="124" title="Jean Baptiste Point du Sable" label="Pointe du Sable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="238" end="245" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="247" end="255" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q643284" start="351" end="364" title="Chicago River" label="Chicago River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6170210" start="382" end="397" title="Jean Baptiste Point Du Sable Homesite" label="is memorialized"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="403" end="429" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196674" start="446" end="459" title="Pioneer Court" label="Pioneer Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="632" end="643" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554770" start="655" end="671" title="Illinois Country" label="Illinois Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065583" start="819" end="829" title="Potawatomi" label="Potawatomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="830" end="845" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q85774651" start="859" end="867" title="Kitihawa Point du Sable" label="Kitihawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="922" end="948" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365374" start="1015" end="1022" title="Patriot (American Revolution)" label="Patriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176765" start="1104" end="1119" title="Michilimackinac" label="Michilimackinac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936982" start="1148" end="1167" title="St. Clair, Michigan" label="St. Clair, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q773432" start="1479" end="1490" title="St. Charles, Missouri" label="St. Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="1540" end="1554" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310022" start="1701" end="1707" title="DuSable High School" label="school"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040299" start="1709" end="1715" title="DuSable Museum of African American History" label="museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q24886716" start="1717" end="1723" title="Chicago Harbor" label="harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310023" start="1725" end="1729" title="DuSable Park (Chicago)" label="park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928112" start="1731" end="1737" title="Michigan Avenue Bridge" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216467" start="1743" end="1747" title="Lake Shore Drive (Chicago)" label="road"/>
<link wikidata="Q6308981" start="2030" end="2045" title="Juliette Augusta Magill Kinzie" label="Juliette Kinzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="2072" end="2079" title="Chicago, Illinois" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="2195" end="2205" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q6860348" start="2272" end="2290" title="Milo Milton Quaife" label="Milo Milton Quaife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196408" start="2485" end="2501" title="historical novel" label="historical novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q132189" start="2591" end="2601" title="Saint-Marc" label="Saint-Marc"/>
<link wikidata="Q861551" start="2605" end="2619" title="Saint-Domingue" label="Saint-Domingue"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="2636" end="2641" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569593" start="2786" end="2799" title="Canada (New France)" label="French Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q658054" start="2827" end="2843" title="Louisiana (New France)" label="French Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065583" start="2894" end="2904" title="Potawatomi" label="Potawatomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q85774651" start="2917" end="2925" title="Kitihawa Point du Sable" label="Kitihawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2979" end="2987" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025785" start="3000" end="3007" title="Cahokia, Illinois" label="Cahokia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554770" start="3015" end="3031" title="Illinois Country" label="Illinois Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="3095" end="3112" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="3182" end="3197" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812669" start="3328" end="3336" title="voyageur" label="voyageur"/>
<link wikidata="Q511878" start="3352" end="3368" title="coureur des bois" label="coureur des bois"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789034" start="3661" end="3676" title="Arent DePeyster" label="Arent DePeyster"/>
<link wikidata="Q370648" start="3718" end="3738" title="Fort Michilimackinac" label="Fort Michilimackinac"/>
<link wikidata="Q251668" start="3782" end="3808" title="Province of Quebec (1763–1791)" label="British province of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536534" start="4081" end="4105" title="Harbor Springs, Michigan" label="Harbor Springs, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832719" start="4342" end="4353" title="Trail Creek (Lake Michigan)" label="Trail Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q989282" start="4400" end="4422" title="Michigan City, Indiana" label="Michigan City, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="4452" end="4478" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365374" start="4531" end="4538" title="Patriot (American Revolution)" label="Patriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="4850" end="4857" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7147647" start="4982" end="4998" title="Patrick Sinclair" label="Patrick Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054325" start="5007" end="5022" title="St. Clair River" label="St. Clair River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936982" start="5273" end="5282" title="St. Clair, Michigan" label="St. Clair"/>
<link wikidata="Q643284" start="5397" end="5410" title="Chicago River" label="Chicago River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095748" start="5697" end="5712" title="Chicago portage" label="Chicago portage"/>
<link wikidata="Q33791" start="5745" end="5752" title="pirogue" label="pirogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181875" start="6091" end="6102" title="John Kinzie" label="John Kinzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6170966" start="6120" end="6132" title="Jean La Lime" label="Jean La Lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q193713" start="6417" end="6427" title="smoking (food)" label="smokehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q773432" start="6593" end="6604" title="St. Charles, Missouri" label="St. Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q748300" start="6662" end="6679" title="Louisiana (New Spain)" label="Spanish Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249923" start="6708" end="6725" title="List of colonial governors of Louisiana" label="colonial governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q25653" start="6739" end="6744" title="ferry" label="ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="6756" end="6770" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362849" start="7313" end="7337" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of St. Louis" label="Archdiocese of St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q955764" start="7706" end="7739" title="University of Illinois at Chicago" label="University of Illinois at Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548416" start="8625" end="8643" title="Great Lakes region" label="Great Lakes region"/>
<link wikidata="Q861551" start="9069" end="9083" title="Saint Domingue" label="Saint Domingue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436517" start="9666" end="9670" title="Chief Mate" label="mate"/>
<link wikidata="Q999403" start="10057" end="10066" title="Kaskaskia, Illinois" label="Kaskaskia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658828" start="10068" end="10086" title="Illinois Territory" label="Illinois Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q233129" start="10497" end="10503" title="Peoria, Illinois" label="Peoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8321" start="10511" end="10525" title="Illinois River" label="Illinois River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6170966" start="11389" end="11401" title="Jean La Lime" label="Jean La Lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="11417" end="11423" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q49241" start="11992" end="12011" title="Lexington, Kentucky" label="Lexington, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="12406" end="12419" title="Federal government of the United States" label="US government"/>
<link wikidata="Q767317" start="12527" end="12547" title="Treaty of Greenville" label="Treaty of Greenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656995" start="12565" end="12585" title="Northwest Indian War" label="Northwest Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q506618" start="12900" end="12913" title="Louis Jolliet" label="Louis Jolliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q336630" start="12918" end="12935" title="Jacques Marquette" label="Jacques Marquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095748" start="12999" end="13014" title="Chicago Portage" label="Chicago Portage"/>
<link wikidata="Q298156" start="13234" end="13246" title="René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle" label="René LaSalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711731" start="13248" end="13262" title="Henri de Tonti" label="Henri de Tonti"/>
<link wikidata="Q17081489" start="13296" end="13325" title="Mission of the Guardian Angel" label="Mission of the Guardian Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181875" start="13955" end="13966" title="John Kinzie" label="John Kinzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q300347" start="14207" end="14251" title="Century of Progress International Exposition" label="Century of Progress International Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q305286" start="14474" end="14487" title="Fort Dearborn" label="Fort Dearborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196674" start="14728" end="14741" title="Pioneer Court" label="Pioneer Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6170210" start="14891" end="14928" title="Jean Baptiste Point Du Sable Homesite" label="Jean Baptiste Point Du Sable Homesite"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="14949" end="14975" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867529" start="15106" end="15121" title="Michigan Avenue (Chicago)" label="Michigan Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837858" start="15129" end="15162" title="Michigan–Wacker Historic District" label="Michigan–Wacker Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q121811577" start="15271" end="15282" title="Bust of Jean Baptiste Point du Sable" label="bronze bust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928112" start="15359" end="15381" title="Michigan Avenue Bridge" label="Michigan Avenue Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216467" start="15518" end="15534" title="Lake Shore Drive" label="Lake Shore Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310022" start="15638" end="15657" title="DuSable High School" label="DuSable High School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15668" end="15679" title="Douglas, Chicago#Bronzeville" label="Bronzeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759951" start="15822" end="15847" title="Margaret Taylor-Burroughs" label="Margaret Taylor-Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040299" start="15977" end="16026" title="DuSable Black History Museum and Education Center" label="DuSable Black History Museum and Education Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492277" start="16039" end="16064" title="Chicago&amp;#x27;s South Side" label="Chicago&amp;#x27;s South Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191344" start="16112" end="16140" title="Northern Illinois University" label="Northern Illinois University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291867" start="16239" end="16254" title="Randolph Street (Chicago)" label="Randolph Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q643284" start="16276" end="16289" title="Chicago River" label="Chicago River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310023" start="16307" end="16319" title="DuSable Park" label="DuSable Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q295584" start="16435" end="16452" title="Harold Washington" label="Harold Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q773432" start="16583" end="16594" title="St. Charles, Missouri" label="St. Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="16638" end="16655" title="US Postal Service" label="US Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031135" start="16779" end="16797" title="History of Chicago" label="History of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q6560667" start="16800" end="16831" title="List of African-American firsts" label="List of African-American firsts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775522" start="16834" end="16851" title="Antoine Ouilmette" label="Antoine Ouilmette"/>
<link wikidata="Q85756571" start="17120" end="17139" title="Destination Freedom" label="Destination Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16170770" start="17158" end="17172" title="Richard Durham" label="Richard Durham"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40416" wikidata="Q2888523" url="?curid=40416" title="Battle of Fort Dearborn">
<text>The Battle of Fort Dearborn (sometimes called the Fort Dearborn Massacre) was an engagement between United States troops and Potawatomi Native Americans that occurred on August 15, 1812, near Fort Dearborn in what is now Chicago, Illinois (at that time, part of the Illinois Territory). The battle, which occurred during the War of 1812, followed the evacuation of the fort as ordered by the commander of the United States Army of the Northwest, William Hull. The battle lasted about 15 minutes and resulted in a complete victory for the Native Americans. After the battle, Fort Dearborn was burned down. Some of the soldiers and settlers who had been taken captive were later ransomed.

Following the battle, the federal government became convinced that all Indians had to be removed from the territory and the vicinity of any settlements, as settlers continued to migrate to the area. The fort was rebuilt in 1816.

==Background==
Fort Dearborn was constructed by United States troops under the command of Captain John Whistler in 1803. It was located on the south bank of the main stem of the Chicago River in what is now the Loop community area of downtown Chicago. At the time, the area was seen as wilderness. In the view of a later commander, Heald, it was &quot;so remote from the civilized part of the world.&quot; The fort was named in honor of Henry Dearborn, then United States Secretary of War. It had been commissioned after the Northwest Indian War of 1785–1795 and the signing of the Treaty of Greenville at Fort Greenville (now Greenville, Ohio) on August 3, 1795. As part of the terms of the treaty, a coalition of Native Americans and frontiersmen, known as the Western Confederacy, turned over to the United States large parts of modern-day Ohio and various other parcels of land, including centered on the mouth of the Chicago River.

The British Empire had ceded the Northwest Territory, comprising what is now Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, Wisconsin, and parts of Minnesota, to the United States at the Treaty of Paris in 1783. However, the area had been the subject of dispute between the Native American nations and the United States since the passage of the Northwest Ordinance in 1787. The Indian Nations followed Tenskwatawa, the Shawnee prophet and the brother of Tecumseh. Tenskwatawa had a vision of purifying his society by expelling the &quot;children of the Evil Spirit,&quot; the American settlers. Tenskwatawa and Tecumseh formed a confederation of numerous tribes to block American expansion. The British saw the Native American nations as valuable allies and a buffer to their Canadian colonies and provided them arms. Attacks on American settlers in the Northwest further worsened tensions between Britain and the United States. The confederation&#x27;s raids hindered American access to potentially-valuable farmlands, mineral deposits, and fur trade areas.

In 1810, as a result of a long running feud, Captain Whistler and other senior officers at Fort Dearborn were removed. Whistler was replaced by Captain Nathan Heald, who had been stationed at Fort Wayne, Indiana. Heald was dissatisfied with his new posting and immediately applied for and received a leave of absence to spend the winter in Massachusetts. On his return journey to Fort Dearborn, he visited Kentucky, where he married Rebekah Wells, the daughter of Samuel Wells, and they traveled together to the fort in June 1811.

As the United States and Britain moved towards war, antipathy between the settlers and Native Americans in the Fort Dearborn area increased. In the summer of 1811, British emissaries tried to enlist the support of Native Americans in the region by telling them that the British would help them to resist the encroaching American settlement. On April 6, 1812, a band of Winnebago Indians murdered Liberty White, an American, and John B. Cardin, a French Canadian, at a farm called Hardscrabble, which was located on the south branch of the Chicago River, in the area now called Bridgeport. News of the murder was carried to Fort Dearborn by a soldier of the garrison, named John Kelso, and a small boy, who had managed to escape from the farm. Following the murder, some nearby settlers moved into the fort, and the rest fortified themselves in a house that had belonged to Charles Jouett, a Native American agent. Fifteen men from the civilian population were organized into a militia by Captain Heald and were armed with guns and ammunition from the fort.

==Battle==
On June 18, 1812, the United States declared war on the British Empire, and on July 17, British forces captured Fort Mackinac near the north coast of Lake Michigan. On July 29, General William Hull received news of the fall of Fort Mackinac and immediately sent orders to Heald to evacuate Fort Dearborn near the south coast of Lake Michigan, for fear that it could no longer be adequately supplied with provisions. In his letter to Heald, which arrived at Fort Dearborn on August 9, Hull ordered Heald to destroy all the arms and ammunition and to give the remaining goods to friendly Indians in the hope of attaining an escort to Fort Wayne. Hull also sent a copy of these orders to Fort Wayne to the southeast of Lake Michigan, with additional instructions to provide Heald with all the information, advice and assistance within their power. In the following days, the sub-Native American agent at Fort Wayne, Captain William Wells, who was the uncle of Heald&#x27;s wife, Rebekah, assembled a group of about 30 Miami Native Americans. Wells, Corporal Walter K. Jordan, and the Miamis traveled to Fort Dearborn to provide an escort for the evacuees.

Wells arrived at Fort Dearborn on August 12 or 13 (sources differ), and on August 14, Heald held a council with the Potawatomi leaders to inform them of his intention to evacuate the fort. The Native Americans believed that Heald told them that he would distribute the firearms, ammunition, provisions, and whiskey among them and that if they would send a band of Potawatomis to escort them safely to Fort Wayne, he would pay them a large sum of money. However, Heald ordered all the surplus arms, ammunition, and liquor destroyed &quot;fearing that [the Native Americans] would make bad use of it if put in their possession.&quot; On August 14, a Potawatomi chief called Black Partridge warned Heald that the young men of the tribe intended to attack and that he could no longer restrain them.

At 9:00 am on August 15, the garrison, comprising, according to Heald&#x27;s report, 54 US regulars, 12 militia, nine women and 18 children, left Fort Dearborn with the intention of marching to Fort Wayne. Wells led the group with some of the Miami escorts, while the rest of the Miamis were positioned at the rear. About south of Fort Dearborn, a band of Potawatomi warriors ambushed the garrison. Heald reported that, upon discovering that the Indians were preparing to ambush from behind a dune, the company marched to the top of the dune, fired off a round and charged at the Native Americans.

The maneuver separated the cavalry from the wagons, which allowed the overwhelming Native American force to charge into the gap, divide, and surround both groups. During the ensuing battle, some of the Native Americans charged at the wagon train that contained the women and children and the provisions. The wagons were defended by the militia, as well as Ensign Ronan and the fort physician Van Voorhis. The officers and militia were killed, along with two of the women and most of the children. Wells disengaged from the main battle and attempted to ride to the aid of those at the wagons. In doing so, he was brought down. According to eyewitness accounts, he fought off many Native Americans before being killed, and a group of Indians immediately cut out his heart and ate it to absorb his courage.

The battle lasted about 15 minutes, when Heald and the surviving soldiers withdrew to an area of elevated ground on the prairie. They surrendered to the Native Americans, who took them as prisoners to their camp near Fort Dearborn. In his report, Heald detailed the American loss at 26 regulars, all 12 of the militia, two women and twelve children killed, with the other 28 regulars, seven women, and six children taken prisoner. Survivors of the massacre filed different accounts regarding the Miami warriors. Some said that they fought for the Americans, and others said they did not fight at all.

==Accounts==
The recollections of a number of the survivors of the battle have been published. Heald&#x27;s story was recorded on September 22, 1812, by Charles Askin in his diary, Heald also wrote brief accounts of events in his journal and in an official report of the battle. Walter Jordan recorded his version of events in a letter to his wife dated October 12, 1812. Helm wrote a detailed narrative of events, but his fear of being court-martialed for his criticism of Heald made him delay publication until 1814. John Kinzie&#x27;s recollections of the battle were recorded by Henry Schoolcraft in August 1820.

The accounts of details of the conflict are discrepant, particularly in their attribution of blame for the battle. Juliette Augusta Magill Kinzie&#x27;s &quot;Wau-Bun: The Early Day in the Northwest&quot;, which was first published in 1856, provides the traditional account of the conflict. However, it is based on family stories and is regarded as historically inaccurate. Nonetheless, its popular acceptance was surprisingly strong.

The Battle of Fort Dearborn has also been referred to as the &quot;Fort Dearborn Massacre&quot; by the defending Americans. The battle has been claimed a massacre due to the large number of Americans killed including women and children, as opposed to the relatively-smaller Potawatomi losses incurred. The conflict has also been argued to have been a measure of self-defense on the part of the Potawatomi.

==Aftermath==
After the battle, the Native Americans took their prisoners to their camp near Fort Dearborn and the fort was burned to the ground. The region remained empty of U.S. citizens until after the war ended. Some of the prisoners died in captivity, and others were later ransomed. The fort, however, was rebuilt in 1816.

General William Henry Harrison, who was not present at the battle, later claimed the Miami had fought against the Americans, and he used the Battle of Fort Dearborn as a pretext to attack Miami villages. Miami Chief, Pacanne, and his nephew, Jean Baptiste Richardville, accordingly ended their neutrality in the War of 1812 and allied with the British.

==Historical perspective==
Seen from the perspective of the War of 1812, and the larger conflict between Britain and France which precipitated it, this was a very small and brief battle, but it ultimately had larger consequences in the territory. Arguably, for the Native Americans, it was an example of &quot;winning the battle but losing the war&quot; since the US later pursued a policy of removing the tribes from the region, resulting in the 1833 Treaty of Chicago, which was marked at its culmination in 1835 by the last great Native American war dance in the nascent city. Thereafter, the Potawatomi and other tribes were moved further west.

==Location==

Eyewitness accounts place the battle on the lake shore somewhere between south of Fort Dearborn. Heald&#x27;s official report said the battle occurred south of the fort, placing the battle at what is now the intersection of Roosevelt Road (12th Street) and Michigan Avenue. Juliette Kinzie, shortly before her death in 1870, stated that the battle had started by a large cottonwood tree, which still stood on 18th Street between Prairie Avenue and the lake. The tree was supposed to have been the last remaining of a grove of trees that had been saplings at the time of the battle.

The tree was blown down in a storm on May 16, 1894, and a portion of its trunk was preserved at the Chicago Historical Society. The historian Harry A. Musham points out that the testimony relating to the tree is all second hand and came from people who had settled in Chicago more than 20 years after the battle. Moreover, based on the diameter of the preserved section of trunk (about ) he estimated the age of the tree at the time that it was blown over at no more than 80 years and, therefore, he asserted that it could not have been growing at the time of the battle. Nevertheless, the site at 18th Street and Prairie Avenue has become the location traditionally associated with the battle, and on the battle&#x27;s 197th anniversary in 2009, the Chicago Park District, the Prairie District Neighborhood Alliance and other community partners dedicated &quot;Battle of Fort Dearborn Park&quot; near the site at 18th Street and Calumet Avenue.

==Monuments==

In 1893, George Pullman had a sculpture he had commissioned from Carl Rohl-Smith erected near his house. It portrays the rescue of Margaret Helm, the stepdaughter of Chicago resident John Kinzie and wife of Lieutenant Linai Taliaferro Helm, by Potawatomi chief Black Partridge, who led her and some others to Lake Michigan and helped her escape by boat. The monument was moved to the lobby of the Chicago Historical Society in 1931. In the 1970s, however, Native American groups protested the display of the monument, and it was removed.

In the 1990s, the statue was reinstalled near 18th Street and Prairie Avenue, close to its original site, at the time of the revival of the Prairie Avenue Historic District. It was later removed for conservation reasons by the Office of Public Art of the Chicago Department of Cultural Affairs. There are some efforts to reinstall the monument, but it is meeting resistance from the Chicago American Indian Center.

The battle is also memorialized with a sculpture by Henry Hering, called &quot;Defense&quot;, which is located on the south western tender&#x27;s house of the Michigan Avenue Bridge, which partially covers the site of Fort Dearborn. There are also memorials in Chicago to individuals who fought in the battle. William Wells is commemorated in the naming of Wells Street, a north–south street and part of the original 1830 58-block plat of Chicago, while Nathan Heald is commemorated in the naming of Heald Square. Ronan Park on the city&#x27;s Far North Side honors Ensign George Ronan, who was the first West Point graduate to die in battle.

==See also==
* List of battles fought in Illinois

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
*
*
*
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2888523" start="4" end="27" title="Battle of Fort Dearborn" label="Battle of Fort Dearborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888523" start="50" end="72" title="Battle of Fort Dearborn" label="Fort Dearborn Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="100" end="113" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065583" start="125" end="135" title="Potawatomi" label="Potawatomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q305286" start="192" end="205" title="Fort Dearborn" label="Fort Dearborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="221" end="228" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658828" start="266" end="284" title="Illinois Territory" label="Illinois Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="325" end="336" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794349" start="409" end="444" title="Army of the Northwest (United States)" label="United States Army of the Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q881002" start="446" end="458" title="William Hull" label="William Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="966" end="979" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036511" start="1008" end="1015" title="Captain (U.S. Army)" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182728" start="1016" end="1029" title="John Whistler" label="John Whistler"/>
<link wikidata="Q643284" start="1096" end="1109" title="Chicago River" label="Chicago River"/>
<link wikidata="Q70626" start="1129" end="1133" title="Loop, Chicago" label="Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q860582" start="1134" end="1148" title="Community areas of Chicago" label="community area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="1161" end="1168" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q963349" start="1355" end="1369" title="Henry Dearborn" label="Henry Dearborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419102" start="1376" end="1406" title="United States Secretary of War" label="United States Secretary of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656995" start="1443" end="1463" title="Northwest Indian War" label="Northwest Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q767317" start="1500" end="1520" title="Treaty of Greenville" label="Treaty of Greenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q763080" start="1545" end="1561" title="Greenville, Ohio" label="Greenville, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="1633" end="1649" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355821" start="1654" end="1666" title="frontiersmen" label="frontiersmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186402" start="1681" end="1700" title="Western Confederacy" label="Western Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1721" end="1734" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="1761" end="1765" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="1860" end="1874" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q669315" start="1889" end="1908" title="Northwest Territory" label="Northwest Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="1933" end="1937" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="1939" end="1946" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="1948" end="1956" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="1958" end="1966" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="1968" end="1977" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="1992" end="2001" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q217450" start="2031" end="2046" title="Treaty of Paris (1783)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q280537" start="2189" end="2208" title="Northwest Ordinance" label="Northwest Ordinance"/>
<link wikidata="Q254682" start="2246" end="2257" title="Tenskwatawa" label="Tenskwatawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q257808" start="2298" end="2306" title="Tecumseh" label="Tecumseh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="2620" end="2628" title="Canada" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969121" start="3056" end="3068" title="Nathan Heald" label="Nathan Heald"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3096" end="3115" title="Forts of Fort Wayne, Indiana#Fort Wayne" label="Fort Wayne, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="3244" end="3257" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="3310" end="3318" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537653" start="3805" end="3822" title="Ho-Chunk" label="Winnebago Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925167" start="4013" end="4023" title="Bridgeport, Chicago" label="Bridgeport"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="4550" end="4575" title="War of 1812" label="war on the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890483" start="4608" end="4630" title="Siege of Fort Mackinac" label="captured Fort Mackinac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169" start="4655" end="4668" title="Lake Michigan" label="Lake Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q881002" start="4690" end="4702" title="William Hull" label="William Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q305286" start="4962" end="4975" title="Fort Dearborn" label="Fort Dearborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q49268" start="5190" end="5200" title="Fort Wayne" label="Fort Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020175" start="5426" end="5439" title="William Wells (soldier)" label="William Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q956264" start="5520" end="5525" title="Miami people" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921430" start="6331" end="6346" title="Black Partridge (chief)" label="Black Partridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065583" start="6811" end="6821" title="Potawatomi" label="Potawatomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q956264" start="8355" end="8369" title="Miami warriors" label="Miami warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181875" start="8980" end="8991" title="John Kinzie" label="John Kinzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q715889" start="9044" end="9061" title="Henry Schoolcraft" label="Henry Schoolcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6308981" start="9194" end="9224" title="Juliette Augusta Magill Kinzie" label="Juliette Augusta Magill Kinzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q11869" start="10260" end="10282" title="William Henry Harrison" label="William Henry Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7121872" start="10469" end="10476" title="Pacanne" label="Pacanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3164536" start="10494" end="10520" title="Jean Baptiste Richardville" label="Jean Baptiste Richardville"/>
<link wikidata="Q87256769" start="11053" end="11075" title="1833 Treaty of Chicago" label="1833 Treaty of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q130403" start="11155" end="11164" title="war dance" label="war dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441902" start="11494" end="11508" title="Roosevelt Road" label="Roosevelt Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867529" start="11527" end="11542" title="Michigan Avenue (Chicago)" label="Michigan Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401253" start="11699" end="11713" title="Prairie Avenue" label="Prairie Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963315" start="11953" end="11979" title="Chicago History Museum" label="Chicago Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963322" start="12604" end="12625" title="Chicago Park District" label="Chicago Park District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237813" start="12631" end="12669" title="Prairie District Neighborhood Alliance" label="Prairie District Neighborhood Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040723" start="12880" end="12895" title="Carl Rohl-Smith" label="Carl Rohl-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181875" start="12998" end="13009" title="John Kinzie" label="John Kinzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921430" start="13076" end="13091" title="Black Partridge (chief)" label="Black Partridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963315" start="13212" end="13238" title="Chicago History Museum" label="Chicago Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237813" start="13494" end="13526" title="Prairie Avenue District" label="Prairie Avenue Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q15430055" start="13745" end="13767" title="American Indian Center" label="American Indian Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928112" start="13929" end="13951" title="Michigan Avenue Bridge" label="Michigan Avenue Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q831939" start="14201" end="14205" title="plat" label="plat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690185" start="14270" end="14282" title="Heald Square Monument" label="Heald Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544025" start="14343" end="14355" title="George Ronan" label="George Ronan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="14375" end="14385" title="West Point" label="West Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q48779100" start="14429" end="14463" title="List of battles fought in Illinois" label="List of battles fought in Illinois"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40417" wikidata="Q305286" url="?curid=40417" title="Fort Dearborn">
<text>Fort Dearborn was a United States fort, first built in 1803 beside the Chicago River, in what is now Chicago, Illinois. It was constructed by U.S. troops under Captain John Whistler and named in honor of Henry Dearborn, then United States Secretary of War. The original fort was destroyed following the Battle of Fort Dearborn during the War of 1812, and a replacement Fort Dearborn was constructed on the same site in 1816 and decommissioned by 1837.

Parts of the fort were lost to the widening of the Chicago River in 1855, and a fire in 1857. The last vestiges of Fort Dearborn were destroyed in the Great Chicago Fire of 1871. The site of the fort is now a Chicago Landmark, located in the Michigan–Wacker Historic District, at the southern end of the DuSable Michigan Avenue Bridge.

==Background==
===Historic events===
Human activity in the Chicago area prior to the arrival of European explorers is mostly unknown. In 1673, an expedition headed by Louis Jolliet and Jacques Marquette was the first recorded to have crossed the Chicago Portage and traveled along the Chicago River. Marquette returned in 1674, and camped for a few days near the mouth of the river. He moved to the portage, where he camped through the winter of 1674–75. Joliet and Marquette did not report any Native Americans living near the Chicago River area at that time. Archaeologists, however, have discovered numerous historic Indian village sites dating to that time elsewhere in the Chicago region.

In 1682, René Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle had claimed a large territory (including the Chicago area), for France. Two of de La Salle&#x27;s men built a stockade at the portage in the winter of 1682/1683.

In 1763, following defeat in the French and Indian War, the French ceded this area to Great Britain. It became a region within their Province of Quebec. Great Britain later ceded the area to the United States (at the end of the American Revolutionary War), although the Northwest Territory remained under &quot;de facto&quot; British control until about 1796.

Following defeat of several Native American tribes in the Northwest Indian War of 1785–1795, the Treaty of Greenville was signed between the US and several chiefs at Fort Greenville (now Greenville, Ohio), on August 3, 1795. As part of the terms of this treaty, a coalition of Native Americans and Frontiers men, known as the Western Confederacy, ceded to the United States large parts of modern-day Ohio, Michigan, Indiana, Wisconsin, and Illinois. This included &quot;six miles square&quot; centered from the mouth of the Chicago River.

===Local events===
A French-Jesuit mission, the Mission of the Guardian Angel, was founded somewhere in the vicinity in 1696, but was abandoned around 1700. The Fox Wars effectively closed the area to Europeans in the first part of the 18th century. The first non-native to re-settle in the area may have been a trader named Guillory, who might have had a trading-post near Wolf Point on the Chicago River around 1778.

Jean Baptiste Point du Sable, a French-speaking colonist of African descent, built a prosperous farm and trading post near the mouth of the Chicago River in the 1780s, at a site directly across the river from the future fort. A settlement developed there and he is widely regarded as the founder of Chicago. Antoine Ouilmette is the next recorded resident of Chicago; he claimed to have settled at the mouth of the Chicago River in July 1790.

== First Fort Dearborn ==

On March 9, 1803, Henry Dearborn, the Secretary of War, wrote to Colonel Jean Hamtramck, the commandant of Detroit, instructing him to have an officer and six men survey the route from Detroit to Chicago, and to make a preliminary investigation of the situation at Chicago. Captain John Whistler was selected as commandant of the new post, and set out with six men to complete the survey. The survey completed, on July 14, 1803, a company of troops set out to make the overland journey from Detroit to Chicago. Whistler and his family made their way to Chicago on a schooner called the &quot;Tracy&quot;. The troops reached their destination on August 17. The &quot;Tracy&quot; was anchored about half a mile offshore, unable to enter the Chicago River due to a sandbar at its mouth. Julia Whistler, the wife of Captain Whistler&#x27;s son, Lieutenant William Whistler, later related that 2000 Indians gathered to see the &quot;Tracy&quot;. The troops had completed the construction of the fort by the summer of 1804; it was a log-built fort enclosed in a double stockade, with two blockhouses (see diagram above). The fort was named &quot;Fort Dearborn&quot;, after U.S. Secretary of War Henry Dearborn, who had commissioned its construction.
A fur trader, John Kinzie, who bought the old Du Sable property, arrived in Chicago in 1804, and rapidly became the civilian leader of the small settlement that grew around the fort. In 1810, Kinzie and Whistler became embroiled in a dispute over Kinzie supplying alcohol to the Indians. In April, Whistler and other senior officers at the fort were removed; Whistler was replaced as commandant of the fort by Captain Nathan Heald.

===Battle of Fort Dearborn===

During the War of 1812, General William Hull ordered the evacuation of Fort Dearborn in August 1814. Captain Heald oversaw the evacuation, but on August 15, the evacuees were ambushed along the trail by about 500 Potawatomi Indians in the Battle of Fort Dearborn. The Potawatomi captured Heald and his wife, Rebekah, and ransomed them to the British. Of the 148 soldiers, women, and children who evacuated the fort, 86 were killed in the ambush. The Potawatomi burned the fort to the ground the next day.

==Second Fort Dearborn==
Following the war, a second Fort Dearborn was built (1816). This fort consisted of a double wall of wooden palisades, officer and enlisted barracks, a garden, and other buildings. The American forces garrisoned the fort until 1823, when peace with the Indians led the garrison to be deemed redundant. The temporary abandonment lasted until 1828, when it was re-garrisoned following the outbreak of war with the Winnebago Indians. In her 1856 memoir, &quot;Wau Bun&quot;, Juliette Kinzie described the fort as it appeared on her arrival in Chicago in 1831:

The fort was closed briefly before the Black Hawk War of 1832 and by 1837, the fort was being used by the Superintendent of Harbor Works. In 1837, the fort and its reserve, including part of the land that became Grant Park, was deeded to the city by the Federal Government. In 1855, part of the fort was demolished so that the south bank of the Chicago River could be dredged, straightening the bend in the river and widening it at this point by about ; and in 1857, a fire destroyed nearly all the remaining buildings in the fort. The remaining blockhouse and few surviving outbuildings were destroyed in the Great Chicago Fire of 1871.

==Legacy and monuments==

The southern perimeter of Fort Dearborn was located at what is now the intersection of Wacker Drive and Michigan Avenue in the Loop community area of Chicago along the Magnificent Mile. Part of the fort outline is marked by plaques, and a line embedded in the sidewalk and road near the Michigan Avenue Bridge and Wacker Drive. A few boards from the old fort were retained and are now in the Chicago History Museum in Lincoln Park.

First Presbyterian Church (Chicago), the longest continuously-operating institution in Chicago was founded in the carpentry shop of Fort Dearborn on June 26, 1833 and today is located in Woodlawn, Chicago

On March 5, 1899, the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; publicized a Chicago Historical Society replica of the original fort.

In 1933, at the Century of Progress Exhibition, a detailed replica of Fort Dearborn was erected as a fair exhibit. As part of the celebration, both a United States one-cent postage stamp and a souvenir sheet (containing 25 of the stamps) were issued, showing the fort. The individual stamp and sheet were reprinted when Postmaster General James A. Farley gave imperforated examples of these, and other stamps, to his friends. Because of the ensuing public outcry, millions of copies of &quot;Farley&#x27;s Follies&quot; were printed and sold.

In 1939, the Chicago City Council added a fourth star to the city flag to represent Fort Dearborn. This star is depicted as the left-most, or first, star of the flag.

The site of the fort was designated a Chicago Landmark on September 15, 1971.

An elementary school in the Chicago Public Schools system is named after Fort Dearborn.

==Gallery==
==See also==
* Fort Chécagou
* History of Chicago

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q305286" start="0" end="13" title="Fort Dearborn" label="Fort Dearborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="20" end="33" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="34" end="38" title="fortification" label="fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q643284" start="71" end="84" title="Chicago River" label="Chicago River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="101" end="108" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="110" end="118" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036511" start="160" end="167" title="Captain (U.S. Army)" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182728" start="168" end="181" title="John Whistler" label="John Whistler"/>
<link wikidata="Q963349" start="204" end="218" title="Henry Dearborn" label="Henry Dearborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419102" start="225" end="255" title="United States Secretary of War" label="United States Secretary of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888523" start="303" end="326" title="Battle of Fort Dearborn" label="Battle of Fort Dearborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="338" end="349" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q70520" start="604" end="622" title="Great Chicago Fire" label="Great Chicago Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q86557673" start="662" end="678" title="Chicago Landmark" label="Chicago Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837858" start="695" end="728" title="Michigan–Wacker Historic District" label="Michigan–Wacker Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928112" start="757" end="787" title="DuSable Bridge" label="DuSable Michigan Avenue Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q506618" start="957" end="970" title="Louis Jolliet" label="Louis Jolliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q336630" start="975" end="992" title="Jacques Marquette" label="Jacques Marquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095748" start="1036" end="1051" title="Chicago Portage" label="Chicago Portage"/>
<link wikidata="Q298156" start="1494" end="1533" title="René Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle" label="René Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle"/>
<link wikidata="Q298156" start="1613" end="1624" title="René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle" label="de La Salle"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="1730" end="1751" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="1783" end="1796" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q251668" start="1830" end="1848" title="Province of Quebec (1763–1791)" label="Province of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1892" end="1905" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="1925" end="1951" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q669315" start="1967" end="1986" title="Northwest Territory" label="Northwest Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="2008" end="2016" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656995" start="2116" end="2136" title="Northwest Indian War" label="Northwest Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q767317" start="2155" end="2175" title="Treaty of Greenville" label="Treaty of Greenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q763080" start="2245" end="2261" title="Greenville, Ohio" label="Greenville, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="2335" end="2351" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355821" start="2356" end="2369" title="Frontier" label="Frontiers men"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186402" start="2384" end="2403" title="Western Confederacy" label="Western Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2418" end="2431" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="2458" end="2462" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="2464" end="2472" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="2474" end="2481" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="2483" end="2492" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17081489" start="2646" end="2675" title="Mission of the Guardian Angel" label="Mission of the Guardian Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477039" start="2759" end="2767" title="Fox Wars" label="Fox Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q8029883" start="2972" end="2982" title="Wolf Point, Chicago" label="Wolf Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q492555" start="3018" end="3046" title="Jean Baptiste Point du Sable" label="Jean Baptiste Point du Sable"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775522" start="3326" end="3343" title="Antoine Ouilmette" label="Antoine Ouilmette"/>
<link wikidata="Q963349" start="3507" end="3521" title="Henry Dearborn" label="Henry Dearborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419102" start="3527" end="3543" title="United States Secretary of War" label="Secretary of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3165642" start="3554" end="3576" title="Jean François Hamtramck" label="Colonel Jean Hamtramck"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="3596" end="3603" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182728" start="3763" end="3784" title="John Whistler" label="Captain John Whistler"/>
<link wikidata="Q204577" start="4055" end="4063" title="schooner" label="schooner"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840593" start="4552" end="4560" title="stockade" label="stockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q82101" start="4571" end="4581" title="blockhouse" label="blockhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419102" start="4656" end="4677" title="Secretary of War" label="U.S. Secretary of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q963349" start="4678" end="4692" title="Henry Dearborn" label="Henry Dearborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181875" start="4747" end="4758" title="John Kinzie" label="John Kinzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969121" start="5143" end="5163" title="Nathan Heald" label="Captain Nathan Heald"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="5208" end="5219" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q881002" start="5229" end="5241" title="William Hull" label="William Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065583" start="5410" end="5420" title="Potawatomi" label="Potawatomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888523" start="5436" end="5459" title="Battle of Fort Dearborn" label="Battle of Fort Dearborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="5539" end="5546" title="British Empire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q90685" start="5835" end="5843" title="palisade" label="palisade"/>
<link wikidata="Q131263" start="5867" end="5875" title="barracks" label="barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4256410" start="6114" end="6129" title="Winnebago War" label="outbreak of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537653" start="6139" end="6148" title="Winnebago (tribe)" label="Winnebago"/>
<link wikidata="Q6308981" start="6199" end="6214" title="Juliette Augusta Magill Kinzie" label="Juliette Kinzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q879980" start="6324" end="6338" title="Black Hawk War" label="Black Hawk War"/>
<link wikidata="Q159085" start="6497" end="6507" title="Grant Park (Chicago)" label="Grant Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q82101" start="6831" end="6841" title="blockhouse" label="blockhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q70520" start="6895" end="6913" title="Great Chicago Fire" label="Great Chicago Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958800" start="7037" end="7049" title="Wacker Drive" label="Wacker Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867529" start="7054" end="7069" title="Michigan Avenue (Chicago)" label="Michigan Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q70626" start="7077" end="7081" title="Chicago Loop" label="Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q860582" start="7082" end="7096" title="Community areas of Chicago" label="community area"/>
<link wikidata="Q285218" start="7118" end="7134" title="Magnificent Mile" label="Magnificent Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q721747" start="7174" end="7180" title="Commemorative plaque" label="plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928112" start="7237" end="7259" title="Michigan Avenue Bridge" label="Michigan Avenue Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958800" start="7264" end="7276" title="Wacker Drive" label="Wacker Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963315" start="7342" end="7364" title="Chicago History Museum" label="Chicago History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795453" start="7368" end="7380" title="Lincoln Park, Chicago" label="Lincoln Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q23302284" start="7383" end="7418" title="First Presbyterian Church (Chicago)" label="First Presbyterian Church (Chicago)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816105" start="7570" end="7587" title="Woodlawn, Chicago" label="Woodlawn, Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="7617" end="7632" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963315" start="7652" end="7678" title="Chicago Historical Society" label="Chicago Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q300347" start="7726" end="7756" title="Century of Progress" label="Century of Progress Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q37930" start="7883" end="7896" title="postage stamp" label="postage stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q521461" start="7903" end="7917" title="souvenir sheet" label="souvenir sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q20820583" start="8030" end="8048" title="Postmaster General" label="Postmaster General"/>
<link wikidata="Q954859" start="8049" end="8064" title="James A. Farley" label="James A. Farley"/>
<link wikidata="Q731790" start="8070" end="8081" title="imperforate" label="imperforate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402799" start="8315" end="8324" title="Flag of Chicago" label="city flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q86557673" start="8460" end="8476" title="Chicago Landmark" label="Chicago Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963340" start="8529" end="8551" title="Chicago Public Schools" label="Chicago Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q788746" start="8617" end="8630" title="Fort Chécagou" label="Fort Chécagou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031135" start="8633" end="8651" title="History of Chicago" label="History of Chicago"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40418" wikidata="Q193608" url="?curid=40418" title="Carl Sandburg">
<text>Carl August Sandburg (January 6, 1878 – July 22, 1967) was an American poet, biographer, journalist, and editor. He won three Pulitzer Prizes: two for his poetry and one for his biography of Abraham Lincoln. During his lifetime, Sandburg was widely regarded as &quot;a major figure in contemporary literature&quot;, especially for volumes of his collected verse, including &quot;Chicago Poems&quot; (1916), &quot;Cornhuskers&quot; (1918), and &quot;Smoke and Steel&quot; (1920). He enjoyed &quot;unrivaled appeal as a poet in his day, perhaps because the breadth of his experiences connected him with so many strands of American life&quot;. When he died in 1967, President Lyndon B. Johnson observed that &quot;Carl Sandburg was more than the voice of America, more than the poet of its strength and genius. He was America.&quot; 

==Life==
Carl Sandburg was born in a three-room cottage at 313 East Third Street in Galesburg, Illinois, to Clara Mathilda (née Anderson) and August Sandberg, both of Swedish ancestry. He adopted the nickname &quot;Charles&quot; or &quot;Charlie&quot; in elementary school at about the same time he and his two oldest siblings changed the spelling of their last name to &quot;Sandburg&quot;.

At the age of thirteen, he left school and began driving a milk wagon. From the age of about fourteen until he was seventeen or eighteen, he worked as a porter at the Union Hotel barbershop in Galesburg. After that, he was on the milk route again for 18 months. He then became a bricklayer and a farm laborer on the wheat plains of Kansas. After an interval spent at Lombard College in Galesburg, he became a hotel servant in Denver, then a coal-heaver in Omaha. He began his writing career as a journalist for the &quot;Chicago Daily News&quot;. Later, he wrote poetry, history, biographies, novels, children&#x27;s literature, and film reviews. Sandburg also collected and edited books of ballads and folklore. He spent most of his life in Illinois, Wisconsin, and Michigan before moving to North Carolina.

Sandburg volunteered to join the military during the Spanish–American War and was stationed in Puerto Rico with the 6th Illinois Infantry, disembarking at Guánica, Puerto Rico, on July 25, 1898. Sandburg was never actually called to battle. He attended West Point for just two weeks before failing a mathematics and grammar exam. Sandburg returned to Galesburg and entered Lombard College but left without a degree in 1903. He then moved to Milwaukee, Wisconsin, to work for a newspaper, and also joined the Wisconsin Social Democratic Party, the name by which the Socialist Party of America was known in the state. Sandburg served as a secretary to Emil Seidel, socialist mayor of Milwaukee from 1910 to 1912. Carl Sandburg later remarked that Milwaukee was where he got his bearings and that the rest of his life had been &quot;the unrolling of a scene that started up in Wisconsin&quot;.

Sandburg met Lilian Steichen (1883–1977) at the Milwaukee Social Democratic Party office in 1907, and they married the next year in Milwaukee. Lilian&#x27;s brother was the photographer Edward Steichen. Sandburg with his wife, whom he called Paula, raised three daughters. Their first daughter, Margaret, was born in 1911. The Sandburgs moved to Harbert, Michigan, and then to suburban Chicago, Illinois in 1912 after he was offered a job by a Chicago newspaper. They lived in Evanston, Illinois, before settling at 331 South York Street in Elmhurst, Illinois, from 1919 to 1930. During the time, Sandburg wrote &quot;Chicago Poems&quot; (1916), &quot;Cornhuskers&quot; (1918), and &quot;Smoke and Steel&quot; (1920). In 1919 Sandburg won a Pulitzer Prize &quot;made possible by a special grant from The Poetry Society&quot; for his collection &quot;Cornhuskers&quot;. Sandburg also wrote three children&#x27;s books in Elmhurst: &quot;Rootabaga Stories&quot;, in 1922, followed by &quot;Rootabaga Pigeons&quot; (1923), and &quot;Potato Face&quot; (1930). Sandburg also wrote &quot;Abraham Lincoln: The Prairie Years&quot;, a two-volume biography, in 1926, &quot;The American Songbag&quot; (1927), and a book of poems called &quot;Good Morning, America&quot; (1928) in Elmhurst. The Sandburg house at 331 South York Street in Elmhurst was demolished and the site is now a parking lot. The family moved to Michigan in 1930.

Sandburg won the 1940 Pulitzer Prize for History for the four-volume &quot;The War Years&quot;, the sequel to his &quot;Abraham Lincoln&quot;, and a second Poetry Pulitzer in 1951 for &quot;Complete Poems&quot;.

In 1945, he moved to Connemara, a rural estate in Flat Rock, North Carolina. Here, he produced a little over a third of his total published work and lived with his wife, daughters, and two grandchildren.

On February 12, 1959, in commemorations of the 150th anniversary of Abraham Lincoln&#x27;s birth, Congress met in joint session to hear actor Fredric March give a dramatic reading of the Gettysburg Address, followed by an address by Sandburg.

Sandburg supported the Civil Rights Movement and was the first white man to be honored by the NAACP with their Silver Plaque Award as a &quot;major prophet of civil rights in our time.&quot;
Sandburg died of natural causes in 1967 and his body was cremated. The ashes were interred under &quot;Remembrance Rock&quot;, a granite boulder located behind his birth house in Galesburg.

==Career==

===Poetry and prose===

Much of Carl Sandburg&#x27;s poetry, such as &quot;Chicago&quot;, focused on Chicago, Illinois, where he spent time as a reporter for the &quot;Chicago Daily News&quot; and &quot;The Day Book&quot;. His most famous description of the city is as &quot;Hog Butcher for the World/Tool Maker, Stacker of Wheat/Player with Railroads and the Nation&#x27;s Freight Handler,/Stormy, Husky, Brawling, City of the Big Shoulders.&quot;

Sandburg earned Pulitzer Prizes for his collection &quot;The Complete Poems of Carl Sandburg&quot;, &quot;Corn Huskers&quot;, and for his biography of Abraham Lincoln (&quot;Abraham Lincoln: The War Years&quot;). Sandburg is also remembered by generations of children for his &quot;Rootabaga Stories&quot; and &quot;Rootabaga Pigeons&quot;, a series of whimsical, sometimes melancholy stories he originally created for his own daughters. &quot;The Rootabaga Stories&quot; were born of Sandburg&#x27;s desire for &quot;American fairy tales&quot; to match American childhood. He felt that the European stories involving royalty and knights were inappropriate, and so populated his stories with skyscrapers, trains, corn fairies and the &quot;Five Marvelous Pretzels&quot;.

In 1919, Sandburg was assigned by his editor at the &quot;Daily News&quot; to do a series of reports on the working classes and tensions among whites and African Americans. The impetus for these reports were race riots that had broken out in other American cities. Ultimately, major riots broke out in Chicago too, but much of Sandburg&#x27;s writing on the issues before the riots caused him to be seen as having a prophetic voice. A visiting philanthropist, Joel Spingarn, who was also an official of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, read Sandburg&#x27;s columns with interest and asked to publish them, as &quot;The Chicago Race Riots, July, 1919&quot;.

===Lincoln works===
Sandburg&#x27;s popular multivolume biography &quot;Abraham Lincoln: The Prairie Years&quot;, 2 vols. (1926) and &quot;Abraham Lincoln: The War Years&quot;, 4 vols. (1939) are collectively &quot;the best-selling, most widely read, and most influential book[s] about Lincoln.&quot; The books have been through many editions, including a one-volume edition in 1954 prepared by Sandburg.

Sandburg&#x27;s Lincoln scholarship had an enormous impact on the popular view of Lincoln. The books were adapted by Robert E. Sherwood for his Pulitzer Prize-winning play, &quot;Abe Lincoln in Illinois&quot; (1938) and David Wolper&#x27;s six-part dramatization for television, &quot;Sandburg&#x27;s Lincoln&quot; (1974). He recorded excerpts from the biography and some of Lincoln&#x27;s speeches for Caedmon Records in New York City in May 1957. He was awarded a Grammy Award in 1959 for Best Performance – Documentary Or Spoken Word (Other Than Comedy) for his recording of Aaron Copland&#x27;s &quot;Lincoln Portrait&quot; with the New York Philharmonic. Some historians suggest more Americans learned about Lincoln from Sandburg than from any other source.

The books garnered critical praise and attention for Sandburg, including the 1940 Pulitzer Prize for History for the four-volume &quot;The War Years&quot;. But Sandburg&#x27;s works on Lincoln also received substantial criticism. William E. Barton, who had published a Lincoln biography in 1925, wrote that Sandburg&#x27;s book &quot;is not history, is not even biography&quot; because of its lack of original research and uncritical use of evidence, but Barton nevertheless thought it was &quot;real literature and a delightful and important contribution to the ever-lengthening shelf of really good books about Lincoln.&quot; Historian Milo Milton Quaife criticized Sandburg for not documenting his sources and questioned the accuracy of &quot;The Prairie Years&quot;, noting they contain a number of factual errors. Others have complained &quot;The Prairie Years&quot; and &quot;The War Years&quot; contain too much material that is neither biography nor history, saying the books are instead &quot;sentimental poeticizing&quot; by Sandburg. Sandburg himself may have viewed his works more as an American epic than as a mere biography, a view also mirrored by other reviewers.

===Folk music===

Sandburg&#x27;s 1927 anthology the &quot;American Songbag&quot; enjoyed enormous popularity, going through many editions; and Sandburg himself was perhaps the first American urban folk singer, accompanying himself on solo guitar at lectures and poetry recitals, and in recordings, long before the first or the second folk revival movements (of the 1940s and 1960s, respectively). According to the musicologist Judith Tick:
As a populist poet, Sandburg bestowed a powerful dignity on what the &#x27;20s called the &quot;American scene&quot; in a book he called a &quot;ragbag of stripes and streaks of color from nearly all ends of the earth ... rich with the diversity of the United States.&quot; Reviewed widely in journals ranging from the &quot;New Masses&quot; to &quot;Modern Music&quot;, the &quot;American Songbag&quot; influenced a number of musicians. Pete Seeger, who calls it a &quot;landmark&quot;, saw it &quot;almost as soon as it came out.&quot; The composer Elie Siegmeister took it to Paris with him in 1927, and he and his wife Hannah &quot;were always singing these songs. That was home. That was where we belonged.&quot;

===Film===
Sandburg said he considered working on D. W. Griffith&#x27;s &quot;Intolerance&quot; (1916) but his first film work was when he signed on to work on the production of &quot;The Greatest Story Ever Told&quot; (1965) in July 1960 for a year, receiving an &quot;in creative association with Carl Sandburg&quot; credit on the film.

==Legacy==

===Commemoration===
Carl Sandburg&#x27;s boyhood home in Galesburg is now operated by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency as the Carl Sandburg State Historic Site. The site contains the cottage Sandburg was born in, a modern visitor center, and small garden with a large stone called Remembrance Rock, under which his and his wife&#x27;s ashes are buried. Sandburg&#x27;s home of 22 years in Flat Rock, Henderson County, North Carolina, is preserved by the National Park Service as the Carl Sandburg Home National Historic Site. Carl Sandburg College is located in Sandburg&#x27;s birthplace of Galesburg, Illinois. During the Spanish-American War, Sandburg was stationed at Camp Alger in Fairfax County, Virginia and so the county has both a Sandburg Road, near the spot where the camp was located, and a Carl Sandburg Middle School.

On January 6, 1978, the 100th anniversary of his birth, the United States Postal Service issued a commemorative stamp honoring Sandburg. The spare design consists of a profile originally drawn by his friend William A. Smith in 1952, along with Sandburg&#x27;s own distinctive autograph.

The Rare Book &amp; Manuscript Library (University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign) (RBML) houses the Carl Sandburg Papers. The bulk of the collection was purchased directly from Carl Sandburg and his family. In total, the RBML owns over 600 cubic feet of Sandburg&#x27;s papers, including photographs, correspondence, and manuscripts.

In 2011, Sandburg was inducted into the Chicago Literary Hall of Fame.

===Namesakes===
Carl Sandburg Village was a 1960s urban renewal project in the Near North Side, Chicago. Financed by the city, it is located between Clark and LaSalle St. between Division Street and North Ave. Solomon &amp; Cordwell, architects. In 1979, Carl Sandburg Village was converted to condominium ownership.

Numerous schools are named for Sandburg throughout the United States, and he was present at some of these schools&#x27; dedications. (Some years after attending the 1954 dedication of Carl Sandburg High School in Orland Park, Illinois, Sandburg returned for an unannounced visit; the school&#x27;s principal at first mistook him for a hobo.) Sandburg Halls, a student residence hall at the University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee, carries a plaque commemorating Sandburg&#x27;s roles as an organizer for the Social Democratic Party and as personal secretary to Emil Seidel, Milwaukee&#x27;s first Socialist mayor.

Carl Sandburg Library opened in Livonia, Michigan, in 1961. The name was recommended by the Library Commission as an example of an American author representing the best of literature of the Midwest. Carl Sandburg had taught at the University of Michigan for a time.

Galesburg opened Sandburg Mall in 1975, named in honor of Sandburg. The Chicago Public Library installed the Carl Sandburg Award, annually awarded for contributions to literature.

Amtrak added the &quot;Carl Sandburg&quot; train in 2006 to supplement the &quot;Illinois Zephyr&quot; on the Chicago–Quincy route.

Carl Sandburg Middle School in Alexandria, Virginia, part of Fairfax County Public Schools, was named in honor of Sandburg in 1985.

=== In other media ===

*William Saroyan wrote a short story about Sandburg in his 1971 book &quot;Letters from 74 rue Taitbout or Don&#x27;t Go But If You Must Say Hello To Everybody&quot;.
* Sandburg&#x27;s &quot;Sometime they&#x27;ll give a war and nobody will come&quot; from &quot;The People, Yes&quot; was a slogan of the German peace movement (&quot;Stell dir vor, es ist Krieg, und keiner geht hin&quot;); however, it is often falsely attributed to Bertolt Brecht.
* Daniel Steven Crafts&#x27; &quot;The Song and The Slogan&quot; is an orchestral composition built around recited passages from Sandburg&#x27;s &quot;Prairie&quot;.
* Peter Louis van Dijk&#x27;s &quot;Windy City Songs&quot;, based on the &quot;Chicago&quot; poems, was performed by the Chicago Children&#x27;s Choir and the Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University Choir in 2007.
* Bob Gibson&#x27;s &quot;The Courtship of Carl Sandburg&quot;, starring Tom Amandes as Sandburg
* In Jonathan Lethem&#x27;s novel &quot;Dissident Gardens&quot; the main character Rose Zimmer became an Abraham Lincoln devotee after reading Sandburg&#x27;s biography. Her copy of the six volumes became the centerpiece of her shrine to Lincoln.
* Sufjan Stevens&#x27;s &quot;Come on! Feel the Illinoise! Part I: The World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition Part II: Carl Sandburg Visits Me in a Dream&quot; (from &quot;Illinois&quot;).
*Composer Phyllis Zimmerman set Sandburg&#x27;s poems to music in her choral composition &quot;Fog&quot;, which was recorded and produced on CD.

==Bibliography==


*&quot;In Reckless Ecstasy&quot; (1904) (poetry) (originally published as Charles Sandburg)
*&quot;Incidentals&quot; (1904) (poetry and prose) (originally published as Charles Sandburg)
*&quot;Plaint of a Rose&quot; (1908) (poetry) (originally published as Charles Sandburg)
*&quot;Joseffy&quot; (1910) (prose) (originally published as Charles Sandburg)
*&quot;You and Your Job&quot; (1910) (prose) (originally published as Charles Sandburg)
*&quot;Chicago Poems&quot; (1916) (poetry)
*&quot;Cornhuskers&quot; (1918) (poetry)
*&quot;Chicago Race Riots&quot; (1919) (prose) (with an introduction by Walter Lippmann)
*&quot;Clarence Darrow of Chicago&quot; (1919) (prose)
*&quot;Smoke and Steel&quot; (1920) (poetry)
*&quot;Rootabaga Stories&quot; (1922) (children&#x27;s stories)
*&quot;Slabs of the Sunburnt West&quot; (1922) (poetry)
*&quot;Rootabaga Pigeons&quot; (1923) (children&#x27;s stories)
*&quot;Selected Poems&quot; (1926) (poetry)
*&quot;Abraham Lincoln: The Prairie Years&quot; (1926) (biography)
*&quot;The American Songbag&quot; (1927) (folk songs)
*&quot;Songs of America&quot; (1927) (folk songs) (collected by Sandburg; edited by Alfred V. Frankenstein)
*&quot;Abe Lincoln Grows Up&quot; (1928) (biography [primarily for children])
*&quot;Good Morning, America&quot; (1928) (poetry)
*&quot;Steichen the Photographer&quot; (1929) (history)
*&quot;Early Moon&quot; (1930) (poetry)
*&quot;Potato Face&quot; (1930) (children&#x27;s stories)
*&quot;Mary Lincoln: Wife and Widow&quot; (1932) (biography)
*&quot;The People, Yes&quot; (1936) (poetry)
*&quot;Abraham Lincoln: The War Years&quot; (1939) (biography)
*&quot;Storm over the Land&quot; (1942) (biography) (excerpts from Sandburg&#x27;s own &quot;Abraham Lincoln: The War Years&quot;)
*&quot;Road to Victory&quot; (1942) (exhibition catalog) (text by Sandburg; images compiled by Edward Steichen and published by the Museum of Modern Art)
*&quot;Home Front Memo&quot; (1943) (essays)
*&quot;Remembrance Rock&quot; (1948) (novel)

*&quot;Lincoln Collector: the story of the Oliver R. Barrett Lincoln collection&quot; (1949) (prose)
*&quot;The New American Songbag&quot; (1950) (folk songs)
*&quot;Complete Poems&quot; (1950) (poetry)
*&quot;The Wedding Procession of the Rag Doll and the Broom Handle and Who Was In It&quot; (1950) (children&#x27;s story)
*&quot;Always the Young Strangers&quot; (1953) (autobiography)
*&quot;Abraham Lincoln: The Prairie Years and the War Years&quot; (1954) (illustrated one-volume edition)
*&quot;Selected Poems of Carl Sandburg&quot; (1954) (poetry) (edited by Rebecca West)
*&quot;The Family of Man&quot; (1955) (exhibition catalog) (introduction; images compiled by Edward Steichen)
*&quot;Prairie-Town Boy&quot; (1955) (autobiography) (essentially excerpts from &quot;Always the Young Strangers&quot;)
*&quot;Sandburg Range&quot; (1957) (prose and poetry)
*&quot;Harvest Poems, 1910–1960&quot; (1960) (poetry)
*&quot;Wind Song&quot; (1960) (poetry)
*&quot;The World of Carl Sandburg&quot; (1960) (stage production) (adapted and directed by Norman Corwin, dramatic readings by Bette Davis and Leif Erickson, singing and guitar by Clark Allen, with closing cameo by Sandburg himself)
*&quot;Carl Sandburg at Gettysburg&quot; (1961) (documentary)
*&quot;Honey and Salt&quot; (1963) (poetry)
*&quot;The Letters of Carl Sandburg&quot; (1968) (autobiographical/correspondence) (edited by Herbert Mitgang)
*&quot;Breathing Tokens&quot; (poetry by Sandburg, edited by Margaret Sandburg) (1978) (poetry)
*&quot;Ever the Winds of Chance&quot; (1983) (autobiography) (started by Sandburg, completed by Margaret Sandburg and George Hendrick)
*&quot;Carl Sandburg at the Movies: a poet in the silent era, 1920–1927&quot; (1985) (selections of his reviews of silent movies; collected and edited by Dale Fetherling and Doug Fetherling)
*&quot;Billy Sunday and other poems&quot; (1993) (edited with an introduction by George Hendrick and Willene Hendrick)
*&quot;Poems for Children Nowhere Near Old Enough to Vote&quot; (1999) (compiled and with an introduction by George and Willene Hendrick)
*&quot;Poems for the People.&quot; (1999) 73 newfound poems from his early years in Chicago, edited with an introduction by George Hendrick and Willene Hendrick
*&quot;Abraham Lincoln: The Prairie Years and the War Years&quot; (2007) (illustrated edition with an introduction by Alan Axelrod)
==See also==

*Carl Sandburg Home National Historic Site
==References==

===Footnotes===
===Notes===


== Further reading ==
* Niven, Penelope. &quot;Carl Sandburg: A Biography&quot;. New York: Scribner&#x27;s, 1991.
* Sandburg, Carl. &quot;The Letters of Carl Sandburg&quot;. New York: Harcourt, Brace &amp; World, 1968.
* Sandburg, Helga. &quot;A Great and Glorious Romance: The Story of Carl Sandburg and Lilian Steichen&quot;. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1978.

==External links==
* Carl Sandburg&#x27;s birthplace in Galesburg, IL (at sandburg.org)
* Carl Sandburg Birthplace, Galesburg, IL (at uncharted101.com)
* Carl Sandburg Home, North Carolina from the National Park Service
* 
* The Day Carl Sandburg Died, PBS &quot;American Masters&quot; video
* &quot;Prayers for the People: Carl Sandburg&#x27;s Poetry and Songs&quot; , a Nebraska Educational Telecommunications film, University of Nebraska (video, 1 hour)
* Carl Sandburg databases from the University of Illinois
* Carl Sandburg from the FBI website
* Previously unknown Sandburg poem focuses on power of the gun
* 
* Helga Sandburg at LC Authorities, with 20 records
* Carl Sandburg Home NHS images on Open Parks Network
* &quot;Without The Cain and The Derby&quot;, a poem by Carl Sandburg: &quot;Vanity Fair&quot;, May, 1922
* 

=== Archival materials ===
*Oliver Barrett-Carl Sandburg Papers at Newberry Library
*North Carolina Writers Photographs Collection, J Murrey Atkins Library, UNC Charlotte
*Sandburg Series in the Harry Golden papers, J Murrey Atkins Library, UNC Charlotte
*Guide to the Carl Sandburg and Ruth Falkenau Correspondence 1919-1930 at the University of Chicago Special Collections Research Center
*Guide to the Carl Sandburg-Joseph Halle Schaffner Collection 1927-1969 at the University of Chicago Special Collections Research Center
*. Yale Collection of American Literature, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library.
*Alan Jenkins (AC 1924) Carl Sandburg Collection at the Amherst College Archives &amp; Special Collections</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193608" start="0" end="20" title="Carl Sandburg" label="Carl August Sandburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="126" end="141" title="Pulitzer Prizes" label="Pulitzer Prizes"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="191" end="206" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095740" start="379" end="392" title="Chicago Poems" label="Chicago Poems"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="673" end="690" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q782574" start="916" end="935" title="Galesburg, Illinois" label="Galesburg, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="999" end="1006" title="Sweden" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="1557" end="1563" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197435" start="1592" end="1607" title="Lombard College" label="Lombard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="1651" end="1657" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963306" start="1746" end="1764" title="Chicago Daily News" label="Chicago Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="1967" end="1975" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="1977" end="1986" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="1992" end="2000" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="2018" end="2032" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="2088" end="2108" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019645" start="2190" end="2197" title="Guánica, Puerto Rico" label="Guánica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="2199" end="2210" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="2288" end="2298" title="United States Military Academy" label="West Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197435" start="2408" end="2423" title="Lombard College" label="Lombard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="2476" end="2496" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353232" start="2600" end="2626" title="Socialist Party of America" label="Socialist Party of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632795" start="2685" end="2696" title="Emil Seidel" label="Emil Seidel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566926" start="2708" end="2726" title="List of mayors of Milwaukee" label="mayor of Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q193608" start="2940" end="2955" title="Lilian Steichen" label="Lilian Steichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q313899" start="3113" end="3128" title="Edward Steichen" label="Edward Steichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304428" start="3273" end="3290" title="Harbert, Michigan" label="Harbert, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="3313" end="3320" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q462799" start="3404" end="3412" title="Evanston, Illinois" label="Evanston"/>
<link wikidata="Q579542" start="3468" end="3476" title="Elmhurst, Illinois" label="Elmhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629872" start="3727" end="3745" title="Poetry Society of America" label="The Poetry Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385038" start="4090" end="4110" title="The American Songbag" label="The American Songbag"/>
<link wikidata="Q599254" start="4373" end="4399" title="Pulitzer Prize for History" label="Pulitzer Prize for History"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4426" end="4439" title="Abraham Lincoln: The War Years" label="The War Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040758" start="4585" end="4594" title="Carl Sandburg Home National Historic Site" label="Connemara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459852" start="4614" end="4639" title="Flat Rock, Henderson County, North Carolina" label="Flat Rock, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="4837" end="4852" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4883" end="4896" title="List of joint sessions of the United States Congress#1950s" label="joint session"/>
<link wikidata="Q181819" start="4911" end="4924" title="Fredric March" label="Fredric March"/>
<link wikidata="Q214524" start="4956" end="4974" title="Gettysburg Address" label="Gettysburg Address"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="5036" end="5057" title="Civil Rights Movement" label="Civil Rights Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="5107" end="5112" title="National Association for the Advancement of Colored People" label="NAACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438541" start="5221" end="5235" title="natural causes" label="natural causes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963285" start="5482" end="5489" title="Chicago (poem)" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="5508" end="5525" title="Chicago" label="Chicago, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963306" start="5575" end="5593" title="Chicago Daily News" label="Chicago Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389530" start="5610" end="5622" title="The Day Book" label="The Day Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="5873" end="5887" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="6008" end="6023" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6031" end="6061" title="Abraham Lincoln: The War Years" label="Abraham Lincoln: The War Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366589" start="6139" end="6156" title="Rootabaga Stories" label="Rootabaga Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="6783" end="6800" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091648" start="6906" end="6917" title="Chicago race riot of 1919" label="major riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q4431219" start="7089" end="7102" title="Joel Spingarn" label="Joel Spingarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="7136" end="7194" title="National Association for the Advancement of Colored People" label="National Association for the Advancement of Colored People"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362097" start="7841" end="7859" title="Robert E. Sherwood" label="Robert E. Sherwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q902654" start="7944" end="7956" title="David Wolper" label="David Wolper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016792" start="8127" end="8142" title="Caedmon Records" label="Caedmon Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="8146" end="8159" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="8190" end="8202" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593890" start="8215" end="8280" title="Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album" label="Best Performance – Documentary Or Spoken Word (Other Than Comedy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q192185" start="8302" end="8315" title="Aaron Copland" label="Aaron Copland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832579" start="8329" end="8345" title="Lincoln Portrait" label="Lincoln Portrait"/>
<link wikidata="Q471154" start="8361" end="8382" title="New York Philharmonic" label="New York Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q599254" start="8570" end="8596" title="Pulitzer Prize for History" label="Pulitzer Prize for History"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8623" end="8636" title="Abraham Lincoln: The War Years" label="The War Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578606" start="8718" end="8735" title="William E. Barton" label="William E. Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6860348" start="9126" end="9144" title="Milo Quaife" label="Milo Milton Quaife"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385038" start="9728" end="9744" title="American Songbag" label="American Songbag"/>
<link wikidata="Q51123" start="10879" end="10893" title="D. W. Griffith" label="D. W. Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q192206" start="10907" end="10918" title="Intolerance (film)" label="Intolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218601" start="11013" end="11041" title="The Greatest Story Ever Told" label="The Greatest Story Ever Told"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040759" start="11316" end="11349" title="Carl Sandburg State Historic Site" label="Carl Sandburg State Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459852" start="11579" end="11622" title="Flat Rock, Henderson County, North Carolina" label="Flat Rock, Henderson County, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="11644" end="11665" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040758" start="11673" end="11714" title="Carl Sandburg Home National Historic Site" label="Carl Sandburg Home National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040755" start="11716" end="11737" title="Carl Sandburg College" label="Carl Sandburg College"/>
<link wikidata="Q782574" start="11782" end="11801" title="Galesburg, Illinois" label="Galesburg, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="12083" end="12111" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756502" start="12121" end="12140" title="commemorative stamp" label="commemorative stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004592" start="12230" end="12246" title="William Arthur Smith" label="William A. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q18749551" start="12311" end="12394" title="The Rare Book &amp;amp; Manuscript Library (University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign)" label="The Rare Book &amp;amp; Manuscript Library (University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040760" start="12736" end="12757" title="Carl Sandburg Village" label="Carl Sandburg Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q986328" start="12799" end="12823" title="Near North Side, Chicago" label="Near North Side, Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040757" start="13222" end="13247" title="Carl Sandburg High School" label="Carl Sandburg High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013520" start="13251" end="13272" title="Orland Park, Illinois" label="Orland Park, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q843281" start="13373" end="13377" title="hobo" label="hobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416044" start="13380" end="13394" title="Sandburg Halls" label="Sandburg Halls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755318" start="13428" end="13461" title="University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee" label="University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632795" start="13593" end="13604" title="Emil Seidel" label="Emil Seidel"/>
<link wikidata="Q853552" start="13679" end="13696" title="Livonia, Michigan" label="Livonia, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="13878" end="13900" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60787544" start="13931" end="13944" title="Sandburg Mall" label="Sandburg Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060421" start="13986" end="14008" title="Chicago Public Library" label="Chicago Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q55712621" start="14118" end="14131" title="Illinois Zephyr and Carl Sandburg" label="Carl Sandburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q55712621" start="14176" end="14191" title="Illinois Zephyr and Carl Sandburg" label="Illinois Zephyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155989" start="14205" end="14212" title="Chicago Union Station" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272109" start="14213" end="14219" title="Quincy station (Amtrak)" label="Quincy"/>
<link wikidata="Q408109" start="14289" end="14318" title="Fairfax County Public Schools" label="Fairfax County Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q207356" start="14386" end="14401" title="William Saroyan" label="William Saroyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28873506" start="14460" end="14488" title="Letters from 74 rue Taitbout" label="Letters from 74 rue Taitbout"/>
<link wikidata="Q38757" start="14818" end="14832" title="Bertolt Brecht" label="Bertolt Brecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765229" start="14869" end="14892" title="The Song and The Slogan" label="The Song and The Slogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q22022004" start="15121" end="15150" title="Chicago Children&amp;#x27;s Choir" label="Chicago Children&amp;#x27;s Choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331614" start="15159" end="15197" title="Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University" label="Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q887948" start="15215" end="15225" title="Bob Gibson (musician)" label="Bob Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q166148" start="15286" end="15297" title="Tom Amandes" label="Tom Amandes"/>
<link wikidata="Q440100" start="15315" end="15330" title="Jonathan Lethem" label="Jonathan Lethem"/>
<link wikidata="Q15052481" start="15350" end="15367" title="Dissident Gardens" label="Dissident Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="15415" end="15430" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q319502" start="15559" end="15573" title="Sufjan Stevens" label="Sufjan Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658831" start="15724" end="15732" title="Illinois (Sufjan Stevens album)" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q93454256" start="15751" end="15768" title="Phyllis Zimmerman" label="Phyllis Zimmerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452534" start="16188" end="16195" title="Joseffy" label="Joseffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366589" start="16628" end="16645" title="Rootabaga Stories" label="Rootabaga Stories"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16856" end="16890" title="Abraham Lincoln: The Prairie Years" label="Abraham Lincoln: The Prairie Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756627" start="17429" end="17444" title="The People, Yes" label="The People, Yes"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17474" end="17504" title="Abraham Lincoln: The War Years" label="Abraham Lincoln: The War Years"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17623" end="17653" title="Abraham Lincoln: The War Years" label="Abraham Lincoln: The War Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q313899" start="17756" end="17771" title="Edward Steichen" label="Edward Steichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="17793" end="17813" title="Museum of Modern Art" label="Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311739" start="17867" end="17883" title="Remembrance Rock" label="Remembrance Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087782" start="17949" end="17966" title="Oliver R. Barrett" label="Oliver R. Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q769103" start="18493" end="18510" title="The Family of Man" label="The Family of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q313899" start="18579" end="18594" title="Edward Steichen" label="Edward Steichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143754" start="18870" end="18896" title="The World of Carl Sandburg" label="The World of Carl Sandburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251336" start="18954" end="18967" title="Norman Corwin" label="Norman Corwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q71206" start="18990" end="19001" title="Bette Davis" label="Bette Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232794" start="19006" end="19019" title="Leif Erickson (actor)" label="Leif Erickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q97167733" start="19043" end="19054" title="Clark Allen" label="Clark Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040758" start="20300" end="20341" title="Carl Sandburg Home National Historic Site" label="Carl Sandburg Home National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q782574" start="20816" end="20829" title="Galesburg, IL" label="Galesburg, IL"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="20958" end="20979" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q14704981" start="21132" end="21171" title="Nebraska Educational Telecommunications" label="Nebraska Educational Telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q616527" start="21661" end="21677" title="Newberry Library" label="Newberry Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40419" wikidata="Q179224" url="?curid=40419" title="Dover">
<text>Dover ( ) is a town and major ferry port in Kent, South East England. It faces France across the Strait of Dover, the narrowest part of the English Channel at from Cap Gris Nez in France. It lies south-east of Canterbury and east of Maidstone. The town is the administrative centre of the Dover District and home of the Port of Dover.

Archaeological finds have revealed that the area has always been a focus for peoples entering and leaving Britain. The name derives from the River Dour that flows through it.

In recent times the town has undergone transformations with a high-speed rail link to London, new retail in town with St James&#x27; area opened in 2018, and a revamped promenade and beachfront. This followed in 2019, with a new 500m Pier to the west of the Harbour, and new Marina unveiled as part of a £330m investment in the area. It has also been a point of destination for many illegal migrant crossings.

The Port of Dover provides much of the town&#x27;s employment, as does tourism including to the landmark White Cliffs of Dover. There were over 368,000 tourists visiting Dover castle in the year of 2019.
Dover is classified as a Large-Port Town, due to its large volumes of port traffic and low urban population.

==History==

Archaeological finds have shown that there were Stone Age people in the area, and that some Iron Age finds also exist. During the Roman period, the area became part of the Roman communications network. It was connected by road to Canterbury and Watling Street and it became &quot;Portus Dubris&quot;, a fortified port. Dover has a partly preserved Roman lighthouse (the tallest surviving Roman structure in Britain) and the remains of a villa with preserved Roman wall paintings. Dover later figured in Domesday Book (1086).

Forts were built above the port and lighthouses were constructed to guide passing ships. It is one of the Cinque Ports. and has served as a bastion against various attackers: notably the French during the Napoleonic Wars and Germany during the Second World War.

During the Cold War, a Regional Seat of Government was located within the White Cliffs beneath Dover Castle. This is omitted from the strategic objects appearing on the Soviet 1:10,000 city plan of Dover that was produced in 1974. The port would have served as an embarkation point for sending reinforcements to the British Army of the Rhine in the event of a Soviet ground invasion of Europe.

In 1974, a discovery was made at Langdon Bay off the coast near Dover. It contained bronze axes of French design and is probably the remainder of the cargo of a sunken ship. At the same time, this find also shows that trade routes across the Channel between England and France existed already in the Bronze Age, or even earlier. In 1992, the so-called Dover boat from the Bronze Age was discovered in six metres depth underwater. This is one of the oldest finds of a seaworthy boat. Using the radiocarbon method of investigation, the boat&#x27;s construction was dated to approximately 1550 BC.

===Etymology===
First recorded in its Latinised form of &quot;Portus Dubris&quot;, the name derives from the Brythonic word for water ( in Middle Welsh, in Modern Welsh apart from &quot; &#x27;dwfrliw&#x27; &quot; (Watercolour) which has retained the old Welsh spelling, in Breton). The same element is present in the town&#x27;s French name and the name of the river, &quot;Dour&quot;, which is also evident in other English towns such as Wendover. However, the modern Modern Welsh name is an adaptation of the English name &quot;Dover&quot;.

The current name was in use at least by the time of Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;King Lear&quot; (between 1603 and 1606), in which the town and its cliffs play a prominent role.

===The Siege of Dover (1216)===

Louis VIII of France landed his army, seeking to depose King Henry III, on Dover&#x27;s mainland beach. Henry III ambushed Louis&#x27; army with approximately 400 bowmen atop The White Cliffs of Dover and his cavalry attacking the invaders on the beach. However, the French slaughtered the English cavalry and made their way up the cliffs to disperse the bowmen. Louis&#x27; army seized Dover village, forcing the English back to Canterbury. French control of Dover lasted for three months after which English troops pushed back, forcing the French to surrender and return home.

==Geography and climate==

Dover is in the south-east corner of Britain. From South Foreland, the nearest point to the European mainland, Cap Gris Nez is away across the Strait of Dover.

The site of its original settlement lies in the valley of the River Dour, sheltering from the prevailing south-westerly winds. This has led to the silting up of the river mouth by the action of longshore drift. The town has been forced into making artificial breakwaters to keep the port in being. These breakwaters have been extended and adapted so that the port lies almost entirely on reclaimed land.

The higher land on either side of the valley – the Western Heights and the eastern high point on which Dover Castle stands – has been adapted to perform the function of protection against invaders. The town has gradually extended up the river valley, encompassing several villages in doing so. Little growth is possible along the coast, since the cliffs are on the sea&#x27;s edge. The railway, being tunnelled and embanked, skirts the foot of the cliffs.

Dover has an oceanic climate (Köppen classification &quot;Cfb&quot;) similar to the rest of the United Kingdom with mild temperatures year-round and a light amount of rainfall each month. The warmest recorded temperature was , recorded at Langdon Bay on 25 July 2019, While the lowest recorded temperature was , recorded at Dover RMS on 31 January 1972. The temperature is usually between and .

==Demography==
In 1800, the year before Britain&#x27;s first national census, Edward Hasted (1732–1812) reported that the town had a population of almost 10,000 people.

At the 2001 census, the town of Dover had 28,156 inhabitants, while the population of the whole urban area of Dover, as calculated by the Office for National Statistics, was 39,078 inhabitants.

With the expansion of Dover, many of the outlying ancient villages have been incorporated into the town. Originally the parishes of Dover St. Mary&#x27;s and Dover St. James, since 1836 Buckland and Charlton have become part Dover, and Maxton (a hamlet to the west), River, Kearsney, Temple Ewell, and Whitfield, all to the north of the town centre, are within its conurbation.

==Economy==

===Retail===
The town&#x27;s main shopping streets are the High Street, Biggin Street, Market Square, Cannon Street, Pencester Road and Castle Street. The Castleton Retail Park is to the north-west of the town centre. The new St James&#x27; Retail and Leisure Park opened in 2018 and is a southern extension of the town centre; it consists of shops, restaurants, a Travelodge Hotel and a Cineworld Cinema.

===Shipping===

The Dover Harbour Board is the responsible authority for the running of the Port of Dover. The English Channel, here at its narrowest point in the Straits of Dover, is the busiest shipping lane in the world. Ferries crossing between here and the Continent have to negotiate their way through the constant stream of shipping crossing their path. The &quot;Dover Strait Traffic Separation Scheme&quot; allots ships separate lanes when passing through the Strait. The Scheme is controlled by the Channel Navigation Information Service based at Maritime Rescue Co-ordination Centre Dover. MRCC Dover is also charged with co-ordination of civil maritime search and rescue within these waters.

The Port of Dover is also used by cruise ships. The old Dover Marine railway station building houses one passenger terminal, together with a car park. A second, purpose-built, terminal is located further out along the pier.

The ferry lines using the port are (number of daily sailings in parentheses):
* to Calais: P&amp;O Ferries (13), DFDS Seaways (14), Irish Ferries (14).
* to Dunkirk: DFDS Seaways (11).

These services have been cut in recent years:
* P&amp;O Ferries sailings to Boulogne (5 daily) were withdrawn in 1993 and Zeebrugge (4 daily) in 2002.
* SNCF withdrew their three train ferry sailings on the opening of the Channel Tunnel.
* Regie voor Maritiem Transport moved their Ostend service of three sailings daily to Ramsgate in 1994; this route was operated by TransEuropa Ferries until April 2013.
* Stena Line merged their 20 Calais sailings into the current P&amp;O operation in 1998.
* Hoverspeed ceased operations in 2005 and withdrew their 8 daily sailings.
* SpeedFerries ceased operations in 2008 and withdrew their 5 daily sailings.
* LD Lines ceased the Dover-Dieppe service on 29 June 2009 and Dover-Boulogne 5 September 2010.
* SeaFrance ceased operations in 2012 of their Dover-Calais service which was their only service.
&lt;br&gt;
==Main sights==

* Blériot memorial: the outline of Louis Blériot&#x27;s aircraft, marked with granite setts, at the exact spot where Blériot landed after the first cross-Channel flight, 1909
* Dover Castle
* White Cliffs of Dover
* Dover Western Heights
* Dover Museum
* Dover Marina
* Dover Pier
* Roman Painted House Museum
* Maison Dieu, Dover
* Samphire Hoe
* South Foreland Lighthouse
* Pines Garden
* St Edmund&#x27;s Chapel
* St Mary&#x27;s Church
* St James&#x27; Church: preserved as a &quot;tidy ruin&quot;
* St Paul&#x27;s Church

==Transport==

===Road===
Dover&#x27;s main communications artery, the A2 road replicates two former routes, connecting the town with Canterbury. The Roman road was followed for centuries until, in the late 18th century, it became a toll road. Stagecoaches were operating: one description stated that the journey took all day to reach London, from 4am to being &quot;in time for supper&quot;.

The other main roads, travelling west and east, are the A20 to Folkestone and thence the M20 to London, and the A258 through Deal to Sandwich.

In December 2020, a long line of freight trucks formed due to sudden border closures with France, because of new strains of COVID-19 within the United Kingdom.

===Rail===
The railway reached Dover from two directions: the South Eastern Railway&#x27;s main line connected with Folkestone in 1844, and the London, Chatham &amp; Dover Railway opened its line from Canterbury in 1861. Southeastern trains run from Dover Priory to London Charing Cross, London Victoria or London St Pancras International stations in London, and Ramsgate or Sandwich in Kent. With the introduction of the high-speed service into St Pancras International via High Speed 1, rail journey times between London and Dover were reduced to 55 minutes non-stop.

The Chatham Main Line into Priory was electrified under British Railways in 1959 as part of Stage 1 of Kent Coast Electrification, under the BR 1955 Modernisation Plan. The line up to Ramsgate, via Deal, was subsequently electrified under stage two of Kent Coast electrification in January 1961. The line from Folkestone into Priory was electrified in June 1961.

A tram system operated in the town from 1897 to 1936.

===Walking===
Dover has two long distance footpaths: the Saxon Shore Way and the North Downs Way. The National Trust White Cliffs can be reached by foot from the town centre, with pathways to South Foreland Lighthouse, and St Margarets Bay along the cliff top . The walking routes from Dover pass the National Trust visitor centre on the landmark chalk cliffs overlooking the English Channel with views of France visible on a clear day.

===Cycling===
Two National Cycle Network routes begin their journey at the town. Route one goes from Dover to Canterbury.
This route links with National Cycle Route 2 from Dover to St Austell, Regional route 16, and Regional route 17 in Dover. It passes three castles. Firstly from Dover on the steap incline past Dover Castle. ThenSouth Foreland Lighthouse is visible from the route. Mostly traffic-free along the east coast from Kingsdown to Deal, passing Walmer Castle and Deal Castle. Follows toll road (free to cyclists) through the Royal Cinque Ports Golf Club to the town of Sandwich. In Sandwich the route links with Regional route 15.
Dover town centre is cycle friendly: There are dedicated cycle lanes along the seafront and cycle routes through the town&#x27;s pedestrianised High Street area.

===Ferry===
The Port of Dover is a 20-minute walk from Dover Priory railway station.
The port offers crossings to both Calais (DFDS, P&amp;O and Irish Ferries) and Dunkerque (DFDS). The Dover to Dunkirk ferry route was originally operated by ferry operator Norfolkline. This company was later acquired by the pan European operator DFDS Seaways in July 2010. The crossing time is approximately two hours. The location of Dunkirk is also more convenient for those travelling by road transport on to countries in Northern Europe including Belgium, the Netherlands, Germany and further afield.

===Bus===
Stagecoach in East Kent provide local bus services. Dover is on the Stagecoach Diamond network providing links to Canterbury and Deal. The Western Docks at the port of Dover are served from the town centre as well as Canterbury and Deal. Dover is the start of The Wave network to New Romney via Folkestone, Hythe and Dymchurch. There are services to Lydd via Lydd Airport, and links to Sandwich.

National Express runs coaches from Dover to other towns in Kent including Canterbury, Folkestone, Ashford, Kent, Maidstone, Gillingham at Hempsted Valley shopping centre and Greenhithe at Bluewater Shopping Centre for Dartford to London including Bexleyheath, Eltham, Walworth, Canary Wharf, Elephant &amp; Castle, the City of London and to Victoria Coach Station.

==RNLI==

The Dover lifeboat is a Severn class lifeboat based in the Western Docks.
Dover Lifeboat station is based at crosswall quay in Dover Harbour. There is a Severn-class lifeboat, which is the biggest in the fleet. It belongs to the RNLI which covers all of Great Britain. The lifeboat number is 17–09 and has a lot of emergencies in the Channel. The Severn class is designed to lay afloat. Built from fibre reinforced composite (FRC) the boat is lightweight yet very strong and is designed to right itself in the event of a capsize.

==Education==
There are seven secondary level schools serving Dover.

Public schools

* Dover College

Dover College is a mixed public school founded in 1871 by a group of local business men.

Selective secondary schools

There are two single-sex grammar schools and a mixed military school in Dover.

* Dover Grammar School for Boys (DGSB)
* Dover Grammar School for Girls (DGGS)

Both grammar schools require the Dover Test or the Kent Test for admission to Year 7.

* Duke of York&#x27;s Royal Military School

Duke of York&#x27;s Royal Military School is a selective secondary school with academy status and England&#x27;s only military boarding school for children of service personnel (co-education ages 11–18), located next to the former site of Connaught Barracks.

Non-selective secondary schools

There are 3 ex-secondary modern mixed schools in Dover, all with academy status.

* Astor Secondary School

Astor Secondary School federated with St Radigunds Primary School (then renamed White Cliffs Primary College for the Arts) to form the Dover Federation for the Arts (DFA). Subsequently, Barton Junior School and Shatterlocks Nursery and Infant School joined the DFA. In 2014, the DFA was warned by the Department for Education about &quot;unacceptably low standards of performance of pupils &quot;.

* St Edmund&#x27;s Catholic School

St Edmund&#x27;s Catholic School federated with St Richards Catholic Primary School to form the Dover Federation of Catholic Schools.

* Dover Christ Church Academy

Dover Christ Church Academy is located in Whitfield, 4 miles north of Dover.

Technical College

Dover Technical College is part of the East Kent College (EKC) group.

In addition, 16 primary schools and two special schools add to the educational offering.

==Public services==
Dover has one hospital, Buckland Hospital. Earlier hospitals included the Royal Victoria Hospital, the Isolation Hospital and the Eye Hospital.

==Local media==
===Television===
Local news and television programmes are provided by BBC South East and ITV Meridian. Television signals are received from the nearby Dover TV transmitter situated south of the town and a local relay transmitter in the centre of Dover.

Dover was the home to television studios and production offices of Southern Television Ltd, the company which operated the ITV franchise for South and South East England from 1958 to 1981. The studios were located on Russell Street and were home to programmes like &#x27;Scene South East&#x27;, &#x27;Scene Midweek&#x27;, &#x27;Southern News&#x27;, &#x27;Farm Progress&#x27; and the nightly epilogue, &#x27;Guideline&#x27;. The studios were operated by TVS in 1982 and home to &#x27;Coast to Coast&#x27;, however they closed a year later when the company moved their operations to the newly complete Television Centre in Maidstone.

===Newspapers===
Dover has two paid for newspapers, the &quot;Dover Express&quot; (published by Kent Regional News and Media) and the &quot;Dover Mercury&quot; (published by the KM Group). Free newspapers for the town previously included the &quot;Dover and Deal Extra&quot;, part of the KM Group; and &quot;yourdover&quot;, part of KOS Media.

===Radio===
Dover has one local commercial radio station, KMFM Shepway and White Cliffs Country, broadcasting to Dover on 106.8FM. The station was founded in Dover as Neptune Radio in September 1997 but moved to Folkestone in 2003 and was consequently rebranded after a takeover by the KM Group. Dover is also served by the county-wide stations Heart South, Gold and BBC Radio Kent.

The Gateway Hospital Broadcasting Service, in Buckland Hospital radio, closed at the end of 2006. It was the oldest hospital radio station in East Kent being founded in 1968.

DCR 104.9FM (Dover Community Radio) started broadcasting on 104.9FM in May 2022 and is Dover and White Cliffs Country&#x27;s community radio station. The online station of the same name launched on 30 July 2011 offering local programmes, music and news for Dover and district. Prior to this DCR was an online podcasting service since 2010. . Dover Community Radio was awarded a community radio licence by OFCOM on 12 May 2020.

As of November 2021, BFBS Gurkha Radio has been broadcasting on 90.8FM in Dover and can be picked up within 1 mile of its transmission site at the Dover Community Centre located at Burgoyne Heights. This is part of a trial broadcast of small scale FM services by OFCOM due to end in September 2022 but it maybe extended to serve the Gurkha community living at Burgoyne Heights.

==Culture==

There are three museums: the main Dover Museum, the Dover Transport Museum and the Roman Painted House. The town has two cinemas, the Silver Screen Cinema located at the Dover Museum and the Cineworld Cinema opened in 2018 as part of the St James&#x27; Retail and Leisure complex. A former cinema King&#x27;s Hall, dating from 1911 and now a bingo club, is in Biggin Street.

The Discovery Centre located off the Market Square houses Dover&#x27;s library, Dover Museum, Silver Screen Cinema, the Roundhouse Community Theatre as well as adult education facilities. The Charlton Shopping Centre off the High Street has retail units, the Dover Local community hub, leisure facilities and the studios of Dover Community Radio.

The White Cliffs Theatre opened in 2001 is based at Astor College. There is also a community theatre based at St Edmund&#x27;s Catholic School

==Twin towns==

Dover is twinned with:
* Calais, France
* Huber Heights, Ohio, United States
* Split, Croatia
*Dover, Christ Church, Barbados

==Sports==
Dover District Leisure Centre operated by Places Leisure located in Whitfield opened in March 2019 replacing the previous facility on Townwall Street, which was operated by Your Leisure, a not for profit charitable trust, which caters for sports and includes a swimming pool.

There are sports clubs, among them Dover Athletic F.C., who play in the Isthmian League; rugby; swimming; water polo and netball (Dover and District Netball League).

Dover Rowing Club is the oldest coastal rowing club in Britain and has a rich history, at one time becoming the best club on the south coast. More information can be found on the history page of the club&#x27;s website.

One event which gets media attention is that of swimming the English Channel.

Sea fishing, from the beach, pier or out at sea, is carried out here. The so-called Dover sole (&quot;solea solea&quot;) is found all over European waters.

Dover is now the host of a variety of watersports; such as paddle-boarding and kayaking.

==Notable people==
==In literature==
* M.R. James located part of his 1911 ghost story &quot;Casting the Runes&quot;, from &quot;More Ghost Stories&quot;, in the town&#x27;s Lord Warden Hotel
* Matthew Arnold used the setting of Dover in his 19th-century poem, &quot;Dover Beach&quot;.
* Dover features several times in &quot;A Tale of Two Cities&quot; by Charles Dickens.
* Russell Hoban repurposed Dover as &quot;Do It Over&quot; in his 1980, post apocalyptic novel &quot;Riddley Walker&quot;. Wye became &quot;How&quot;; Canterbury, &quot;Cambry&quot;, and Ashford, &quot;Bernt Arse&quot;.

==In song==
* &quot;(There&#x27;ll Be Bluebirds Over) The White Cliffs of Dover&quot; by Vera Lynn, recorded in 1942.
* &quot;Cliffs of Dover&quot; is an instrumental rock composition by the American guitarist, singer and songwriter Eric Johnson, released on his 1990 studio album &quot;Ah Via Musicom&quot;.
* &quot;Clover Over Dover&quot; by British band Blur is track 12 on their 1994 album &quot;Parklife&quot;.
* &quot;Calais to Dover&quot; by American band Bright Eyes is track 13 on their 2020 album &quot;Down in the Weeds, Where the World Once Was&quot;.
* &quot;Dover Beach&quot; by Baby Queen is on her 2021 album &quot;The Yearbook&quot;. She wrote the song following a visit to Dover, taking inspiration from Matthew Arnold&#x27;s poem of the same name. Queen filmed an accompanying music video at Samphire Hoe.

==See also==
* Strait of Dover

==Notes==
==References==
===Bibliography===
* 

==External links==
* UKHO nautical charts of Dover and approaches
* The Dover War Memorial Project
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q179224" start="0" end="5" title="Dover" label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="44" end="48" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q159898" start="97" end="112" title="Strait of Dover" label="Strait of Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="140" end="155" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q531030" start="164" end="176" title="Cap Gris Nez" label="Cap Gris Nez"/>
<link wikidata="Q29303" start="210" end="220" title="Canterbury" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q213180" start="233" end="242" title="Maidstone" label="Maidstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971967" start="289" end="303" title="Dover District" label="Dover District"/>
<link wikidata="Q739207" start="320" end="333" title="Port of Dover" label="Port of Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="442" end="449" title="Great Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337355" start="477" end="487" title="River Dour" label="River Dour"/>
<link wikidata="Q60776359" start="895" end="921" title="English Channel migrant crossings (2018-present)" label="illegal migrant crossings."/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="994" end="1001" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q754785" start="1028" end="1049" title="White Cliffs of Dover" label="White Cliffs of Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="1250" end="1264" title="Archaeology" label="Archaeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="1298" end="1307" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="1342" end="1350" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="1380" end="1392" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman period"/>
<link wikidata="Q29303" start="1480" end="1490" title="Canterbury" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434239" start="1495" end="1509" title="Watling Street" label="Watling Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105460" start="1530" end="1543" title="Dubris" label="Portus Dubris"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="1753" end="1766" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q748895" start="1882" end="1894" title="Cinque Ports" label="Cinque Ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="1981" end="1996" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2020" end="2036" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="2050" end="2058" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309152" start="2062" end="2089" title="Regional Seat of Government" label="Regional Seat of Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q654842" start="2355" end="2380" title="British Army of the Rhine" label="British Army of the Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485798" start="2467" end="2478" title="Langdon Bay (Kent)" label="Langdon Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="2734" end="2744" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="2927" end="2945" title="Radiocarbon dating" label="radiocarbon method"/>
<link wikidata="Q533909" start="3020" end="3027" title="1550 BC" label="1550 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105460" start="3092" end="3105" title="Portus Dubris" label="Portus Dubris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248800" start="3139" end="3148" title="Common Brittonic" label="Brythonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487263" start="3169" end="3181" title="Middle Welsh" label="Middle Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="3186" end="3198" title="Welsh Language" label="Modern Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12107" start="3304" end="3310" title="Breton language" label="Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337355" start="3399" end="3415" title="river Dour" label="&amp;quot;Dour&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569184" start="3470" end="3478" title="Wendover" label="Wendover"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="3500" end="3512" title="Welsh Language" label="Modern Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q181598" start="3652" end="3661" title="King Lear" label="King Lear"/>
<link wikidata="Q165284" start="3783" end="3803" title="Louis VIII of France" label="Louis VIII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="3839" end="3853" title="Henry III of England" label="King Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q754785" start="3958" end="3983" title="The White Cliffs of Dover" label="The White Cliffs of Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q15278681" start="4441" end="4455" title="South Foreland" label="South Foreland"/>
<link wikidata="Q531030" start="4501" end="4513" title="Cap Gris Nez" label="Cap Gris Nez"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337355" start="4613" end="4623" title="River Dour, Kent" label="River Dour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938255" start="4745" end="4760" title="longshore drift" label="longshore drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302536" start="5007" end="5022" title="Dover Western Heights" label="Western Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q950970" start="5059" end="5071" title="Dover Castle" label="Dover Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="5426" end="5441" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485798" start="5652" end="5663" title="Langdon Bay, Kent" label="Langdon Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313139" start="5737" end="5746" title="Duke of York&amp;#x27;s Royal Military School" label="Dover RMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343359" start="5887" end="5900" title="Edward Hasted" label="Edward Hasted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334971" start="6117" end="6147" title="Office for National Statistics" label="Office for National Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784912" start="6441" end="6446" title="River, Kent" label="River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382264" start="6448" end="6456" title="Kearsney, Kent" label="Kearsney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703021" start="6458" end="6470" title="Temple Ewell" label="Temple Ewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996443" start="6476" end="6485" title="Whitfield, Kent" label="Whitfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="7084" end="7099" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q739207" start="7682" end="7695" title="Port of Dover" label="Port of Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636023" start="7734" end="7762" title="Dover Marine railway station" label="Dover Marine railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519829" start="7994" end="8009" title="P&amp;amp;O Ferries" label="P&amp;amp;O Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q15410089" start="8016" end="8028" title="DFDS Seaways" label="DFDS Seaways"/>
<link wikidata="Q997355" start="8035" end="8048" title="Irish Ferries" label="Irish Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q15410089" start="8069" end="8081" title="DFDS Seaways" label="DFDS Seaways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519829" start="8137" end="8152" title="P&amp;amp;O Ferries" label="P&amp;amp;O Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q81997" start="8165" end="8173" title="Boulogne" label="Boulogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q184383" start="8211" end="8220" title="Zeebrugge" label="Zeebrugge"/>
<link wikidata="Q13646" start="8242" end="8246" title="SNCF" label="SNCF"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262" start="8268" end="8279" title="train ferry" label="train ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q10257" start="8311" end="8325" title="Channel Tunnel" label="Channel Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583377" start="8329" end="8358" title="Regie voor Maritiem Transport" label="Regie voor Maritiem Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q12996" start="8371" end="8377" title="Ostend" label="Ostend"/>
<link wikidata="Q736439" start="8413" end="8421" title="Ramsgate" label="Ramsgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407473" start="8458" end="8477" title="TransEuropa Ferries" label="TransEuropa Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q833903" start="8498" end="8508" title="Stena Line" label="Stena Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631636" start="8587" end="8597" title="Hoverspeed" label="Hoverspeed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575436" start="8663" end="8675" title="SpeedFerries" label="SpeedFerries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205976" start="8741" end="8749" title="LD Lines" label="LD Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q183557" start="8767" end="8773" title="Dieppe, Seine-Maritime" label="Dieppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q693802" start="8837" end="8846" title="SeaFrance" label="SeaFrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6454" start="8888" end="8894" title="Calais" label="Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q5396" start="8996" end="9009" title="Louis Blériot" label="Louis Blériot"/>
<link wikidata="Q950970" start="9138" end="9150" title="Dover Castle" label="Dover Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q754785" start="9153" end="9174" title="White Cliffs of Dover" label="White Cliffs of Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302536" start="9177" end="9198" title="Dover Western Heights" label="Dover Western Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302509" start="9201" end="9213" title="Dover Museum" label="Dover Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105460" start="9244" end="9270" title="Roman Painted House" label="Roman Painted House Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243899" start="9273" end="9291" title="Maison Dieu, Dover" label="Maison Dieu, Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410114" start="9294" end="9306" title="Samphire Hoe" label="Samphire Hoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q110194054" start="9309" end="9334" title="South Foreland Lighthouse" label="South Foreland Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q16898399" start="9337" end="9349" title="Pines Garden" label="Pines Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379318" start="9352" end="9375" title="St Edmund&amp;#x27;s Chapel" label="St Edmund&amp;#x27;s Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19587196" start="9378" end="9399" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Dover" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q16246351" start="9402" end="9423" title="St James&amp;#x27; Church, Dover" label="St James&amp;#x27; Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q55886141" start="9464" end="9485" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Church, Dover" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q888603" start="9558" end="9565" title="A2 road (Great Britain)" label="A2 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939396" start="9720" end="9729" title="toll road" label="toll road"/>
<link wikidata="Q339249" start="9731" end="9741" title="Stagecoach" label="Stagecoach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129820" start="9937" end="9940" title="A20 road (England)" label="A20"/>
<link wikidata="Q375314" start="9944" end="9954" title="Folkestone" label="Folkestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q608504" start="9970" end="9973" title="M20 motorway" label="M20"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649066" start="9993" end="9997" title="A258 road" label="A258"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="10149" end="10157" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826415" start="10248" end="10276" title="South Eastern Railway (England)" label="South Eastern Railway&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826042" start="10330" end="10365" title="London, Chatham &amp;amp; Dover Railway" label="London, Chatham &amp;amp; Dover Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q108888230" start="10407" end="10419" title="Southeastern (train operating company)" label="Southeastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666521" start="10436" end="10448" title="Dover Priory railway station" label="Dover Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q801128" start="10452" end="10472" title="Charing Cross railway station" label="London Charing Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q985210" start="10474" end="10489" title="London Victoria railway station" label="London Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q720102" start="10493" end="10524" title="St Pancras railway station" label="London St Pancras International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897319" start="10549" end="10557" title="Ramsgate railway station" label="Ramsgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977660" start="10561" end="10569" title="Sandwich railway station" label="Sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q277604" start="10661" end="10673" title="High Speed 1" label="High Speed 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087674" start="10761" end="10778" title="Chatham Main Line" label="Chatham Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q605169" start="10813" end="10825" title="British Rail" label="British Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204830" start="10901" end="10924" title="1955 Modernisation Plan" label="1955 Modernisation Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302480" start="11123" end="11134" title="Dover Corporation Tramways" label="tram system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407406" start="11204" end="11227" title="Long distance footpaths in the United Kingdom" label="long distance footpaths"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428841" start="11233" end="11248" title="Saxon Shore Way" label="Saxon Shore Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000593" start="11257" end="11272" title="North Downs Way" label="North Downs Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q333515" start="11278" end="11292" title="National Trust" label="National Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q110194054" start="11368" end="11393" title="South Foreland Lighthouse" label="South Foreland Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q333515" start="11477" end="11491" title="National Trust" label="National Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="11552" end="11567" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248471" start="11632" end="11654" title="National Cycle Network" label="National Cycle Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972051" start="11758" end="11780" title="National Cycle Route 2" label="National Cycle Route 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q110194054" start="11946" end="11971" title="South Foreland Lighthouse" label="South Foreland Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543161" start="12072" end="12085" title="Walmer Castle" label="Walmer Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180981" start="12090" end="12101" title="Deal Castle" label="Deal Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q739207" start="12437" end="12450" title="Port of Dover" label="Port of Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666521" start="12476" end="12504" title="Dover Priory railway station" label="Dover Priory railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6454" start="12540" end="12546" title="Calais" label="Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q45797" start="12585" end="12594" title="Dunkirk" label="Dunkerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q45797" start="12616" end="12623" title="Dunkirk" label="Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q913879" start="12678" end="12689" title="Norfolkline" label="Norfolkline"/>
<link wikidata="Q15410089" start="12752" end="12764" title="DFDS Seaways" label="DFDS Seaways"/>
<link wikidata="Q45797" start="12841" end="12848" title="Dunkirk" label="Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="12957" end="12964" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="12970" end="12981" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596864" start="13022" end="13045" title="Stagecoach in East Kent" label="Stagecoach in East Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q29303" start="13136" end="13146" title="Canterbury" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011096" start="13151" end="13155" title="Deal, Kent" label="Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596864" start="13282" end="13298" title="Stagecoach The Wave routes" label="The Wave network"/>
<link wikidata="Q181071" start="13302" end="13312" title="New Romney" label="New Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q375314" start="13317" end="13327" title="Folkestone" label="Folkestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q967166" start="13329" end="13334" title="Hythe, Kent" label="Hythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796278" start="13339" end="13348" title="Dymchurch" label="Dymchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639689" start="13372" end="13376" title="Lydd" label="Lydd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986577" start="13381" end="13393" title="Lydd Airport" label="Lydd Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q26163" start="13408" end="13416" title="Sandwich, Kent" label="Sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479582" start="13419" end="13435" title="National Express Coaches" label="National Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="13478" end="13482" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q725261" start="13517" end="13530" title="Ashford, Kent" label="Ashford, Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q213180" start="13532" end="13541" title="Maidstone" label="Maidstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q610238" start="13543" end="13553" title="Gillingham, Kent" label="Gillingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028239" start="13593" end="13603" title="Greenhithe, Kent" label="Greenhithe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907366" start="13607" end="13632" title="Bluewater Shopping Centre" label="Bluewater Shopping Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q858775" start="13637" end="13645" title="Dartford" label="Dartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q146732" start="13666" end="13677" title="Bexleyheath" label="Bexleyheath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057625" start="13679" end="13685" title="Eltham" label="Eltham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231883" start="13687" end="13695" title="Walworth" label="Walworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q124377" start="13697" end="13709" title="Canary Wharf" label="Canary Wharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716414" start="13711" end="13732" title="Elephant &amp;amp; Castle" label="Elephant &amp;amp; Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="13734" end="13752" title="the City of London" label="the City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q279459" start="13760" end="13782" title="Victoria Coach Station" label="Victoria Coach Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457960" start="13819" end="13840" title="Severn class lifeboat" label="Severn class lifeboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457960" start="13948" end="13969" title="Severn-class lifeboat" label="Severn-class lifeboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166873" start="14024" end="14028" title="RNLI" label="RNLI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302478" start="14414" end="14427" title="Dover College" label="Dover College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302478" start="14429" end="14442" title="Dover College" label="Dover College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972829" start="14454" end="14467" title="Public school (UK)" label="public school"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302487" start="14630" end="14659" title="Dover Grammar School for Boys" label="Dover Grammar School for Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302489" start="14669" end="14699" title="Dover Grammar School for Girls" label="Dover Grammar School for Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313139" start="14797" end="14838" title="Duke of York&amp;#x27;s Royal Military School" label="Duke of York&amp;#x27;s Royal Military School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313139" start="14840" end="14881" title="Duke of York&amp;#x27;s Royal Military School" label="Duke of York&amp;#x27;s Royal Military School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671329" start="14919" end="14933" title="Academy (English school)" label="academy status"/>
<link wikidata="Q22000780" start="15079" end="15097" title="Connaught Barracks, Dover" label="Connaught Barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443856" start="15148" end="15164" title="Secondary modern school" label="secondary modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671329" start="15198" end="15212" title="Academy (English school)" label="academy status"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811051" start="15217" end="15239" title="Astor Secondary School" label="Astor Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811051" start="15241" end="15263" title="Astor Secondary School" label="Astor Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q112482884" start="15264" end="15273" title="School federation (England and Wales)" label="federated"/>
<link wikidata="Q16899610" start="15642" end="15674" title="St Edmund&amp;#x27;s Catholic School, Dover" label="St Edmund&amp;#x27;s Catholic School"/>
<link wikidata="Q16899610" start="15676" end="15708" title="St Edmund&amp;#x27;s Catholic School, Dover" label="St Edmund&amp;#x27;s Catholic School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302475" start="15813" end="15840" title="Dover Christ Church Academy" label="Dover Christ Church Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302475" start="15842" end="15869" title="Dover Christ Church Academy" label="Dover Christ Church Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328696" start="15978" end="15995" title="East Kent College" label="East Kent College"/>
<link wikidata="Q30293037" start="16144" end="16161" title="Buckland Hospital" label="Buckland Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q84238284" start="16194" end="16217" title="Royal Victoria Hospital, Dover" label="Royal Victoria Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834972" start="16351" end="16365" title="BBC South East" label="BBC South East"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975073" start="16370" end="16382" title="ITV Meridian" label="ITV Meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302541" start="16432" end="16437" title="Dover transmitting station" label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570537" start="16602" end="16621" title="Southern Television" label="Southern Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q213180" start="17156" end="17165" title="Maidstone" label="Maidstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328701" start="17308" end="17321" title="East Kent Mercury and Dover Mercury" label="Dover Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334107" start="17346" end="17354" title="KM Group" label="KM Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335258" start="17501" end="17510" title="KOS Media" label="KOS Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q6333504" start="17571" end="17608" title="KMFM Shepway and White Cliffs Country" label="KMFM Shepway and White Cliffs Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q65066884" start="17858" end="17869" title="Heart South" label="Heart South"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578576" start="17871" end="17875" title="Gold (British radio network)" label="Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q751391" start="17880" end="17894" title="BBC Radio Kent" label="BBC Radio Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302509" start="18927" end="18939" title="Dover Museum" label="Dover Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105460" start="18976" end="18995" title="Roman Painted House" label="Roman Painted House"/>
<link wikidata="Q40580910" start="19190" end="19206" title="King&amp;#x27;s Hall, Dover" label="King&amp;#x27;s Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="19786" end="19793" title="sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q6454" start="19802" end="19808" title="Calais, France" label="Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033307" start="19819" end="19832" title="Huber Heights, Ohio" label="Huber Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="19834" end="19838" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663" start="19856" end="19861" title="Split, Croatia" label="Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626524" start="19879" end="19902" title="Christ Church, Barbados" label="Christ Church, Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658370" start="20227" end="20246" title="Dover Athletic F.C." label="Dover Athletic F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q18571" start="20264" end="20279" title="Isthmian League" label="Isthmian League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20628" end="20656" title="English Channel#By swimming" label="swimming the English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q27773" start="20743" end="20753" title="Solea solea" label="Dover sole"/>
<link wikidata="Q963715" start="20945" end="20955" title="M.R. James" label="M.R. James"/>
<link wikidata="Q19112349" start="20999" end="21016" title="Casting the Runes" label="Casting the Runes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016858" start="21035" end="21053" title="More Ghost Stories" label="More Ghost Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q271032" start="21100" end="21114" title="Matthew Arnold" label="Matthew Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q308918" start="21232" end="21252" title="A Tale of Two Cities" label="A Tale of Two Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="21262" end="21277" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353673" start="21281" end="21294" title="Russell Hoban" label="Russell Hoban"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332458" start="21380" end="21394" title="Riddley Walker" label="Riddley Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q590063" start="21402" end="21405" title="Wye, Kent" label="Wye"/>
<link wikidata="Q29303" start="21430" end="21440" title="Canterbury" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q725261" start="21466" end="21473" title="Ashford, Kent" label="Ashford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437295" start="21520" end="21579" title="(There&amp;#x27;ll Be Bluebirds Over) The White Cliffs of Dover" label="(There&amp;#x27;ll Be Bluebirds Over) The White Cliffs of Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q229330" start="21589" end="21598" title="Vera Lynn" label="Vera Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569668" start="21626" end="21641" title="Cliffs of Dover (composition)" label="Cliffs of Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q311580" start="21733" end="21745" title="Eric Johnson (guitarist, born 1954)" label="Eric Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735373" start="21787" end="21801" title="Ah Via Musicom" label="Ah Via Musicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q485820" start="21857" end="21861" title="Blur (band)" label="Blur"/>
<link wikidata="Q241777" start="21900" end="21908" title="Parklife" label="Parklife"/>
<link wikidata="Q915714" start="21963" end="21974" title="Bright Eyes (band)" label="Bright Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q97357898" start="22013" end="22056" title="Down in the Weeds, Where the World Once Was" label="Down in the Weeds, Where the World Once Was"/>
<link wikidata="Q106554525" start="22093" end="22103" title="Baby Queen" label="Baby Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q271032" start="22222" end="22236" title="Matthew Arnold" label="Matthew Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q159898" start="22341" end="22356" title="Strait of Dover" label="Strait of Dover"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40420" wikidata="Q217727" url="?curid=40420" title="John Hancock Center">
<text>The John Hancock Center is a 100-story, 1,128-foot supertall skyscraper located in Chicago, Illinois. Located in the Magnificent Mile district, the building was officially renamed 875 North Michigan Avenue in 2018.

The skyscraper was designed by Peruvian-American chief designer Bruce Graham and Bangladeshi-American structural engineer Fazlur Rahman Khan of Skidmore, Owings and Merrill (SOM). When the building topped out on May 6, 1968, it was the second-tallest building in the world after the Empire State Building, in  New York City, and the tallest in Chicago. It is currently the fifth-tallest building in Chicago and the thirteenth-tallest in the United States, behind the Aon Center in Chicago and ahead of the Comcast Technology Center in Philadelphia. When measured to the top of its antenna masts, it stands at . The building is home to several offices and restaurants, as well as about 700 condominiums, and at the time of its completion contained the highest residence in the world. The building was named for John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Company, a developer and original tenant of the building, which itself was named for the U.S. Founding Father John Hancock. In 2018 John Hancock Insurance, years after leaving the building, requested that its name be removed; the owner is seeking another naming rights deal.

From the 95th-floor restaurant, which closed in late 2023, diners were able look out at Chicago and Lake Michigan. The observatory (360 Chicago), which competes with the Willis Tower&#x27;s Skydeck, has a 360° view of the city, up to four states, and a distance of over . 360 Chicago is home to TILT, a moving platform that leans visitors over the edge of the skyscraper to a 30-degree angle, a full bar with local selections, Chicago&#x27;s only open-air SkyWalk, and also features free interactive high-definition touchscreens in six languages. The 44th-floor sky lobby features the highest indoor swimming pool in the United States.

==History==

=== 20th century ===
The project, which would become the world&#x27;s second tallest building at opening, was conceived and owned by Jerry Wolman in late 1964. The project was financed by John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Company. Construction of the tower was interrupted in 1967 due to a flaw in an innovative engineering method used to pour concrete in stages, that was discovered when the building was 20 stories high. The engineers were getting the same soil settlements for the 20 stories that had been built as what they had expected for the &quot;entire&quot; 99 stories. This forced the owner to stop development until the engineering problem could be resolved, resulting in a credit crunch. The situation is similar to the one faced during the construction of 111 West Wacker, then known as the Waterview Tower. Wolman&#x27;s bankruptcy resulted in John Hancock taking over the project, which retained the original design, architect, engineer, and main contractor.

The building&#x27;s first resident was Ray Heckla, the original building engineer, responsible for the residential floors from 44 to 92. Heckla moved his family in April 1969, before the building was completed.

The 1988 film &quot;Poltergeist III&quot; was set at the John Hancock Center and was filmed in early 1987.

=== 21st century ===
On December 10, 2006, the non-residential portion of the building was sold by San Francisco–based Shorenstein Properties for $385 million and was purchased by a joint venture of Chicago-based Golub &amp; Company and the Whitehall Street Real Estate Funds. Shorenstein Properties had bought the building in 1998 for $220 million.

Golub defaulted on its debt and the building was acquired in 2012 by Deutsche Bank, who subsequently carved up the building. The venture of Deutsche Bank and New York–based NorthStar Realty Finance paid an estimated $325 million for debt on 875 North Michigan Avenue in 2012 after Shorenstein Properties defaulted on $400 million in loans. The observation deck was sold to Paris-based Montparnasse 56 Group for between $35 million and $45 million in July 2012. That same month, Prudential Real Estate Investors acquired the retail and restaurant space for almost $142 million. In November 2012, Boston-based American Tower Corp affiliate paid $70 million for the antennas. In June 2013, a venture of Chicago-based real estate investment firm Hearn Co., New York–based investment firm Mount Kellett Capital Management L.P. and San Antonio–based developer Lynd Co. closed on the expected acquisition of 875 North Michigan Avenue&#x27;s of office space and 710-car parking deck. The Chicago firm did not disclose a price, but sources said it was about $145 million. This was the last step in that piecemeal sale process. In May 2016, Hearn Co. announced that they were seeking buyers for the naming rights with possible signage rights for the building.

Hustle up the Hancock is an annual stair climb race up the 94 floors from the Michigan Avenue level to the observation deck. It is held on the last Sunday of February. The climb benefits Respiratory Health Association. The record time as of 2007 is 9 minutes 30 seconds.

The building is home to the transmitter of Univision&#x27;s WGBO-DT (channel 66), while all other full-power television stations in Chicago broadcast from Willis Tower. The City Colleges of Chicago&#x27;s WYCC (channel 20) transmitted from the building until November 2017, when it departed the air as part of the 2016 FCC spectrum auction.

On February 12, 2018, John Hancock Insurance requested that its name and logos throughout the building&#x27;s interior be removed immediately; John Hancock had not had a naming-rights deal with the skyscraper&#x27;s owners since 2013. The building&#x27;s name was subsequently changed to its street address as 875 North Michigan Avenue.

=== Incidents ===
On November 11, 1981, Veterans Day, high-rise firefighting and rescue advocate Dan Goodwin, for the purpose of calling attention to the inability to rescue people trapped in the upper floors of skyscrapers, successfully climbed the building&#x27;s exterior wall. Wearing a wetsuit and using a climbing device that enabled him to ascend the I-beams on the building&#x27;s side, Goodwin battled repeated attempts by the Chicago Fire Department to knock him off. Fire Commissioner William Blair ordered Chicago firemen to stop Goodwin by directing a fully engaged fire hose at him and by blasting fire axes through nearby glass from the inside. Fearing for Goodwin&#x27;s life, Mayor Jane Byrne intervened and allowed him to continue to the top.

On December 18, 1997, comedian Chris Farley was found dead in his apartment on the 60th floor of the building.

On March 9, 2002, part of a scaffold fell 43 stories after being torn loose by wind gusts around crushing several cars, killing three people in two of them. The remaining part of the stage swung back-and-forth in the gusts repeatedly slamming against the building, damaging cladding panels, breaking windows, and sending pieces onto the street below.

On November 21, 2015, a fire broke out in an apartment on the 50th floor of the building. The Chicago Fire Department was able to extinguish the fire after an hour and a half; five people suffered minor injuries.

On February 11, 2018, a fire in a car on the seventh floor required approximately 150 firefighters to extinguish.

On November 16, 2018, an express elevator cable broke. Initial reports stated that an elevator with six passengers plunged 84 stories from the 95th to 11th floor. Since express elevators are not accessible from floors within the express zone, a team of firefighters had to break through a brick wall from the parking garage to extricate the passengers, none of whom suffered injuries. Elevators to the 95th/96th floor were closed thereafter pending investigation. Subsequent investigation documented only a controlled descent from the 20th floor to the 11th floor.

A piece of cladding fell from the building on January 5, 2022.

==Architecture==

One of the most famous buildings of the structural expressionist style, the skyscraper&#x27;s distinctive X-braced exterior shows that the structure&#x27;s skin is part of its &quot;tubular system&quot;. This is one of the engineering techniques which the designers used to achieve a record height; the tubular system is the structure that keeps the building upright during wind and earthquake loads. This X-bracing allows for both higher performance from tall structures and the ability to open up the inside floorplan. Such original features have allowed 875 North Michigan Avenue to become an architectural icon. It was pioneered by Bangladeshi-American structural civil engineer Fazlur Khan and chief architect Bruce Graham.

The interior was remodeled in 1995, adding to the lobby travertine, black granite, and textured limestone surfaces. The elliptical-shaped plaza outside the building serves as a public oasis with seasonal plantings and a 12-foot (3.7 m) waterfall. A band of white lights at the top of the building is visible all over Chicago at night, and changes colors for different events. For example, at Christmas time the colors are green and red. When a Chicago-area sports team goes far in the playoffs, the colors are changed to match that team&#x27;s colors.

The building is a member of the World Federation of Great Towers. It has won various awards for its distinctive style, including the Distinguished Architects Twenty-five Year Award from the American Institute of Architects in May 1999. In celebration of the 2018 Illinois Bicentennial, the John Hancock Center was selected as one of the Illinois 200 Great Places by the American Institute of Architects Illinois component (AIA Illinois) and was recognized by USA Today Travel magazine, as one of AIA Illinois&#x27; selections for Illinois 25 Must See Places.

The building is only partially protected by a fire sprinkler system, as the residential floors do not have sprinklers. Including its antennas, the building has a height of , making it the thirty-third tallest building in the world when measured to pinnacle height.

==Interior spaces==
===44th floor sky lobby===
The 44th level skylobby is the floor where the building transitions from offices to residential, with offices occupying floors below and residences occupying floors above.

====Swimming pool====
On its 44th floor, the John Hancock Center has a resident swimming pool. The pool area has double-height ceilings. 

The pool is the highest pool in the United States when measured by distance above ground level.

====Resident/office tenant grocery store====
On its 44th floor, the building has a grocery store accessible only to apartment residents and office tenants. In 2007, operation of the grocery store was taken over by the local Potash chain of grocery stores. As of February 2023, Potash continues to operate the grocery store.

===Upper floors===
====Express elevators====
The elevators that serve the top three public floors are credited as the fastest in both North America and the Western Hemisphere. Manufactured by Otis, the elevators travel 96 floors at a top speed of . It has been said that they would be capable of reaching the 95th floor in 38 seconds if they could run the entire trip at their top speed.

====360 Chicago Observation Deck====

Located on the 94th floor, 360 Chicago Observation Deck is 875 North Michigan Avenue&#x27;s horizon observatory. The floor of the observatory is above the street-level below. The entrance can be found on the concourse level of 875 North Michigan Avenue, accessible from the Michigan Avenue side of the building. The observatorywas previously named &quot;John Hancock Observatory&quot;. It has been independently owned and operated since 2014 as an subsidiary of the Paris, France-based observation deck company Magnicity (formerly known as the &quot;Montparnasse 56 Group&quot;). After its acquisition of the observation deck, the company extensively renovated the space in 2014. 

The observatory boasts more floor space than its direct competitor, Skydeck at the Willis Tower. The observation deck currently includes a cocktail lounge named the &quot;CloudBar&quot;. After the closure of the building&#x27;s 96th floor cocktail lounge, 360 CHICAGO has advertised it as being the highest cocktail lounge in the city. It was formerly named &quot;BAR 94&quot;. In the summer of 2014, 360 Chicago added its TILT attraction. TILT, which requires an additional fee to experience, features a series of floor-to-ceiling windows that slowly tilt outside the building to 30°. The observation deck also features an open-air &quot;skydeck&quot; area.

For several years in the 2010s, during its winter season, the observation deck would feature the &quot;world&#x27;s highest skating rink&quot;, with an artificial ice rink being seasonally installed. At one point, observation deck had a mascot named Seemore Miles.


====Former 95th floor restaurant and 96th floor cocktail lounge====
Separate from its observatory, 875 Michigan Avenue formerly had a restaurant space on its 95th floor and a cocktail lounge space on its 96th floor. The combined space on these floors was approximately . The original restaurant in this space was named &quot;The 95th restaurant&quot;, which operated from the 1970s until 1993. Its accompanying 96th floor cocktail lounge was named &quot;Images&quot;. From 1993 until 2023, the 95th floor was home to a restaurant named the &quot;Signature Room&quot;, with the accompanying cocktail lounge on the 96th floor being named the &quot;Signature Lounge&quot;. The name alluded to the famous signature of early American figure John Hancock. The restaurant was an upscale establishment that offered patrons scenic views. It enforced a dress code for patrons. It received numerous awards. In April 2023, the restaurant and bar were listed for sale. In September 2023, the Signature Room abruptly ceased operations, with ownership citing &quot;severe economic hardship&quot; that they attributed to the impact of the earlier COVID-19 pandemic.

In June 2024, 360 CHICAGO (operators of the building&#x27;s observation deck) acquired the 95th and 96th floors, announcing that while their plans for the floors were not yet finalized they do not intend to operate a restaurant. Months later, it was announced that Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill (the architectural firm that designed the building in the 1970s) would be involved in re-imaging the two floors.

===Parking garage===
Housed within several of the lower levels of the building is a parking garage, which cars enter and depart via a spiral vehicle ramp.
==Other features==
===Retail plaza===
The building features a two-level outdoor plaza along its Michigan Avenue face. The plaza contains retail and dining tenants. The top level of the plaza is at street level, while the lower level is sunken below the street level.

Current tenants include The Cheesecake Factory and The North Face. Past tenants have included Best Buy.

The plaza was originally rectangular in shape. Per the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot;, the plaza was modeled after the plaza at New York City&#x27;s Rockefeller Center. The plaza&#x27;s design featured a fountain pool that would be turned into an ice rink in colder weather. 

In 1988, plans were unveiled by the John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Company (the owners of the building at the time) to replace the plaza with a &quot;$20 million glass and marble three-story atrium&quot;. One rationale cited by building&#x27;s management was they claimed that access to the building&#x27;s ground level was complicated by the need of pedestrians to circumnavigate around the courtyard in order to reach the street-level entrance to the building&#x27;s lobby. They also cited a belief that the building&#x27;s entrance was too understated for a building of its level of prominence. This atrium proposal faced backlash from local residents who felt that such an addition would mar the appearance of the landmark building. In 1989, newly-elected mayor Richard M. Daley criticized the proposed atrium and the plans were ultimately abandoned.

In 1994, the plaza was renovated, with the sunken portion transforming from its previous rectangular shape to an elliptical shape. In 1999, &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; architecture critic Blair Kamin wrote that this renovation had made the plaza a more &quot;welcoming&quot; space. This renovation came after the more dramatic late-1980s renovation plans were abandoned. A further $10 million renovation for the plaza was considered by the building&#x27;s owners in the mid-2010s which would have added features such as video screens and decorative prisms to the plaza.

===Antennas===
Since its completion, the tower has been topped by two antenna structures. These antenna superstructures support a large number of broadcast antenna equipment. At the time of the tower&#x27;s completion, both antenna structures were in height, and RCA had given the architects of the building an estimate that 700 feet of antenna structure would be required to accommodate all of the city&#x27;s radio and television stations. In 2002, the eastern antenna tower was extended to a height of in order to enable WBBM-TV to add new digital antenna equipment at a height greater than the roof height of the Sears Tower (Willis Tower). Subsequently, the western antenna tower was reduced to a height of .

For a long time, the antenna towers utilized incandescent red lights and a red and white paint scheme to provide a visibility to aviation in compliance with federal regulations. However, in order to forgo the expense and effort of annually reapplying striped paint to the antenna towers, the tower instead installed red strobe lights atop the tower and eliminated the striped paint scheme, as striped paint is not required if structures are topped by such lights.

A sizable number of television and radio stations utilize the antenna towers. Many stations maintain broadcast equipment on both the John Hancock Center and the Willis Tower&#x27;s antenna structures in order to have both a primary and backup broadcasting point.

In November 2012, Boston-based American Tower Corp affiliate paid $70 million to acquire ownership of the antennas.

==See also==

* Architecture of Chicago
* List of buildings and structures
* List of buildings with 100 floors or more
* List of tallest buildings in the world
* List of tallest buildings in Chicago
* List of tallest buildings in the United States
* List of tallest buildings and structures in the world
* List of tallest freestanding structures in the world
* List of tallest freestanding steel structures

==Footnotes==

==References==

The Cloudbase Chronicles, Life at the Top - An engineers Tale by Harry W. Budge III

==External links==
* 360 Chicago, formerly Hancock Observatory
* 875 North Michigan Avenue on CTBUH Skyscraper Center
* 
*John Hancock Center
*Society of Architectural Historians SAH ARCHIPEDIA entry on John Hancock Center</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q217727" start="4" end="23" title="John Hancock Center" label="John Hancock Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q831691" start="33" end="38" title="Storey" label="story"/>
<link wikidata="Q11303" start="61" end="71" title="skyscraper" label="skyscraper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="83" end="90" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="92" end="100" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q285218" start="117" end="133" title="Magnificent Mile" label="Magnificent Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q217727" start="180" end="205" title="John Hancock Center" label="875 North Michigan Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q62570" start="280" end="292" title="Bruce Graham" label="Bruce Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q62918" start="338" end="356" title="Fazlur Rahman Khan" label="Fazlur Rahman Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q459464" start="360" end="388" title="Skidmore, Owings and Merrill" label="Skidmore, Owings and Merrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q9188" start="499" end="520" title="Empire State Building" label="Empire State Building"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="525" end="539" title=" New York City" label=" New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416850" start="589" end="622" title="List of tallest buildings in Chicago" label="fifth-tallest building in Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q930338" start="631" end="670" title="List of tallest buildings in the United States" label="thirteenth-tallest in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q271695" start="683" end="693" title="Aon Center (Chicago)" label="Aon Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958963" start="722" end="747" title="Comcast Technology Center" label="Comcast Technology Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="751" end="763" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068623" start="797" end="810" title="Radio masts and towers" label="antenna masts"/>
<link wikidata="Q161851" start="905" end="916" title="Condominium (living space)" label="condominium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6237561" start="1026" end="1068" title="John Hancock Insurance" label="John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="1155" end="1170" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="Founding Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q272774" start="1171" end="1183" title="John Hancock" label="John Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169" start="1437" end="1450" title="Lake Michigan" label="Lake Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1527" end="1534" title="Willis Tower#Skydeck" label="Skydeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537579" start="1899" end="1908" title="sky lobby" label="sky lobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1958" end="1971" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6184672" start="2120" end="2132" title="Jerry Wolman" label="Jerry Wolman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302438" start="2793" end="2808" title="Waterview Tower" label="Waterview Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q496853" start="3196" end="3211" title="Poltergeist III" label="Poltergeist III"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="3383" end="3396" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501468" start="3403" end="3425" title="Shorenstein Properties" label="Shorenstein Properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501468" start="3561" end="3583" title="Shorenstein Properties" label="Shorenstein Properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q66048" start="3704" end="3717" title="Deutsche Bank" label="Deutsche Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501468" start="3916" end="3938" title="Shorenstein Properties" label="Shorenstein Properties"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4020" end="4041" title="Montparnasse 56 Group" label="Montparnasse 56 Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315901" start="5073" end="5103" title="Respiratory Health Association" label="Respiratory Health Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q731824" start="5201" end="5210" title="Univision" label="Univision"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949672" start="5218" end="5225" title="WGBO-DT" label="WGBO-DT"/>
<link wikidata="Q29294" start="5313" end="5325" title="Willis Tower" label="Willis Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123128" start="5331" end="5355" title="City Colleges of Chicago" label="City Colleges of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957974" start="5363" end="5367" title="WYCC" label="WYCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q755999" start="5878" end="5890" title="Veterans Day (United States)" label="Veterans Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213588" start="5935" end="5946" title="Dan Goodwin" label="Dan Goodwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963308" start="6274" end="6297" title="Chicago Fire Department" label="Chicago Fire Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q295390" start="6537" end="6547" title="Jane Byrne" label="Jane Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q311752" start="6631" end="6643" title="Chris Farley" label="Chris Farley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963308" start="7158" end="7181" title="Chicago Fire Department" label="Chicago Fire Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037332" start="7970" end="7978" title="Cladding (construction)" label="cladding"/>
<link wikidata="Q845318" start="8081" end="8105" title="High-tech architecture" label="structural expressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041545" start="8147" end="8155" title="X-bracing" label="X-braced"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850763" start="8223" end="8237" title="tube (structure)" label="tubular system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850763" start="8344" end="8358" title="tube (structure)" label="tubular system"/>
<link wikidata="Q62918" start="8724" end="8735" title="Fazlur Khan" label="Fazlur Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q62570" start="8756" end="8768" title="Bruce Graham" label="Bruce Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q187156" start="8827" end="8837" title="travertine" label="travertine"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="8867" end="8876" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q249340" start="9482" end="9504" title="Twenty-five Year Award" label="Twenty-five Year Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q465197" start="9514" end="9546" title="American Institute of Architects" label="American Institute of Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q465197" start="9694" end="9726" title="American Institute of Architects" label="American Institute of Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537579" start="10212" end="10220" title="skylobby" label="skylobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501" start="10450" end="10463" title="swimming pool" label="swimming pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295201" start="10689" end="10702" title="grocery store" label="grocery store"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134069" start="11123" end="11127" title="Otis Elevator Company" label="Otis"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="11824" end="11829" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="11831" end="11837" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282870" start="12852" end="12871" title="artificial ice rink" label="artificial ice rink"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670161" start="12937" end="12943" title="mascot" label="mascot"/>
<link wikidata="Q188675" start="13668" end="13677" title="signature" label="signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q272774" start="13703" end="13715" title="John Hancock" label="John Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q286300" start="13810" end="13820" title="dress code" label="dress code"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="14098" end="14115" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218805" start="14612" end="14626" title="parking garage" label="parking garage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045842" start="14975" end="14997" title="The Cheesecake Factory" label="The Cheesecake Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q152784" start="15002" end="15016" title="The North Face" label="The North Face"/>
<link wikidata="Q533415" start="15045" end="15053" title="Best Buy" label="Best Buy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="15117" end="15132" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q11277" start="15202" end="15220" title="Rockefeller Center" label="Rockefeller Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q539814" start="16100" end="16116" title="Richard M. Daley" label="Richard M. Daley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924121" start="16378" end="16389" title="Blair Kamin" label="Blair Kamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q218038" start="17024" end="17027" title="RCA" label="RCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947005" start="17285" end="17292" title="WBBM-TV" label="WBBM-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q192593" start="17521" end="17533" title="incandescent" label="incandescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q8271517" start="17796" end="17808" title="strobe light" label="strobe light"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860391" start="18338" end="18361" title="Architecture of Chicago" label="Architecture of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176199" start="18364" end="18396" title="List of buildings and structures" label="List of buildings and structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q756456" start="18399" end="18440" title="List of buildings with 100 floors or more" label="List of buildings with 100 floors or more"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779466" start="18443" end="18481" title="List of tallest buildings in the world" label="List of tallest buildings in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416850" start="18484" end="18520" title="List of tallest buildings in Chicago" label="List of tallest buildings in Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q930338" start="18523" end="18569" title="List of tallest buildings in the United States" label="List of tallest buildings in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q12234854" start="18572" end="18625" title="List of tallest buildings and structures in the world" label="List of tallest buildings and structures in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q5927416" start="18628" end="18680" title="List of tallest freestanding structures in the world" label="List of tallest freestanding structures in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q97166216" start="18683" end="18728" title="List of tallest freestanding steel structures" label="List of tallest freestanding steel structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q372245" start="18940" end="18945" title="CTBUH" label="CTBUH"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40429" wikidata="Q752873" url="?curid=40429" title="Waltzing Matilda">
<text>&quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; is a song developed in the Australian style of poetry and folk music called a bush ballad. It has been described as the country&#x27;s &quot;unofficial national anthem&quot;.

The title was Australian slang for travelling on foot (waltzing) with one&#x27;s belongings in a &quot;matilda&quot; (swag) slung over one&#x27;s back. The song narrates the story of an itinerant worker, or &quot;swagman&quot;, boiling a billy at a bush camp and capturing a stray jumbuck (sheep) to eat. When the jumbuck&#x27;s owner, a squatter (grazier), and three troopers (mounted policemen) pursue the swagman for theft, he declares &quot;You&#x27;ll never catch me alive!&quot; and commits suicide by drowning himself in a nearby billabong (watering hole), after which his ghost haunts the site.

The original lyrics were composed in 1895 by Australian poet Banjo Paterson, to a tune played by Christina MacPherson based on her memory of Thomas Bulch&#x27;s march &quot;Craigielee&quot;, which was in turn based on James Barr&#x27;s setting for Robert Tannahill&#x27;s poem &quot;Thou Bonnie Wood o Craigielee&quot;.

The first published setting of &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; was Harry Nathan&#x27;s on 20 December 1902. Nathan wrote a new variation of Christina MacPherson&#x27;s melody and changed some of the words. Sydney tea merchant, James Inglis, wanted to use &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; as an advertising jingle for Billy Tea. In early 1903, Inglis purchased the rights to &#x27;Waltzing Matilda&#x27; and asked Marie Cowan, the wife of one of his managers, to try her hand at turning it into an advertising jingle. Cowan made some more changes to the words and some very minor changes to Nathan&#x27;s melody and gave the song a simple, brisk, harmonious accompaniment which made it very catchy. Her song, published in 1903, grew in popularity, and Cowan&#x27;s arrangement remains the best-known version of &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot;.

Extensive folklore surrounds the song and the process of its creation, to the extent that it has its own museum, the Waltzing Matilda Centre in Winton, in the Queensland outback, where Paterson wrote the lyrics. In 2012, to remind Australians of the song&#x27;s significance, Winton organised the inaugural Waltzing Matilda Day to be held on 6 April, wrongly thought at the time to be the anniversary of its first performance.

The song was first recorded in 1926 as performed by John Collinson and Russell Callow. In 2008, this recording of &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; was added to the Sounds of Australia registry in the National Film and Sound Archive, which says that there are more recordings of &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; than any other Australian song.

==History==
===Writing of the song===

In 1895, Andrew Barton Paterson was living in Sydney, New South Wales. By day, he was a solicitor. By night he wrote his much-loved poetry and moonlighted as a freelance journalist under the pen name of &quot;The Banjo&quot;. Banjo was the name of his favourite horse on his father&#x27;s farm. Paterson took a holiday from his day job, probably in early August. He made a journey of at least 5 days to visit Sarah Riley, his fiancée of 7 years, in Winton, central-western Queensland and to see how people lived on the enormous, remote sheep stations in the district.

On arriving in Winton, Banjo attended a gathering where Christina Macpherson, Sarah&#x27;s friend from school days in St Kilda, Melbourne, played some music to entertain those present. One tune caught Banjo&#x27;s attention. In Christina&#x27;s own words, &quot;Mr Paterson asked me what it was – I could not tell him &amp; he then said that that he thought that he could write some lines to it. He then and there wrote the first verse.&quot; The rest of the song was written and rehearsed over a period of some three or four weeks in August and early September at a number of locations. Credible accounts exist of the later verses being written at Dagworth Station, a sheep station 130km north-west of Winton in Central West Queensland, owned by the Macpherson family. Paterson and others have left accounts of the song being written at Dick&#x27;s Creek, en route to Winton from Dagworth Station. The song was then sung, with piano accompaniment, in a house in Winton (owned by members of the Riley family). There is photographic evidence of the song, at an advanced stage, being sung at Oondooroo Station, again with piano accompaniment. When no piano was available, the instrument that Christina played was a small, very early model of an instrument called a volkszither or akkordzither in Germany. In America, where it became very popular, it was called an autoharp At Dagworth and Dick&#x27;s Creek, Christina would have played the autoharp.

On 24 April 1894, Christina had attended the annual Warrnambool steeplechase meeting in south western Victoria. The music at the meeting was provided by the Warrnambool Garrison Artillery Band. The first item played by the band was the quick march &quot;Craigielee&quot;, composed by English-born Australian Thomas Bulch, in or before 1891, using the pseudonym Godfrey Parker. &quot;Craigielee&quot; was a typical march with three strains. The first strain in the main section was based on &quot;Thou Bonny Wood of Craigie Lee&quot;, composed by Glasgow musician James Barr, published in 1818 for Robert Tannahill&#x27;s poem &quot;Thou Bonnie Wood o Craigielee&quot; which was written prior to 1806. Christina had a good memory for songs and, when she had the opportunity, tried to play the first strain by ear on piano. Christina&#x27;s memory was not perfect. The first strain of &quot;Craigielee&quot; had the musical form AABC. Christina remembered the AAB section and put it into her tune as bars 1–12. For some reason she did not add the C section to her song as bars 13–16. To complete her tune, Christina repeated the second A section. Christina&#x27;s tune had the musical form AABA. This is the musical form of &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; sung today.

When Christina arrived at Dagworth in June 1895 she found an autoharp with three or four chord bars, which belonged to the bookkeeper, John Tait Wilson. As there was no piano at Dagworth, Christina learned to play this autoharp. Within seven weeks she was able to play the tune that she heard at Warrnambool, well enough to catch the attention of Banjo Paterson. During the rest of her stay at Dagworth she mastered it.

About seven weeks after she arrived at Dagworth, Christina and her brothers went into Winton for a week or so. This coincided with the time that Banjo Paterson arrived to meet Sarah Riley. Banjo and Sarah were immediately invited to join the group returning to Dagworth Station. This was an irresistible temptation for a man venturing into the outback, the &#x27;never-never&#x27; for the first time. During his stay, Paterson would have seen the places, heard the stories and encountered the people who inspired the lyrics of the original &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot;.

=== Possible inspirations ===
In Queensland, in 1891, the Great Shearers&#x27; Strike brought the colony close to civil war and was broken only after the Premier of Queensland, Samuel Griffith, called in the military. In July and August 1894, as the shearing season approached, the strike broke out again in protest at a wage and contract agreement proposed by the squatters. During July and August, seven shearing sheds in central Queensland were burned by striking union shearers before shearing could begin with non-union labour. Early on the morning of 2 September, a group of striking union shearers, firing rifles and pistols, set fire to the shearing shed at Dagworth. The fire killed over a hundred sheep. The shed was defended by Constable Michael Daly, Bob Macpherson and his brothers and employees. In the early afternoon of the same day, Senior Constable Austin Cafferty, in Kynuna, was informed that a man had shot himself at a striking shearers&#x27; camp in a billabong 4 miles from Kynuna and about 15 miles from Dagworth. When he arrived at the camp, S/C Cafferty found the body of Samuel Hoffmeister, also known as &quot;Frenchy&quot;, with a bullet wound through the mouth, in an apparent suicide. Hoffmeister was a known leader of the striking unionists and suspected of being involved in the arson attack at Dagworth on the night before. Later S/C Cafferty was joined by Constable Michael Daly, who had travelled from Dagworth. Three days later, a Coronial inquest into Hoffmeister&#x27;s death was held at Kynuna Station. Police Magistrate, Ernest Eglington, travelled from Winton to conduct it. Dr Welford accompanied him to carry out a post mortem. Evidence was given by shearers who were in the camp when Hoffmeister died. The coroner found that the cause of Hoffmeister&#x27;s death was &quot;suicide&quot; – a single gunshot to the mouth. That finding has, in 2010, been questioned.

Banjo Paterson was a first-class horseman and loved riding. It is likely that he would have seized any opportunity to go riding at Dagworth. Bob Macpherson (the brother of Christina) and Paterson went riding together and, in Christina&#x27;s words, &quot;they came to a waterhole (or billabong) &amp; found the skin of a sheep which had been recently killed—all that had been left by a swagman&quot;. This incident may have inspired the second verse. Tom Ryan worked at Dagworth in 1895 and recorded an incident in which Paterson accompanied Dagworth horse breaker, Jack Lawton, when he went to the Combo to bring in a mob of horses. They brought them part of the way in and then put them against a fence running into a waterhole. Lawton then took the saddle from his horse and gave it a swim. He then stripped off and dived from a gum tree into the waterhole. Paterson followed suit. Jack then noticed that the mob of horses were walking away and would probably go back to their starting point. He jumped on his own horse without waiting to don any clothes and galloped after the mob. He was surprised, on looking around, to find his companion had again followed his example. On reaching the station that night, Paterson told him it was the best day&#x27;s outing he had ever had.

Banjo&#x27;s stay at Dagworth Station was short. He would have spent at least 16 days travelling during his absence from Sydney. While claims are made that he attended Combo Waterhole, they are not confirmed by Banjo or others who were present at the time of any visit there. There is no evidence that Banjo made the 52 km round trip to the Four Mile Billabong where Hoffmeister&#x27;s body was found. It is highly unlikely that he would have had time to do so during his short stay at Dagworth Station.

===Christina&#x27;s manuscripts===
Paterson returned to Sydney in early September. Sometime later, Banjo wrote to Christina and asked her to send him a copy of the music of their song. This presented Christina with a serious problem: Christina played music by ear: she did not use sheet music. Writing down music from memory is quite challenging, even for musicians who read music well. It is extremely challenging for one who does not. In Christina&#x27;s own words, &quot;I am no musician but did my best.&quot; Christina managed to get hold of some 12-stave manuscript paper and wrote a first draft, writing down the notes of her song on the stave, as little open circles, at the pitch, and in the order that she remembered them. Christina would have used a piano to help her do this. She made no effort to indicate the lengths of the notes. In bar 9, Christina wrote the first 2 notes as a C. This was a mistake: they should have been B flat. Christina corrected this in a later manuscript. Christina had a very good ear. Unfortunately, Christina had very limited ability to represent the time value of notes. Her full drafts have many mistakes. Some are minor and easily corrected. Some are fundamentally wrong. Christina&#x27;s final drafts do not accurately represent the melody that she sang, and as written, they are unplayable. Despite this, it is possible to infer, with considerable accuracy, the melody of the tune that Christina recalled when she eventually drafted the manuscript and it established the Scottish origin of the song.

In 2001, Australian folk singer, Dave de Hugard, made a recording of the original &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; based on his interpretation of the Macpherson/Paterson manuscript. This can be heard at archived exhibition, &quot;Who&#x27;ll come a Waltzing Matilda with me?&quot; at the national library of Australia. In 2014, American musician, Robbie Hateley, uploaded his interpretation of Christina&#x27;s manuscript to YouTube. His upload is based on good quality research mainly from the national library of Australia. While the singers use different styles, the melody adopted by both is very similar. This melody is probably similar to the melody that Christina and others sang in 1895

It is not known when Banjo wrote to Christina or where Christina was when the manuscripts were written. Christina may have still been in Queensland or she may have returned to Melbourne. Christina wrote at least 3 full drafts of the song. She kept one, now known as the Macpherson manuscript. She sent one to Banjo and gave another to W. B. Bartlam, the manager of a station adjoining Dagworth at the time. This one is now known as the Bartlam-Roulston manuscript. The Bartlam-Roulston manuscript has the correct notes at the beginning of bar 9, indicating that it was written after the Macpherson manuscript. The manuscript that she kept was passed down to her sister, Margaret (McArthur) who in turn passed it down to her daughter, Diana (Baillieu). It was made public in 1992 and was later donated it to the National Library of Australia. The Bartlams knew what their manuscript was, but no one believed them until 1971. This allowed some myths about the song to grow. Both full drafts and the first draft are held at the National Library of Australia. The manuscript sent to Paterson was lost.

===Memories and miscellanea===
Some 40 years later, and not long before Christina died, Christina and Banjo each left different accounts of their recollection of the events surrounding the writing of &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot;. In the early 1930s, English musician Dr Thomas Wood worked his way around Australia as a music examiner and searched for Australian folk songs. He was captivated by &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot;. In 1931, the Argus newspaper reported him saying that &#x27;Waltzing Matilda&#x27; was written on a moment&#x27;s inspiration by Banjo Paterson, his sister composing the music equally spontaneously. In 1934, in his book &quot;Cobbers&quot;, Wood wrote a brief, colourful, but very incomplete account of the composition of &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot;. Christina carefully drafted a letter to him to set the record straight but did not date or send it. In it, Christina stated that when the first verse was written, she had travelled to Winton with her brothers and that she had heard the music played by a band at Warrnambool. Christina then added more information from 1895 through to the song&#x27;s inclusion in the &quot;Australasian Students Song Book&quot;, which was published in 1911. Christina had a comprehensive memory and was proud of her role in producing the song. About the same time, for a talk on ABC radio, Paterson wrote that in 1894 the shearers staged a strike by way of expressing themselves, and Macpherson&#x27;s shearing shed was burnt down, and a man was picked up dead. ... while resting for lunch or changing horses on our four-in-hand-journeys, Miss Macpherson, afterwards the wife of financial magnate, J McCall McCowan, used to play a little Scottish tune on a zither, and I put words to the tune and called it &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot;. These scanty details complement Christina&#x27;s account but do not suggest that the song meant a lot to him. Paterson also attributed the playing of the music to the wrong Macpherson sister. Christina&#x27;s sister Jean married McCall McCowan. Christina never married. As time passed, Banjo&#x27;s memories of his trip to Dagworth faded.

Some 30 years later again and also for a talk on ABC radio, Hugh Paterson, Banjo&#x27;s son, wrote his recollection of what Banjo had told him about the role that the autoharp played in the composition of &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot;. When Christina played her tune derived from &quot;Bonnie Wood of Craigielea&quot;, Banjo said, &quot;I told her that I thought I could write some whimsical words to match the tune&#x27;s appeal to me... We were too far out in the &#x27;never-never&#x27; for pianos. But Miss Macpherson played it for me on an autoharp while I wrote the words that seemed to me to express its whimsicality and dreaminess.&quot;

For many years, it was believed that the song was first performed on 6 April 1895 by Sir Herbert Ramsay, 5th Bart., at the North Gregory Hotel in Winton, Queensland. The occasion was a banquet for the Premier of Queensland. This day is still celebrated as &#x27;Waltzing Matilda Day&#x27;. In fact, Christina, Jean and Ewen Macpherson left Melbourne on the SS Wodonga on 1 June 1895 and the song was not written until probably late August. &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; was certainly not sung on 6 April 1895. Sir Herbert Ramsay did sing &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; when Bob Macpherson, Christina and Banjo visited Oondooroo Station, owned by the Ramsay family probably in the first week of September 1895. Herbert was dressed up as a swagman and his photo was taken.

Barrister, Trevor Monti, made a study of the transcript of the Coronial inquest into the death of Samuel Hoffmeister. In February 2010, ABC News reported his opinion that the death of Hoffmeister was more akin to a gangland assassination than to suicide.

===Alternative theories===
Given the tumultuous events of the shearers&#x27; strike and the burning down of 8 shearing sheds in the Winton &amp; Kynuna districts in 1894, and given Paterson&#x27;s socialist views, it is not difficult to see why historians look for a political allegory in the words of &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot;, penned in the districts in 1895. Ross Fitzgerald, emeritus professor in history and politics at Griffith University, argued that the defeat of the strike only a year or so before the song&#x27;s creation, would have been in Paterson&#x27;s mind, most likely consciously but at least &quot;unconsciously&quot;, and thus was likely to have been an inspiration for the song. Fitzgerald stated, &quot;the two things aren&#x27;t mutually exclusive&quot;a view shared by others, who, while not denying the significance of Paterson&#x27;s relationship with Macpherson, nonetheless recognise the underlying story of the shearers&#x27; strike and Hoffmeister&#x27;s death in the lyrics of the song.

According to writer, Mathew Richardson, the &#x27;swagman&#x27;, at his most corporeal, is Frenchy Hoffmeister, 
who actually committed suicide by a billabong...In a more general way, the swagman represents the 
&#x27;free citizen, the itinerant with no vote, no award, no arbitration, standing for the union&#x27;.

These theories were not shared by other historians. In 2008, Australian writers and historians Peter and Sheila Forrest claimed that the widespread belief that Paterson had penned the ballad as a socialist anthem, inspired by the Great Shearers&#x27; Strike, was false and a &quot;misappropriation&quot; by political groups. The Forrests asserted that Paterson had in fact written the self-described &quot;&quot; as part of his flirtation with Christina Macpherson, despite his engagement to Sarah Riley.

The original words of the first two lines of the first chorus of &#x27;Waltzing Matilda&#x27; are, &#x27;Who&#x27;ll come a&#x27;waltzing Matilda my darling? Who&#x27;ll come a&#x27;waltzing Matilda with me?&#x27; In 2019, in &quot;Waltzing Matilda- Australia&#x27;s Accidental Anthem&quot;, W Benjamin Lindner asks two questions. &quot;Is &#x27;Waltzing Matilda&#x27; a serenade and who was the &#x27;darling&#x27; to whom Paterson posed the question, &#x27;Who&#x27;ll come a&#x27;waltzing Matilda with me? Lindner gives the unequivocal answer, Waltzing Matilda&#x27; is a serenade to Paterson&#x27;s musical muse, Christina.&quot;

Graham Seal, Professor of Folklore at Curtain University, WA, wrote that &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; is – &quot;let&#x27;s be honest – a pretty silly ditty about a swaggie knocking off a sheep and throwing himself in the billabong when the squatter and the cops turn up.&quot;
Several alternative theories for the origins of the words of &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; have been proposed since the time it was written. Some oral stories collected during the twentieth century claimed that Paterson had merely modified an existing bush song, but there is no evidence for this. In 1905, Paterson himself published a book of bush ballads he had collected from around Australia entitled &quot;Old Bush Songs&quot;, with nothing resembling &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; in it. Nor do any other publications or recordings of bush ballads include anything to suggest it preceded Paterson. Meanwhile, manuscripts from the time the song originated indicate the song&#x27;s origins with Paterson and Christina Macpherson, as do their own recollections and other pieces of evidence.

===History of the music===
The story of &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; began in West Paisley, Scotland, about 2 km south of where Glasgow airport is today. Robert Tannahill, the weaver poet, wrote a poem, &quot;Thou Bonnie Wood of Craigielea&quot;, prior to 1806. It was written in the pattern chorus, verse, chorus, verse, ready to be set to music. Tannahill&#x27;s friend James Barr set it to music, and it was published in 1818. Barr&#x27;s song was unusually melodious: it used four 4-bar phrases in a 16-bar song. It had the musical form ABCD. In 1850, an arrangement was published in &#x27;The Lyric Gems of Scotland&#x27;, page 65, which was written in the pattern verse, chorus, verse, chorus, and it dropped the second phrase of the verse and repeated the first. It had the musical form AABC. In 1880, an arrangement by T S Gleadhill, published in &#x27;Kyles Scottish Lyric Gems&#x27;, pages 244, 245, also dropped the second phrase of the verse and repeated the first. Thomas Bulch, an English expat living in Australia, wrote a quick march arrangement for brass band, called &#x27;Craigielee&#x27; most likely in 1891. The opening strain of &#x27;Craigielee&#x27; was &#x27;Bonnie Wood of Craigielea&#x27; with the musical form AABC. It is very close to the melody in the &quot;Lyric Gems&quot; and perhaps even closer to the melody in Gleadhill&#x27;s &quot;Kyles Scottish Lyric Gems&quot;. This was the tune that caught Christina Macpherson&#x27;s attention at the races at Warrnambool, Victoria, in 1894. Christina had a good ear and, when she next sat at a piano, she tried to play the opening strain. Christina remembered the AAB phrases and transcribed them into bars 1 to 12 of her tune. For some reason, Christina did not transcribe the C phrase into bars 13 to 16 of her tune. Instead, she repeated bars 5 to 8 in bars 13 to 16. This gave Christina&#x27;s tune the musical form AABA, popular American style. This is the musical form of &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; sung today.

One more change needed to be made. The tune that Christina played for Banjo was written to set the poem &quot;Thou Bonnie Wood of Craigielea&quot; to music. The words of its chorus are, 
&lt;poem&gt;
Thou bonnie wood of Craigielee,
Thou bonnie wood of Craigielee,
Near thee I pass&#x27;d life&#x27;s early day,
An&#x27; won my Mary&#x27;s heart in thee.&lt;/poem&gt;

The number of syllables in each line is 8, 8, 8, 7. The verses are the same.

The words of the original chorus of Christina&#x27;s Waltzing Matilda are 
&lt;poem&gt;
Who&#x27;ll come a Waltzing Matilda my darling?
Who&#x27;ll come a waltzing Matilda with me?
Waltzing Matilda and leading a water bag,
Who&#x27;ll come a waltzing Matilda with me?&lt;/poem&gt;

The number of syllables in each line is 11, 10, 12, 10. The verses are similar.

As Banjo and Christina collaborated on their song, Christina had to add more notes to her initial tune. She did this by breaking up several notes in each line into shorter ones. While doing this, Christina retained the shape of the melody and the typical 2/4 type rhythm of &#x27;Craigielee&#x27;. Typical of songs with multiple verses, the melody had to be changed slightly in some verses to fit the meter of the words. Christina and Banjo would have had some arguments, Christina wanting to preserve the tune and Banjo wanting the strict meter of the lyrics to be preserved. Despite this, the two tunes sound very similar. Many may even say that they are the same.

This tune did not spread very quickly: an electronic search of Australian newspapers between 1895 and 1902, using trove, reveals only two reports of &#x27;Waltzing Matilda&#x27; being sung. On 9 October 1900, the governor of Queensland visited Winton and Mr. A. Ramsay sang &#x27;Waltzing Matilda&#x27;, &quot;one of Banjo Patterson&#x27;s ditties composed in the Winton district.&quot; On 23 November 1901, the Hughenden representative of the N.Q. Herald reported that, Waltzing Matilda&#x27; is all the rage here now.&quot; Three regional newspapers printed the words of the &quot;quaint trifle&quot;, but not the tune. Some of the words had been changed and resembled the words later used by Marie Cowan.

===Alternative theories and myths===
There has been speculation about the similarity of &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; and a British song, &quot;The Bold Fusilier&quot; or &quot;The Gay Fusilier&quot; (also known as &quot;Marching through Rochester&quot;, referring to Rochester in Kent and the Duke of Marlborough). Author Matthew Richardson writes that a &quot;direct creative link is indisputable&quot; between the two and that Banjo Paterson would have been familiar with &quot;The Bold Fusilier&quot; and was likely guided by the pattern and sound. The similarity is so obvious that one is clearly a copy of the other. &quot;The Bold Fusilier&quot; is dated by some to the start of the 18th century. 
In the early 1900s only one verse and chorus of the song were known. This snippet was printed in &quot;The Bulletin&quot; magazine in Sydney, Australia on 8 October 1941.
&lt;poem&gt;Verse: A gay fusilier was marching down through Rochester
Bound for the wars in the low country,
And he cried as he tramped through the drear streets of Rochester,
Who&#x27;ll be a sojer for Marlboro with me?&lt;/poem&gt;
&lt;poem&gt;Chorus: Who&#x27;ll be a sojer, Who&#x27;ll be a sojer,
Who&#x27;ll be a sojer for Marlboro with me?
And he cried as he tramped through the drear streets of Rochester,
Who&#x27;ll be a sojer for Marlboro with me?&lt;/poem&gt; The song sung today has the musical form AABA and is sung to the same tune as Marie Cowan&#x27;s &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot;, published in Sydney, Australia, in 1903. The lyrics describe events as happening in Rochester, England, during the reign of Queen Anne, 1702 to 1714. It was widely, though not universally, accepted that the song was written at that time. English folklore authority Ralph Vaughan Williams considered that the earlier existence of the song was very doubtful because its language was not appropriate to the early eighteenth century. There is no documentary proof that &quot;The Bold Fusilier&quot; existed before 1900. The song has the musical form AABA, which suggests a much later origin. On the other hand, the origin of &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; can be traced from &quot;Thou Bonny Wood of Craigie Lee&quot; published in 1818. Hearsay evidence exists that &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; was sung by Australian soldiers in South Africa during the Boer War and that the British troops returned friendly fire by singing &quot;The Gay/Bold Fusilier&quot; as a parody. 
In about 1970, English folk singer Peter Coe reworked the existing first verse and chorus and added another four verses. This song, a timeless comment about war, is quite popular today and has spawned other similar lyrics. Peter&#x27;s song is called &quot;The Rochester Recruiting Sergeant&quot;.

In his 1987 book, Richard Magoffin speculated that the music of &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; may have been sourced from an Irish Jig, &quot;Go to the Devil and Shake Yourself&quot;, which was probably composed by Irishman, John Field, and which began to appear in print about 1797. In a letter to Magoffin, the City Librarian of Dublin Library said that he thought he could detect a slight resemblance in it to &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot;. This is very tenuous evidence. Magoffin also went to say that it would be nice to think that the Irish have played a part in providing Australia with her song.

Until the internet arrived, it was extremely difficult for researchers to access old music. Now, with YouTube and digital collections of old music, it is a quick and simple task. An audio file of &quot;Go to the Devil and Shake Yourself&quot; can be heard, and the sheet music can be viewed, in the external links, at the above references and numerous other websites. It is now obvious to anyone that there is no resemblance between it and &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot;.

===Ownership===
On 12 January 1903, Paterson sold the rights to &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; and &quot;some other pieces&quot; to Angus &amp; Robertson for &quot;a fiver&quot;, five Australian pounds. A good shearer could easily make more than that in a week. Very soon after, tea trader James Inglis, owner of Inglis and Co., purchased the musical rights to &#x27;Waltzing Matilda&#x27; from Angus and Robertson for 5 guineas (5 pounds and 5 shillings). Inglis asked Marie Cowan, who was married to his accountant, to &#x27;rejig&#x27; the song for use as an advertising jingle for the Billy Tea company, making it nationally famous. Within two months of Paterson selling the copyright, musicians could buy a copy of Marie Cowan&#x27;s altered lyrics set to a new arrangement of Christina&#x27;s music for 9 pence.

Although by 1996, no copyright applied to the song in Australia and many other countries, the Australian Olympic organisers had to pay royalties to an American publisher, Carl Fischer Music, following the song being played at the 1996 Summer Olympics held in Atlanta. According to some reports, the song was copyrighted by Carl Fischer Music in 1941 as an original composition. However, &quot;The Sydney Morning Herald&quot; reported that Carl Fischer Music had collected the royalties on behalf of Messrs Allan &amp; Co, an Australian publisher that claimed to have bought the original copyright, though Allan&#x27;s claim &quot;remains unclear&quot;. Arrangements such as those claimed by Richard D. Magoffin remain in copyright in America. 

==Cowan&#x27;s melody==
Over time and as they travel, folk songs tend to change. This happened to Banjo and Christina&#x27;s &#x27;Waltzing Matilda&#x27;. On 23 November 1901, the Hughenden representative of the N.Q. Herald reported that, Waltzing Matilda&#x27; is all the rage here just now and some clever fellow has managed to fit the quaint trifle with an exceedingly catchy air&quot;. The report contained the words, but not the tune. Some of the words had been changed. Banjo&#x27;s swagman had become a &quot;jolly&quot; swagman and the second line of verse 1 was repeated as the second line of the chorus following each of the verses.

The first setting of &#x27;Waltzing Matilda&#x27; that was published was Harry Nathan&#x27;s, with Sydney publisher Palings&#x27; Brisbane office on 20 December 1902. This was two weeks before Paterson sold the rights to &#x27;Waltzing Matilda&#x27; to Angus and Robertson. Nathan credited Banjo for the lyrics, with the music arranged and harmonized by Harry A. Nathan. Nathan changed some of the lyrics and wrote a new variation of the original tune. Banjo&#x27;s swagman had become a &quot;jolly&quot; swagman who sang as he &quot;waited till his billy boiled&quot;.
Very soon after Paterson sold his rights on 12 January 1903, they were purchased by tea merchant James Inglis, who wanted to use &#x27;Waltzing Matilda&#x27; as an advertising jingle for Billy Tea. By this time, Nathan&#x27;s arrangement of &#x27;Waltzing Matilda&#x27; would have been on sale at Palings Sydney shop for several weeks and Inglis would have had the opportunity to purchase it. Inglis did not find any of the existing settings satisfactory and invited Marie Cowan, the wife of one of his managers, to try her hand at it. The melody of Harry Nathan&#x27;s and Marie Cowan&#x27;s arrangements are so similar that one is clearly a copy of the other. Marie Cowan made some minor changes to Nathan&#x27;s tune and changed a few of the lyrics. The policemen became &quot;troopers&quot; in verse 3 and the swagman cried, &quot;You&#x27;ll never take me alive.&quot; in verse 4. Cowan repeated the second line of each verse in the corresponding chorus. She gave the song a simple, brisk, harmonious accompaniment which made it very catchy. Her song, published in 1903, quickly grew in popularity and Cowan&#x27;s arrangement remains the best-known version of &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot;.
&lt;score raw sound&gt;
\header { tagline = ##f }
\layout { indent = 0\cm
 \context { \Score \remove &quot;Bar_number_engraver&quot; }
 \context { \Voice \remove &quot;Dynamic_engraver&quot; }

global = { \key f \major \time 4/4 }

sopranoVoice = \relative c&quot; {
 \global
 \dynamicUp \autoBeamOff
 a8. a16 a8 a g4 g | f a8 f d e f4 |
 c4 f8. a16 c4 c8 c | c c c4 c8 r8
 f, g | a4 a8 a g4 g | f8 g a f d e f4 |
 c f8. a16 c4 bes8 a | g4 g8 g f4 r4 |
 c&#x27; c8. c16 c4 a | f&#x27; f8. e16 d4 c |
 c4 c8. c16 d4 c8. c16 | c4 bes8 a g r
 f g | a4 a8 a g4 g | f8 g a f d e f4 |
 c f8. a16 c4 bes8 a | g4 g8 g f4 r \bar &quot;|.&quot;

verse = \lyricmode {
 Once a jol -- ly swag -- man camped by a bill -- a -- bong
 Un -- der the shade of a coo -- li -- bah tree,
 And he sang as he watched and wai -- ted till his Bil -- ly boiled,
 You&#x27;ll come a -- waltz -- ing Ma -- til -- da with me.
 Waltz -- ing Ma -- til -- da, waltz -- ing Ma -- til -- da,
 You&#x27;ll come a -- waltz -- ing Ma -- til -- da with me,
 And he sang as he watched and wai -- ted till his Bil -- ly boiled,
 You&#x27;ll come a -- waltz -- ing Ma -- til -- da with me.

right = \relative c&quot; {
 \global
 r8 a,\p c f r4 &lt;e c bes&gt; | r &lt;a, c f&gt; r &lt;bes d f&gt; |
 r8 a c f r a, c f | &lt;c a&#x27; c&gt;4 &lt;c bes&#x27; c&gt; &lt;c a&#x27; c&gt;8 r8
 f8 g | r8 a, [c f] r4 &lt;e c bes g&gt;4 | r4 &lt;f c a&gt; r &lt;f d bes&gt; |
 r8 a, c f r &lt;f c a&gt;8 &lt;e c bes&gt;4 | &lt;e c bes g&gt; &lt;e c bes&gt; &lt;f c a&gt; r |
 &lt;c&#x27; a&gt; &lt;c a&gt;8. &lt;c a&gt;16 &lt;c a&gt;4 &lt;a f&gt; | &lt;f&#x27; a,&gt; &lt;f a,&gt;8. &lt;e c&gt;16 &lt;d bes&gt;4 &lt;c a&gt; |
 &lt;c a&gt; &lt;c a&gt;8. &lt;c a&gt;16 &lt;d bes&gt;4 &lt;c a&gt;8. &lt;c a&gt;16 | &lt;c a&gt;4 &lt;bes g&gt;8 &lt;a f&gt; &lt;g c&gt; r
 f g | r a, c f r4 &lt;e c bes&gt; | r &lt;f c a&gt; r &lt;f d bes&gt; |
 r8 a, c f r a, c f | &lt;e c bes g&gt;4 &lt;e c bes g&gt; &lt;f c a&gt; r \bar &quot;|.&quot;

left = \relative c {
 \global
 &lt;f f,&gt;4\pp r &lt;c c,&gt; r | &lt;f f,&gt; r &lt;bes, bes,&gt; r |
 &lt;f&#x27; f,&gt; r &lt;f f,&gt; r | &lt;f f,&gt; &lt;c c,&gt; &lt;f f,&gt;
 r | &lt;f f,&gt; r &lt;c c,&gt; r | &lt;f f,&gt; r bes, r |
 &lt; f&#x27; f,&gt; r &lt;f f,&gt; r8 c | &lt;c c,&gt;4 &lt;c c,&gt; &lt;f f,&gt; r |
 &lt;f f,&gt; &lt;e&#x27; c a&gt; &lt;f c a&gt; r | &lt;f, f,&gt; &lt;a c f&gt; &lt;bes d f&gt; &lt;a c f&gt; |
 &lt;f f,&gt; &lt;a c f&gt; &lt;bes d f&gt; &lt;a c&gt; | &lt;c, c,&gt; &lt;g&#x27; bes c&gt; &lt;c, c,&gt;8 r8
 r4 | &lt;f f,&gt; r &lt;c c,&gt; r | &lt;f f,&gt; r &lt;bes, bes,&gt; r | &lt;f&#x27; f,&gt; r &lt;f f,&gt; r | &lt;c c,&gt; &lt;c c,&gt; &lt;f f,&gt; r \bar &quot;|.&quot;

sopranoVoicePart = \new Staff \with { midiInstrument = &quot;1 acoustic grand piano&quot;}
 { \sopranoVoice }
 \addlyrics { \verse }

pianoPart = \new PianoStaff «
 \new Staff = &quot;right&quot; \with { midiInstrument = &quot;1 acoustic grand piano &quot;}
 \right
 \new Staff = &quot;left&quot; \with { midiInstrument = &quot;1 acoustic grand piano&quot; }
 { \clef bass \left }

\score { « \sopranoVoicePart \pianoPart »
 \layout { }
 \midi { \tempo 4=110 }
&lt;/score&gt;
Source.

==Lyrics==
===Typical lyrics===
There are no official lyrics to &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; and slight variations can be found in different sources. The following lyrics are the Cowan version published as sheet music in early 1903.
&lt;poem&gt;
Once a jolly swagman camped by a billabong
Under the shade of a coolibah tree,
And he sang as he watched and waited till his &quot;Billy&quot; boiled,
&quot;You&#x27;ll come a-waltzing Matilda, with me.&quot;

&quot;Chorus:&quot;
Waltzing Matilda, waltzing Matilda,
You&#x27;ll come a-waltzing Matilda, with me,
And he sang as he watched and waited till his &quot;Billy&quot; boiled,
&quot;You&#x27;ll come a-waltzing Matilda, with me.&quot;

Down came a jumbuck to drink at that billabong,
Up jumped the swagman and grabbed him with glee,
And he sang as he shoved that jumbuck in his tucker bag,
&quot;You&#x27;ll come a-waltzing Matilda, with me.&quot;

&quot;(Chorus)&quot;

Up rode the squatter, mounted on his thoroughbred.
Down came the troopers, one, two, and three.
&quot;Whose is that jumbuck you&#x27;ve got in your tucker bag?
You&#x27;ll come a-waltzing Matilda, with me.&quot;

&quot;(Chorus)&quot;

Up jumped the swagman and sprang into the billabong.
&quot;You&#x27;ll never catch me alive!&quot; said he
And his ghost may be heard as you pass by that billabong:
&quot;You&#x27;ll come a-waltzing Matilda, with me.&quot;

&quot;(Chorus)&quot;&lt;/poem&gt;
===Glossary===
The lyrics contain many distinctively Australian English words, some now rarely used outside the song. These include:

; Waltzing : derived from the German term &quot;auf der Walz&quot;, which means to travel while working as a craftsman and learn new techniques from other masters.
; Matilda: a romantic term for a swagman&#x27;s bundle. See below, &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot;.
; Waltzing Matilda: from the above terms, &quot;to waltz Matilda&quot; is to travel with a swag, that is, with all one&#x27;s belongings on one&#x27;s back wrapped in a blanket or cloth. The exact origins of the term &quot;Matilda&quot; are disputed; one fanciful derivation states that when swagmen met each other at their gatherings, there were rarely women to dance with. Nonetheless, they enjoyed a dance and so danced with their swags, which was given a woman&#x27;s name. However, this appears to be influenced by the word &quot;waltz&quot;, hence the introduction of dancing. It seems more likely that, as a swagman&#x27;s only companion, the swag came to be personified as a female.

:The National Library of Australia states:
::Matilda is an old Teutonic female name meaning &quot;mighty battle maid&quot;. This may have informed the use of &quot;Matilda&quot; as a slang term to mean a &quot;de facto&quot; wife who accompanied a wanderer. In the Australian bush a man&#x27;s swag was regarded as a sleeping partner, hence his &quot;Matilda&quot;. (Letter to Rt. Hon. Sir Winston Churchill, KG from Harry Hastings Pearce, 19 February 1958. Harry Pearce Papers, NLA Manuscript Collection, MS2765)

:In Germany the terms &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; have a very specific meaning:
::It refers to the tradition where craftsmen, after having completed their apprenticeship, spend 3 years away from their hometown, travelling on minimal budget, working in many places in order to acquire experience and master their craft. See Journeyman Years for a detailed description. In this context, (&quot;Walz&quot;) or (&quot;auf der Walz&quot;) refers to this activity. And (&quot;Mathilda&quot;) is the patron saint of the road, looking after the men (and women), helping them but sometimes dealing harsh lessons.
::Hence (&quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot;) would refer to the activity of a journey man traveling the road, only carrying a simple swag.


; swagman: a man who travelled the country looking for work. The swagman&#x27;s &quot;swag&quot; was a bed roll that bundled his belongings.
; billabong: an oxbow lake (a cut-off river bend) found alongside a meandering river
; coolibah tree: a kind of eucalyptus tree which grows near billabongs
; jumbuck: a sheep
; billy: a can for boiling water, usually 1–1.5 litres (2–3 pints)
; tucker bag: a bag for carrying food
; troopers: mounted policemen
; squatter: Australian squatters started as early farmers who raised livestock on land which they did not have the legal title to use; in many cases they later gained legal use of the land even though they did not have full possession, and became wealthy thanks to these large land holdings. The squatter&#x27;s claim to the land may be as unfounded as is the swagman&#x27;s claim to the jumbuck.

===Variations===
The lyrics of &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; have been changed since it was written. Banjo Paterson wrote the original lyrics of &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; in his notebook. When Paterson visited Winton and Dagworth in August 1895, he carried a foolscap size 1892 legal diary that was never used for legal work. In it he used to write the first draft of verses and chapters of books. On a page in the &quot;W&quot; section, as he composed them, Paterson penned the original words of &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot;. He did not include the date, the title or punctuation. In three places he made changes by crossing out the first words he wrote and replacing them. This notebook is now at the National Library of Australia, and it has been digitized. A transcript of the original words reads

&lt;poem style=&quot;margin-left: 2em;&quot;&gt;Oh there once was a swagman camped in the billabong
Under the shade of a Coolibah tree
And he sang as he looked at the old billy boiling
Who&#x27;ll come a-waltzing Matilda with me

:Who&#x27;ll come a waltzing Matilda my darling
:Who&#x27;ll come a waltzing Matilda with me
:Waltzing Matilda and leading a water bag
:Who&#x27;ll come a waltzing Matilda with me

Down came a jumbuck to drink at the water hole
Up jumped the swagman and grabbed him in glee
And he sang as he put him away in the tucker bag
You&#x27;ll come a waltzing Matilda with me

:You&#x27;ll come a waltzing Matilda my darling
:You&#x27;ll come a waltzing Matilda with me
:Waltzing Matilda and leading a water bag
:You&#x27;ll come a waltzing Matilda with me

Down came the squatter a riding on his thorough-bred
Down came Policemen one, two, &amp; three
Whose is the jumbuck you&#x27;ve got in the tucker-bag
You&#x27;ll come a waltzing Matilda with we

:You&#x27;ll come a waltzing Matilda my darling
:You&#x27;ll come a waltzing Matilda with we
:Waltzing Matilda and leading a water bag
:You&#x27;ll come a waltzing Matilda with we

But the swagman, he up and he jumped in the waterhole
Drowning himself by the Coolibah tree
And his ghost can be heard as it sings in the billabong,
Who&#x27;ll come a waltzing Matilda with me.&#x27;&lt;/poem&gt;

Initially, the fourth line of verse 1 was, &#x27;Who&#x27;ll come a rovin&#x27; Australia with me&#x27;. Paterson later changed it to, &#x27;Who&#x27;ll come a waltzing Matilda with me&#x27;.

The first line of the first chorus began as, &#x27;Who&#x27;ll come a &quot;rovin&#x27;. &quot;Paterson crossed out&quot; rovin &quot;and changed the line to, &#x27;Who&#x27;ll come a waltzing Matilda my darling.

In line 3 of the first chorus he wrote, &#x27;Waltzing Matilda and leading a &quot;tucker&quot; bag&#x27;. Paterson crossed out &quot;tucker&quot; and wrote, &#x27;Waltzing Matilda and leading a water bag&#x27;.

Banjo added a little bit of humour. In verse 3, the squatter and the three policemen address the hapless swagman, &#x27;Whose is the jumbuck you&#x27;ve got in the tucker bag? You&#x27;ll come a waltzing Matilda with we.&#x27; The ungrammatical (in standard Australian English), comical and poetically unusual &quot;we&quot; was intended and was repeated in the third chorus. &quot;We&quot; as the object is common in some English dialects such as Geordie but incorrect in standard Australian English. The bad English would have elicited a good giggle from those who heard it. Christina&#x27;s manuscript of &#x27;Waltzing Matilda&#x27; also has the ungrammatical &quot;we&quot; in the last line of verse 3. As the song changed, it was quickly forgotten.

The following version, considered to be the &#x27;original&#x27;, was published by Paterson himself in &quot;Saltbush Bill, J.P., and Other Verses&quot; in 1917, and appears as follows:
&lt;poem style=&quot;margin-left: 2em;&quot;&gt;Oh! there once was a swagman camped in the Billabong,
Under the shade of a Coolabah tree;
And he sang as he looked at his old billy boiling,
&#x27;Who&#x27;ll come a-waltzing Matilda with me.&#x27;

:Who&#x27;ll come a-waltzing Matilda, my darling,
:Who&#x27;ll come a-waltzing Matilda with me?
:Waltzing Matilda and leading a water-bag—
:Who&#x27;ll come a-waltzing Matilda with me?

Down came a jumbuck to drink at the water-hole,
Up jumped the swagman and grabbed him in glee;
And he sang as he put him away in his tucker-bag,
&#x27;You&#x27;ll come a-waltzing Matilda with me!&#x27;

Down came the Squatter a-riding his thorough-bred;
Down came Policemen – one, two, and three.
&#x27;Whose is the jumbuck you&#x27;ve got in the tucker-bag?
You&#x27;ll come a-waltzing Matilda with we.&#x27; 

But the swagman, he up and he jumped in the water-hole,
Drowning himself by the Coolabah tree;
And his ghost may be heard as it sings in the Billabong,
&#x27;Who&#x27;ll come a-waltzing Matilda with me?&#x27;&lt;/poem&gt;
There is also the Queensland version of &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; that is popular with folk singers. Verses 1 to 4 retain almost the exact words of the original Banjo Paterson text. The chorus is the same as the first verse of the original and is repeated unchanged after each verse. The words are set to a pretty, lilting melody with the musical form ABAB. It has no resemblance to the Macpherson/Paterson tune with the musical form AABA. It is not known who composed the tune or when it was composed. 
&lt;poem style=&quot;margin-left: 2em;&quot;&gt;Oh there once was a swagman camped in a billabong,
Under the shade of the coolibah tree;
And he sang as he looked at his old billy boiling,
&#x27;Who&#x27;ll come a waltzing Matilda with me?&#x27;

&quot;Chorus:&quot;
Who&#x27;ll come a-waltzing Matilda my darling?
Who&#x27;ll come a-waltzing Matilda with me?
Waltzing Matilda and leading a water bag,
Who&#x27;ll come a-waltzing Matilda with me?

Down came a jumbuck to drink at the water hole,
Up jumped the swagman and grabbed him with glee;
And he sang as he stowed him away in his tucker-bag,
&#x27;You&#x27;ll come a-waltzing Matilda with me.&#x27;

(&quot;Chorus&quot;)

Down came the squatter a-riding his thoroughbred;
Down came policemen – one two and three.
&#x27;Whose is the jumbuck you&#x27;ve got in your tucker bag?
You&#x27;ll come a-waltzing Matilda with me.&#x27;

(&quot;Chorus&quot;)

But the swagman he up and he jumped in the water-hole,
Drowning himself by the coolibah tree;
And his ghost may be heard as it sings in the billabong,
&#x27;Who&#x27;ll come a-waltzing Matilda with me?&#x27;

(&quot;Chorus&quot;)&lt;/poem&gt;

==Status==

In May 1988 the Australasian Performing Right Association (APRA) chief executive, John Sturman, presented five platinum awards, &quot;which recognised writers who had created enduring works which have become a major part of the Australian culture&quot;, at the annual APRA Awards ceremony as part of their celebrations for the Australian Bicentenary. One of the platinum awards was for Paterson and Cowan&#x27;s version of &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot;.

===Official use===
The song has never been the officially recognised national anthem in Australia. However, from 1976 to 1984 it was one of three &quot;national songs&quot; that could be used in place of the then national anthem, &quot;God Save the Queen&quot; (except for royal or vice-regal events). The Fraser government in 1977 included &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; in a plebiscite to choose the &quot;national song&quot;. &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; received 28% of the vote compared with 43% for &quot;Advance Australia Fair&quot;, 19% for &quot;God Save the Queen&quot; and 10% for &quot;Song of Australia&quot;. Later the Hawke government advised the declaration of &quot;Advance Australia Fair&quot; as the national anthem, without reference to an official &quot;national song&quot;. Subsequent prime minister Paul Keating stated that &quot;[&#x27;Waltzing Matilda&#x27;] has long been our unofficial national song. Not our anthem. As I&#x27;ve said before, one can&#x27;t sing too solemnly about a jumbuck. But Waltzing Matilda is Australia&#x27;s song and it always will be.&quot;

Australian passports issued from 2003 have had the lyrics of &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; hidden microscopically in the background pattern of most of the pages for visas and arrival/departure stamps.

===Sports===
&quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; was used at the 1974 FIFA World Cup and, as a response to the New Zealand All Blacks haka, it has gained popularity as a sporting anthem for the Australia national rugby union team. It would have been played at award ceremonies at the Montreal Olympic Games in 1976, but Australia received no gold medals.

Matilda the Kangaroo was the mascot at the 1982 Commonwealth Games held in Brisbane, Queensland. Matilda was a cartoon kangaroo, who appeared as a high mechanical kangaroo at the opening ceremony, accompanied by Rolf Harris singing &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot;.

The Australian women&#x27;s national soccer team is nicknamed the Matildas after this song.

Jessica Mauboy and Stan Walker recorded a version of &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; to promote the London 2012 Summer Olympics in Australia. It was released as a single on 3 August 2012.

===Military units===
It is used as the quick march of the 1st Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment and as the official song of the US 1st Marine Division, commemorating the time the unit spent in Australia during the Second World War. Part of the tune is used in the British Royal Tank Regiment&#x27;s slow march, because an early British tank model was called &quot;Matilda&quot;.

===Annual Day===
6 April has been observed as Waltzing Matilda Day annually in Australia since 2012.

==Covers and derivative works==
In 1995, it was reported that at least 500 artists in Australia and overseas had released recordings of &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot;, and according to Peter Burgis of the National Film and Sound Archive, it is &quot;one of the most recorded songs in the world&quot;. Artists and bands who have covered the song range from rock stars to children&#x27;s performers such as Burl Ives; to choirs, including the Mormon Tabernacle Choir. Jimmie Rodgers had a US#41 pop hit with the song in 1959.

On 14 April 1981, on Space Shuttle &quot;Columbia&quot;&#x27;s first mission, country singer Slim Dusty&#x27;s rendition was broadcast to Earth. A remastered version of this rendition was later certified Gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA).

===Films===
Versions of the song have been used as the title of, or been prominently featured in, a number of films and television programs.

&quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; is a 1933 Australian film directed by and starring Pat Hanna. It features a young Coral Browne.

The first few words of the song provided the title of &quot;Once a Jolly Swagman&quot;, a 1949 British film starring Dirk Bogarde, but the film has no connection to Australia or to the story told in the song.

An animated short was made in 1958 for Australian television.

Ernest Gold used the song and variations of it extensively in the 1959 film &quot;On the Beach&quot;.

The 2017 short film &quot;Waltzing Tilda&quot; features various versions of the song, including one sung by the main character.

The song is featured in the 2019 film &quot;&quot; despite the film being set in 1889, six years before the song was written.

===TV series===
The theme song of the 1980 Australian television series &quot;Secret Valley&quot; is sung to a faster version of the tune of &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot;.

===Video games===
It is the theme song for Australia in the video game &quot;Civilization VI&quot;.

The song is the basis for the side quest &quot;The Empty Billabong&quot; in &quot;,&quot; which was developed by 2K Australia. The player is instructed to search for a man known only as &quot;the Jolly Swagman&quot; at his camp under a coolibah tree where they find his tuckerbag and an audiolog where the Jolly Swagman recounts events identical to the song.

===Stage===
On the occasion of Queensland&#x27;s 150-year celebrations in 2009, Opera Queensland produced the revue &quot;Waltzing Our Matilda&quot;, staged at the Conservatorium Theatre and subsequently touring twelve regional centres in Queensland. The show was created by Jason and Leisa Barry-Smith and Narelle French. The story line used the fictional process of Banjo Paterson writing the poem when he visited Queensland in 1895 to present episodes of four famous Australians: bass-baritone Peter Dawson (1882–1961), soprano Dame Nellie Melba (1861–1931), Bundaberg-born tenor Donald Smith (1922–1998), and soprano Gladys Moncrieff, also from Bundaberg. The performers were Jason Barry-Smith as Banjo Paterson, Guy Booth as Dawson, David Kidd as Smith, Emily Burke as Melba, Zoe Traylor as Moncrieff, and Donna Balson (piano, voice). The production toured subsequently again in several years. British guitarist Brian May performed an acoustic version of the song solo during Queen + Adam Lambert&#x27;s tour of Australia in 2014.

===Derivative musical works===
* During the 1950s, a parody of the original entitled &quot;Once a Learned Doctor&quot; gained some currency in Australian university circles. It featured lyrics rewritten with reference to the split in the Australian Labor Party in the period 1954 to 1957.
* In 1961, Australian songwriter Jack O&#x27;Hagan provided new lyrics to the traditional tune, titled &quot;God Bless Australia&quot; (see that article for its lyrics), which he hoped would become the Australian national anthem.
* Eric Bogle&#x27;s 1971 song &quot;And the Band Played Waltzing Matilda&quot; relates the story of a former swagman whose comrades got killed in the Gallipoli campaign and who himself lost his legs. The end of the song includes a fragment of &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot;.
* Rambling Syd Rumpo (played by Kenneth Williams) in the late 1960s BBC radio programme &quot;Round the Horne&quot; did a parody of &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; beginning &quot;Once long ago in the shade of a goolie bush...&quot;
* &quot;The Family Car Songbook&quot; (1983) presents a &quot;translation&quot; of the song into an &quot;American&quot; version, using the same tune.
* Tom Waits&#x27; 1976 song &quot;Tom Traubert&#x27;s Blues&quot; incorporates elements of &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot;.
*Australian composer Harry Sdraulig&#x27;s &quot;Fantasia on Waltzing Matilda&quot; (2020) was composed for Yo-Yo Ma and Kathryn Stott.
*Australian violinist Ray Chen&#x27;s album &quot;The Golden Age&quot;, nominated for an ARIA Music Award, concludes with an arrangement for string quartet by fellow &quot;Made in Berlin&quot; quartet member Stephan Koncz.

==References==

===Sources===

==External links==
*Waltzing Matilda – Australia&#x27;s Favourite Song
*Who&#x27;ll come a Waltzing Matilda with me? online exhibition from the National Library of Australia
*Matildacentre.com.au, the official website of the Waltzing Matilda Centre, an exhibit in the Qantilda Museum in Winton, Queensland
*Papers of Christina McPherson relating to the song &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; digitised and held by the National Library of Australia
*&quot;Waltzing Matilda – The Musical&quot;, musically correct transcription of the Christina Macpherson version
* First recording of the song &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot;, australianscreen online
* , Slim Dusty
* &#x27;Craigielee&#x27;, arranged by English-born Australian Thomas Bulch in 1891. 
*&#x27;The Lyric Gems of Scotland&#x27;, page 65 &#x27;Bonnie Wood of Craigielee&#x27; in &#x27;Lyric Gems of Scotland&#x27; 1850. 
*&#x27;Kyles Scottish Lyric Gems&#x27;, pages 244, 245 &#x27;Bonnie Wood of Craigielea&#x27; arranged by T S Gleadhill in &#x27;Kyles Scottish Lyric Gems&#x27; 1880.
*Photos of a volkszither &amp; autoharp with three chord bars Creek Don&#x27;t Rise Home Page – Autoharp Articles
*&quot;Go to the Devil and Shake Yourself&quot; YouTube video with audio and sheet music arranged/composed by John Field.
*&quot;Go to the Devil and Shake Yourself&quot; Musecore video with audio and sheet music arranged/composed by John Field. 
*&quot;Thou Bonny Wood of Craigie Lee&quot; Thou Bonnie Wood O&#x27;craigielea · Billy Scott &amp; Langholm Common Riding</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q752873" start="6" end="22" title="Waltzing Matilda" label="Waltzing Matilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001430" start="107" end="118" title="bush ballad" label="bush ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7652932" start="323" end="327" title="Swag (bedroll)" label="swag"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017959" start="418" end="425" title="swagman" label="swagman"/>
<link wikidata="Q13049520" start="443" end="448" title="Billycan" label="billy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6310928" start="486" end="493" title="jumbuck" label="jumbuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424449" start="543" end="551" title="squatting (pastoral)" label="squatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056738" start="553" end="560" title="Pastoralism" label="grazier"/>
<link wikidata="Q803749" start="742" end="751" title="billabong" label="billabong"/>
<link wikidata="Q209333" start="753" end="766" title="Oxbow lake" label="watering hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q436699" start="870" end="884" title="Banjo Paterson" label="Banjo Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788009" start="950" end="962" title="Thomas Bulch" label="Thomas Bulch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129399" start="1027" end="1037" title="James Barr (composer)" label="James Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4451255" start="1057" end="1073" title="Robert Tannahill" label="Robert Tannahill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2081" end="2104" title="Winton, Queensland#Waltzing Matilda Centre" label="Waltzing Matilda Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026409" start="2108" end="2114" title="Winton, Queensland" label="Winton"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="2123" end="2133" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q569073" start="2134" end="2141" title="outback" label="outback"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564927" start="2552" end="2571" title="Sounds of Australia" label="Sounds of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565882" start="2588" end="2619" title="National Film and Sound Archive" label="National Film and Sound Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q436699" start="2776" end="2798" title="Andrew Barton Paterson" label="Andrew Barton Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5208691" start="3985" end="4001" title="Dagworth Station" label="Dagworth Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097233" start="4005" end="4018" title="Station (Australian agriculture)" label="sheep station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054054" start="4049" end="4072" title="Central West Queensland" label="Central West Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q705867" start="4837" end="4848" title="Warrnambool" label="Warrnambool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300237" start="4849" end="4861" title="Steeplechase (horse racing)" label="steeplechase"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788009" start="5093" end="5105" title="Thomas Bulch" label="Thomas Bulch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129399" start="5348" end="5358" title="James Barr (composer)" label="James Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4451255" start="5382" end="5398" title="Robert Tannahill" label="Robert Tannahill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2230175" start="7099" end="7126" title="1891 Australian shearers&amp;#x27; strike" label="Great Shearers&amp;#x27; Strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q13526082" start="7195" end="7216" title="Premier of Queensland" label="Premier of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471137" start="7218" end="7233" title="Samuel Griffith" label="Samuel Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="7323" end="7329" title="Strike action" label="strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424449" start="7406" end="7415" title="Squatting (Australian history)" label="squatters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340502" start="7556" end="7572" title="Scab labour" label="non-union labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="15418" end="15421" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026409" start="17008" end="17026" title="Winton, Queensland" label="Winton, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650197" start="17767" end="17775" title="ABC News (Australia)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202292" start="18315" end="18334" title="Griffith University" label="Griffith University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001430" start="20989" end="21000" title="bush ballad" label="bush ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q507517" start="25889" end="25898" title="Rochester, Kent" label="Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q153803" start="25915" end="25934" title="John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough" label="Duke of Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q207947" start="27361" end="27383" title="Ralph Vaughan Williams" label="Ralph Vaughan Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764054" start="29565" end="29586" title="Angus &amp;amp; Robertson" label="Angus &amp;amp; Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q783373" start="29617" end="29633" title="Australian pound" label="Australian pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q16031724" start="29723" end="29735" title="James Inglis (politician)" label="James Inglis"/>
<link wikidata="Q264922" start="30007" end="30013" title="jingle" label="jingle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="30273" end="30282" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040137" start="30423" end="30441" title="Carl Fischer Music" label="Carl Fischer Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q8531" start="30482" end="30502" title="1996 Summer Olympics" label="1996 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q390216" start="30645" end="30670" title="The Sydney Morning Herald" label="The Sydney Morning Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q44679" start="38076" end="38094" title="Australian English" label="Australian English"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38205" end="38217" title="Journeyman years#Germany" label="auf der Walz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294787" start="38266" end="38275" title="artisan" label="craftsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q623578" start="39115" end="39144" title="National Library of Australia" label="National Library of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895245" start="39949" end="39965" title="Journeyman years" label="Journeyman Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017959" start="40367" end="40374" title="swagman" label="swagman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7652932" start="40451" end="40455" title="Swag (bedroll)" label="swag"/>
<link wikidata="Q803749" start="40508" end="40517" title="billabong" label="billabong"/>
<link wikidata="Q209333" start="40522" end="40532" title="oxbow lake" label="oxbow lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713314" start="40593" end="40606" title="Eucalyptus coolabah" label="coolibah tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q45669" start="40618" end="40628" title="eucalyptus" label="eucalyptus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6310928" start="40664" end="40671" title="jumbuck" label="jumbuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q13049520" start="40683" end="40688" title="billycan" label="billy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851096" start="40750" end="40760" title="tucker bag" label="tucker bag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845560" start="40788" end="40796" title="Trooper (police rank)" label="troopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424449" start="40818" end="40826" title="Squatting (Australian history)" label="squatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q653421" start="44456" end="44463" title="Geordie" label="Geordie"/>
<link wikidata="Q23035411" start="44873" end="44910" title="Saltbush Bill, J.P., and Other Verses" label="Saltbush Bill, J.P., and Other Verses"/>
<link wikidata="Q64399020" start="47701" end="47742" title="Australasian Performing Right Association" label="Australasian Performing Right Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653396" start="47953" end="47964" title="APRA Awards (Australia)" label="APRA Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823888" start="48012" end="48034" title="Australian Bicentenary" label="Australian Bicentenary"/>
<link wikidata="Q40807" start="48375" end="48393" title="God Save the Queen" label="God Save the Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5493604" start="48445" end="48462" title="Fraser government" label="Fraser government"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001974" start="48466" end="48524" title="1977 Australian plebiscite (National Song)" label="1977 included &amp;quot;Waltzing Matilda&amp;quot; in a plebiscite"/>
<link wikidata="Q170601" start="48648" end="48670" title="Advance Australia Fair" label="Advance Australia Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q181279" start="48735" end="48752" title="Song of Australia" label="Song of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684915" start="48770" end="48786" title="Hawke government" label="Hawke government"/>
<link wikidata="Q242654" start="48959" end="48971" title="Paul Keating" label="Paul Keating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274223" start="49233" end="49252" title="Australian passport" label="Australian passport"/>
<link wikidata="Q166121" start="49492" end="49511" title="1974 FIFA World Cup" label="1974 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q25210843" start="49550" end="49565" title="Haka (sports)" label="All Blacks haka"/>
<link wikidata="Q622443" start="49621" end="49656" title="Australia national rugby union team" label="Australia national rugby union team"/>
<link wikidata="Q8444" start="49711" end="49741" title="1976 Summer Olympics" label="Montreal Olympic Games in 1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070208" start="49795" end="49803" title="Kangaroo" label="Kangaroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116438" start="49826" end="49849" title="1982 Commonwealth Games" label="1982 Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="49858" end="49866" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975172" start="49995" end="50006" title="Rolf Harris" label="Rolf Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q782012" start="50050" end="50094" title="Australia women&amp;#x27;s national soccer team" label="Australian women&amp;#x27;s national soccer team"/>
<link wikidata="Q443892" start="50139" end="50153" title="Jessica Mauboy" label="Jessica Mauboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330139" start="50158" end="50169" title="Stan Walker" label="Stan Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="50243" end="50263" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596177" start="50383" end="50423" title="1st Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment" label="1st Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q163669" start="50456" end="50478" title="1st Marine Division (United States)" label="US 1st Marine Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q431675" start="50692" end="50699" title="Matilda I (tank)" label="Matilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565882" start="51013" end="51044" title="National Film and Sound Archive" label="National Film and Sound Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q315723" start="51213" end="51222" title="Burl Ives" label="Burl Ives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052606" start="51249" end="51272" title="Mormon Tabernacle Choir" label="Mormon Tabernacle Choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689292" start="51274" end="51288" title="Jimmie Rodgers (pop singer)" label="Jimmie Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q54383" start="51354" end="51388" title="Space Shuttle Columbia" label="Space Shuttle &amp;quot;Columbia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q217543" start="51396" end="51409" title="STS-1" label="first mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q607807" start="51426" end="51436" title="Slim Dusty" label="Slim Dusty"/>
<link wikidata="Q550239" start="51549" end="51590" title="Australian Recording Industry Association" label="Australian Recording Industry Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966850" start="51748" end="51764" title="Waltzing Matilda (1933 film)" label="Waltzing Matilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143507" start="51822" end="51831" title="Pat Hanna" label="Pat Hanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q508226" start="51853" end="51865" title="Coral Browne" label="Coral Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091902" start="51928" end="51948" title="Once a Jolly Swagman" label="Once a Jolly Swagman"/>
<link wikidata="Q299190" start="51985" end="51997" title="Dirk Bogarde" label="Dirk Bogarde"/>
<link wikidata="Q83437679" start="52100" end="52138" title="Waltzing Matilda (1958 film)" label="made in 1958 for Australian television"/>
<link wikidata="Q215753" start="52141" end="52152" title="Ernest Gold (composer)" label="Ernest Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469774" start="52223" end="52235" title="On the Beach (1959 film)" label="On the Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q58313492" start="52270" end="52284" title="Waltzing Tilda" label="Waltzing Tilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913746" start="52578" end="52591" title="Secret Valley" label="Secret Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941951" start="52700" end="52710" title="Music in the Civilization video game series" label="theme song"/>
<link wikidata="Q24050047" start="52749" end="52764" title="Civilization VI" label="Civilization VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q16823622" start="52886" end="52898" title="2K Australia" label="2K Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096621" start="53213" end="53229" title="Opera Queensland" label="Opera Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q918727" start="53243" end="53248" title="revue" label="revue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4218672" start="53297" end="53319" title="Queensland Conservatorium Griffith University" label="Conservatorium Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197520" start="53408" end="53413" title="Jason Barry-Smith" label="Jason"/>
<link wikidata="Q810480" start="53616" end="53629" title="bass-baritone" label="bass-baritone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699181" start="53630" end="53642" title="Peter Dawson (bass-baritone)" label="Peter Dawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q30903" start="53656" end="53663" title="soprano" label="soprano"/>
<link wikidata="Q237607" start="53669" end="53681" title="Nellie Melba" label="Nellie Melba"/>
<link wikidata="Q185404" start="53695" end="53704" title="Bundaberg" label="Bundaberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q27914" start="53710" end="53715" title="tenor" label="tenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295173" start="53716" end="53728" title="Donald Smith (tenor)" label="Donald Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566439" start="53754" end="53770" title="Gladys Moncrieff" label="Gladys Moncrieff"/>
<link wikidata="Q15873" start="54050" end="54059" title="Brian May" label="Brian May"/>
<link wikidata="Q16522487" start="54114" end="54134" title="Queen + Adam Lambert" label="Queen + Adam Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="54408" end="54430" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Australian Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6114401" start="54492" end="54509" title="Jack O&amp;#x27;Hagan" label="Jack O&amp;#x27;Hagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5575821" start="54568" end="54587" title="God Bless Australia" label="God Bless Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170601" start="54661" end="54687" title="Australian national anthem" label="Australian national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q543737" start="54691" end="54701" title="Eric Bogle" label="Eric Bogle"/>
<link wikidata="Q489601" start="54725" end="54761" title="And the Band Played Waltzing Matilda" label="And the Band Played Waltzing Matilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="54839" end="54857" title="Gallipoli campaign" label="Gallipoli campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289249" start="54964" end="54982" title="Rambling Syd Rumpo" label="Rambling Syd Rumpo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093792" start="54994" end="55010" title="Kenneth Williams" label="Kenneth Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371210" start="55056" end="55071" title="Round the Horne" label="Round the Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q184805" start="55345" end="55354" title="Tom Waits" label="Tom Waits"/>
<link wikidata="Q4107667" start="55377" end="55402" title="Tom Traubert&amp;#x27;s Blues" label="Tom Traubert&amp;#x27;s Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q234891" start="55572" end="55580" title="Yo-Yo Ma" label="Yo-Yo Ma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377130" start="55585" end="55598" title="Kathryn Stott" label="Kathryn Stott"/>
<link wikidata="Q442132" start="55622" end="55630" title="Ray Chen" label="Ray Chen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862932" start="55689" end="55705" title="ARIA Music Award" label="ARIA Music Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q623578" start="55999" end="56028" title="National Library of Australia" label="National Library of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q607807" start="56499" end="56509" title="Slim Dusty" label="Slim Dusty"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40433" wikidata="Q104095" url="?curid=40433" title="Molde">
<text>Molde () is a town and municipality in Møre og Romsdal county, Norway. It is located in the traditional district of Romsdal. It is located on the Romsdal Peninsula, surrounding the Fannefjord and Moldefjord.

The administrative centre of the municipality is the city of Molde which is also the administrative centre of Møre og Romsdal county, the commercial hub of the Romsdal region, and the seat of the Diocese of Møre. Other main population centres in the municipality include the villages of Hjelset, Kleive, Nesjestranda, Midsund, Nord-Heggdal, Eidsvåg, Rausand, Boggestranda, Myklebostad, Eresfjord, and Eikesdalen.

Molde has a maritime, temperate climate, with cool-to-warm summers, and relatively mild winters. The city is nicknamed &quot;The City of Roses&quot;.

Molde was originally the name of a farm by a natural harbour, which grew into a timber trading port in the late 16th century. Formal trading rights were introduced before 1604, and the town was incorporated through a royal charter in 1742. Molde was established as a municipality on 1 January 1838 (see formannskapsdistrikt law).

The town continued to grow throughout the 18th and 19th centuries, becoming a centre for Norwegian textile and garment industry, as well as the administrative centre for the region, and a major tourist destination. After World War II, Molde experienced accelerated growth, merging with Bolsøy Municipality and parts of Veøy Municipality on 1 January 1964, and has become a centre for not only administrative and public services, but also academic resources and industrial output.

The municipality is the 56th largest by area out of the 356 municipalities in Norway. Molde is the 31st most populous municipality in Norway with a population of 32,446. The municipality&#x27;s population density is and its population has increased by 4.9% over the previous 10-year period.

==History==
The city&#x27;s current location dates from the late Medieval times but is preceded by an earlier Medieval township on Veøya, an island to the south of present-day Molde. The settlement at Veøya probably dates from the Migration Period, but is first mentioned in the sagas by Snorri Sturluson as the location of the &quot;Battle of Sekken&quot; in 1162, where king Håkon the Broad-shouldered was killed fighting the aristocrat Erling Skakke, during the Norwegian civil wars.
However, settlement in the area can be traced much further back in time—evidence given by two rock slabs carved with petroglyphs found at Bjørset, west of the city center.

At the eve of the 15th century, the influence of Veøya waned, and the island was eventually deserted.

Originating from the two farms Reknes and Molde (later Moldegård), a minor port called &quot;Moldefjæra&quot; (&quot;Molde Landing&quot;) emerged around 1600, based on trade with timber and herring.
The town gained formal trading rights before 1604 under the supervision of Trondheim. After the Treaty of Copenhagen in 1660, Molde became the administrative center of Romsdal amt, and was incorporated as a city through a royal charter in 1742. Molde continued to grow throughout the 18th and 19th centuries, becoming a center for the Norwegian textile and garment industry. Tourism later became a major industry, and Molde saw notabilities such as the German emperor Wilhelm II of Germany and the Prince of Wales as regular summer visitors. Molde consisted of luxurious hotels surrounding an idyllic township with quaint, wooden houses, lush gardens, and parks, esplanades, and pavilions, earning it the nickname &quot;the Town of Roses&quot;. This was interrupted when one-third of the city was destroyed in a fire on 21 January 1916. However, Molde recovered and continued to grow in the economically difficult interbellum period.

A second fire, or series of fires, struck from the German air-raids in April and May 1940, which destroyed about two-thirds of the town. Molde was in effect the capital of Norway for a week after King Haakon, Crown Prince Olav, and members of the government and parliament arrived at Molde on April 23, after a dramatic flight from Oslo. They were put up at Glomstua, then at the western outskirts of the town, and experienced the bombing raids personally. The Norwegian gold reserve was also conveyed to Molde, and was hidden in a clothing factory.

However, German intelligence was well aware of this, and on April 25 the Luftwaffe initiated a series of air-raids. For a week the air-raid siren on the chimney of the dairy building announced the repeated attacks. April 29 turned out to be the worst day in the history of Molde, as the city was transformed into a sea of flames by incendiary bombs. Until then the church had escaped undamaged, but in the final sortie a firebomb became stuck high up in the tower, and the wooden church was obliterated by fire.

After World War II, Molde experienced tremendous growth. As the modernization of the Norwegian society accelerated in the post-reconstruction years, Molde became a center for not only administrative and public services, but also academic resources and industrial output. After the consolidation of the town itself and its adjacent communities in 1964, Molde became a modern city, encompassing most branches of employment, from farming and fisheries to industrial production, banking, higher education, tourism, commerce, health care, and civil administration.

===Municipality===
The town of Molde was established as an urban municipality on 1 January 1838 (see formannskapsdistrikt law). It was surrounded by the rural municipality of Bolsøy. On 1 July 1915, a part of Bolsøy (population: 183) was transferred to the city of Molde. On 1 January 1952, another part of Bolsøy (population: 1,913) was transferred to Molde.

During the 1960s, there were many municipal mergers across Norway due to the work of the Schei Committee. On 1 January 1964, the Molde (town) (population: 8,289) merged with the Sekken, Veøya, and Nesjestranda parts of municipality of Veøy (population: 756), all of the municipality of Bolsøy (population: 7,996), and the Mordal area of Nord-Aukra municipality (population: 77) to form the present day municipality of Molde.

On 1 January 2020, the neighbouring municipalities of Midsund and Nesset merged with Molde to form a much larger municipality called Molde.

==Name==
The municipality (originally the town and parish) is named after the old &quot;Molde&quot; farmstead () since this was where the town was built. The name&#x27;s origin is somewhat uncertain. It could be the plural form is which means &quot;fertile soil&quot; or &quot;earth&quot;. The other possibility is that it comes from the word which means &quot;skull&quot; or &quot;mold&quot; (referring to the rounded peaks in Moldemarka). Pronunciation varies between the standard &quot;Molde&quot; and the rural &quot;Molle&quot; (pronounced with thick &quot;l&quot;). A person from Molde will refer to themself as a &quot;Moldenser&quot;.

==Coat of arms==
The coat of arms was granted on 29 June 1742. The informal blazon is &quot;a water spouting whale, which drives a barrel in front of itself&quot; (). The arms have a blue field (background) and the charge is a whale and barrel floating on the ocean waves. It also has a mural crown above the escutcheon since the municipality includes a town. The exact design of the coat of arms is not formally depicted in law, so it has varied some over the centuries. The arms symbolize a whale chasing herring into a barrel, based on an old myth that the whales (guided by God) chased the schools of herring into the fjords at certain times. It also portrays the city&#x27;s founding industries of herring fisheries and timber exports. Molde was never a whaling port, but the unusually bountiful fisheries in the early 1740s alleviated the city&#x27;s suffering during a major famine. The sighting of whales, usually pods of orca, was commonly held to be the start of the spring herring fisheries. The municipal flag is a white flag with the coat of arms in the centre.

Moldesangen (&quot;The Song of Molde&quot;) is the semi-official anthem. It was written by Palle Godtfred Olaus Dørum (1818–1886) and composed by Karl Groos (1789–1861), supposedly in 1818, and is the same tune used the anthem of the German federal state Mecklenburg-Vorpommern (Moldesangen)

==Geography==
Molde municipality includes part of the Romsdal peninsula as well as many islands including the islands of Otrøya and Midøya. To the southeast, Molde municipality stretches about inland. The town of Molde consists of a long and wide strip of urban land running east–west along the north shore of the Moldefjord, an arm of the Romsdalsfjord, on the Romsdal peninsula. The city is sheltered by Bolsøya and the Molde archipelago, a chain of low-lying islands and islets, to the south, and the wood-clad hills of Moldemarka to the north. The city centre is located just west of the river Moldeelva, which runs into the city from the north, originating in the Moldevatnet lake, through the valley Moldedalen. Despite the river being minor and seasonal, it supported several sawmills in the 16th and 17th centuries. This gave rise to the original town itself through a combination of a good harbour, proximity to the sea routes, vast timber resources, and a river capable of supporting mills. In 1909, the river housed the first hydro electric power plant capable of providing sufficient electricity for the city, and the upper reaches of the river still provide drinking water for most of the city.

Its panoramic view of some 222 partly snow-clad peaks, usually referred to as the Molde panorama, is one of Molde&#x27;s main attractions, and has drawn tourists to the city since the 19th century. Molde is nicknamed the &quot;Town of Roses&quot;, a name which originated during Molde&#x27;s era as a tourist destination of international fame in the late 19th century.

Neighbouring municipalities are Aukra, Gjemnes, and Hustadvika (to the north); Ålesund (to the southwest); Vestnes and Rauma (to the south); and Tingvoll and Sunndal (to the east).

===Points of interest===
Salmon, sea trout and sea char are found in the rivers throughout the area, especially the Rauma, Driva, and Eira, already legendary among the British gentry in the mid-19th century. Trout is abundant in most lakes. Cod, pollock, saithe, mackerel and other species of saltwater fish are commonly caught in the Romsdalsfjord, both from land and from boat. Skiing is a common activity among the inhabitants of Molde in the winter, on groomed tracks, in resorts or by own trail. There are several rock climbing, ice climbing, bouldering, glacier and basejumping areas in the immediate vicinity of Molde.

The &quot;Atlantic road&quot; was voted the Norwegian Construction of the Century in 2005. It is built on bridges and landfills across small islands and skerries, and spans from the small communities of Vikan and Vevang to Averøy, an island with several historic landmarks, such as the Bremsnes cave with Mesolithic findings from the Fosna culture, the mediaeval Kvernes stave church, and Langøysund, now a remote fishing community, but once a bustling port along the main coastal route. Langøysund was the site of the compromise between King Magnus I and the farmers along the coast in 1040. The compromise is regarded as Norway&#x27;s Magna Carta, and is commemorated though the &quot;Pilespisser&quot; () monument.

&quot;Trollkirka&quot; (English: lit. &quot;Troll Church&quot;) is a marble grotto leading up to an underground waterfall. The grotto is situated 30 minutes outside Molde, followed by a 1-hour hike up a steep trail. &quot;Trollveggen&quot; is Europe&#x27;s tallest vertical, overhanging mountain face, with several very difficult climbing routes. &quot;Trollstigen&quot; is the most visited tourist road in Norway. The road twists and turns its way up an almost vertical mountainside through 11 hairpin bends to an altitude of . &quot;Mardalsfossen&quot; is the highest waterfall in Northern Europe and the fourth highest waterfall in the world, cascading 297 metres down into the valley. The total height of the waterfall is .

Bud is a fishing village on the very tip of the Romsdal peninsula. It gained importance during the Middle Ages as a trading post, and hosted the last free Privy Council of Norway in 1533, a desperate attempt to save the country&#x27;s independence and stave off the Protestant Reformation, led by Olav Engelbrektsson, archbishop of Nidaros (today &quot;Trondheim&quot;). The massive Ergan coastal defences, a restored German coastal fort from World War II, and a part of the Atlantic Wall, is situated in Bud. The fishing communities of Ona, Bjørnsund and Håholmen are located on remote islands off the coast, only accessible by boat or ferry.

===Moldemarka===

Moldemarka, the hilly woodland area north of the city, is public land. The area has an extensive network of paths, walking trails and skiing tracks. Forest roads enter the area from several directions. Bulletin boards and maps provide information regarding local plants and wildlife, as well as signposts along the trails. Marked trails lead to a number of peaks, sites and fishing lakes and rivers. A national fishing licence is required to fish in the lakes and streams.

Varden, above sea level is a viewpoint directly above Molde, with a good view of the city, the fjord with the Molde archipelago and the Molde panorama.

===Climate===
Molde has a temperate oceanic climate (&quot;Cfb&quot;) also known as marine west coast climate. Molde holds the national high for the month of October, with recorded on 11 October 2005. Due to its geographic location, Molde experiences frequent snowfalls in winter, but this snow is usually wet as the winters tend to be mild. The record high was recorded in July 2018. The record low was recorded in both January and February 2010.

A natural phenomenon occurring in Molde and the adjacent district, are frequent winter days with temperatures above , sometimes even above . This is due to the foehn wind from south and south-east. The sheltered location of the city, facing south with hills to the north, mountains to the east and mountainous islands to the west, contributes to Molde&#x27;s climate and rich plant life, especially among species naturally growing on far lower latitudes, like chestnut, oak, tilia (&quot;lime&quot; or &quot;linden&quot;), beech, yew, and others.
&lt;br&gt;
==Government==

Molde Municipality is responsible for primary education (through 10th grade), outpatient health services, senior citizen services, welfare and other social services, zoning, economic development, and municipal roads and utilities. The municipality is governed by a municipal council of directly elected representatives. The mayor is indirectly elected by a vote of the municipal council. The municipality is under the jurisdiction of the Møre og Romsdal District Court and the Frostating Court of Appeal.

===Municipal council===
The municipal council () of Molde is made up of 49 representatives who are elected to four-year terms. The tables below show the current and historical composition of the council by political party.









===Mayors===
The mayors () of Molde:

* 1837–1838: C.B. Brinchmann
* 1839–1839: J.S. Sommerschield 
* 1840–1840: C.B. Brinchmann 
* 1841–1841: Bastian Width
* 1842–1842: Edvard Kraft
* 1843–1844: K.A. Bjørseth 
* 1845–1845: Claus S. Jervell
* 1846–1846: K.A. Bjørseth 
* 1847–1847: Johan Olivarius Horn 
* 1848–1848: Claus S. Jervell 
* 1849–1850: Johan Olivarius Horn
* 1851–1853: Isach Georg Dass
* 1854–1854: Christen Smith
* 1855–1855: Johan Olivarius Horn
* 1856–1856: Claus S. Jervell 
* 1857–1857: Johan Olivarius Horn
* 1858–1858: Gunder Paulsen
* 1859–1859: Andreas Lind
* 1860–1860: Gunder Paulsen
* 1861–1861: Andreas Lind
* 1862–1862: Henrik L. Sommerschield
* 1863–1864: Thorvald Johannes Owren 
* 1865–1865: Isach Georg Dass 
* 1866–1866: Ludvig Arnoldus Leth
* 1867–1867: Gunder Paulsen
* 1868–1869: Ludvig Arnoldus Leth 
* 1870–1870: Fredrik Christian Sand
* 1871–1874: K.F. Feilberg
* 1875–1876: Ferdinand Nicolai Roll
* 1877–1877: Henrik L. Sommerschield
* 1878–1878: Johan B. Ræstad
* 1879–1883: Tobias Annæus Owren
* 1884–1886: Ludvig Arnoldus Leth
* 1887–1888: Ferdinand Nicolai Roll
* 1888–1890: J.L.W. Dietrichson
* 1891–1891: Ludvig Arnoldus Leth
* 1892–1892: J.L.W. Dietrichson
* 1893–1893: O. Berg
* 1894–1895: J.L.W. Dietrichson 
* 1896–1899: Albert Dessen 
* 1900–1902: Lars Nøsen 
* 1903–1904: Birger Stuevold-Hansen 
* 1905–1907: Ulrich Møller 
* 1908–1910: Nils Christian Egede Hertzberg
* 1911–1913: Lars Jacobsen 
* 1914–1916: Nils Christian Egede Hertzberg
* 1917–1922: Anton Holm 
* 1923–1925: Kristian Nøsen 
* 1926–1927: Nils B. Elvsaas (V)
* 1928–1930: Hans Jakob Sparre Schneider
* 1931–1934: Ole Sivertsen Nås (V)
* 1935–1937: Oscar Hanssen (H)
* 1938–1940: Ole Sivertsen Nås (V)
* 1941–1945: Hans Jakob Sparre Schneider (NS)
* 1945–1945: Ole Sivertsen Nås (V)
* 1946–1946: Nils B. Elvsaas (V)
* 1947–1947: O. Aasgård (Ap)
* 1948–1950: Nils B. Elvsaas (V)
* 1951–1955: Asgaut Bore (V)
* 1956–1959: Kåre Stokkeland (Ap)
* 1960–1961: Petter Pettersson (H)
* 1962–1965: Johan Skipnes (KrF)
* 1966–1969: Petter Pettersson (H)
* 1970–1971: Olav Askvik (V)
* 1972–1973: Johan Skipnes (KrF)
* 1972–1973: Petter Pettersson (H)
* 1974–1977: Wilhelm Wilkens (Sp)
* 1978–1979: Asmund Fredly (KrF)
* 1980–1981: Bernt Vilnes (H)
* 1982–1983: Asmund Fredly (KrF)
* 1984–1985: Rolf Myhre (KrF)
* 1986–1989: Ragnar Heggdal (H)
* 1990–1993: Rolf Myhre (KrF)
* 1994–1998: Einar Øveraas (H)
* 1998–2003: Rolf Myhre (KrF)
* 2003–2011: Jan Petter Hammerø (H)
* 2011–2023: Torgeir Dahl (H)
* 2023-present: Trygve Grydeland (H)
==Culture==
Three of the &quot;four great&quot; Norwegian authors are connected to Molde. Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson spent his childhood years at Nesset outside Molde, and attended school in the city. Henrik Ibsen frequently spent his vacations at the mansion &quot;Moldegård&quot; visiting the family Møller; and Alexander Kielland resided in the city as the governor of Romsdals amt. Ibsen&#x27;s play &quot;Rosmersholm&quot; is generally thought to be inspired by life at the mansion Moldegård, and &quot;The Lady from the Sea&quot; is also believed to be set in the city of Molde, although never actually mentioned. Other authors from or with ties to Molde include Edvard Hoem, Jo Nesbø, Knut Ødegård, and Nini Roll Anker, a friend of Sigrid Undset.

The Romsdal Museum, one of Norway&#x27;s largest folk museums, was established in 1912. Buildings originating from all over the region have been moved here to form a typical cluster of farm buildings including &quot;open hearth&quot; houses, sheds, outhouses, smokehouses and a small chapel. The &quot;town street&quot; with Mali&#x27;s Café shows typical Molde town houses from the pre-World War I period. The Museum of the Fisheries is an open-air museum located on the island of Hjertøya, 10 minutes from the centre of Molde. A small fishing village with authentic buildings, boats and fishing equipment, the museum shows local coastal culture from 1850 onwards.

The local newspaper is Romsdals Budstikke.

===Churches===

The Church of Norway has ten parishes () within the municipality of Molde. It is part of the Molde domprosti (arch-deanery) in the Diocese of Møre.

===Festivals===
The Moldejazz jazz festival is held in Molde every July. Moldejazz is one of the largest and oldest jazz festivals in Europe, and one of the most important. An estimated 40,000 tickets are sold for the more than a hundred events during the festival. Between 80,000 and 100,000 visitors visit the city during the one-week-long festival.

Every August, Molde and Nesset are hosts to the Bjørnson Festival, an international literature festival. Established by the poet Knut Ødegård in connection with the 250-year anniversary of Molde, the festival is named in honour of the Nobel Prize in Literature laureate Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson (1832–1910). It is the oldest and the most internationally acclaimed literature festival in Norway.

In addition to the two major events, a number of minor festivals are held annually. Byfest, the city&#x27;s celebration of incorporation, is an arrangement by local artists, coinciding with the anniversary of the royal charter of 29 June 1742.

==Education==

Molde University College offers a wide range of academic opportunities, from nursing and health-related studies, to economics and administrative courses. The school is Norway&#x27;s leading college in logistics, and well established as a centre for research and academic programmes in information technology, with degrees up to and including PhD.

==Transportation==
Hurtigruta calls on Molde every day, on its journey between Bergen and Kirkenes. The nearest railway station is Åndalsnes, the terminus for the Rauma Line.

The local airport is Molde Airport which has several daily flights to Oslo, Bergen, and Trondheim, as well as weekly flights to other domestic and international destinations.

The European route E39 and Norwegian County Road 64 both pass through the municipality. The city of Molde is connected to Fræna Municipality (to the north) by the Tussen Tunnel. The city is connected to the Røvika and Nesjestranda part of the municipality by the Fannefjord Tunnel and Bolsøy Bridge, significantly shortening the drive by avoiding driving all the way around the Fannefjorden. The proposed Langfjord Tunnel would connect Molde Municipality to Rauma Municipality via a tunnel under the Langfjorden.

==Sports==

Molde hosts a variety of sports teams, most notably the football team, Molde FK, which plays in the Eliteserien, the top division in the Norwegian football league system. Their home matches are played at Aker stadion, inaugurated in 1998, which holds a record attendance of 13,308. The team is five-time league champions (2011, 2012, 2014, 2019 and 2022), five-time Norwegian Cup winners (1994, 2005, 2013, 2014 and 2021-22), and has made numerous appearances in European tournaments, including the UEFA Champions League. The club was founded in 1911, during Molde&#x27;s period of great British and Continental influx, and was first named &quot;International&quot;, since it predominantly played teams made up from crews of foreign vessels visiting the city.

In addition to a number of international players, the city has also produced several ski jumpers, cross-country skiers and alpine skiers of international merit.

Other sports include the accomplished team handball clubs (Molde Elite, SK Træff, SK Rival), athletics teams (IL Molde-Olymp), skiing clubs, basketball and volleyball teams.

==International relations==
===Twin towns — sister cities===
Molde has three sister cities. They are: 
* Borås, Sweden
* Mikkeli, Finland
* Vejle, Denmark

== Gallery ==
==Notable residents==
=== Public service &amp; business ===

* Nicholas Lawson (1790-1851) Vice governor of Galápagos for Ecuador, born on Sekken 
* Ole Anton Qvam (1834–1904) lawyer, politician and Prime Minister of Norway 1902/03
* Dorothea Christensen (1847–1908) a domestic science proponent and politician
* Jacob Tanner, (1865–1964) Norwegian American Lutheran educator and religious author
* Johan Scharffenberg (1869–1965) a psychiatrist, politician, speaker and writer
* Olav Kavli (1872–1958) a businessman who founded the Kavli company
* Jens Arup Seip (1905–1992) medieval historian and interpreter of 1800s political history
* Eystein Fjærli (1917–1987) lieutenant colonel, defence strategist, author and politician
* Arne Solli (1938–2017) Norwegian Army general &amp; Chief of Defence of Norway
* Kjell Magne Bondevik (born 1947) politician, Prime Minister of Norway, 2001-2005
* Bjørn T. Grydeland (born 1949) President of EFTASA &amp; EU Ambassador 
* Torgeir Dahl (born 1953) politician and Mayor of Molde since 2011
* Kjell Inge Røkke (born 1958) a Norwegian billionaire

=== The Arts ===
* Karen Splid Møller (1800–1880) a Norwegian handwritten cookbook writer 
* Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson (1832–1910) writer of &quot;noble, magnificent and versatile poetry&quot;, won the 1903 Nobel Prize in Literature, brought up in Nesset
* Maurycy Gottlieb (1856–1879) a Polish realist painter of the Romantic period, lived in Molde
* Hanna Hoffmann (1858–1917), Danish sculptor and silversmith
* Rasmus Rasmussen (1862–1932) a Norwegian actor, folk singer and theatre director 
* Nini Roll Anker (1873–1942) novelist and playwright about women within different social classes
* Kurt Schwitters, (1887–1948) German artist using dadaism, constructivism and surrealism, had a hut on Hjertøya pre-WWII
* Terje Fjærn (1942-2016) musician, orchestra leader and musical conductor
* Knut Ødegård (born 1945) poet, also lives in Reykjavík, Iceland
* Terje Venaas (born 1947) a Norwegian jazz musician (upright bass)
* Edvard Hoem (born 1949) a Norwegian novelist, dramatist, lyricist and psalmist 
* Jo Nesbø (born 1960) a Norwegian writer, musician and economist; grew up in Molde
* Arne Nøst (born 1962) a Norwegian graphic artist and theatre director
* John Arne Sæterøy (born 1965) pen name &quot;Jason&quot;, cartoonist of silent animal characters
* Ann-Helen Moen (born 1969) a Norwegian lyric soprano 
* Paal Nilssen-Love (born 1974) a Norwegian drummer and composer in jazz and free improvisation
* Ane Brun (born 1976) a Norwegian songwriter, guitarist, and vocalist of Sami origin
* Ola Kvernberg (born 1981) a jazz violinist
* Daniel Herskedal (born 1982) a Norwegian jazz tuba player
* Hayden Powell (born 1983) a jazz trumpeter and composer, grew up in Molde
* Mari Kvien Brunvoll (born 1984) a Norwegian folk and jazz singer
* Linnéa Myhre (born 1990) a Norwegian author and blogger
* Tuva Halse (born 1999) a Norwegian violinist, keyboard player, vocalist and composer

=== Sport ===
* Otto Berg (1906–1991) a long jumper, competed at the 1936 Summer Olympics
* Arne Legernes (born 1931) a retired Norwegian footballer with 41 caps for Norway
* Einar Halle (born 1943) a Norwegian former UEFA football referee and referee observer
* Harry Hestad (born 1944) a former footballer and coach with 412 club caps and 31 for Norway
* Jan Fuglset (born 1945) a former footballer with over 288 club caps and 20 for Norway
* Ingolf Mork (1947–2012) ski jumper, winner of Four Hills Tournament 1971/72
* Arild Monsen (born 1962) cross-country skier, World Champion 1985
* Kjetil Rekdal (born 1968) a football manager and a former player with 484 club caps and 83 for Norway
* Trond Strande (born 1970) a former footballer with 275 caps with Molde FK
* Petter Rudi (born 1973) a retired footballer with 350 club caps and 46 for Norway
* Mette Solli (born 1974) a Norwegian kickboxer, World Champion 2001, 2004, 2007
* Andrine Flemmen (born 1974) a retired giant slalom alpine skier, won three World Cup races
* Kurt Asle Arvesen (born 1975) a Norwegian former professional road bicycle racer
* Daniel Berg Hestad (born 1975) a football manager and a former player with 557 club caps
* John Arne Riise (born 1980) a former footballer with 546 club caps and 110 for Norway
* Christian Gauseth (born 1984) a Norwegian footballer with over 320 club caps
* Johan Remen Evensen (born 1985) ski jumper, former world record-holder in ski flying
* Magnus Wolff Eikrem (born 1990) footballer with over 220 club caps and 17 for Norway
* Ragnhild Mowinckel (born 1992) alpine skier, twice silver medallist at the 2018 Winter Olympics
* Ada Hegerberg (born 1995) a footballer with over 220 club caps and 80 for Norway

==References==
==External links==
*Municipal fact sheet from Statistics Norway 
* Tourist information
* Molde University college
* Molde International Jazz Festival
* Romsdals Budstikke
* Molde F.K.
* VS Molde Futsal
* Molde Sports Association
* Molde and the Molde Panorama
* Images from Molde and Romsdal by Armin Burkhart</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q104095" start="0" end="5" title="Molde" label="Molde"/>
<link wikidata="Q5803752" start="23" end="35" title="List of municipalities of Norway" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q50627" start="39" end="54" title="Møre og Romsdal" label="Møre og Romsdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192299" start="55" end="61" title="Counties of Norway" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="63" end="69" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q379158" start="92" end="112" title="Traditional districts of Norway" label="traditional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467860" start="116" end="123" title="Romsdal" label="Romsdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516559" start="146" end="163" title="Romsdal Peninsula" label="Romsdal Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770980" start="181" end="191" title="Fannefjord" label="Fannefjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810520" start="196" end="206" title="Moldefjord" label="Moldefjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306755" start="213" end="234" title="administrative centre" label="administrative centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q10587563" start="262" end="275" title="Molde (town)" label="city of Molde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306755" start="294" end="315" title="administrative centre" label="administrative centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q50627" start="319" end="334" title="Møre og Romsdal" label="Møre og Romsdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467860" start="369" end="376" title="Romsdal" label="Romsdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028602" start="405" end="420" title="Diocese of Møre" label="Diocese of Møre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770680" start="496" end="503" title="Hjelset" label="Hjelset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770365" start="505" end="511" title="Kleive, Møre og Romsdal" label="Kleive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779426" start="513" end="525" title="Nesjestranda" label="Nesjestranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q13648970" start="527" end="534" title="Midsund (village)" label="Midsund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7050514" start="536" end="548" title="Nord-Heggdal" label="Nord-Heggdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971033" start="550" end="557" title="Eidsvåg, Nesset" label="Eidsvåg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453417" start="559" end="566" title="Rausand" label="Rausand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937581" start="568" end="580" title="Boggestranda" label="Boggestranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6947562" start="582" end="593" title="Myklebostad, Møre og Romsdal" label="Myklebostad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792461" start="595" end="604" title="Eresfjord" label="Eresfjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429876" start="610" end="620" title="Eikesdalen" label="Eikesdalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="635" end="643" title="Oceanic climate" label="maritime"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="645" end="662" title="temperate climate" label="temperate climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017" start="886" end="898" title="16th century" label="16th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="991" end="1004" title="royal charter" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q899491" start="1077" end="1097" title="formannskapsdistrikt" label="formannskapsdistrikt"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="1204" end="1211" title="textile" label="textile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11460" start="1216" end="1223" title="garment" label="garment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306755" start="1249" end="1270" title="administrative centre" label="administrative centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1326" end="1338" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940094" start="1391" end="1397" title="Bolsøy" label="Bolsøy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514386" start="1424" end="1428" title="Veøy" label="Veøy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="1780" end="1798" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1988" end="1996" title="Medieval" label="Medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771166" start="2009" end="2014" title="Veøya" label="Veøya"/>
<link wikidata="Q131192" start="2109" end="2125" title="Migration Period" label="Migration Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q102323" start="2166" end="2182" title="Snorri Sturluson" label="Snorri Sturluson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769689" start="2222" end="2228" title="Sekken" label="Sekken"/>
<link wikidata="Q316398" start="2250" end="2260" title="Haakon II of Norway" label="king Håkon"/>
<link wikidata="Q725219" start="2317" end="2330" title="Erling Skakke" label="Erling Skakke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760671" start="2343" end="2363" title="Civil war era in Norway" label="Norwegian civil wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q42195" start="2482" end="2493" title="petroglyphs" label="petroglyphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q25804" start="2915" end="2924" title="Trondheim" label="Trondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q829702" start="2936" end="2956" title="Treaty of Copenhagen (1660)" label="Treaty of Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306755" start="2983" end="3004" title="administrative center" label="administrative center"/>
<link wikidata="Q50627" start="3008" end="3019" title="Møre og Romsdal" label="Romsdal amt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155564" start="3047" end="3051" title="kjøpstad" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="3062" end="3075" title="royal charter" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="3308" end="3318" title="William II, German Emperor" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="3322" end="3329" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q180729" start="3338" end="3353" title="Prince of Wales" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="3826" end="3832" title="Nazi Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q150939" start="3846" end="3864" title="Operation Weserübung" label="April and May 1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="4399" end="4408" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q899491" start="5501" end="5521" title="formannskapsdistrikt" label="formannskapsdistrikt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940094" start="5575" end="5581" title="Bolsøy" label="Bolsøy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017886" start="5850" end="5865" title="Schei Committee" label="Schei Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q10587563" start="5890" end="5902" title="Molde (town)" label="Molde (town)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769689" start="5939" end="5945" title="Sekken" label="Sekken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771166" start="5947" end="5952" title="Veøya" label="Veøya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779426" start="5958" end="5970" title="Nesjestranda" label="Nesjestranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514386" start="5996" end="6000" title="Veøy" label="Veøy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940094" start="6047" end="6053" title="Bolsøy" label="Bolsøy"/>
<link wikidata="Q489342" start="6098" end="6108" title="Aukra" label="Nord-Aukra"/>
<link wikidata="Q488380" start="6241" end="6248" title="Midsund" label="Midsund"/>
<link wikidata="Q484046" start="6253" end="6259" title="Nesset Municipality" label="Nesset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478645" start="6379" end="6385" title="prestegjeld" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055732" start="6710" end="6714" title="Molding (process)" label="mold"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895767" start="6756" end="6766" title="Moldemarka" label="Moldemarka"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="6993" end="7005" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q120083528" start="7048" end="7054" title="blazon" label="blazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q372254" start="7160" end="7165" title="field (heraldry)" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424805" start="7187" end="7193" title="charge (heraldry)" label="charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q429340" start="7259" end="7270" title="mural crown" label="mural crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q331357" start="7281" end="7291" title="Escutcheon (heraldry)" label="escutcheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865281" start="7465" end="7470" title="whale" label="whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127419" start="7479" end="7486" title="herring" label="herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="7902" end="7906" title="orca" label="orca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196" start="8303" end="8325" title="Mecklenburg-Vorpommern" label="Mecklenburg-Vorpommern"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516559" start="8395" end="8412" title="Romsdal peninsula" label="Romsdal peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979800" start="8462" end="8468" title="Otrøya" label="Otrøya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573315" start="8473" end="8479" title="Midøya" label="Midøya"/>
<link wikidata="Q10587563" start="8546" end="8559" title="Molde (town)" label="town of Molde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810520" start="8655" end="8665" title="Moldefjord" label="Moldefjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106298" start="8681" end="8694" title="Romsdalsfjord" label="Romsdalsfjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516559" start="8703" end="8720" title="Romsdal peninsula" label="Romsdal peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770646" start="8747" end="8754" title="Bolsøya" label="Bolsøya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895760" start="8763" end="8780" title="Molde archipelago" label="Molde archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895767" start="8864" end="8874" title="Moldemarka" label="Moldemarka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515217" start="8939" end="8948" title="Moldeelva" label="Moldeelva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435936" start="9010" end="9021" title="Moldevatnet" label="Moldevatnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q505213" start="9124" end="9131" title="sawmill" label="sawmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="9378" end="9392" title="hydro electric" label="hydro electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q159719" start="9393" end="9404" title="power plant" label="power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895765" start="9632" end="9646" title="Molde panorama" label="Molde panorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q489342" start="9952" end="9957" title="Aukra" label="Aukra"/>
<link wikidata="Q493283" start="9959" end="9966" title="Gjemnes" label="Gjemnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q60777023" start="9972" end="9982" title="Hustadvika (municipality)" label="Hustadvika"/>
<link wikidata="Q62266" start="9999" end="10006" title="Ålesund" label="Ålesund"/>
<link wikidata="Q488060" start="10027" end="10034" title="Vestnes" label="Vestnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q500205" start="10039" end="10044" title="Rauma, Norway" label="Rauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q488252" start="10065" end="10073" title="Tingvoll" label="Tingvoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q48521" start="10078" end="10085" title="Sunndal" label="Sunndal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="10127" end="10133" title="Salmon" label="Salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095355" start="10135" end="10144" title="sea trout" label="sea trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q548682" start="10149" end="10157" title="Salvelinus" label="sea char"/>
<link wikidata="Q494838" start="10218" end="10223" title="River Rauma" label="Rauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259332" start="10225" end="10230" title="Driva" label="Driva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310513" start="10236" end="10240" title="River Eira" label="Eira"/>
<link wikidata="Q844586" start="10278" end="10284" title="gentry" label="gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258881" start="10310" end="10315" title="Trout" label="Trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q13194939" start="10343" end="10346" title="Cod" label="Cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123445" start="10348" end="10355" title="pollock" label="pollock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125285" start="10357" end="10363" title="saithe" label="saithe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8064278" start="10365" end="10373" title="mackerel" label="mackerel"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="10405" end="10409" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q130949" start="10482" end="10488" title="Skiing" label="Skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154336" start="10621" end="10634" title="rock climbing" label="rock climbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148495" start="10636" end="10648" title="ice climbing" label="ice climbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q852989" start="10650" end="10660" title="bouldering" label="bouldering"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="10662" end="10669" title="glacier" label="glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q809831" start="10674" end="10685" title="basejumping" label="basejumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q756561" start="10739" end="10752" title="Atlantic road" label="Atlantic road"/>
<link wikidata="Q484111" start="10952" end="10958" title="Averøy" label="Averøy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="11034" end="11044" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q109483" start="11063" end="11068" title="Fosna" label="Fosna"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="11082" end="11091" title="mediaeval" label="mediaeval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545346" start="11092" end="11112" title="Kvernes stave church" label="Kvernes stave church"/>
<link wikidata="Q310999" start="11272" end="11280" title="Magnus I of Norway" label="Magnus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="11366" end="11377" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q510772" start="11670" end="11681" title="Trollveggen" label="Trollveggen"/>
<link wikidata="Q940332" start="11801" end="11812" title="Trollstigen" label="Trollstigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q34038" start="12018" end="12027" title="waterfall" label="waterfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q27479" start="12031" end="12046" title="Northern Europe" label="Northern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000456" start="12177" end="12180" title="Bud, Norway" label="Bud"/>
<link wikidata="Q34763" start="12233" end="12242" title="peninsula" label="peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="12276" end="12287" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528244" start="12332" end="12345" title="Privy Council" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="12443" end="12465" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007127" start="12474" end="12493" title="Olav Engelbrektsson" label="Olav Engelbrektsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q659423" start="12495" end="12516" title="archbishop of Nidaros" label="archbishop of Nidaros"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="12620" end="12632" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q57370" start="12652" end="12665" title="Atlantic Wall" label="Atlantic Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034648" start="12898" end="12909" title="public land" label="public land"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="13322" end="13337" title="Above mean sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106298" start="13409" end="13414" title="Romsdalsfjord" label="fjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895760" start="13424" end="13441" title="Molde archipelago" label="Molde archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895765" start="13450" end="13464" title="Molde panorama" label="Molde panorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="13503" end="13518" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561" start="13727" end="13731" title="snow" label="snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q65942121" start="13918" end="13936" title="natural phenomenon" label="natural phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12314" start="14076" end="14086" title="foehn wind" label="foehn wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q129324" start="14376" end="14384" title="chestnut" label="chestnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="14386" end="14389" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q127849" start="14391" end="14396" title="tilia" label="tilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25403" start="14439" end="14444" title="beech" label="beech"/>
<link wikidata="Q27355" start="14446" end="14449" title="taxus" label="yew"/>
<link wikidata="Q975085" start="14528" end="14545" title="primary education" label="primary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q31207" start="14579" end="14594" title="Health care" label="health services"/>
<link wikidata="Q191089" start="14596" end="14610" title="old age" label="senior citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="14621" end="14628" title="welfare spending" label="welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q205398" start="14639" end="14654" title="Social work" label="social services"/>
<link wikidata="Q702232" start="14656" end="14662" title="zoning" label="zoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530482" start="14664" end="14684" title="economic development" label="economic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q34442" start="14700" end="14704" title="road" label="road"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="14755" end="14772" title="Municipal council (Norway)" label="municipal council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196727" start="14776" end="14792" title="Direct election" label="directly elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="14814" end="14819" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q877353" start="14823" end="14841" title="Indirect election" label="indirectly elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q105554543" start="14928" end="14958" title="Møre og Romsdal District Court" label="Møre og Romsdal District Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4249343" start="14967" end="14993" title="Frostating Court of Appeal" label="Frostating Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="15024" end="15041" title="Municipal council (Norway)" label="municipal council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="15212" end="15217" title="Political party" label="party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15245" end="15251" title="Mayor#Scandinavia" label="mayors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443888" start="16141" end="16163" title="Ferdinand Nicolai Roll" label="Ferdinand Nicolai Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443888" start="16310" end="16332" title="Ferdinand Nicolai Roll" label="Ferdinand Nicolai Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783673" start="16551" end="16573" title="Birger Stuevold-Hansen" label="Birger Stuevold-Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354569" start="16616" end="16646" title="Nils Christian Egede Hertzberg" label="Nils Christian Egede Hertzberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354569" start="16688" end="16718" title="Nils Christian Egede Hertzberg" label="Nils Christian Egede Hertzberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q500190" start="16803" end="16804" title="Liberal Party (Norway)" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q500190" start="16879" end="16880" title="Liberal Party (Norway)" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q586364" start="16910" end="16911" title="Conservative Party (Norway)" label="H"/>
<link wikidata="Q500190" start="16945" end="16946" title="Liberal Party (Norway)" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q167189" start="16990" end="16992" title="Nasjonal Samling" label="NS"/>
<link wikidata="Q500190" start="17026" end="17027" title="Liberal Party (Norway)" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q500190" start="17059" end="17060" title="Liberal Party (Norway)" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q190219" start="17087" end="17089" title="Labour Party (Norway)" label="Ap"/>
<link wikidata="Q500190" start="17121" end="17122" title="Liberal Party (Norway)" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q500190" start="17150" end="17151" title="Liberal Party (Norway)" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453629" start="17166" end="17181" title="Kåre Stokkeland" label="Kåre Stokkeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q190219" start="17183" end="17185" title="Labour Party (Norway)" label="Ap"/>
<link wikidata="Q586364" start="17219" end="17220" title="Conservative Party (Norway)" label="H"/>
<link wikidata="Q6215374" start="17235" end="17248" title="Johan Skipnes" label="Johan Skipnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166025" start="17250" end="17253" title="Christian Democratic Party (Norway)" label="KrF"/>
<link wikidata="Q586364" start="17287" end="17288" title="Conservative Party (Norway)" label="H"/>
<link wikidata="Q11993412" start="17303" end="17314" title="Olav Askvik" label="Olav Askvik"/>
<link wikidata="Q500190" start="17316" end="17317" title="Liberal Party (Norway)" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q6215374" start="17332" end="17345" title="Johan Skipnes" label="Johan Skipnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166025" start="17347" end="17350" title="Christian Democratic Party (Norway)" label="KrF"/>
<link wikidata="Q586364" start="17384" end="17385" title="Conservative Party (Norway)" label="H"/>
<link wikidata="Q493685" start="17417" end="17419" title="Centre Party (Norway)" label="Sp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166025" start="17449" end="17452" title="Christian Democratic Party (Norway)" label="KrF"/>
<link wikidata="Q586364" start="17481" end="17482" title="Conservative Party (Norway)" label="H"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166025" start="17512" end="17515" title="Christian Democratic Party (Norway)" label="KrF"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577475" start="17530" end="17540" title="Rolf Myhre" label="Rolf Myhre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166025" start="17542" end="17545" title="Christian Democratic Party (Norway)" label="KrF"/>
<link wikidata="Q586364" start="17576" end="17577" title="Conservative Party (Norway)" label="H"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577475" start="17592" end="17602" title="Rolf Myhre" label="Rolf Myhre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166025" start="17604" end="17607" title="Christian Democratic Party (Norway)" label="KrF"/>
<link wikidata="Q586364" start="17637" end="17638" title="Conservative Party (Norway)" label="H"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577475" start="17653" end="17663" title="Rolf Myhre" label="Rolf Myhre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166025" start="17665" end="17668" title="Christian Democratic Party (Norway)" label="KrF"/>
<link wikidata="Q586364" start="17703" end="17704" title="Conservative Party (Norway)" label="H"/>
<link wikidata="Q14371572" start="17719" end="17731" title="Torgeir Dahl" label="Torgeir Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q586364" start="17733" end="17734" title="Conservative Party (Norway)" label="H"/>
<link wikidata="Q586364" start="17770" end="17771" title="Conservative Party (Norway)" label="H"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17804" end="17814" title="Norwegian literature#National Romantic Period" label="four great"/>
<link wikidata="Q46405" start="17863" end="17884" title="Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson" label="Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q484046" start="17914" end="17920" title="Nesset Municipality" label="Nesset"/>
<link wikidata="Q36661" start="17969" end="17981" title="Henrik Ibsen" label="Henrik Ibsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q318358" start="18082" end="18100" title="Alexander Kielland" label="Alexander Kielland"/>
<link wikidata="Q50627" start="18140" end="18152" title="Møre og Romsdal" label="Romsdals amt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432009" start="18178" end="18189" title="Rosmersholm" label="Rosmersholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212719" start="18276" end="18297" title="The Lady from the Sea" label="The Lady from the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291349" start="18437" end="18448" title="Edvard Hoem" label="Edvard Hoem"/>
<link wikidata="Q202693" start="18450" end="18458" title="Jo Nesbø" label="Jo Nesbø"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088740" start="18460" end="18472" title="Knut Ødegård" label="Knut Ødegård"/>
<link wikidata="Q446663" start="18478" end="18493" title="Nini Roll Anker" label="Nini Roll Anker"/>
<link wikidata="Q80889" start="18507" end="18520" title="Sigrid Undset" label="Sigrid Undset"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516023" start="18527" end="18541" title="Romsdal Museum" label="Romsdal Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q33506" start="18577" end="18583" title="museum" label="museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q585473" start="18744" end="18750" title="hearth" label="hearth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18934" end="18957" title="Museum of the Fisheries" label="Museum of the Fisheries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760436" start="19213" end="19231" title="Romsdals Budstikke" label="Romsdals Budstikke"/>
<link wikidata="Q666860" start="19254" end="19270" title="Church of Norway" label="Church of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q11984490" start="19343" end="19358" title="Molde domprosti" label="Molde domprosti"/>
<link wikidata="Q385337" start="19365" end="19372" title="deanery" label="deanery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028602" start="19381" end="19396" title="Diocese of Møre" label="Diocese of Møre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769538" start="19419" end="19428" title="Moldejazz" label="Moldejazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="19429" end="19433" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q484046" start="19776" end="19782" title="Nesset Municipality" label="Nesset"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919977" start="19800" end="19817" title="Bjørnson Festival" label="Bjørnson Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="19987" end="20012" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q46405" start="20022" end="20043" title="Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson" label="Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465973" start="20405" end="20429" title="Molde University College" label="Molde University College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165613" start="20772" end="20782" title="Hurtigruta" label="Hurtigruta"/>
<link wikidata="Q26793" start="20832" end="20838" title="Bergen" label="Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q209423" start="20843" end="20851" title="Kirkenes" label="Kirkenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q271083" start="20884" end="20893" title="Åndalsnes" label="Åndalsnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q402345" start="20916" end="20926" title="Rauma Line" label="Rauma Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618505" start="20950" end="20963" title="Molde Airport, Årø" label="Molde Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375888" start="21109" end="21127" title="European route E39" label="European route E39"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771253" start="21132" end="21156" title="Norwegian County Road 64" label="Norwegian County Road 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856823" start="21268" end="21281" title="Tussen Tunnel" label="Tussen Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15076770" start="21312" end="21318" title="Røvika" label="Røvika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779426" start="21323" end="21335" title="Nesjestranda" label="Nesjestranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433924" start="21368" end="21385" title="Fannefjord Tunnel" label="Fannefjord Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355891" start="21390" end="21403" title="Bolsøy Bridge" label="Bolsøy Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770980" start="21483" end="21495" title="Fannefjorden" label="Fannefjorden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485999" start="21510" end="21526" title="Langfjord Tunnel" label="Langfjord Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354513" start="21605" end="21616" title="Langfjorden (Møre og Romsdal)" label="Langfjorden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="21687" end="21695" title="football (soccer)" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q208552" start="21702" end="21710" title="Molde FK" label="Molde FK"/>
<link wikidata="Q201671" start="21731" end="21742" title="Eliteserien" label="Eliteserien"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500681" start="21768" end="21800" title="Norwegian football league system" label="Norwegian football league system"/>
<link wikidata="Q417367" start="21835" end="21847" title="Aker stadion" label="Aker stadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376083" start="21953" end="21957" title="2011 Molde FK season" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q600127" start="21959" end="21963" title="2012 Molde FK season" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q16579188" start="21965" end="21969" title="2014 Molde FK season" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q59655259" start="21971" end="21975" title="2019 Molde FK season" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q111955734" start="21980" end="21984" title="2022 Molde FK season" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q3693094" start="22020" end="22024" title="1994 Norwegian Football Cup" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q3693112" start="22026" end="22030" title="2005 Norwegian Football Cup" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q11992164" start="22032" end="22036" title="2013 Norwegian Football Cup" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q15977341" start="22038" end="22042" title="2014 Norwegian Football Cup" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q104880655" start="22047" end="22054" title="2021-22 Norwegian Football Cup" label="2021-22"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="22130" end="22151" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718" start="22477" end="22488" title="ski jumping" label="ski jumpers"/>
<link wikidata="Q179687" start="22490" end="22510" title="cross-country skiing (sport)" label="cross-country skiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q186222" start="22515" end="22528" title="alpine skiing" label="alpine skiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="22592" end="22605" title="team handball" label="team handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q19381792" start="22613" end="22624" title="Molde Elite" label="Molde Elite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390708" start="22626" end="22634" title="SK Træff" label="SK Træff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22636" end="22644" title="SK Rival" label="SK Rival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971851" start="22664" end="22678" title="IL Molde-Olymp" label="IL Molde-Olymp"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="22806" end="22819" title="sister cities" label="sister cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q26040" start="22834" end="22839" title="Borås" label="Borås"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="22841" end="22847" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q190583" start="22850" end="22857" title="Mikkeli" label="Mikkeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="22859" end="22866" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27116" start="22869" end="22874" title="Vejle" label="Vejle"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="22876" end="22883" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q15271890" start="22962" end="22977" title="Nicholas Lawson" label="Nicholas Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q38095" start="23007" end="23016" title="Galápagos" label="Galápagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="23021" end="23028" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356502" start="23048" end="23062" title="Ole Anton Qvam" label="Ole Anton Qvam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334076" start="23098" end="23122" title="Prime Minister of Norway" label="Prime Minister of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942820" start="23133" end="23153" title="Dorothea Christensen" label="Dorothea Christensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q425694" start="23168" end="23184" title="domestic science" label="domestic science"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119341" start="23212" end="23224" title="Jacob Tanner" label="Jacob Tanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6096372" start="23298" end="23317" title="Johan Scharffenberg" label="Johan Scharffenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209781" start="23379" end="23389" title="Olav Kavli" label="Olav Kavli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208110" start="23432" end="23437" title="Kavli" label="Kavli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993416" start="23448" end="23462" title="Jens Arup Seip" label="Jens Arup Seip"/>
<link wikidata="Q14434125" start="23539" end="23553" title="Eystein Fjærli" label="Eystein Fjærli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794671" start="23630" end="23640" title="Arne Solli" label="Arne Solli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384177" start="23653" end="23667" title="Norwegian Army" label="Norwegian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097029" start="23682" end="23708" title="Chief of Defence of Norway" label="Chief of Defence of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q207655" start="23711" end="23731" title="Kjell Magne Bondevik" label="Kjell Magne Bondevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334076" start="23756" end="23780" title="Prime Minister of Norway" label="Prime Minister of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919936" start="23794" end="23812" title="Bjørn T. Grydeland" label="Bjørn T. Grydeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775266" start="23838" end="23844" title="European Free Trade Association Surveillance Authority" label="EFTASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="23851" end="23853" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q14371572" start="23868" end="23880" title="Torgeir Dahl" label="Torgeir Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383992" start="23936" end="23952" title="Kjell Inge Røkke" label="Kjell Inge Røkke"/>
<link wikidata="Q27888278" start="24009" end="24027" title="Karen Splid Møller" label="Karen Splid Møller"/>
<link wikidata="Q46405" start="24083" end="24104" title="Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson" label="Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="24193" end="24218" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q443136" start="24243" end="24259" title="Maurycy Gottlieb" label="Maurycy Gottlieb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174101" start="24304" end="24312" title="Romanticism in Poland" label="Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q62080130" start="24338" end="24352" title="Hanna Hoffmann" label="Hanna Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063983" start="24400" end="24416" title="Rasmus Rasmussen (actor)" label="Rasmus Rasmussen"/>
<link wikidata="Q446663" start="24484" end="24499" title="Nini Roll Anker" label="Nini Roll Anker"/>
<link wikidata="Q155158" start="24582" end="24597" title="Kurt Schwitters" label="Kurt Schwitters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="24631" end="24635" title="dada" label="dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q207103" start="24640" end="24654" title="Constructivism (art)" label="constructivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="24659" end="24669" title="surrealism" label="surrealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12005515" start="24704" end="24715" title="Terje Fjærn" label="Terje Fjærn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088740" start="24779" end="24791" title="Knut Ødegård" label="Knut Ødegård"/>
<link wikidata="Q959371" start="24845" end="24857" title="Terje Venaas" label="Terje Venaas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291349" start="24913" end="24924" title="Edvard Hoem" label="Edvard Hoem"/>
<link wikidata="Q202693" start="24995" end="25003" title="Jo Nesbø" label="Jo Nesbø"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794642" start="25079" end="25088" title="Arne Nøst" label="Arne Nøst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604180" start="25196" end="25201" title="Jason (cartoonist)" label="Jason"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766173" start="25250" end="25264" title="Ann-Helen Moen" label="Ann-Helen Moen"/>
<link wikidata="Q442953" start="25306" end="25323" title="Paal Nilssen-Love" label="Paal Nilssen-Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q256783" start="25402" end="25410" title="Ane Brun" label="Ane Brun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120851" start="25488" end="25501" title="Ola Kvernberg" label="Ola Kvernberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11313741" start="25533" end="25549" title="Daniel Herskedal" label="Daniel Herskedal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686383" start="25593" end="25606" title="Hayden Powell" label="Hayden Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760921" start="25669" end="25688" title="Mari Kvien Brunvoll" label="Mari Kvien Brunvoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105457" start="25736" end="25748" title="Linnéa Myhre" label="Linnéa Myhre"/>
<link wikidata="Q125662725" start="25794" end="25804" title="Tuva Halse" label="Tuva Halse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785722" start="25896" end="25905" title="Otto Berg (athlete)" label="Otto Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q8150" start="25949" end="25969" title="1936 Summer Olympics" label="1936 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623566" start="25972" end="25985" title="Arne Legernes" label="Arne Legernes"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="26046" end="26052" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q988489" start="26055" end="26066" title="Einar Halle" label="Einar Halle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783505" start="26143" end="26155" title="Harry Hestad" label="Harry Hestad"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="26228" end="26234" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q378110" start="26237" end="26248" title="Jan Fuglset" label="Jan Fuglset"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="26316" end="26322" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q497765" start="26325" end="26336" title="Ingolf Mork" label="Ingolf Mork"/>
<link wikidata="Q157087" start="26371" end="26392" title="Four Hills Tournament" label="Four Hills Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q606033" start="26403" end="26415" title="Arild Monsen" label="Arild Monsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q179687" start="26428" end="26447" title="Cross-country skiing (sport)" label="cross-country skier"/>
<link wikidata="Q431107" start="26471" end="26484" title="Kjetil Rekdal" label="Kjetil Rekdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="26566" end="26572" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3999685" start="26575" end="26588" title="Trond Strande" label="Trond Strande"/>
<link wikidata="Q208552" start="26640" end="26648" title="Molde FK" label="Molde FK"/>
<link wikidata="Q377784" start="26651" end="26662" title="Petter Rudi" label="Petter Rudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="26726" end="26732" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q11989218" start="26735" end="26746" title="Mette Solli" label="Mette Solli"/>
<link wikidata="Q270466" start="26816" end="26831" title="Andrine Flemmen" label="Andrine Flemmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q340100" start="26909" end="26926" title="Kurt Asle Arvesen" label="Kurt Asle Arvesen"/>
<link wikidata="Q967613" start="26992" end="27010" title="Daniel Berg Hestad" label="Daniel Berg Hestad"/>
<link wikidata="Q189827" start="27083" end="27098" title="John Arne Riise" label="John Arne Riise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788878" start="27171" end="27188" title="Christian Gauseth" label="Christian Gauseth"/>
<link wikidata="Q448126" start="27250" end="27269" title="Johan Remen Evensen" label="Johan Remen Evensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718" start="27282" end="27292" title="ski jumping" label="ski jumper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292241" start="27301" end="27320" title="List of longest ski jumps" label="world record-holder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778947" start="27324" end="27334" title="ski flying" label="ski flying"/>
<link wikidata="Q112949" start="27337" end="27356" title="Magnus Wolff Eikrem" label="Magnus Wolff Eikrem"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="27415" end="27421" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q515245" start="27424" end="27442" title="Ragnhild Mowinckel" label="Ragnhild Mowinckel"/>
<link wikidata="Q186222" start="27455" end="27467" title="Alpine skiing" label="alpine skier"/>
<link wikidata="Q9680" start="27499" end="27519" title="2018 Winter Olympics" label="2018 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q129118" start="27522" end="27535" title="Ada Hegerberg" label="Ada Hegerberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q751994" start="27596" end="27602" title="Norway women&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367019" start="27665" end="27682" title="Statistics Norway" label="Statistics Norway"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40435" wikidata="Q2206741" url="?curid=40435" title="History of Barbados">
<text>Barbados is an island country in the southeastern Caribbean Sea, situated about east of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. Roughly triangular in shape, the island measures some from northwest to southeast and about from east to west at its widest point. The capital and largest town is Bridgetown, which is also the main seaport.

Barbados was inhabited by indigenous peoples – Arawaks and Caribs – prior to the European colonization of the Americas in the 16th century. The island was briefly claimed by the Spanish Empire who saw trees with a beard like feature (hence the name Barbados), and then by Portugal from 1532 to 1620. The island was an English and later a British colony from 1625 until 1966. Sugar cane cultivation in Barbados began in the 1640s, which saw the increasing importation of black slaves from West Africa. Several black slave codes were implemented in the late-17th century which resulted in several slave rebellion attempts, however none was successful. The Consolidated Slave Law was passed following the largest slave rebellion in Barbadian history, this was then followed by the total abolition of slavery in the British Empire in 1834. Britain continued to rule the island until independence was granted in 1966 and the state became a member of the Commonwealth of Nations.

From 1966 to 2021, Barbados was a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy, modelled on the Westminster system, with Elizabeth II, Queen of Barbados, as head of state. Barbados became a republic on November 30, 2021, under Mia Mottley, thus removing the queen as its head of state.

==Before colonization==
Some evidence suggests that Barbados may have been settled in the second millennium BC, but this is limited to fragments of conch lip adzes found in association with shells that have been radiocarbon-dated to about 1630 BC.

Fully documented Amerindian settlement dates to between about 350 and 650 AD, when the Troumassoid people arrived. The arrivals were a group known as the Saladoid-Barrancoid from the mainland of South America.

The second wave of settlers appeared around 800 AD (the Spanish referred to these as &quot;Arawaks&quot;) and a third in the mid-13th century. However, the Amerindian settlement surprisingly came to an end in the early 16th century. There&#x27;s no evidence that the Kalinago (called &quot;Caribs&quot; by the Spanish) ever established a permanent settlement in Barbados, though they often visited the island in their canoes.

==Colonial history==
===Early colonial history===

The Portuguese were the first Europeans to discover the island. Portuguese navigator Pedro A. Campos named it &quot;Os Barbados&quot; (meaning &quot;bearded ones&quot;).

Frequent slave-raiding missions by the Spanish Empire in the early 16th century led to a massive decline in the Amerindian population so that by 1541 a Spanish writer claimed they were uninhabited. The Amerindians were either captured for use as slaves by the Spanish or fled to other, more easily defensible mountainous islands nearby.

From about 1600 the English, French, and Dutch began to found colonies in the North American mainland and the smaller islands of the West Indies. Although Spanish and Portuguese sailors had visited Barbados, the first English ship touched the island on 14 May 1625, and England was the first European nation to establish a lasting settlement there from 1627, when the &quot;William and John&quot; arrived with more than 60 white settlers and six African slaves.

England is commonly said to have made its initial claim to Barbados in 1625, although reportedly an earlier claim may have been made in 1620. Nonetheless, Barbados was claimed from 1625 in the name of King James I of England and Scotland.. There were earlier English settlements in The Americas (1607: Jamestown, 1609: Bermuda, and 1620: Plymouth Colony), and several islands in the Leeward Islands were claimed by the English at about the same time as Barbados (1623: St Kitts, 1628: Nevis, 1632: Montserrat, 1632: Antigua). Nevertheless, the Colony of Barbados quickly grew to become the third major English settlement in the Americas due to its prime eastern location.

===Early English settlement===
The settlement was established as a proprietary colony and funded by Sir William Courten, a City of London merchant who acquired the title to Barbados and several other islands. So the first colonists were actually tenants and much of the profits of their labor returned to Courten and his company.

The first English ship, which had arrived on 14 May 1625, was captained by John Powell. The first settlement began on 17 February 1627, near what is now Holetown (formerly Jamestown), by a group led by John Powell&#x27;s younger brother, Henry, consisting of 80 settlers and 10 English laborers. The latter were young indentured laborers who according to some sources had been abducted, effectively making them slaves. About 40 Taino slaves were brought in from Guyana to help plant crops on the west coast of the island.

Courten&#x27;s title was transferred to James Hay, 1st Earl of Carlisle, in what was called the &quot;Great Barbados Robbery.&quot; Carlisle established a separate settlement at what he called Carlisle Bay, which later became known as Bridgetown.

Carlisle then chose as governor Henry Hawley, who established the House of Assembly in 1639, in an effort to appease the planters, who might otherwise have opposed his controversial appointment. That year, 12 years after the settlement was established, the white adult population stood at an estimated 8,700.

In the period 1640–1660, the West Indies attracted over two-thirds of the total number of English emigrants to the Americas. By 1650, there were 44,000 settlers in the West Indies, as compared to 12,000 on the Chesapeake and 23,000 in New England.

Most English arrivals were indentured. After five years of labour, they were given &quot;freedom dues&quot; of about £10, usually in goods. Before the mid-1630s, they also received 5–10 acres of land, but after that time the island filled and there was no more free land. Around the time of Cromwell a number of rebels and criminals were also transported there.

Timothy Meads of Warwickshire was one of the rebels sent to Barbados at that time, before he received compensation for servitude of 1000 acres of land in North Carolina in 1666. Parish registers from the 1650s show, for the white population, four times as many deaths as marriages. The death rate was very high.

Before this, the mainstay of the infant colony&#x27;s economy was the growing export of tobacco, but tobacco prices eventually fell in the 1630s, as Chesapeake production expanded.

===England&#x27;s civil war===

Around the same time, fighting during the War of the Three Kingdoms and the Interregnum spilled over into Barbados and Barbadian territorial waters. The island was not involved in the war until after the execution of Charles I, when the island&#x27;s government fell under the control of Royalists (ironically the Governor, Philip Bell, remained loyal to Parliament while the Barbadian House of Assembly of Barbados, under the influence of Humphrey Walrond, supported Charles II). On 7 May 1650, the General Assembly of Barbados voted to receive Lord Willoughby as governor, a move which confirmed the Cavaliers as the government of Barbados.

Willoughby rounded up and deported many Roundheads from Barbados, confiscating their property. To try to bring the recalcitrant colony to heel, the Commonwealth Parliament passed an act on 3 October 1650 prohibiting trade between England and Barbados, and because the island also traded with the Netherlands, further navigation acts were passed prohibiting any but English vessels trading with Dutch colonies. These acts were a precursor to the First Anglo-Dutch War.

The Commonwealth of England sent an invasion force under the command of Sir George Ayscue, which arrived in October 1651, and blockaded the island. After some skirmishing, the Royalists in the House of Assembly, feeling the pressures of commercial isolation, led by Lord Willoughby surrendered. The conditions of the surrender were incorporated into the Charter of Barbados (Treaty of Oistins), which was signed at the Mermaid&#x27;s Inn, Oistins, on 17 January 1652.

===Sugar cane and slavery===

Sugar cane cultivation in Barbados began in the 1640s, after its introduction in 1637 by Pieter Blower. Initially, rum was produced but by 1642, sugar was the focus of the industry. As it developed into the main commercial enterprise, Barbados was divided into large plantation estates which replaced the small holdings of the early English settlers as the wealthy planters pushed out the poorer. Some of the displaced farmers relocated to the English colonies in North America, most notably South Carolina. To work the plantations, black Africans – primarily from West Africa – were imported as slaves in such numbers that there were three for every one planter. Increasingly after 1750 the plantations were owned by absentee landlords living in Britain and operated by hired managers. Persecuted Catholics from Ireland also worked the plantations. Life expectancy of slaves was short and replacements were purchased annually.

The introduction of sugar cane from Dutch Brazil in 1640 completely transformed society and the economy. Barbados eventually had one of the world&#x27;s biggest sugar industries. One group instrumental in ensuring the early success of the industry were the Sephardic Jews, who had originally been expelled from the Iberian Peninsula, to end up in Dutch Brazil. As the effects of the new crop increased, so did the shift in the ethnic composition of Barbados and surrounding islands. The workable sugar plantation required a large investment and a great deal of heavy labour. At first, Dutch traders supplied the equipment, financing, and African slaves, in addition to transporting most of the sugar to Europe. Barbados replaced Hispaniola as the main sugar producer in the Caribbean.

In 1655, the population of Barbados was estimated at 43,000, of which about 20,000 were of African descent, with the remainder mainly of English descent. These English smallholders were eventually bought out and the island filled up with large African slave-worked sugar plantations. By 1660, there was near parity with 27,000 blacks and 26,000 whites. By 1666, at least 12,000 white smallholders had been bought out, died, or left the island. Many of the remaining whites were increasingly poor. By 1673, black slaves (33,184) outnumbered white settlers (21,309). By 1680, there were 17 slaves for every indentured servant. By 1684, the disparity grew even further to 19,568 white settlers and 46,502 black slaves. By 1696, there was an estimated 42,000 enslaved blacks, and the white population declined further to 16,888 by 1715.

Due to the increased implementation of slave codes, which emphasized differential treatment between Africans, and the white workers and ruling planter class, the island became increasingly unattractive to poor whites. Black or slave codes were implemented in 1661, 1676, 1682, and 1688. In response to these codes, several slave rebellions were attempted or planned during this time, but none succeeded. Nevertheless, poor whites who had or acquired the means to emigrate often did so. Planters expanded their importation of African slaves to cultivate sugar cane. One early advocate of slave rights in Barbados was the visiting Quaker preacher Alice Curwen in 1677: &quot;For I am persuaded, that if they whom thou call&#x27;st thy Slaves, be Upright-hearted to God, the Lord God Almighty will set them Free in a way that thou knowest not; for there is none set free but in Christ Jesus, for all other Freedom will prove but a Bondage.&quot;

By 1660, Barbados generated more trade than all the other English colonies combined. This remained so until it was eventually surpassed by geographically larger islands like Jamaica in 1713. But even so, the estimated value of the Colony of Barbados in 1730–1731 was as much as £5,500,000. Bridgetown, the capital, was one of the three largest cities in English America (the other two being Boston, Massachusetts, and Port Royal, Jamaica.) By 1700, the English West Indies produced 25,000 tons of sugar, compared to 20,000 for Brazil, 10,000 for the French islands and 4,000 for the Dutch islands. This quickly replaced tobacco, which had been the island&#x27;s main export.

As the sugar industry developed into its main commercial enterprise, Barbados was divided into large plantation estates that replaced the smallholdings of the early English settlers. In 1680, over half the arable land was held by 175 large planters, each of whom used at least 60 slaves. The great plantation owners had connections with the English aristocracy and great influence on Parliament. (In 1668, the West Indian sugar crop sold for £180,000 after customs of £18,000. Chesapeake tobacco earned £50,000 after customs of £75,000).

So much land was devoted to sugar that most foods had to be imported from New England. The poorer whites who were moved off the island went to the English Leeward Islands, or especially to Jamaica. In 1670, the Province of South Carolina was founded, when some of the surplus population again left Barbados. Other nations receiving large numbers of Barbadians included British Guiana and Panama.

Justin Roberts shows that enslaved persons did not spend the majority of time in restricted roles cultivating, harvesting and processing sugar cane, the island&#x27;s most important cash crop. Rather, the enslaved were involved in various activities and in multiple roles: raising livestock, fertilizing soil, growing provisional crops, maintaining plantation infrastructure, caregiving and other tasks. One notable soil management technique was intercropping, planting subsistence crops between the rows of cash crops, which demanded of the enslaved skilled and experienced observations of growing conditions for efficient land use.

By 1750, there were about 18,000 white settlers, compared to approximately 65,000 African slaves.

The slave trade ceased in 1807 and slaves were emancipated in 1834.

===Bussa&#x27;s rebellion===



The British abolished the slave trade in 1807, but not the institution itself. The abolition of slavery itself would only be enacted in 1833 in most parts of the British Empire.

In 1816, enslaved persons rose up in what was the first of three rebellions in the British West Indies to occur in the interval between the end of the slave trade and emancipation, and the largest slave uprising in the island&#x27;s history. Around 20,000 enslaved persons from over 70 plantations are thought to have been involved. The rebellion was partly fuelled by information about the growing abolitionist movement in England, and the opposition against such by local whites.

The rebellion largely surprised planters, who felt that their slaves were content because they were allowed weekly dances, participated in social and economic activity across the island and were generally fed and looked after. However, they had refused to reform the Barbados Slave Code since its inception, a code that denied slaves human rights and prescribed inhumane torture, mutilation or death as a means of control. This contributed to what was later termed &quot;Bussa&#x27;s Rebellion&quot;, named after the slave ranger Bussa, and the result of a growing sentiment that the treatment of slaves in Barbados was &quot;intolerable&quot;, and who believed the political climate in Britain made the time ripe to peacefully negotiate with planters for freedom. Bussa became the most famous of the rebellion&#x27;s organizers, many of whom were either enslaved persons of some higher position or literate freedmen. One woman, Nanny Grigg, is also named as a principal organizer.

However, the rebellion eventually failed. The uprising was triggered prematurely, but the slaves were already greatly outmatched. Barbados&#x27; flat terrain gave the horses of the better-armed militia the clear advantage over the rebels, with no mountains or forest for concealment. Slaves had also thought they would be supported by freed men of colour, but these instead joined efforts to quell the rebellion. Although they drove whites off the plantations, widespread killings did not take place. By the end, 120 slaves died in combat or were immediately executed and another 144 brought to trial and executed. The remaining rebels were shipped off the island.

===Towards the abolition of slavery===
In 1826, the Barbados legislature passed the Consolidated Slave Law, which simultaneously granted concessions to the slaves while providing reassurances to the slave owners. 
Slavery was finally abolished in the British Empire eight years later, in 1834. In Barbados and the rest of the British West Indian colonies, full emancipation from slavery was preceded by a contentious apprenticeship period that lasted four years.

In 1884, the Barbados Agricultural Society sent a letter to Sir Francis Hincks requesting his private and public views on whether the Dominion of Canada would favourably entertain having the then Colony of Barbados admitted as a member of the Canadian Confederation. Asked from Canada were the terms of the Canadian side to initiate discussions, and whether or not the island of Barbados could depend on the full influence of Canada in getting the change agreed to by the British Parliament at Westminster.

===Towards decolonisation===
In 1952, the &quot;Barbados Advocate&quot; newspaper polled several prominent Barbadian politicians, lawyers, businessmen, the Speaker of the House of Assembly and later as first President of the Senate, Sir Theodore Branker, Q.C.and found them to be in favour of immediate federation of Barbados along with the rest of the British Caribbean with complete Dominion Status within five years from the date of inauguration of the West Indies Federation with Canada.

However, plantation owners and merchants of British descent still dominated local politics, owing to the high income qualification required for voting. More than 70 per cent of the population, many of them disenfranchised women, were excluded from the democratic process. It was not until the 1930s that the descendants of emancipated slaves began a movement for political rights. One of the leaders of this, Sir Grantley Adams, founded the Barbados Progressive League in 1938, which later became known as the Barbados Labour Party (BLP).

Adams and his party demanded more rights for the poor and for the people, and staunchly supported the monarchy. Progress toward a more democratic government in Barbados was made in 1942, when the exclusive income qualification was lowered and women were given the right to vote. By 1949, governmental control was wrested from the planters, and in 1953 Adams became Premier of Barbados.

From 1958 to 1962, Barbados was one of the ten members of the West Indies Federation, a federalist organisation doomed by nationalist attitudes. Grantley Adams served as its first and only &quot;Premier&quot;, but his leadership failed in attempts to form similar unions, and his continued defence of the monarchy was used by his opponents as evidence that he was no longer in touch with the needs of his country. Errol Walton Barrow, a fervent reformer, became the people&#x27;s new advocate. Barrow had left the BLP and formed the Democratic Labour Party (DLP) as a liberal alternative to Adams&#x27; conservative government. Barrow instituted many progressive social programmes, such as free education for all Barbadians and a school meals system. By 1961, Barrow had replaced Adams as Premier and the DLP controlled the government.

With the Federation dissolved, Barbados reverted to its former status, that of a self-governing colony. The island negotiated its own independence at a constitutional conference with Britain in June 1966. After years of peaceful and democratic progress, Barbados finally became an independent state on 30 November 1966, with Errol Barrow its first prime minister, with Elizabeth II as Queen of Barbados. Upon independence Barbados became a full member of the Commonwealth of Nations. A year later, Barbados&#x27; international linkages were expanded by obtaining membership of both the United Nations and the Organization of American States.

===Political history===
Carrington (1982) examines politics during the American Revolution, revealing that Barbadian political leaders shared many of the grievances and goals of the American revolutionaries, but that they were unwilling to go to war over them. Nevertheless, the repeated conflicts between the island assembly and the royal governors brought important constitutional reforms which confirmed the legislature&#x27;s control over most local matters and its power over the executive.

From 1800 until 1885, Barbados then served as the main seat of Government for the former British colonies of the Windward Islands. During that period of around 85 years, the resident Governor of Barbados also served as the Colonial head of the Windward Islands. After the Government of Barbados officially exited from the Windward Island union in 1885, the seat was moved from Bridgetown to St. George&#x27;s on the neighbouring island of Grenada, where it remained until the territory of the Windward Islands was dissolved.

Soon after Barbados&#x27; withdrawal from the Windward Islands, Barbados became aware that Tobago was going to be amalgamated with another territory as part of a single state. In response, Barbados made an official bid to the British Government to have neighbouring Island Tobago joined with Barbados in a political union. The British government however decided that Trinidad would be a better fit and Tobago instead was made a Ward of Trinidad.

African slaves worked on plantations owned by merchants of English and Scottish descent. It was these merchants who continued to dominate Barbados politics, even after emancipation, due to a high income restriction on voting. Only the upper 30 per cent had any voice in the democratic process. It was not until the 1930s that a movement for political rights was begun by the descendants of emancipated slaves, who started trade unions. Charles Duncan O&#x27;Neal, Clennell Wickham and the members of the Democratic League were some of the leaders of this movement. This was initially opposed by Sir Grantley Adams, who played an instrumental role in the bankruptcy and shutdown of &quot;The Herald&quot; newspapers, one of the movement&#x27;s foremost voices. Adams would later found the Barbados Progressive League (now the Barbados Labour Party) in 1938, during the Great Depression. The Depression caused mass unemployment and strikes, and the standard of living on the island fell drastically. With the death of O’Neal and the demise of the League, Adams cemented his power, but he used this to advocate for causes that had once been his rivals, including more help for the people especially the poor.

Finally, in 1942, the income qualification was lowered. This was followed by the introduction of universal adult suffrage in 1951, and Adams was elected as Premier of Barbados in 1958. For his action and leadership, Adams would later become a National Hero.

From 1958 to 1962, Barbados was one of the ten members of the West Indies Federation, an organisation doomed to failure by a number of factors, including what were often petty nationalistic prejudices and limited legislative power. Indeed, Adams&#x27;s position as &quot;Prime Minister&quot; was a misnomer, as all of the Federation members were still colonies of Britain. Adams, once a political visionary and now a man whose policies seemed to some blind to the needs of his country, not only held fast to his notion of defending the monarchy but also made additional attempts to form other Federation-like entities after that union&#x27;s demise. When the Federation was terminated, Barbados reverted to its former status as a self-governing colony, but efforts were made by Adams to form another federation composed of Barbados and the Leeward and Windward Islands.

Errol Walton Barrow was to replace Grantley Adams as the advocate of populism, and it was he who would eventually lead the island into Independence in 1966. Barrow, a fervent reformer and once a member of the Barbados Labour Party, had left the party to form his own Democratic Labour Party, as the liberal alternative to the conservative BLP government under Adams. He remains a National Hero for his work in social reformation, including the institution of free education for all Barbadians. In 1961, Barrow supplanted Adams as Premier as the DLP took control of the government.

== Independence ==
Due to several years of growing autonomy, Barbados, with Barrow at the helm, was able successfully to negotiate its independence at a constitutional conference with the United Kingdom in June 1966. After years of peaceful and democratic progress, Barbados finally became an independent state and formally joined the Commonwealth of Nations on 30 November 1966, Errol Barrow serving as its first prime minister.

The Barrow government sought to diversify the economy away from agriculture, seeking to boost industry and the tourism sector. Barbados was also at the forefront of regional integration efforts, spearheading the creation of CARIFTA and CARICOM. The DLP lost the 1976 Barbadian general election to the BLP under Tom Adams. Adams adopted a more conservative and strongly pro-Western stance, allowing the Americans to use Barbados as the launchpad for their invasion of Grenada in 1983. Adams died in office in 1985 and was replaced by Harold Bernard St. John; however, St. John lost the 1986 Barbadian general election, which saw the return of the DLP under Errol Barrow, who had been highly critical of the US intervention in Grenada. Barrow, too, died in office, and was replaced by Lloyd Erskine Sandiford, who remained prime minister until 1994.

Owen Arthur of the BLP won the 1994 Barbadian general election, remaining prime minister until 2008. Arthur was a strong advocate of republicanism, though a planned referendum to replace Queen Elizabeth as Head of State in 2008 never took place. The DLP won the 2008 Barbadian general election, but the new Prime Minister David Thompson died in 2010 and was replaced by Freundel Stuart. The BLP returned to power in 2018 under Mia Mottley, who became Barbados&#x27;s first female prime minister.

=== Transition to republic ===
The Government of Barbados announced on 15 September 2020 that it intended to become a republic by 30 November 2021, the 55th anniversary of its independence resulting in the replacement of the hereditary monarch of Barbados with an elected president. Barbados would then cease to be a Commonwealth realm, but could maintain membership in the Commonwealth of Nations, like Guyana and Trinidad and Tobago.

On 20 September 2021, just over a full year after the announcement for the transition was made, the Constitution (Amendment) (No. 2) Bill, 2021 was introduced to the Parliament of Barbados. Passed on 6 October, the Bill made amendments to the Constitution of Barbados, introducing the office of the President of Barbados to replace the role of Elizabeth II, Queen of Barbados. The following week, on 12 October 2021, incumbent Governor-General of Barbados Sandra Mason was jointly nominated by the Prime Minister and Leader of the Opposition as candidate to be the first President of Barbados, and was subsequently elected on 20 October. Mason took office on 30 November 2021. Prince Charles, who was heir apparent to the Barbadian Crown, attended the swearing-in ceremony in Bridgetown at the invitation of the Government of Barbados.

Queen Elizabeth II sent a message of congratulations to President Mason and the people of Barbados, saying: &quot;As you celebrate this momentous day, I send you and all Barbadians my warmest good wishes for your happiness, peace and prosperity in the future.&quot;

A survey was taken between October 23, 2021, and November 10, 2021, by the University of the West Indies that showed 34% of respondents being in favour of transitioning to a republic, while 30% were indifferent. Notably, no overall majority was found in the survey; with 24% not indicating a preference, and the remaining 12% being opposed to the removal of Queen Elizabeth.

In January 2022, Barbados Prime Minister Mia Mottley&#x27;s Labor Party received a landslide victory, winning all 30 legislative seats, in the first general election since Barbados became a republic.

On 20 June 2022, a Constitutional Review Commission was formed and sworn in by Jeffrey Gibson (who, at the time, was serving temporarily as Acting President of Barbados) to review the Constitution of Barbados.

The Commission will have an 18-month timeline to complete its work. They are expected to solicit input from members of the public in Barbados via a series of face-to-face and online events.

==Confederations and union proposals==
A number of proposals have been mooted in the past to integrate Barbados into neighbouring countries or even the Canadian Confederation. To date all have failed, and one proposal led to deadly riots in 1876, when Governor John Pope Hennessy tried to pressure Barbadian politicians to integrate more firmly into the Windward Islands. Governor Hennessy was quickly transferred from Barbados by the British Crown. In 1884, attempts were then made by the influential Barbados Agricultural Society to have Barbados form a political association with the Canadian Confederation. From 1958 to 1962 Barbados became one of the ten states of the West Indies Federation. Lastly in the 1990s, a plan was devised by the leaders of Guyana, Barbados, and Trinidad and Tobago to form a political association between those three governments. Again this deal was never completed, following the loss of Sir Lloyd Erskine Sandiford in the Barbadian general elections.

== See also ==

*Bussa&#x27;s rebellion
*Military history of Barbados
*British colonization of the Americas
*French colonization of the Americas
*History of the Americas
*History of North America
*History of the British West Indies
*List of prime ministers of Barbados
*List of governors of Barbados
*Longitude
*Piracy in the Caribbean
*Politics of Barbados
*Spanish colonization of the Americas
*Timeline of Barbadian history
*West Indies Federation
==Notes==
==References==
==Additional sources==
*
*Hoyes, F. A. 1963. &quot;The Rise of West Indian Democracy: The Life and Times of Sir Grantley Adams&quot;. Advocate Press.
*Williams, Eric. 1964. &quot;British Historians and the West Indies&quot;. P.N.M. Publishing Company, Port-of-Spain.
*Scott, Caroline. 1999. &quot;Insight Guide Barbados&quot;. Discovery Channel and Insight Guides; fourth edition, Singapore. 

==Further reading==
*Beckles, Hilary McD., and Andrew Downes. &quot;The Economics of Transition to the Black Labor System in Barbados, 1630–1680,&quot; &quot;Journal of Interdisciplinary History,&quot; Vol. 18, No. 2 (Autumn 1987), pp. 225–247. in JSTOR
*Blackman, Francis W., &quot;National Heroine of Barbados: Sarah Ann Gill&quot; (Barbados: Methodist Church, 1998, 27 pp.)
*Blackman, Francis W., &quot;Methodism, 200 years in Barbados&quot; (Barbados: Caribbean Contact, 1988, 160 pp.)
*Butler, Kathleen Mary. &quot;The Economics of Emancipation: Jamaica &amp; Barbados, 1823–1843&quot; (1995), online edition
*Dunn, Richard S., &quot;The Barbados Census of 1680: Profile of the Richest Colony in English America&quot;, &quot;William and Mary Quarterly,&quot; vol. 26, no. 1 (January 1969), pp. 3–30, in JSTOR.
*
*Harlow, V. T. &quot;A History of Barbados&quot; (1926).
*Howe, Glenford D., and Don D. Marshall, eds. &quot;The Empowering Impulse: The Nationalist Tradition of Barbados&quot; (Canoe Press, 2001) online edition
*Kurlansky, Mark. 1992. &quot;A Continent of Islands: Searching for the Caribbean Destiny&quot;. Addison-Wesley Publishing. .
*Michener, James, A. 1989. &quot;Caribbean&quot;. Secker &amp; Warburg. London. . Especially see Chapter V., &quot;Big Storms in Little England&quot;, pp. 140–172; popular writer
*Molen, Patricia A. &quot;Population and Social Patterns in Barbados in the Early Eighteenth Century,&quot; &quot;William and Mary Quarterly,&quot; Vol. 28, No. 2 (April 1971), pp. 287–300 in JSTOR
*
*Ragatz, Lowell Joseph. &quot;Absentee Landlordism in the British Caribbean, 1750–1833&quot;, &quot;Agricultural History,&quot; Vol. 5, No. 1 (January 1931), pp. 7–24 in JSTOR
*Richardson; Bonham C. &quot;Economy and Environment in the Caribbean: Barbados and the Windwards in the Late 1800s&quot; (The University of the West Indies Press, 1997) online edition 
*Sheridan; Richard B. &quot;Sugar and Slavery: An Economic History of the British West Indies, 1623–1775&quot; (University of the West Indies Press, 1994) online edition 
*Starkey, Otis P. &quot;The Economic Geography of Barbados&quot; (1939).
*Thomas, Robert Paul. &quot;The Sugar Colonies of the Old Empire: Profit or Loss for Great Britain?&quot; &quot;Economic History Review&quot;, Vol. 21, No. 1 (April 1968), pp. 30–45 in JSTOR

==External links==
*Notable dates of Barbadian History – Government of Barbados
*African influences in Barbados
*Barbados Museum &amp; Historical Society
*History, Government Information Services, Government of Barbados
*Rulers.org — Barbados List of rulers for Barbados
*Watson, Karl. The Civil War in Barbados. BBC History, 2001-04-01.
*The Tramways of Barbados: historical survey with map and 16 illustrations
*Report of the Brown University Steering Committee on Slavery and Justice</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q244" start="0" end="8" title="Barbados" label="Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q757" start="88" end="120" title="Saint Vincent and the Grenadines" label="Saint Vincent and the Grenadines"/>
<link wikidata="Q36168" start="285" end="295" title="Bridgetown" label="Bridgetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q117244" start="377" end="383" title="Arawak peoples" label="Arawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q27106" start="389" end="395" title="Island Caribs" label="Caribs"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="411" end="448" title="European colonization of the Americas" label="European colonization of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="508" end="522" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q45670" start="602" end="610" title="Kingdom of Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q617219" start="648" end="655" title="English overseas possessions" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="668" end="675" title="British Empire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="705" end="715" title="Sugar cane" label="Sugar cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q22092280" start="984" end="1006" title="Consolidated Slave Law" label="Consolidated Slave Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q29914504" start="1032" end="1076" title="Bussa&amp;#x27;s rebellion" label="largest slave rebellion in Barbadian history"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="1142" end="1156" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="1279" end="1302" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="1339" end="1362" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="1367" end="1390" title="parliamentary democracy" label="parliamentary democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="1408" end="1426" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster system"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="1433" end="1445" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257585" start="1447" end="1464" title="Queen of Barbados" label="Queen of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="1469" end="1482" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827147" start="1539" end="1550" title="Mia Mottley" label="Mia Mottley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517447" start="1757" end="1762" title="adzes" label="adzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="1865" end="1875" title="Amerindian" label="Amerindian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4405634" start="2002" end="2010" title="Saladoid" label="Saladoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q117244" start="2150" end="2157" title="Arawak people" label="Arawaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q27106" start="2326" end="2334" title="Kalinago" label="Kalinago"/>
<link wikidata="Q27106" start="2349" end="2355" title="Island Caribs" label="Caribs"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="2747" end="2761" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="3316" end="3323" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="3715" end="3747" title="James I of England" label="James I of England and Scotland."/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="3791" end="3803" title="The Americas" label="The Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q323813" start="3811" end="3820" title="Jamestown, Virginia" label="Jamestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="3828" end="3835" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q126195" start="3847" end="3862" title="Plymouth Colony" label="Plymouth Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q29971" start="3892" end="3907" title="Leeward Islands" label="Leeward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q204989" start="3978" end="3986" title="St Kitts" label="St Kitts"/>
<link wikidata="Q207794" start="3994" end="3999" title="Nevis" label="Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13353" start="4007" end="4017" title="Montserrat" label="Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q316390" start="4025" end="4032" title="Antigua" label="Antigua"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407580" start="4249" end="4267" title="proprietary colony" label="proprietary colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568523" start="4286" end="4301" title="William Courten" label="William Courten"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="4305" end="4319" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290478" start="4666" end="4674" title="Holetown" label="Holetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122364" start="4831" end="4847" title="indentured labor" label="indentured labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q210623" start="4941" end="4946" title="Taino" label="Taino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023437" start="5076" end="5107" title="James Hay, 1st Earl of Carlisle" label="James Hay, 1st Earl of Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132819" start="5316" end="5328" title="Henry Hawley (governor)" label="Henry Hawley"/>
<link wikidata="Q570619" start="5350" end="5367" title="Barbados House of Assembly" label="House of Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="5804" end="5814" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="5829" end="5840" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577772" start="6775" end="6800" title="War of the Three Kingdoms" label="War of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558636" start="6809" end="6820" title="Interregnum (England)" label="Interregnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378359" start="6901" end="6920" title="English Revolution in the Colonies" label="involved in the war"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="6950" end="6959" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183207" start="7057" end="7068" title="Philip Bell (colonial administrator)" label="Philip Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="7088" end="7098" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q570619" start="7119" end="7148" title="House of Assembly of Barbados" label="House of Assembly of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="7201" end="7211" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772473" start="7279" end="7294" title="Francis Willoughby, 5th Baron Willoughby of Parham" label="Lord Willoughby"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7525" end="7548" title="Rump Parliament#Commonwealth of England" label="Commonwealth Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="7673" end="7684" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q318785" start="7694" end="7709" title="navigation acts" label="navigation acts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7771" end="7785" title="Dutch Empire#Atlantic" label="Dutch colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151913" start="7822" end="7843" title="First Anglo-Dutch War" label="First Anglo-Dutch War"/>
<link wikidata="Q330362" start="7850" end="7873" title="Commonwealth of England" label="Commonwealth of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q599171" start="7918" end="7935" title="George Ayscue" label="Sir George Ayscue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772473" start="8112" end="8127" title="Francis Willoughby, 5th Baron Willoughby of Parham" label="Lord Willoughby"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8200" end="8219" title="Charter of Barbados" label="Charter of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q692475" start="8285" end="8292" title="Oistins" label="Oistins"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="8345" end="8355" title="Sugar cane" label="Sugar cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="8490" end="8495" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="8837" end="8851" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="9158" end="9165" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="9294" end="9304" title="sugar cane" label="sugar cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q221357" start="9310" end="9322" title="Dutch Brazil" label="Dutch Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="9531" end="9545" title="Sephardi Jews" label="Sephardic Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="9589" end="9606" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q221357" start="9621" end="9633" title="Dutch Brazil" label="Dutch Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981541" start="10933" end="10944" title="Barbados Slave Code" label="slave codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931533" start="11099" end="11110" title="redlegs" label="poor whites"/>
<link wikidata="Q18559685" start="11539" end="11551" title="Alice Curwen" label="Alice Curwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="12229" end="12250" title="Boston, Massachusetts" label="Boston, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q685357" start="12256" end="12275" title="Port Royal, Jamaica" label="Port Royal, Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513167" start="13264" end="13290" title="Province of South Carolina" label="Province of South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q918126" start="13422" end="13436" title="British Guiana" label="British Guiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="13441" end="13447" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7554944" start="13866" end="13881" title="soil management" label="soil management"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="14311" end="14322" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q29914504" start="14490" end="14497" title="Bussa&amp;#x27;s rebellion" label="rose up"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981541" start="15214" end="15233" title="Barbados Slave Code" label="Barbados Slave Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q29914504" start="15477" end="15482" title="Bussa" label="Bussa"/>
<link wikidata="Q22092280" start="16680" end="16702" title="Consolidated Slave Law" label="Consolidated Slave Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481296" start="17120" end="17138" title="Francis Hincks" label="Sir Francis Hincks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17275" end="17283" title="Proposed provinces and territories of Canada#Current or former British territories" label="admitted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="17303" end="17325" title="Canadian Confederation" label="Canadian Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519880" start="17616" end="17633" title="Barbados Advocate" label="Barbados Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q570619" start="17739" end="17756" title="House of Assembly of Barbados" label="House of Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q586461" start="17793" end="17799" title="Senate of Barbados" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="17929" end="17938" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q652560" start="18024" end="18046" title="West Indies Federation" label="West Indies Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q707548" start="18470" end="18488" title="Sir Grantley Adams" label="Sir Grantley Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q740420" start="18571" end="18592" title="Barbados Labour Party" label="Barbados Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q652560" start="19050" end="19072" title="West Indies Federation" label="West Indies Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q707548" start="19133" end="19147" title="Grantley Adams" label="Grantley Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361644" start="19402" end="19421" title="Errol Walton Barrow" label="Errol Walton Barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q956182" start="19521" end="19544" title="Democratic Labour Party (Barbados)" label="Democratic Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448101" start="19906" end="19927" title="self-governing colony" label="self-governing colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="20194" end="20206" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257585" start="20210" end="20227" title="Queen of Barbados" label="Queen of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="20284" end="20307" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="20411" end="20425" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q123759" start="20434" end="20465" title="Organization of American States" label="Organization of American States"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="21054" end="21061" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q183416" start="21078" end="21094" title="Windward Islands" label="Windward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q773097" start="21148" end="21168" title="Governor of Barbados" label="Governor of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572261" start="21188" end="21225" title="Colonial heads of the Windward Islands" label="Colonial head of the Windward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q41547" start="21356" end="21373" title="St. George&amp;#x27;s, Grenada" label="St. George&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q769" start="21404" end="21411" title="Grenada" label="Grenada"/>
<link wikidata="Q185111" start="21582" end="21588" title="Tobago" label="Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q842438" start="21997" end="22025" title="British people" label="English and Scottish descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="22360" end="22372" title="trade unions" label="trade unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076999" start="22374" end="22400" title="Charles Duncan O&amp;#x27;Neal" label="Charles Duncan O&amp;#x27;Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131612" start="22402" end="22418" title="Clennell Wickham" label="Clennell Wickham"/>
<link wikidata="Q707548" start="22537" end="22551" title="Grantley Adams" label="Grantley Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q740420" start="22763" end="22784" title="Barbados Labour Party" label="Barbados Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="22806" end="22822" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971242" start="22868" end="22875" title="British West Indian labour unrest of 1934–1939" label="strikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q175850" start="22885" end="22903" title="standard of living" label="standard of living"/>
<link wikidata="Q185387" start="23258" end="23266" title="suffrage" label="suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q106670651" start="23388" end="23401" title="National Heroes of Barbados" label="National Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q652560" start="23466" end="23488" title="West Indies Federation" label="West Indies Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257585" start="23940" end="23948" title="Monarchy of Barbados" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448101" start="24134" end="24155" title="self-governing colony" label="self-governing colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361644" start="24275" end="24294" title="Errol Walton Barrow" label="Errol Walton Barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858606" start="24410" end="24422" title="Barbados Independence Act 1966" label="Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q740420" start="24484" end="24505" title="Barbados Labour Party" label="Barbados Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q956182" start="24542" end="24565" title="Democratic Labour Party (Barbados)" label="Democratic Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q106670651" start="24655" end="24668" title="National Heroes of Barbados" label="National Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340978" start="24739" end="24748" title="Education in Barbados" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="25192" end="25215" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039385" start="25512" end="25519" title="CARIFTA" label="CARIFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q205995" start="25524" end="25531" title="CARICOM" label="CARICOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858572" start="25550" end="25581" title="1976 Barbadian general election" label="1976 Barbadian general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q259189" start="25599" end="25608" title="Tom Adams (politician)" label="Tom Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q501866" start="25743" end="25762" title="United States invasion of Grenada" label="invasion of Grenada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371769" start="25821" end="25844" title="Harold Bernard St. John" label="Harold Bernard St. John"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858574" start="25873" end="25904" title="1986 Barbadian general election" label="1986 Barbadian general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q114622" start="26071" end="26094" title="Lloyd Erskine Sandiford" label="Lloyd Erskine Sandiford"/>
<link wikidata="Q356389" start="26137" end="26148" title="Owen Arthur" label="Owen Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858576" start="26168" end="26199" title="1994 Barbadian general election" label="1994 Barbadian general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4026809" start="26399" end="26430" title="2008 Barbadian general election" label="2008 Barbadian general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q310082" start="26459" end="26473" title="David Thompson (Barbadian politician)" label="David Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q57709" start="26507" end="26522" title="Freundel Stuart" label="Freundel Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q46994649" start="26550" end="26557" title="2018 Barbadian general election" label="in 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827147" start="26564" end="26575" title="Mia Mottley" label="Mia Mottley"/>
<link wikidata="Q202686" start="26951" end="26969" title="Commonwealth realm" label="Commonwealth realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="27008" end="27031" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q734" start="27038" end="27044" title="Guyana" label="Guyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q754" start="27049" end="27068" title="Trinidad and Tobago" label="Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q108857904" start="27370" end="27391" title="President of Barbados" label="President of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="27415" end="27427" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261556" start="27498" end="27526" title="Governor-General of Barbados" label="Governor-General of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q28405232" start="27642" end="27663" title="List of heads of state of Barbados" label="President of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q108908701" start="27686" end="27693" title="2021 Barbadian presidential election" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="27748" end="27762" title="Prince Charles" label="Prince Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q746153" start="28250" end="28279" title="University of the West Indies" label="University of the West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827147" start="28592" end="28603" title="Mia Mottley" label="Mia Mottley"/>
<link wikidata="Q84076952" start="28708" end="28716" title="2022 Barbadian general election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="29306" end="29328" title="Canadian Confederation" label="Canadian Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607815" start="29415" end="29433" title="John Pope Hennessy" label="John Pope Hennessy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183416" start="29508" end="29524" title="Windward Islands" label="Windward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q114622" start="30076" end="30103" title="Sir Lloyd Erskine Sandiford" label="Sir Lloyd Erskine Sandiford"/>
<link wikidata="Q29914504" start="30158" end="30180" title="Bussa&amp;#x27;s rebellion" label="Bussa&amp;#x27;s rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055559" start="30182" end="30210" title="Military history of Barbados" label="Military history of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q918254" start="30212" end="30248" title="British colonization of the Americas" label="British colonization of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990219" start="30250" end="30285" title="French colonization of the Americas" label="French colonization of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q690256" start="30287" end="30310" title="History of the Americas" label="History of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q149527" start="30312" end="30336" title="History of North America" label="History of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869161" start="30338" end="30372" title="History of the British West Indies" label="History of the British West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137950" start="30374" end="30409" title="List of prime ministers of Barbados" label="List of prime ministers of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q773097" start="30411" end="30440" title="List of governors of Barbados" label="List of governors of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="30442" end="30451" title="Longitude" label="Longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469245" start="30453" end="30476" title="Piracy in the Caribbean" label="Piracy in the Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155602" start="30478" end="30498" title="Politics of Barbados" label="Politics of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047607" start="30500" end="30536" title="Spanish colonization of the Americas" label="Spanish colonization of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805639" start="30538" end="30567" title="Timeline of Barbadian history" label="Timeline of Barbadian history"/>
<link wikidata="Q652560" start="30569" end="30591" title="West Indies Federation" label="West Indies Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760891" start="31032" end="31052" title="Hilary Beckles" label="Beckles, Hilary McD."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40439" wikidata="Q77189" url="?curid=40439" title="Lothair III, Holy Roman Emperor">
<text>Lothair III, sometimes numbered Lothair II and also known as Lothair of Supplinburg ( June 1075 – 4 December 1137), was Holy Roman Emperor from 1133 until his death. He was appointed Duke of Saxony in 1106 and elected King of Germany in 1125 before being crowned emperor in Rome. The son of the Saxon count Gebhard of Supplinburg, his reign was troubled by the constant intriguing of the Hohenstaufens, Duke Frederick II of Swabia and Duke Conrad of Franconia. He died while returning from a successful campaign against the Norman Kingdom of Sicily.

==Rise to power==
In 1013, a certain Saxon nobleman named &quot;Liutger&quot; was mentioned as a count in or of the Harzgau subdivision of Eastphalia. His grandson Count Gebhard, father of Emperor Lothair, possibly acquired the castle of Süpplingenburg about 1060 via his marriage with Hedwig, a daughter of the Bavarian count Frederick of Formbach and his wife Gertrud, herself a descendant of the Saxon margrave Dietrich of Haldensleben who secondly married the Billung duke Ordulf of Saxony upon Count Frederick&#x27;s death.

Little is known of Lothair&#x27;s youth. His name first appears in the contemporary records in 1088. His father Gebhard of Supplinburg joined the Saxon rebellion against the ruling Salian dynasty and died on 9 June 1075 in the Battle of Langensalza, fighting troops loyal to emperor Henry IV. Shortly after Gebhard&#x27;s death Lothair was born at Unterlüß. In 1107 he married Richenza, daughter of Count Henry of Northeim and Gertrude of Brunswick, heiress of the Brunonids.

Lothair&#x27;s land purchases, inheritance and marriage alliances among the Saxon nobles, resulted in the acquisition of the domains of the House of Billung and the Counts of Northeim. The marriage with Richenza of the Brunonids in particular, made him the wealthiest nobleman among his fellow Saxons. He supported future emperor Henry V during his 1104 rebellion against his father Henry IV, and the ensuing disempowerment campaign, that culminated in the abdication of the emperor on December 31, 1105, and his son&#x27;s coronation a few days later. For his loyalty Lothair was rewarded with the fief of title and estate of the Duchy of Saxony upon the death of duke Magnus of Billung, who had died without an heir in 1106. Emboldened by the promotion and incensed over the king&#x27;s increasingly autocratic rule, such as the wanton imposition of a new tax on ducal lords, Duke Lothair joined the growing opposition party to Henry. He acted autonomously by vesting Count Adolf of Schauenburg with the newly established County of Holstein in 1111. Lothair was temporarily deposed in 1112, when Henry transferred the ducal title to Otto of Ballenstedt. He was soon reinstated when count Otto fell into disgrace and he tactically submitted himself to Henry V. In 1115 however, he took command of the rebellious Saxon forces and defeated the emperor in the Battle of Welfesholz. Henry completely lost control over the administration and the revenue of Saxony. When in 1123 Henry V vested Count Wiprecht of Groitzsch with the Margraviate of Meissen, Lothair enforced the appointment of Conrad of Wettin and ceded the March of Lusatia to Count Albert the Bear.

==Reign==
Upon Emperor Henry V&#x27;s death in 1125, Archchancellor Adalbert summoned the royal electoral assembly in Mainz. On August 24 the electors declined the candidacy of the primary contender Duke Frederick of Hohenstaufen, who destroyed his chances due to his appalling overconfidence (&quot;ambicone cecatus&quot;) and his refusal to accept free princely elections (&quot;libera electio&quot;). Adalbert of Mainz considered Lothair to be a suitable candidate. Although the most powerful territorial prince in Saxony, he was of advanced age (slightly over fifty years of age) and had no male heir, not the ideal prerequisites for a long dynastic line of kings. He was elected King of Germany and asserted himself against Leopold III of Austria and Charles the Good. His election was notable in that it marked a departure from the concept of hereditary succession as the electors preferred a sovereign with moderate powers after the Salian era of &quot;oppressio&quot;. Somewhat naive concerning the complex power struggle between the papacy and the empire, Lothair also consented to several symbolic acts that were subsequently interpreted by the Roman Curia as signaling acceptance of papal confirmation of his position.

Duke Vladislaus I of Bohemia died in 1125. The succession was disputed among his surviving brother Soběslav I and his Moravian cousin Otto the Black, who was supported by Vladislaus&#x27; widow Richeza of Berg. In late 1125 Lothair joined Otto&#x27;s side, who had advanced large sums of money.

A military campaign against Soběslav was launched and in February 1126 Lothair&#x27;s force entered Bohemian territory and was promptly defeated at the Battle of Chlumec. Soběslav captured high-ranking nobles, like Albert the Bear and Louis I of Thuringia. However, Soběslav immediately went to meet Lothair at his camp and formally requested and received the fief of Bohemia. Peace was restored, prisoners set free and although the winner of the battle had submitted himself to the losing side, he secured full legitimacy and lasting prestige.

===Dispute with the Staufers===
Having both Saxon and Bavarian ancestry, the Supplinburg dynasty was a political opponent of the Salian dynasty and the House of Hohenstaufen. Disputes arose with Duke Frederick II when he refused to hand over property to Lothair, which the king considered to be royal property, the Staufer on the other hand argued, that it belonged to the Salian heritage. The contentious assets had long been administered together with other Salian domestic estates, their origin was hard to determine and difficult to separate. Lothair advocated the principle that all of the assets in question had now become imperial properties due to the extinction of the Salian dynasty. The first armed engagements between Lothair and the Staufer took place as early as 1125 and increased in the years that followed. Lothair, with the approval obtained at a meeting of the princes in Regensburg, attempted to seize the crown lands, which provoked a Staufer reaction. Lothair then isolated Frederick II as he placed him under Imperial ban and withdrew the Franconian ducal fief from Conrad.

After Lothair&#x27;s 1127 campaign against the Staufers had collapsed at the gates of Nuremberg, the Swabians and the Franconians declared Frederick&#x27;s younger brother Conrad anti-king Conrad III. Looking for support of his kingship, in 1128 Conrad went to Italy, where he was crowned King of Italy by Anselm V, Archbishop of Milan. Lothair took advantage of Conrad&#x27;s absence and weak position and resumed his attacks on the Staufers and in 1129 conquered the Staufer cities Nuremberg and Speyer. Conrad, on the other hand failed to acquire the desired assistance in Italy, and having made no political progress, returned in 1130, which assured at least a partial victory for Lothair.

Lastly Lothair, in order to prevent the loss of Burgundy to a power hostile to the empire, appointed his loyal ally Conrad I, Duke of Zähringen as Rector of the &quot;Principatus Burgundiaey&quot;.
===Domestic policies in the Northeast===

Emperor Lothar&#x27;s policies and actions in the northern and eastern estates of the kingdom would have the longest-lasting impacts. As a Saxon by birth, he was certainly more focused on that region than previous and future monarchs. He already pursued active territorial policies before his royal tenure as early as 1111, when he installed count Adolf of Schauenburg in Holstein and Stormarn.
In an act of royal consolidation policy Lothair established the Landgraviate of Thuringia, that encompassed the remaining and predominantly non-contiguous estates of the ill-fated former Merovingian Duchy of Thuringia. The brutal conquest of the old Thuringii kingdom under king Chlothar I had left the area devastated. Subsequently the Franks desired to rule the acquisition, which proved to be only partly successful, as a long process of depopulation and recurring population replacement by Franconians, Bavarians and Christianized Slavs followed. The 1129 appointment of Herman of Winzenburg to the comital office was a failure, as he allegedly was deposed a year later on charges of breach of the peace. The sources, however provide conflicting dates. The 1131 investiture of Louis marked the beginning of smooth Ludowingian rule for more than a century.

In 1134 Lothar appointed the Ascanian Albert the Bear as Margrave of Brandenburg and in 1136 Conrad the Great of Wettin, already margrave of Meissen, for the office of the Margraviate of Lusatia, thereby uniting the two marches. In addition, he petitioned the pope to grant more executive rights for the Archbishoprics of Bremen and Magdeburg. King Eric II of Denmark was made an imperial prince of the emperor in 1135, and member of the Reichstag. Lothair&#x27;s diplomatic missions to the warring parties of Poland and Bohemia/Hungary were successful and resulted in overdue tribute payment by the Polish Duke Bolesław III Wrymouth for the 1121 established Duchy of Pomerania, which in addition to the island of Rügen was eventually secured as a fief of the Empire.

===Relations with the Papacy===

The 1130 papal election had resulted in another schism. A minority of the cardinals elected Innocent II before a majority of the cardinals appointed Anacletus II in a tumultuous process. Both popes claimed to have been legally elected and in a first collision Anacletus prevailed. Innocent had to leave Rome and fled to France. Nonetheless, Anacletus could only secure the support of Roger II of Sicily, Innocent was, with the help of Bernard of Clairvaux, able to secure the support of King Louis VI of France and King Henry I of England.

Both popes offered Lothair the imperial crown. The king was occupied with the Staufer resistance and once again it was Bernard of Clairvaux who convinced the sovereign to favor pope Innocent II. In March 1131 these three met in Liège, where Lothair performed the ceremonial strator service (stirrup holder) for the pope and promised help in the conflict against Anacletus and Roger II of Sicily. His request for investiture restoration was rejected, but all rights and privileges as laid out in the Concordat of Worms were confirmed. Innocent II crowned Lothair King of the Romans again on 29 March 1131.

Lothair was accompanied by a modest troop contingent as most men were garrisoned in Germany to counter Staufer aggression. He carefully avoided hostilities but attempted to besiege Milan, which, however, failed. Eventually he arrived in Rome. As Anacletus controlled St. Peter, Lothair&#x27;s imperial coronation took place in the Lateran Basilica on 4 June 1133. Emperor Lothair continued to avoid explicit resistance against papal impediments on his royal office. He ignored Innocent&#x27;s bull, in which he advocated imperial authority derived from him and Lothair recognized papal claims to the vast Matildine estates in Northern Italy (formerly owned by Margravine Matilda of Tuscany), although he was able to secure the territorial fiefs.

===Campaign against Sicily===

In the northern empire Lothair finally succeeded and defeated the Staufers in 1135 thanks to the help of Henry the Proud, who had been the Duke of Bavaria since the death of his father, Henry the Black. At the Reichstag in Bamberg in 1135 the brothers were pardoned and restored to their office and estates. Anti-king Conrad renounced his royal title, The Staufers promised to take part in the Emperor&#x27;s second Italian campaign, before a ten-year constitutio pacis was declared.
Lothair, now uncontested ruler, set out in 1136 with a sizeable army. In 1136 the campaign against Roger began at the insistence of Innocent II and Byzantine Emperor John II Comnenus. Two columns, one led by Lothair, the other by his son-in-law Henry the Proud arrived in Italy. On the river Tronto, Count William of Loritello did homage to Lothair and opened the gates of Termoli to him. Advancing deep into the southern part of the peninsula, the two armies met at Bari, and continued further south in 1137. Roger offered to give Apulia as a fief of the Empire to one of his sons and give another son as a hostage, terms which Lothair refused after being pressured by Innocent II.

The imperial troops, however, were adamant against campaigning during the hot summer and revolted. The emperor, who had hoped for the complete conquest of Sicily, instead captured Capua and Apulia from Roger and bestowed them on Roger&#x27;s enemies. Innocent, however, protested, claiming that Apulia fell under papal reign. Emperor and Pope eventually jointly bequeathed the duchy to Rainulf of Alife. Lothair resided in Salerno from August to October 1137 and had copper coins (&quot;follari&quot;) minted in his name.

===Death===

On the return trip, he gave his son-in-law Henry of Bavaria the Margraviate of Tuscany and the Duchy of Saxony. He also gave him the imperial insignia, which depending on the point of view was interpreted as designation for the new king or not. On December 3, 1137, Lothair died on the return journey at Breitenwang. His body was boiled to prevent putrefaction, and his bones were transferred to the Collegiate Church of Saints Peter and Paul at Königslutter, which he had chosen as his burial site and for which he had laid the cornerstone in 1135. A month later, pope Anaclet II&#x27;s death also ended the papal schism.
When his grave was opened in 1620, a sword and an imperial orb were found among other things. With the imperial cathedral Lothar has created an outstanding architectural monument. His reign was more than just an episode between Salians and Staufer and considered an era of self-confident rule over the empire, even if his political vision of the establishment of a Welf kingdom on March 7, 1138, in Koblenz was destroyed by the “coup d&#x27;état” of the Staufers.

==Issue==
The Süpplingenburg dynasty was only short-lived. By his wife, Richenza of Northeim, Lothair had only one surviving child, a daughter Gertrude, born 18 April 1115. To secure Welf support for his election as king, Lothair married Gertrude to Henry X, Duke of Bavaria, on 29 May 1127. Their only son was Henry the Lion.

After Lothair&#x27;s death in 1137, the Hohenstaufen Conrad was elected King as Conrad III. Henry the Proud, Lothair’s son-in-law and heir, refused to acknowledge the new king. In response, Conrad III deprived him of all his territories.

==See also==
* Lotharian legend

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 

==External links==

* King Lothar&#x27;s seal in high quality resolution taken from the collections of the Lichtbildarchiv älterer Originalurkunden</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q77189" start="0" end="11" title="Lothair III, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Lothair III"/>
<link wikidata="Q77189" start="32" end="42" title="Lothair III, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Lothair II"/>
<link wikidata="Q77189" start="61" end="83" title="Lothair III, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Lothair of Supplinburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="120" end="138" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q166759" start="183" end="197" title="List of rulers of Saxony" label="Duke of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883514" start="218" end="233" title="List of German monarchs" label="King of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349123" start="307" end="329" title="Gebhard of Supplinburg" label="Gebhard of Supplinburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q130875" start="388" end="400" title="Hohenstaufen" label="Hohenstaufen"/>
<link wikidata="Q552414" start="408" end="430" title="Frederick II, Duke of Swabia" label="Frederick II of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q157133" start="440" end="459" title="Conrad III of Germany" label="Conrad of Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2884809" start="524" end="530" title="Italo-Norman" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="531" end="548" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="Kingdom of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588034" start="667" end="674" title="Harzgau" label="Harzgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q616286" start="690" end="700" title="Eastphalia" label="Eastphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349123" start="721" end="728" title="Gebhard of Supplinburg" label="Gebhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098190" start="837" end="843" title="Hedwig of Formbach" label="Hedwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q47261" start="863" end="871" title="Duchy of Bavaria" label="Bavarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776251" start="891" end="899" title="Vornbach Abbey" label="Formbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q570504" start="965" end="989" title="Dietrich of Haldensleben" label="Dietrich of Haldensleben"/>
<link wikidata="Q689402" start="1015" end="1022" title="Billung" label="Billung"/>
<link wikidata="Q545657" start="1028" end="1044" title="Ordulf, Duke of Saxony" label="Ordulf of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349123" start="1193" end="1215" title="Gebhard of Supplinburg" label="Gebhard of Supplinburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q464347" start="1227" end="1242" title="Saxon revolt of 1073–1075" label="Saxon rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q161204" start="1262" end="1276" title="Salian dynasty" label="Salian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226033" start="1308" end="1329" title="Battle of Langensalza (1075)" label="Battle of Langensalza"/>
<link wikidata="Q60094" start="1364" end="1372" title="Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q566271" start="1429" end="1437" title="Unterlüß" label="Unterlüß"/>
<link wikidata="Q241859" start="1458" end="1466" title="Richenza of Northeim" label="Richenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q71460" start="1486" end="1503" title="Henry, Margrave of Frisia" label="Henry of Northeim"/>
<link wikidata="Q64329" start="1508" end="1529" title="Gertrude of Brunswick" label="Gertrude of Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q590557" start="1546" end="1555" title="Brunonids" label="Brunonids"/>
<link wikidata="Q689402" start="1698" end="1714" title="House of Billung" label="House of Billung"/>
<link wikidata="Q498575" start="1733" end="1741" title="Northeim" label="Northeim"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="1852" end="1858" title="Saxons" label="Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q151707" start="1888" end="1895" title="Henry V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry V"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="2157" end="2161" title="fief" label="fief"/>
<link wikidata="Q164092" start="2189" end="2204" title="Duchy of Saxony" label="Duchy of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q503687" start="2228" end="2245" title="Magnus, Duke of Saxony" label="Magnus of Billung"/>
<link wikidata="Q173424" start="2360" end="2370" title="autocratic" label="autocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q362540" start="2534" end="2554" title="Adolf I of Holstein" label="Adolf of Schauenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q111224" start="2582" end="2600" title="Holstein" label="County of Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q695735" start="2693" end="2712" title="Otto, Count of Ballenstedt" label="Otto of Ballenstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q316604" start="2916" end="2936" title="Battle of Welfesholz" label="Battle of Welfesholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q65633" start="3053" end="3074" title="Wiprecht of Groitzsch" label="Wiprecht of Groitzsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q170180" start="3084" end="3106" title="Margraviate of Meissen" label="Margraviate of Meissen"/>
<link wikidata="Q531805" start="3144" end="3160" title="Conrad, Margrave of Meissen" label="Conrad of Wettin"/>
<link wikidata="Q677501" start="3175" end="3191" title="March of Lusatia" label="March of Lusatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q156041" start="3201" end="3216" title="Albert the Bear" label="Albert the Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q347454" start="3287" end="3295" title="Adalbert of Mainz" label="Adalbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q15824816" start="3309" end="3342" title="1125 German royal election" label="royal electoral assembly in Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q552414" start="3423" end="3432" title="Frederick II, Duke of Swabia" label="Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q347454" start="3623" end="3640" title="Adalbert of Mainz" label="Adalbert of Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883514" start="3903" end="3918" title="King of Germany" label="King of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q349086" start="3948" end="3970" title="Leopold III, Margrave of Austria" label="Leopold III of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q378217" start="3975" end="3991" title="Charles the Good" label="Charles the Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q108169" start="4374" end="4385" title="Roman Curia" label="Roman Curia"/>
<link wikidata="Q454827" start="4455" end="4467" title="Vladislaus I, Duke of Bohemia" label="Vladislaus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162698" start="4471" end="4478" title="Duchy of Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q506071" start="4549" end="4559" title="Soběslav I, Duke of Bohemia" label="Soběslav I"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="4568" end="4575" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794340" start="4584" end="4598" title="Otto II the Black" label="Otto the Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613844" start="4644" end="4659" title="Richeza of Berg" label="Richeza of Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q233350" start="4898" end="4915" title="Battle of Chlumec" label="Battle of Chlumec"/>
<link wikidata="Q156041" start="4961" end="4976" title="Albert the Bear" label="Albert the Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q535016" start="4981" end="5001" title="Louis I of Thuringia" label="Louis I of Thuringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="5106" end="5110" title="fief" label="fief"/>
<link wikidata="Q161204" start="5421" end="5435" title="Salian dynasty" label="Salian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q130875" start="5444" end="5465" title="House of Hohenstaufen" label="House of Hohenstaufen"/>
<link wikidata="Q583733" start="6324" end="6336" title="Imperial ban" label="Imperial ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q695364" start="6569" end="6578" title="anti-king" label="anti-king"/>
<link wikidata="Q271148" start="6679" end="6692" title="King of Italy" label="King of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618347" start="6696" end="6725" title="Anselm V, Archbishop of Milan" label="Anselm V, Archbishop of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="6874" end="6883" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829" start="6888" end="6894" title="Speyer" label="Speyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q650499" start="7201" end="7228" title="Conrad I, Duke of Zähringen" label="Conrad I, Duke of Zähringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q530670" start="7252" end="7275" title="Kingdom of Burgundy" label="Principatus Burgundiaey"/>
<link wikidata="Q362540" start="7673" end="7678" title="Adolf I of Holstein" label="Adolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q562218" start="7682" end="7693" title="Counts of Schauenburg and Holstein" label="Schauenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q111224" start="7697" end="7705" title="Holstein" label="Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257977" start="7710" end="7718" title="Stormarn (gau)" label="Stormarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q59488" start="7907" end="7918" title="Merovingian dynasty" label="Merovingian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311389" start="7919" end="7937" title="Duchy of Thuringia" label="Duchy of Thuringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28984" start="7999" end="8009" title="Chlothar I" label="Chlothar I"/>
<link wikidata="Q102042" start="8295" end="8315" title="Herman I, Count of Winzenburg" label="Herman of Winzenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519259" start="8323" end="8330" title="count" label="comital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722536" start="8408" end="8427" title="breach of the peace" label="breach of the peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q535016" start="8501" end="8506" title="Louis I, Landgrave of Thuringia" label="Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q314918" start="8538" end="8549" title="Ludowingians" label="Ludowingian"/>
<link wikidata="Q156041" start="8619" end="8634" title="Albert the Bear" label="Albert the Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q313536" start="8638" end="8661" title="Margrave of Brandenburg" label="Margrave of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q531805" start="8674" end="8700" title="Conrad, Margrave of Meissen" label="Conrad the Great of Wettin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695" start="8801" end="8808" title="march (territory)" label="marches"/>
<link wikidata="Q837128" start="8903" end="8909" title="Archbishopric of Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q636389" start="8914" end="8923" title="Archbishopric of Magdeburg" label="Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q365085" start="8930" end="8948" title="Eric II of Denmark" label="Eric II of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="9091" end="9097" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="9102" end="9109" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="9110" end="9117" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q53441" start="9193" end="9214" title="Bolesław III Wrymouth" label="Bolesław III Wrymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q696640" start="9240" end="9258" title="Duchy of Pomerania" label="Duchy of Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237" start="9295" end="9300" title="Rügen" label="Rügen"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="9329" end="9333" title="fief" label="fief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358726" start="9387" end="9406" title="1130 papal election" label="1130 papal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q170386" start="9475" end="9486" title="Innocent II" label="Innocent II"/>
<link wikidata="Q314025" start="9532" end="9544" title="Anacletus II" label="Anacletus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q188411" start="9818" end="9838" title="Bernard of Clairvaux" label="Bernard of Clairvaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992" start="10152" end="10157" title="Liège" label="Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353964" start="10198" end="10205" title="strator" label="strator"/>
<link wikidata="Q193901" start="10300" end="10318" title="Roger II of Sicily" label="Roger II of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q154439" start="10423" end="10441" title="Concordat of Worms" label="Concordat of Worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q782985" start="10486" end="10504" title="King of the Romans" label="King of the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="10797" end="10806" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St. Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q84090" start="10861" end="10877" title="Basilica of St. John Lateran" label="Lateran Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q464162" start="11201" end="11219" title="Matilda of Tuscany" label="Matilda of Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936" start="11531" end="11538" title="Bamberg" label="Bamberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195673" start="11760" end="11777" title="Landfrieden" label="constitutio pacis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41628" start="11958" end="11974" title="John II Comnenus" label="John II Comnenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q366696" start="12037" end="12052" title="Henry X, Duke of Bavaria" label="Henry the Proud"/>
<link wikidata="Q14087" start="12084" end="12090" title="Tronto" label="Tronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1834102" start="12098" end="12118" title="William of Loritello" label="William of Loritello"/>
<link wikidata="Q118642" start="12165" end="12172" title="Termoli" label="Termoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519" start="12259" end="12263" title="Bari" label="Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="12324" end="12330" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q58477" start="12656" end="12661" title="Capua" label="Capua"/>
<link wikidata="Q745598" start="12862" end="12878" title="Rainulf of Alife" label="Rainulf of Alife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083" start="12899" end="12906" title="Salerno" label="Salerno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135840" start="12963" end="12970" title="follari" label="follari"/>
<link wikidata="Q656017" start="13316" end="13327" title="Breitenwang" label="Breitenwang"/>
<link wikidata="Q651910" start="13333" end="13348" title="Mos Teutonicus" label="body was boiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q39596" start="13458" end="13470" title="Koenigslutter" label="Königslutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104" start="14034" end="14041" title="Koblenz" label="Koblenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q241859" start="14172" end="14192" title="Richenza of Northeim" label="Richenza of Northeim"/>
<link wikidata="Q62054" start="14243" end="14251" title="Gertrude of Süpplingenburg" label="Gertrude"/>
<link wikidata="Q366696" start="14350" end="14374" title="Henry X, Duke of Bavaria" label="Henry X, Duke of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q105378" start="14411" end="14425" title="Henry the Lion" label="Henry the Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871063" start="14682" end="14698" title="Lotharian legend" label="Lotharian legend"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14851" end="14891" title=":de:Lichtbildarchiv älterer Originalurkunden" label="Lichtbildarchiv älterer Originalurkunden"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40440" wikidata="Q157133" url="?curid=40440" title="Conrad III of Germany">
<text>Conrad III (; ; 1093 or 1094 – 15 February 1152) of the Hohenstaufen dynasty was from 1116 to 1120 Duke of Franconia, from 1127 to 1135 anti-king of his predecessor Lothair III, and from 1138 until his death in 1152 King of the Romans in the Holy Roman Empire. He was the son of Duke Frederick I of Swabia and Agnes, a daughter of Emperor Henry IV.

His reign saw the start of the conflicts between the Guelphs and Ghibellines. He was involved in the failed Second Crusade with Louis VII, where he would fight and lose at Doryleum and would later fall ill and return to Constantinople. After recuperating, he went to Jerusalem but would experience a string of failed sieges. Later returning from the Crusade, he was entangled in some conflicts with Welf VI&#x27;s claim to the Duchy of Bavaria. On his deathbed, he designated his nephew Frederick Barbarossa as his successor instead of his son, Frederick IV, Duke of Swabia.

==Descent==
The origin of the House of Hohenstaufen in the Duchy of Swabia has not been conclusively established. As the name came from the Hohenstaufen Castle (built in 1105) Conrad&#x27;s great-grandfather Frederick of Staufen was a count in the Riesgau and in 1053 became Swabian Count palatine. His son Frederick of Buren probably resided near present-day Wäschenbeuren and about 1050 married Countess Hildegard of Egisheim-Dagsburg from Alsace.
Conrad&#x27;s father took advantage of the conflict between King Henry IV of Germany and the Swabian duke Rudolf of Rheinfelden during the Investiture Controversy. When Rudolf had himself elected German anti-king at Forchheim in 1077, Frederick of Hohenstaufen remained loyal to the royal crown and in 1079 was vested with the Duchy of Swabia by Henry IV, including an engagement with the king&#x27;s daughter Agnes. He died in 1105, leaving two sons, Conrad and his elder brother Frederick II, who inherited the Swabian ducal title. Their mother entered into a second marriage with Babenberg margrave Leopold III of Austria.

==Biography==
In 1105, Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor since 1084, was overthrown by his son Henry V, Conrad&#x27;s uncle. Emperor since 1111, Henry V prepared for his second campaign to Italy upon the death of Margravine Matilda of Tuscany, and in 1116 he appointed Conrad as Duke of Franconia. Conrad was marked out to act as regent for Germany, together with his elder brother, Duke Frederick II of Swabia. At the death of Henry V in 1125, Conrad unsuccessfully supported Frederick II for the kingship of Germany. Frederick was placed under a ban and Conrad was deprived of Franconia and the Kingdom of Burgundy, of which he was rector. With the support of the imperial cities, Swabia, and the Margraviate of Austria, Conrad was elected anti-king at Nuremberg in December 1127.

Conrad quickly crossed the Alps to be crowned King of Italy by Anselmo della Pusterla, Archbishop of Milan, in the village of Monza. Over the next two years, he failed to achieve anything in Italy, however, and returned to Germany in 1130, after Nuremberg and Speyer, two strong cities that supported him, fell to Lothair in 1129. Conrad continued in Lothair&#x27;s opposition, but he and Frederick were forced to acknowledge Lothair as emperor in 1135, during which time Conrad relinquished his title as King of Italy. After this they were pardoned and could take again possession of their lands.

After Lothair&#x27;s death (December 1137), Conrad was elected king at Coblenz on 7 March 1138, in the presence of the papal legate Theodwin. Conrad was crowned at Aachen six days later (13 March) and was acknowledged in Bamberg by several princes of southern Germany. As Henry the Proud, son-in-law and heir of Lothair and the most powerful prince in Germany, who had been passed over in the election, refused to do the same, Conrad deprived him of all his territories, giving the Duchy of Saxony to Albert the Bear and that of Bavaria to Leopold IV, Margrave of Austria. Henry, however, retained the loyalty of his subjects. The civil war that broke out is considered the first act of the struggle between Guelphs and Ghibellines, which later extended southwards to Italy. After Henry&#x27;s death (October 1139), the war was continued by his son Henry the Lion, supported by the Saxons, and by his brother Welf VI. Conrad, after a long siege, defeated the latter at Weinsberg in December 1140, and in May 1142 a peace agreement was reached in Frankfurt.

In the same year, Conrad entered Bohemia to reinstate his brother-in-law Vladislav II as Duke. The attempt to do the same with another brother-in-law, the Polish prince Ladislaus the Exile, failed. Bavaria, Saxony, and the other regions of Germany were in revolt.

In 1146, Conrad heard Bernard of Clairvaux preach the Second Crusade at Speyer, and he agreed to join Louis VII in a great expedition to the Holy Land. At the imperial diet in Frankfurt in March 1147 Conrad and the assembled princes entrusted Bernard of Clairvaux with the recruitment for the Wendish crusade.

Before leaving, he had the nobles elect and crown his son Henry Berengar king. The succession secured in the event of his death, Conrad set out. His army of 20,000 men went overland, via Hungary, causing disruptions in the Byzantine territories through which they passed. They arrived at Constantinople by September 1147, ahead of the French army.

Rather than taking the coastal road around Anatolia through Christian-held territory, by which he sent most of his noncombatants, Conrad took his army across Anatolia. On 25 October 1147, they were defeated by the Seljuk Turks at the Battle of Dorylaeum. Conrad and most of the knights escaped, but most of the foot soldiers were killed or captured. The remaining 2,000 men of the German army limped on to Nicaea, where many of the survivors deserted and tried to return home. Conrad and his adherents had to be escorted to Lopadium by the French, where they joined the main French army under Louis. Conrad fell seriously ill at Ephesus and was sent to recuperate in Constantinople, where his host the Byzantine Emperor Manuel I Comnenus acted as his personal physician. After recovering, Conrad sailed to Acre, and from there reached Jerusalem. He participated in the ill-fated Siege of Damascus and after that failure, grew disaffected with his allies. Another attempt to attack Ascalon failed when Conrad&#x27;s allies did not appear as promised, then Conrad returned to Germany, through Constantinople, where he met again with the Byzantine Emperor Manuel I to discuss the problem of two emperors, and to renew their alliance against Roger II of Sicily.

In 1150, Conrad and Henry Berengar defeated Welf VI and his son Welf VII at the Battle of Flochberg. Henry Berengar died later that year and the succession was thrown open. The Welfs and Hohenstaufen made peace in 1152 and the peaceful succession of one of Conrad&#x27;s family was secured.

Conrad was never crowned emperor and continued to style himself &quot;King of the Romans&quot; until his death. On his deathbed, in the presence of only two witnesses, his nephew Frederick Barbarossa and the Bishop of Bamberg, he allegedly designated Frederick his successor, rather than his own surviving six-year-old son Frederick. Frederick Barbarossa, who had accompanied his uncle on the unfortunate crusade, forcefully pursued his advantage and was duly elected king in Cologne a few weeks later. The young son of the late king was given the Duchy of Swabia.
Conrad left no male heirs by his first wife, Gertrude von Komburg. In 1136, he married Gertrude of Sulzbach, who was a daughter of Berengar II of Sulzbach, and whose sister Bertha was married to the Byzantine Emperor Manuel I. Gertrude was the mother of Conrad&#x27;s children and the link which cemented his alliance with Byzantium.

==See also==
* Kings of Germany family tree

==References==
==Sources==
* Baldwin, M. W. &quot;A History of the Crusades: the first hundred years&quot;, 1969. 
* Bernhardi, Wilhelm (1883). &quot;Konrad III&quot;: Jahrbücher der Deutschen Geschichte. Leipzig: Duncker &amp; Humblot. 
* 
*
*
* Ziegler, W. &quot;König Konrad III. (1138–1152). Hof, Urkunden und Politik (= Forschungen zur Kaiser- und Papstgeschichte des Mittelalters. Band 26)&quot; Böhlau, Wien u. a. 2008</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q157133" start="0" end="10" title="Conrad III of Germany" label="Conrad III"/>
<link wikidata="Q130875" start="56" end="68" title="House of Hohenstaufen" label="Hohenstaufen"/>
<link wikidata="Q703265" start="99" end="116" title="Duchy of Franconia" label="Duke of Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q695364" start="136" end="145" title="anti-king" label="anti-king"/>
<link wikidata="Q77189" start="165" end="176" title="Lothair III" label="Lothair III"/>
<link wikidata="Q782985" start="216" end="234" title="King of the Romans" label="King of the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="242" end="259" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="284" end="305" title="Frederick I of Swabia" label="Frederick I of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q242187" start="310" end="315" title="Agnes of Waiblingen" label="Agnes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="331" end="347" title="Emperor Henry IV" label="Emperor Henry IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q187742" start="403" end="426" title="Guelphs and Ghibellines" label="Guelphs and Ghibellines"/>
<link wikidata="Q51654" start="458" end="472" title="Second Crusade" label="Second Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q134259" start="478" end="487" title="Louis VII of France" label="Louis VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678637" start="522" end="530" title="Battle of Dorylaeum (1147)" label="Doryleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="570" end="584" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q55502" start="617" end="626" title="Kingdom of Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q68012" start="749" end="756" title="Welf VI" label="Welf VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q79789" start="837" end="857" title="Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q702861" start="895" end="923" title="Frederick IV, Duke of Swabia" label="Frederick IV, Duke of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q693980" start="985" end="1000" title="Duchy of Swabia" label="Duchy of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q650474" start="1066" end="1085" title="Hohenstaufen Castle" label="Hohenstaufen Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q538553" start="1174" end="1181" title="Nördlinger Ries" label="Riesgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q22932" start="1209" end="1223" title="Count palatine" label="Count palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q83033" start="1286" end="1299" title="Wäschenbeuren" label="Wäschenbeuren"/>
<link wikidata="Q272897" start="1345" end="1353" title="Eguisheim" label="Egisheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q322763" start="1354" end="1362" title="County of Dagsburg" label="Dagsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142" start="1368" end="1374" title="Alsace" label="Alsace"/>
<link wikidata="Q438435" start="1482" end="1503" title="Rudolf of Rheinfelden" label="Rudolf of Rheinfelden"/>
<link wikidata="Q154764" start="1515" end="1538" title="Investiture Controversy" label="Investiture Controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q695364" start="1579" end="1588" title="anti-king" label="anti-king"/>
<link wikidata="Q16116" start="1592" end="1601" title="Forchheim" label="Forchheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q242187" start="1786" end="1791" title="Agnes of Waiblingen" label="Agnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q552414" start="1857" end="1869" title="Frederick II, Duke of Swabia" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q522698" start="1959" end="1968" title="House of Babenberg" label="Babenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q349086" start="1978" end="2000" title="Leopold III, Margrave of Austria" label="Leopold III of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="2036" end="2054" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q151707" start="2093" end="2100" title="Henry V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry V"/>
<link wikidata="Q838931" start="2187" end="2192" title="Kingdom of Italy (medieval)" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q464162" start="2222" end="2240" title="Matilda of Tuscany" label="Matilda of Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q703265" start="2277" end="2294" title="Duchy of Franconia" label="Duke of Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q530670" start="2595" end="2614" title="Kingdom of Burgundy" label="Kingdom of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147441" start="2632" end="2638" title="Rector (ecclesiastical)" label="rector"/>
<link wikidata="Q57318" start="2664" end="2679" title="Free imperial city" label="imperial cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q283627" start="2697" end="2719" title="Margraviate of Austria" label="Margraviate of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q695364" start="2740" end="2749" title="anti-king" label="anti-king"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="2753" end="2762" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="2809" end="2813" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q271148" start="2828" end="2841" title="King of Italy" label="King of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618347" start="2845" end="2867" title="Anselmo della Pusterla" label="Anselmo della Pusterla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="3028" end="3037" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829" start="3042" end="3048" title="Speyer" label="Speyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q77189" start="3096" end="3103" title="Lothair III, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Lothair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104" start="3452" end="3459" title="Koblenz" label="Coblenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q70622" start="3513" end="3521" title="Theodwin of Santa Rufina" label="Theodwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017" start="3545" end="3551" title="Aachen" label="Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936" start="3602" end="3609" title="Bamberg" label="Bamberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q366696" start="3653" end="3668" title="Henry the Proud" label="Henry the Proud"/>
<link wikidata="Q164092" start="3863" end="3878" title="Duchy of Saxony" label="Duchy of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q156041" start="3882" end="3897" title="Albert the Bear" label="Albert the Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q47261" start="3910" end="3917" title="Duchy of Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3921" end="3952" title="Leopold IV, Margrave of Austria" label="Leopold IV, Margrave of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q187742" start="4089" end="4112" title="Guelphs and Ghibellines" label="Guelphs and Ghibellines"/>
<link wikidata="Q105378" start="4230" end="4244" title="Henry the Lion" label="Henry the Lion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4290" end="4297" title="Welf VI" label="Welf VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390461" start="4315" end="4325" title="Siege of Weinsberg" label="long siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584" start="4350" end="4359" title="Weinsberg" label="Weinsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="4427" end="4436" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="4472" end="4479" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q367578" start="4512" end="4524" title="Vladislaus II, Duke and King of Bohemia" label="Vladislav II"/>
<link wikidata="Q54051" start="4608" end="4627" title="Władysław II the Exile" label="Ladislaus the Exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q188411" start="4726" end="4746" title="Bernard of Clairvaux" label="Bernard of Clairvaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q51654" start="4758" end="4772" title="Second Crusade" label="Second Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829" start="4776" end="4782" title="Speyer" label="Speyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q134259" start="4806" end="4815" title="Louis VII of France" label="Louis VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="4845" end="4854" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="4880" end="4889" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q188411" start="4947" end="4967" title="Bernard of Clairvaux" label="Bernard of Clairvaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q683635" start="4997" end="5012" title="Wendish crusade" label="Wendish crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q698449" start="5073" end="5087" title="Henry Berengar" label="Henry Berengar"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="5202" end="5209" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="5238" end="5247" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="5303" end="5317" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="5407" end="5415" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708255" start="5578" end="5590" title="Seljuk Turks" label="Seljuk Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678637" start="5598" end="5617" title="Battle of Dorylaeum (1147)" label="Battle of Dorylaeum"/>
<link wikidata="Q739037" start="5770" end="5776" title="Nicaea" label="Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4474843" start="5888" end="5896" title="Lopadium" label="Lopadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q47611" start="5993" end="6000" title="Ephesus" label="Ephesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="6066" end="6083" title="Byzantine Emperor" label="Byzantine Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q41610" start="6084" end="6101" title="Manuel I Comnenus" label="Manuel I Comnenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q126084" start="6170" end="6174" title="Acre, Israel" label="Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="6199" end="6208" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q382967" start="6243" end="6260" title="Siege of Damascus (1148)" label="Siege of Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q104664899" start="6345" end="6352" title="Ascalon" label="Ascalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q232896" start="6541" end="6564" title="problem of two emperors" label="problem of two emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q193901" start="6602" end="6620" title="Roger II of Sicily" label="Roger II of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6687" end="6695" title="Welf VII" label="Welf VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q16822614" start="6703" end="6722" title="Battle of Flochberg" label="Battle of Flochberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q782985" start="6985" end="7003" title="King of the Romans" label="King of the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q79789" start="7094" end="7114" title="Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2683068" start="7123" end="7140" title="Bishop of Bamberg" label="Bishop of Bamberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q702861" start="7238" end="7247" title="Frederick IV, Duke of Swabia" label="Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="7391" end="7398" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q299398" start="7525" end="7545" title="Gertrude of Comburg" label="Gertrude von Komburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q469830" start="7567" end="7587" title="Gertrude of Sulzbach" label="Gertrude of Sulzbach"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7611" end="7634" title="Berengar II of Sulzbach" label="Berengar II of Sulzbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q241451" start="7653" end="7659" title="Bertha of Sulzbach" label="Bertha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433410" start="7830" end="7858" title="Kings of Germany family tree" label="Kings of Germany family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40441" wikidata="Q554492" url="?curid=40441" title="Josip Plemelj">
<text>Josip Plemelj (December 11, 1873 – May 22, 1967) was a Slovene mathematician, whose main contributions were to the theory of analytic functions and the application of integral equations to potential theory. He was the first chancellor of the University of Ljubljana.

== Life ==
Plemelj was born in the village of Bled near Bled Castle in Austria-Hungary (now Slovenia); he died in Ljubljana, Yugoslavia (now Slovenia). His father, Urban, a carpenter and crofter, died when Josip was only a year old. His mother Marija, née , found bringing up the family alone very hard, but she was able to send her son to school in Ljubljana, where Plemelj studied from 1886 to 1894. Due to a bench thrown into Tivoli Pond by him or his friends, he could not attend the school after he finished the fourth class and had to pass the final exam privately. After leaving and obtaining the necessary examination results he went to the University of Vienna in 1894 where he had applied to Faculty of Arts to study mathematics, physics and astronomy. His professors in Vienna were von Escherich for mathematical analysis, Gegenbauer and Mertens for arithmetic and algebra, Weiss for astronomy, Stefan&#x27;s student Boltzmann for physics.

In May 1898, Plemelj presented his doctoral thesis under Escherich&#x27;s tutelage entitled &quot;Über lineare homogene Differentialgleichungen mit eindeutigen periodischen Koeffizienten&quot; (Linear Homogeneous Differential Equations with Uniform Periodical Coefficients). He continued with his study in Berlin (1899/1900) under the German mathematicians Frobenius and Fuchs and in Göttingen (1900/1901) under Klein and Hilbert.

In April 1902 he became a private senior lecturer at the University of Vienna. In 1906, he was appointed assistant at the Technical University of Vienna. In 1907, he became associate professor and in 1908 full professor of mathematics at the University of Chernivtsi (Ukrainian: Чернівці, Russian: Черновцы), Ukraine. From 1912 to 1913 he was dean of this faculty. In 1917, his political views led him to be forcibly ejected by the government and resettled in Moravia. After the First World War he became a member of the University Commission under the Slovene Provincial Government and helped establish the first Slovene university at Ljubljana, and was elected its first chancellor. In the same year he was appointed professor of mathematics at the Faculty of Arts. After the Second World War he joined the Faculty of Natural Science and Technology (FNT). He retired in 1957 after having lectured in mathematics for 40 years.

==Earliest contributions==
Plemelj had shown his great gift for mathematics early in elementary school. He mastered the whole of the high school syllabus by the beginning of the fourth year and began to tutor students for their graduation examinations. At that time he discovered alone series for sin &quot;x&quot; and cos &quot;x&quot;. Actually he found a series for cyclometric function arccos &quot;x&quot; and after that he just inverted this series and then guessed a principle for coefficients. Yet he did not have a proof for that.

Plemelj had great joy for a difficult constructional tasks from geometry. From his high school days originates an elementary problem — his later construction of regular sevenfold polygon inscribed in a circle otherwise exactly and not approximately with simple solution as an angle trisection which was yet not known in those days and which necessarily leads to the old Indian or Babylonian approximate construction. He started to occupy himself with mathematics in fourth and fifth class of high school. Beside in mathematics he was interested also in natural science and especially astronomy. He studied celestial mechanics already at high school. He liked observing the stars. His eyesight was so sharp he could see the planet Venus even in the daytime.

== Research ==
Plemelj&#x27;s main research interests were the theory of linear differential equations, integral equations, potential theory, the theory of analytic functions, and functional analysis. Plemelj encountered integral equations while still a student at Göttingen, when the Swedish professor Erik Holmgren gave a lecture on the work of his fellow countryman Fredholm on linear integral equations of the 1st and 2nd kind. Spurred on by Hilbert, Göttingen mathematicians attacked this new area of research and Plemelj was one of the first to publish original results on the question, applying the theory of integral equations to the study of harmonic functions in potential theory.

His most important work in potential theory is summarised in his 1911 book &quot;Potentialtheoretische Untersuchungen&quot; (Studies in Potential Theory), which received the Jablonowski Society award in Leipzig (1500 marks), and the Richard Lieben award from the University of Vienna (2000 crowns) for the most outstanding work in the field of pure and applied mathematics written by any kind of &#x27;Austrian&#x27; mathematician in the previous three years.

His most original contribution is the elementary solution he provided for the Riemann–Hilbert problem &quot;f&quot;+ = &quot;g&quot; &quot;f&quot;− about the existence of a differential equation with given monodromy group. The solution, published in his 1908 article &quot;Riemannian classes of functions with given monodromy group&quot;, rests on three formulas that now carry his name, which connect the values taken by a holomorphic function at the boundary of an arc Γ:

: formula_1

: formula_2

: formula_3

These formulas are variously called the Plemelj formulae, the Sokhotsky-Plemelj formulae, or sometimes (mainly in German literature) the Plemelj-Sokhotsky Formulae, after the Polish mathematician Julian Sochocki (1842–1927).

Based on his methods of solving the Riemann problem he had developed the theory of singular integral equations (MSC (2000) 45-Exx) which was used above all by the Russian school at the head of Nikoloz Muskhelishvili (Николай Иванович Мусхелишвили) (1891–1976).

Plemelj contributed significantly to the theory of analytic functions in solving the problem of uniformization of algebraic functions, contributions on formulation of the theorem of analytic extension of designs and treatises in algebra and in number theory.

In 1912, Plemelj published a very simple proof of the special case of Fermat&#x27;s Last Theorem where the exponent, &quot;n&quot;, is 5. More difficult proofs of this case were first provided by Dirichlet in 1828 and Legendre in 1830.

His arrival in Ljubljana in 1919 was seminal for the development of mathematics in Slovenia. As a good teacher he had raised several generations of mathematicians and engineers. His most famous student is Ivan Vidav. After the Second World War Slovenska akademija znanosti in umetnosti (Slovene Academy of Sciences and Arts) (SAZU) had published his three-year course of lectures for students of mathematics: &quot;Teorija analitičnih funkcij&quot; (The Theory of Analytic Functions),
(SAZU, Ljubljana 1953, pp XVI+516), &quot;Diferencialne in integralske enačbe. Teorija in uporaba&quot; (Differential and Integral Equations. Theory and Application).
Plemelj found a formula for a sum of normal derivatives of one-layered potential in the internal or external region. He was pleased also with algebra and number theory, but he had published only few contributions from these fields – for example a book entitled &quot;Algebra in teorija števil&quot; (Algebra and Number Theory; SAZU, Ljubljana 1962, pp. xiv + 278) which was published abroad as his last work &quot;Problemi v smislu Riemanna in Kleina&quot; (Problems in the Sense of Riemann and Klein; edition and translation by J. R. M. Radok, &quot;Interscience Tract in Pure and Applied Mathematics&quot;, No. 16, Interscience Publishers: John Wiley &amp; Sons, New York, London, Sydney 1964, pp VII+175). This work deals with questions which were of his most interests and examinations. His bibliography includes 33 units, from which 30 are scientific treatises and had been published among the others in a magazines such as: &quot;Monatshefte für Mathematik und Physik&quot;, &quot;Sitzungsberichte der kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften&quot;; in Vienna, &quot;Jahresbericht der deutschen Mathematikervereinigung&quot;, &quot;gdnae.de&quot; in Verhandlungen, &quot;Bulletin des Sciences Mathematiques&quot;, &quot;Obzornik za matematiko in fiziko&quot; and &quot;Publications mathematiques de l&#x27;Universite de Belgrade&quot;. When French mathematician Charles Émile Picard denoted Plemelj&#x27;s works as &quot;deux excellents memoires&quot;, Plemelj became known in the mathematical world.

Plemelj was a regular member of the SAZU since its foundation in 1938, corresponding member of the JAZU (Yugoslav Academy of Sciences and Arts) in Zagreb, Croatia since 1923, corresponding member of the SANU (Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts) in Belgrade since 1930 (1931). In 1954, he received the highest award for research in Slovenia, the Prešeren award. The same year he was elected for corresponding member of the Bavarian Academy of Sciences in Munich.

In 1963, for his 90th anniversary, University of Ljubljana granted him title of the honorary doctor. Plemelj was first teacher of mathematics at Slovene university and 1949 became first honorary member of the ZDMFAJ (Yugoslav Union of Societies of Mathematicians, Physicists, and Astronomers). He left his villa in Bled to the DMFA, where today is his memorial room.

Plemelj did not do extra preparation for lectures; he didn&#x27;t have any notes. He used to say that he thought over the lecture subject on the way from his home in Gradišče to the University. Students are said to have got the impression that he was creating teaching material on the spot and that they were witnessing the formation of something new. He was writing formulae on the table beautifully although they were composited from Greek, Latin or Gothic letters. He requested the same from students. They had to write distinctly.

Plemelj had a very refined ear for languages and created a solid base for the development of Slovene mathematical terminology. He had accustomed students for a clear and logical phraseology. For example, he would become angry if they used the word &quot;rabiti&quot; &#x27;to use&#x27; instead of the word &quot;potrebovati&quot; &#x27;to need&#x27;. For this reason he said: &quot;The engineer who does not know mathematics never &quot;needs&quot; it. But if he knows it, he &quot;uses&quot; it frequently.&quot;

== See also ==
* List of Slovenes
* Slovene mathematicians
* Hilbert&#x27;s twenty-first problem

== References ==
== Sources ==
* Josip Plemelj, &quot;Iz mojega življenja in dela&quot; (From My Life and Work) - in Slovenian, &quot;Obzornik mat. fiz.&quot; 39 (1992) pp. 188–192.

== External links ==

* Josip Plemelj, University of St Andrews
* Mathematics Genealogy of Josip Plemelj</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q554492" start="0" end="13" title="Josip Plemelj" label="Josip Plemelj"/>
<link wikidata="Q15863" start="55" end="62" title="Slovenes" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="63" end="76" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q193756" start="115" end="143" title="theory of analytic functions" label="theory of analytic functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q580101" start="167" end="185" title="integral equations" label="integral equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154848" start="189" end="205" title="potential theory" label="potential theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377" start="242" end="265" title="University of Ljubljana" label="University of Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q202852" start="314" end="318" title="Bled" label="Bled"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049047" start="324" end="335" title="Bled Castle" label="Bled Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="339" end="354" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="360" end="368" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q437" start="382" end="391" title="Ljubljana" label="Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="393" end="403" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q203605" start="441" end="450" title="carpenter" label="carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402801" start="455" end="462" title="croft (land)" label="crofter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810442" start="697" end="708" title="Tivoli Pond" label="Tivoli Pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q165980" start="917" end="937" title="University of Vienna" label="University of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="995" end="1006" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="1008" end="1015" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="1020" end="1029" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q84774" start="1061" end="1074" title="Gustav Ritter von Escherich" label="von Escherich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754" start="1079" end="1100" title="mathematical analysis" label="mathematical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q87737" start="1102" end="1112" title="Leopold Bernhard Gegenbauer" label="Gegenbauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q111999" start="1117" end="1124" title="Franz Mertens" label="Mertens"/>
<link wikidata="Q11205" start="1129" end="1139" title="arithmetic" label="arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968" start="1144" end="1151" title="algebra" label="algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q78850" start="1153" end="1158" title="Edmund Weiss" label="Weiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q16581" start="1174" end="1180" title="Joseph Stefan" label="Stefan"/>
<link wikidata="Q84296" start="1196" end="1205" title="Ludwig Boltzmann" label="Boltzmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="1255" end="1263" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="doctoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="1526" end="1532" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q57228" start="1577" end="1586" title="Ferdinand Georg Frobenius" label="Frobenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q61758" start="1591" end="1596" title="Lazarus Immanuel Fuchs" label="Fuchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033" start="1604" end="1613" title="Göttingen" label="Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q76641" start="1632" end="1637" title="Felix Klein" label="Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q41585" start="1642" end="1649" title="David Hilbert" label="Hilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q689400" start="1774" end="1804" title="Technical University of Vienna" label="Technical University of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551183" start="1894" end="1918" title="Chernivtsi University" label="University of Chernivtsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="1920" end="1929" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="1941" end="1948" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="1961" end="1968" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="2112" end="2119" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2131" end="2146" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2430" end="2446" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q170198" start="2867" end="2873" title="series (mathematics)" label="series"/>
<link wikidata="Q13647261" start="2878" end="2881" title="sine" label="sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13647261" start="2900" end="2903" title="cosine" label="cos"/>
<link wikidata="Q674533" start="2950" end="2970" title="cyclometric function" label="cyclometric function"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2971" end="2977" title="Trigonometric function#Inverse functions" label="arccos"/>
<link wikidata="Q733081" start="3398" end="3414" title="angle trisection" label="angle trisection"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="3795" end="3799" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="3845" end="3851" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="3852" end="3857" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129902" start="3953" end="3982" title="linear differential equations" label="linear differential equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q580101" start="3984" end="4001" title="integral equation" label="integral equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154848" start="4004" end="4020" title="potential theory" label="potential theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q215084" start="4036" end="4053" title="analytic function" label="analytic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q190549" start="4060" end="4079" title="functional analysis" label="functional analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q580101" start="4101" end="4118" title="integral equation" label="integral equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270322" start="4183" end="4196" title="Erik Holmgren" label="Erik Holmgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q453594" start="4249" end="4257" title="Erik Ivar Fredholm" label="Fredholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5986515" start="5111" end="5134" title="Riemann–Hilbert problem" label="Riemann–Hilbert problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q543956" start="5239" end="5254" title="monodromy group" label="monodromy group"/>
<link wikidata="Q207476" start="5457" end="5477" title="holomorphic function" label="holomorphic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543149" start="5609" end="5635" title="Sokhotski–Plemelj theorem" label="Sokhotsky-Plemelj formulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604093" start="5743" end="5758" title="Julian Sochocki" label="Julian Sochocki"/>
<link wikidata="Q695002" start="5966" end="5988" title="Nikoloz Muskhelishvili" label="Nikoloz Muskhelishvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q193756" start="6076" end="6104" title="theory of analytic functions" label="theory of analytic functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q746863" start="6149" end="6167" title="algebraic function" label="algebraic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q82604" start="6239" end="6245" title="design" label="design"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968" start="6264" end="6271" title="algebra" label="algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="6279" end="6292" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q132469" start="6365" end="6391" title="Fermat&amp;#x27;s Last Theorem" label="Fermat&amp;#x27;s Last Theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q29193" start="6491" end="6500" title="Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet" label="Dirichlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q191021" start="6513" end="6521" title="Adrien-Marie Legendre" label="Legendre"/>
<link wikidata="Q508421" start="6737" end="6747" title="Ivan Vidav" label="Ivan Vidav"/>
<link wikidata="Q266063" start="6819" end="6855" title="Slovene Academy of Sciences and Arts" label="Slovene Academy of Sciences and Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q218005" start="7214" end="7217" title="summation" label="sum"/>
<link wikidata="Q383851" start="7221" end="7238" title="normal derivative" label="normal derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479654" start="7826" end="7847" title="John Wiley &amp;amp; Sons" label="John Wiley &amp;amp; Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="7849" end="7857" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="7859" end="7865" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="7867" end="7873" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944084" start="8120" end="8157" title="Monatshefte für Mathematik und Physik" label="Monatshefte für Mathematik und Physik"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8171" end="8232" title="Sitzungsberichte der kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften" label="Sitzungsberichte der kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8410" end="8442" title="Obzornik za matematiko in fiziko" label="Obzornik za matematiko in fiziko"/>
<link wikidata="Q286375" start="8552" end="8572" title="Charles Émile Picard" label="Charles Émile Picard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861609" start="9039" end="9053" title="Prešeren award" label="Prešeren award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377" start="9192" end="9215" title="University of Ljubljana" label="University of Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q202852" start="9472" end="9476" title="Bled" label="Bled"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552557" start="9484" end="9488" title="Society of Mathematicians, Physicists and Astronomers of Slovenia" label="DMFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11790990" start="10593" end="10609" title="List of Slovenes" label="List of Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4802385" start="10612" end="10634" title="Slovene mathematicians" label="Slovene mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4155615" start="10637" end="10672" title="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s twenty-first problem" label="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s twenty-first problem"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40442" wikidata="Q855700" url="?curid=40442" title="Pilgrims (Plymouth Colony)">
<text>The Pilgrims, also known as the Pilgrim Fathers, were the English settlers who travelled to North America on the ship &quot;Mayflower&quot; and established the Plymouth Colony at what now is Plymouth, Massachusetts, United States. John Smith had named this territory New Plymouth in 1620, sharing the name of the Pilgrims&#x27; final departure port of Plymouth, Devon, England. The Pilgrims&#x27; leadership came from religious congregations of Brownists or Separatists who had fled religious persecution in England for the tolerance of 17th-century Holland in the Netherlands.

These Separatists held many of the same Calvinist religious beliefs as Puritans, but unlike Puritans (who wanted a purified established church), Pilgrims believed that their congregations should separate from the Church of England, which led to their being labelled Separatists. After several years of living in exile in Holland, they determined to establish a new settlement in the New World and arranged with investors to fund them. In 1620, they established the Plymouth Colony, in which they erected Congregational churches. The Puritans&#x27; later establishment of the Massachusetts Bay Colony eventually became more powerful in the area; but the Pilgrims&#x27; story nevertheless became a central theme in the history and culture of the United States.

==History==


Around 1605, congregations in Nottinghamshire, England led by John Robinson, Richard Clyfton, and John Smyth quit the Church of England to form Separatist congregations. These held Brownist beliefs—that true churches were voluntary democratic congregations, not whole Christian nations—as taught by Robert Browne, John Greenwood, and Henry Barrowe. As Separatists, they held that their differences with the Church of England were irreconcilable and that their worship should be independent of the trappings, traditions, and organization of a central church.
The Separatist movement was controversial. Under the Act of Uniformity 1559, it was illegal not to attend official Church of England services, with a fine of one shilling (£0.05; about £ today) for each missed Sunday and holy day. The penalties included imprisonment and larger fines for conducting unofficial services. The Seditious Sectaries Act 1592 was specifically aimed at outlawing the Brownists. Under this policy, London Underground Church members were repeatedly imprisoned from 1566, and then Robert Browne and his followers were imprisoned in Norfolk during the 1580s. Henry Barrow, John Greenwood, and John Penry were executed for sedition in 1593. Browne had taken his followers into exile in Middelburg, and Penry urged the London Separatists to emigrate in order to escape persecution, so after his death they went to Amsterdam.

The Archbishop of York, Matthew Hutton, displayed some sympathy to the Puritan cause, writing to Robert Cecil, Secretary of State to James I in 1604:

The Puritans though they differ in Ceremonies and accidentes, yet they agree with us in substance of religion, and I thinke all or the moste parte of them love his Majestie, and the presente state, and I hope will yield to conformitie. But the Papistes are opposite and contrarie in very many substantiall pointes of religion, and cannot but wishe the Popes authoritie and popish religion to be established.
Many Puritans had hoped that reforms and reconciliation would be possible when James came to power which would allow them independence, but the Hampton Court Conference of 1604 denied nearly all of the concessions which they had requested—except for an authorized English translation of the Bible. The same year, Richard Bancroft became Archbishop of Canterbury and launched a campaign against Puritanism and the Separatists. He suspended 300 ministers and fired 80 more, which led some of them to found more Separatist churches. Robinson, Clifton, and their followers founded a Brownist church, making a covenant with God &quot;to walk in all his ways made known, or to be made known, unto them, according to their best endeavours, whatsoever it should cost them, the Lord assisting them&quot;.

Archbishop Hutton died in 1606 and Tobias Matthew was appointed as his replacement. He was one of James&#x27;s chief supporters at the 1604 conference, and he promptly began a campaign to purge the archdiocese of non-conforming influences, including Puritans, Separatists, and those wishing to return to the Catholic faith. Disobedient clergy were replaced, and prominent Separatists were confronted, fined, and imprisoned. He is credited with driving people out of the country who refused to attend Anglican services.

William Brewster was a former diplomatic assistant to the Netherlands. He was living in the Scrooby manor house while serving as postmaster for the village and bailiff to the Archbishop of York. He had been impressed by Clyfton&#x27;s services and had begun participating in services led by John Smyth in Gainsborough, Lincolnshire. After a time, he arranged for a congregation to meet privately at the Scrooby manor house. Services were held beginning in 1606 with Clyfton as pastor, John Robinson as teacher, and Brewster as the presiding elder. Shortly after, Smyth and members of the Gainsborough group moved on to Amsterdam. Brewster was fined £20 (about £ today) &quot;in absentia&quot; for his non-compliance with the church. This followed his September 1607 resignation from the postmaster position, about the time that the congregation had decided to follow the Smyth party to Amsterdam.

Scrooby member William Bradford of Austerfield kept a journal of the congregation&#x27;s events which was eventually published as &quot;Of Plymouth Plantation&quot;. He wrote concerning this time period:

But after these things they could not long continue in any peaceable condition, but were hunted &amp; persecuted on every side, so as their former afflictions were but as flea-bitings in comparison of these which now came upon them. For some were taken &amp; clapt up in prison, others had their houses besett &amp; watcht night and day, &amp; hardly escaped their hands; and the most were faine to flie &amp; leave their howses &amp; habitations, and the means of their livelehood.
===Leiden===

The Pilgrims moved to the Netherlands around 1607–08 and lived in Leiden, Holland, a city of 30,000 inhabitants. Leiden was a thriving industrial center,
and many members were able to support themselves working at Leiden University or in the textile, printing, and brewing trades. Others were less able to bring in sufficient income, hampered by their rural backgrounds and the language barrier; for those, accommodation was constructed on an estate bought by Robinson and three partners. Bradford wrote of their years in Leiden:

For these &amp; other reasons they removed to Leyden, a fair &amp; bewtifull citie, and of a sweete situation, but made more famous by ye universitie wherwith it is adorned, in which of late had been so many learned man. But wanting that traffike by sea which Amerstdam injoyes, it was not so beneficiall for their outward means of living &amp; estats. But being now hear pitchet they fell to such trads &amp; imployments as they best could; valewing peace &amp; their spirituall comforte above any other riches whatsoever. And at length they came to raise a competente &amp; comforteable living, but with hard and continuall labor.
William Brewster had been teaching English at the university, and Robinson enrolled in 1615 to pursue his doctorate. There he participated in a series of debates, particularly regarding the contentious issue of Calvinism versus Arminianism (siding with the Calvinists against the Remonstrants).
Brewster acquired typesetting equipment about 1616 in a venture financed by Thomas Brewer, and began publishing the debates through a local press.
The Netherlands, however, was a land whose culture and language were strange and difficult for the English congregation to understand or learn. They found the Dutch political situation to be unstable, and their children were becoming more and more Dutch as the years passed. The congregation came to believe that they faced eventual extinction if they remained there.

====Decision to leave Holland====
By 1617, the congregation was stable and relatively secure, but there were ongoing issues which needed to be resolved. Bradford noted that many members of the congregation were showing signs of early aging, compounding the difficulties which some had in supporting themselves. A few had spent their savings and given up and returned to England, and the leaders feared that more would follow and that the congregation would become unsustainable. The employment issues made it unattractive for others to come to Leiden, and younger members had begun leaving to find employment and adventure elsewhere. Also compelling was the possibility of missionary work in some distant land, an opportunity that rarely arose in a Protestant stronghold.

Bradford lists some of the reasons for which the Pilgrims felt that they had to leave, including the discouragements that they faced in the Netherlands and the hope of attracting others by finding &quot;a better, and easier place of living&quot;, the children of the group being &quot;drawn away by evil examples into extravagance and dangerous courses&quot;, and the &quot;great hope, for the propagating and advancing the gospel of the kingdom of Christ in those remote parts of the world.&quot; Edward Winslow&#x27;s list was similar. In addition to the economic worries and missionary possibilities, he stressed that it was important for the people to retain their English identity, culture, and language. They also believed that the English Church in Leiden could do little to benefit the larger community there.

At the same time, there were many uncertainties about moving to such a place as America, as stories had come back about failed colonies. There were fears that the native people would be violent, that there would be no source of food or water, that they might be exposed to unknown diseases, and that travel by sea was always hazardous. Balancing all this was a local political situation which was in danger of becoming unstable. The truce was faltering in the Eighty Years&#x27; War, and there was fear over what the attitudes of Spain might be toward them.

Possible destinations included Guiana on the northeast coast of South America where the Dutch had established Essequibo colony, or another site near the Virginia settlements. Virginia was an attractive destination because the presence of the older colony might offer better security and trade opportunities; however, they also felt that they should not settle too near, since that might inadvertently duplicate the political environment back in England. The London Company administered a territory of considerable size in the region, and the intended settlement location was at the mouth of the Hudson River (which instead became the Dutch colony of New Netherland). This plan allayed their concerns of social, political, and religious conflicts, but still promised the military and economic benefits of being close to an established colony.

Robert Cushman and John Carver were sent to England to solicit a land patent. Their negotiations were delayed because of conflicts internal to the London Company, but ultimately a patent was secured in the name of John Wincob on June 9 (Old Style)/June 19 (New Style), 1619.
The charter was granted with the king&#x27;s condition that the Leiden group&#x27;s religion would not receive official recognition.

Preparations then stalled because of the continued problems within the London Company, and competing Dutch companies approached the congregation with the possibility of settling in the Hudson River area. David Baeckelandt suggests that the Leiden group was approached by Englishman Matthew Slade, son-in-law of Petrus Placius, a cartographer for the Dutch East India Company. Slade was also a spy for the English Ambassador, and the Pilgrims&#x27; plans were therefore known both at court and among influential investors in the Virginia Company&#x27;s colony at Jamestown. Negotiations were broken off with the Dutch, however, at the encouragement of English merchant Thomas Weston, who assured them that he could resolve the London Company delays. The London Company intended to claim the area explored by Hudson before the Dutch could become fully established, and the first Dutch settlers did not arrive in the area until 1624.

Weston did come with a substantial change, telling the Leiden group that parties in England had obtained a land grant north of the existing Virginia territory to be called New England. This was only partially true; the new grant did come to pass, but not until late in 1620 when the Plymouth Council for New England received its charter. It was expected that this area could be fished profitably, and it was not under the control of the existing Virginia government.

A second change was known only to parties in England who did not inform the larger group. New investors had been brought into the venture who wanted the terms altered so that half of the settled land and property would revert to the investors at the end of the seven-year contract. Also, there had been a provision in the original agreement that allowed each settler to have two days per week to work on personal business, but this provision was dropped from the final agreement without the knowledge of the Pilgrims.

Amid these negotiations, William Brewster found himself involved with religious unrest emerging in Scotland. In 1618, King James had promulgated the Five Articles of Perth which were seen in Scotland as an attempt to encroach on their Presbyterian tradition. Brewster published several pamphlets that were critical of this law, and they were smuggled into Scotland by April 1619. These pamphlets were traced back to Leiden, and the English authorities unsuccessfully attempted to arrest Brewster. English ambassador Dudley Carleton became aware of the situation and began pressuring the Dutch government to extradite Brewster, and the Dutch responded by arresting Thomas Brewer the financier in September. Brewster&#x27;s whereabouts remain unknown between then and the colonists&#x27; departure, but the Dutch authorities did seize the typesetting materials which he had used to print his pamphlets. Meanwhile, Brewer was sent to England for questioning, where he stonewalled government officials until well into 1620. He was ultimately convicted in England for his continued religious publication activities and sentenced in 1626 to a 14-year prison term.

====Preparations====
Not all of the congregation were able to depart on the first trip. Many members were not able to settle their affairs within the time constraints, and the budget was limited for travel and supplies; also, the group decided that the initial settlement should be undertaken primarily by younger and stronger members. The remainder agreed to follow if and when they could. Robinson would remain in Leiden with the larger portion of the congregation, and Brewster was to lead the American congregation. The church in America would be run independently, but it was agreed that membership would automatically be granted in either congregation to members who moved between the continents.

With personal and business matters agreed upon, the Pilgrims procured supplies and a small ship. &quot;Speedwell&quot; was to bring some passengers from the Netherlands to England, then on to America where it would be kept for the fishing business, with a crew hired for support services during the first year. The larger ship &quot;Mayflower&quot; was leased for transport and exploration services.

===Voyage===

The &quot;Speedwell&quot; was originally named &quot;Swiftsure&quot;. It was built in 1577 at 60 tons and was part of the English fleet that defeated the Spanish Armada. It departed Delfshaven in July 1620 with the Leiden colonists, after a canal ride from Leyden of about seven hours. It reached Southampton, Hampshire, and met with the &quot;Mayflower&quot; and the additional colonists hired by the investors. With final arrangements made, the two vessels set out on August 5 (Old Style)/August 15 (New Style).
Soon after, the &quot;Speedwell&quot; crew reported that their ship was taking on water, so both were diverted to Dartmouth, Devon. The crew inspected &quot;Speedwell&quot; for leaks and sealed them, but their second attempt to depart got them only as far as Plymouth, Devon. The crew decided that &quot;Speedwell&quot; was untrustworthy, and her owners sold her; the ship&#x27;s master and some of the crew transferred to the &quot;Mayflower&quot; for the trip. William Bradford observed that the &quot;Speedwell&quot; seemed &quot;overmasted&quot;, thus putting a strain on the hull; and he expressed suspicions that crew members might have deliberately caused it, allowing them to abandon their year-long commitments. Passenger Robert Cushman wrote that the leaking was caused by a loose board.

====Atlantic crossing====
Of the 120 combined passengers on the two ships, 102 were chosen to travel on the ship with the supplies consolidated. Of these, about half had come by way of Leiden, and about 30 of the adults were members of the congregation.
The reduced party finally sailed successfully on September 6 (Old Style)/September 16 (New Style), 1620.

Initially the trip went smoothly, but under way they were met with strong winds and storms. One of these caused a main beam to crack, and the possibility was considered of turning back, even though they were more than halfway to their destination. However, they repaired the ship sufficiently to continue by using a &quot;great iron screw&quot; brought along by the colonists (probably a jack to be used for either house construction or a cider press). Passenger John Howland was washed overboard in the storm, but he caught a top-sail halyard trailing in the water and was pulled back on board.

One crew member and one passenger died before they reached land. A child was born at sea and named Oceanus.

===Arrival in America===

The &quot;Mayflower&quot; passengers sighted land on November 9, 1620 after enduring miserable conditions for about 65 days, and William Brewster led them in singing Psalm 100. They confirmed that the area was Cape Cod within the New England territory recommended by Weston. They attempted to sail the ship around the cape towards the Hudson River, but they encountered shoals and difficult currents around Cape Malabar (the old French name for Monomoy Island). They decided to turn around, and the ship was anchored in Provincetown Harbor by November 11/21.

====The Mayflower Compact====

The charter was incomplete for the Plymouth Council for New England when the colonists departed England (it was granted while they were in transit on November 3/13). They arrived without a patent; the older Wincob patent was from their abandoned dealings with the London Company. Some of the passengers, aware of the situation, suggested that they were free to do as they chose upon landing, without a patent in place, and to ignore the contract with the investors.

The Leiden congregants, therefore, drafted a brief contract known as the Mayflower Compact, promising cooperation among the settlers &quot;for the general good of the Colony unto which we promise all due submission and obedience.&quot; It organized them into what was called a &quot;civill body politick,&quot; in which issues would be decided by voting, the key ingredient of democracy. It was ratified by majority rule, with 41 adult male Pilgrims signing for the 102 passengers (74 males and 28 females). Included in the company were 13 male servants and three female servants, along with some sailors and craftsmen hired for short-term service to the colony. At this time, John Carver was chosen as the colony&#x27;s first governor. It was Carver who had chartered the &quot;Mayflower&quot; and his is the first signature on the Mayflower Compact, being the most respected and affluent member of the group. The Mayflower Compact is considered to be one of the seeds of American democracy, and historians have called it the world&#x27;s first written constitution.

====First landings====
Thorough exploration of the area was delayed for more than two weeks because the shallop or pinnace (a smaller sailing vessel) which they brought had been partially dismantled to fit aboard the &quot;Mayflower&quot; and was further damaged in transit. Small parties, however, waded to the beach to fetch firewood and attend to long-deferred personal hygiene.

Myles Standish was an English soldier from Chorley whom the colonists had met while in Leiden, and they had asked him to join them as their military adviser. He and Christopher Jones led several exploratory trips ashore while awaiting the shallop&#x27;s repair. They encountered an old European-built house and iron kettle, left behind by some ship&#x27;s crew, and a few recently cultivated fields showing corn stubble.

They came upon an artificial mound near the dunes which they partially uncovered and found to be an Indian grave. Farther along, a similar mound was found, more recently made, and they discovered that some of the burial mounds also contained corn. The colonists took some of the corn, intending to use it as seed for planting, while they reburied the rest. William Bradford later recorded in his book &quot;Of Plymouth Plantation&quot; that, after the shallop had been repaired,

They also found two of the Indian&#x27;s houses covered with mats, and some of their implements in them; but the people had run away and could not be seen. Without permission they took more corn, and beans of various colours. These they brought away, intending to give them full satisfaction when they should meet with any of them—as about six months afterwards they did.

And it is to be noted as a special providence of God, and a great mercy to this poor people, that they thus got seed to plant corn the next year, or they might have starved; for they had none, nor any likelihood of getting any, till too late for the planting season.
By December, most of the passengers and crew had become ill, coughing violently. Many also were suffering from the effects of scurvy. There had already been ice and snowfall, hampering exploration efforts, and nearly half of the Pilgrim passengers died during the first winter.

====First contact====
Explorations resumed on December 6/16. The shallop party headed south along the cape, consisting of seven colonists from Leiden, three from London, and seven crew; they chose to land at the area inhabited by the Nauset people (the area around Brewster, Chatham, Eastham, Harwich, and Orleans) where they saw some people on the shore who fled when they approached. Inland they found more mounds, one containing acorns which they exhumed, and more graves, which they decided not to disturb. They remained ashore overnight and heard cries near the encampment. The following morning, they were attacked by Indians who shot at them with arrows. The colonists retrieved their firearms and shot back, then chased them into the woods but did not find them. There was no more contact with them for several months.

The Indians were already familiar with the English, who had intermittently visited the area for fishing and trade before &quot;Mayflower&quot; arrived. In the Cape Cod area, relations were poor following a visit several years earlier by Thomas Hunt. Hunt kidnapped 20 people from Patuxet (the site of Plymouth Colony) and another seven from Nausett, and he attempted to sell them as slaves in Europe. One of the Patuxet men was Squanto, who became an ally of the Plymouth Colony. He had escaped slavery and made his way to England, where he became fluent in English. He ultimately returned to America, only to discover that his entire village had died from plague.

====Settlement====


Continuing westward, the shallop&#x27;s mast and rudder were broken by storms and the sail was lost. They rowed for safety, encountering the harbor formed by Duxbury and Plymouth barrier beaches. They remained at this spot for two days to recuperate and repair equipment. They named it Clark&#x27;s Island for a &quot;Mayflower&quot; mate who first set foot on it.

They resumed exploration on Monday, December 11/21 when the party crossed over to the mainland and surveyed the area that ultimately became the settlement. The anniversary of this survey is observed in Massachusetts as Forefathers&#x27; Day and is traditionally associated with the Plymouth Rock landing tradition. This land was especially suited to winter building because it had already been cleared, and the tall hills provided a good defensive position.

The cleared village was known as Patuxet to the Wampanoag people and was abandoned about three years earlier following a plague that killed all of its residents. The &quot;Indian fever&quot; involved hemorrhaging and is assumed to have been fulminating smallpox. The outbreak had been severe enough that the colonists discovered unburied skeletons in the dwellings.

The exploratory party returned to the &quot;Mayflower&quot;, which was anchored away, having been brought to the harbor on December 16/26. The Pilgrims evaluated the nearby sites and selected a hill in Plymouth (so named on earlier charts) on December 19/29.

The Pilgrims began construction immediately, with the first common house nearly completed by January 9/19, 20 feet square and built for general use. At this point, each single man was ordered to join himself to one of the 19 families in order to eliminate the need to build any more houses than absolutely necessary. Each extended family was assigned a plot one-half rod wide and three rods long for each household member, then each family built its own dwelling. They brought supplies ashore, and the settlement was mostly complete by early February.

When the first house was finished, it immediately became a hospital for the ill Pilgrims. Thirty-one of the company were dead by the end of February, with deaths still rising. Coles Hill became the first cemetery, on a prominence above the beach, and they allowed grass to overgrow the graves for fear that the Indians would discover how weakened the settlement had actually become.

Between the landing and March, only 47 colonists had survived the diseases that they contracted on the ship. During the worst of the sickness, only six or seven of the group were able to feed and care for the rest. In this time, half the &quot;Mayflower&quot; crew also died.

William Bradford became governor in 1621 upon the death of John Carver. On March 22, 1621, the Pilgrims of Plymouth Colony signed a peace treaty with Massasoit of the Wampanoags. Bradford surrendered the patent of Plymouth Colony to the freemen in 1640, minus a small reserve of three tracts of land. He served as governor for 11 consecutive years, and was elected to various other terms before his death in 1657.

The colony contained Bristol County, Plymouth County, and Barnstable County, Massachusetts. The Massachusetts Bay Colony was reorganized and issued a new charter as the Province of Massachusetts Bay in 1691, and Plymouth ended its history as a separate colony.

==Etymology==

===Bradford&#x27;s history===
The first use of the word &quot;pilgrims&quot; for the &quot;Mayflower&quot; passengers appeared in William Bradford&#x27;s 1651 &quot;Of Plymouth Plantation&quot;. In recounting his group&#x27;s July 1620 departure from Leiden, he used the imagery of Hebrews 11 (Hebrews 11:13–16) about Old Testament &quot;strangers and pilgrims&quot; who had the opportunity to return to their old country but instead longed for a better, heavenly country.

So they lefte goodly &amp; pleasante citie, which had been ther resting place, nere 12 years; but they knew they were pilgrimes, &amp; looked not much on these things; but lift up their eyes to ye heavens, their dearest cuntrie, and quieted their spirits.
There is no record of the term &quot;Pilgrims&quot; being used to describe Plymouth&#x27;s founders for 150 years after Bradford wrote this passage, except when quoting him. The &quot;Mayflower&#x27;s&quot; story was retold by historians Nathaniel Morton (in 1669) and Cotton Mather (in 1702), and both paraphrased Bradford&#x27;s passage and used his word &quot;pilgrims&quot;. At Plymouth&#x27;s Forefathers&#x27; Day observance in 1793, Rev. Chandler Robbins recited this passage.

===Popular use===

The name &quot;Pilgrims&quot; was probably not in popular use before about 1798, even though Plymouth celebrated Forefathers&#x27; Day several times between 1769 and 1798 and used a variety of terms to honor Plymouth&#x27;s founders. The term &quot;Pilgrims&quot; was not mentioned, other than in Robbins&#x27; 1793 recitation.
The first documented use of the term that was not simply quoting Bradford was at a December 22, 1798, celebration of Forefathers&#x27; Day in Boston. A song composed for the occasion used the word &quot;Pilgrims&quot;, and the participants drank a toast to &quot;The Pilgrims of Leyden&quot;.
The term was used prominently during Plymouth&#x27;s next Forefather&#x27;s Day celebration in 1800, and was used in Forefathers&#x27; Day observances thereafter.

By the 1820s, the term &quot;Pilgrims&quot; was becoming more common. Daniel Webster repeatedly referred to &quot;the Pilgrims&quot; in his December 22, 1820, address for Plymouth&#x27;s bicentennial which was widely read. Harriet Vaughan Cheney used it in her 1824 novel &quot;A Peep at the Pilgrims in Sixteen Thirty-Six&quot;, and the term also gained popularity with the 1825 publication of Felicia Hemans&#x27;s classic poem &quot;The Landing of the Pilgrim Fathers&quot;.

==See also==

* Mayflower Society
* National Monument to the Forefathers
* Pilgrim Hall Museum
* Pilgrim Tercentenary half dollar
* Thanksgiving (United States)
* List of &quot;Mayflower&quot; passengers
* List of &quot;Mayflower&quot; passengers who died at sea November/December 1620
* List of &quot;Mayflower&quot; passengers who died in the winter of 1620–21

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* Cheney, Glenn Alan. &quot;Thanksgiving: The Pilgrims&#x27; First Year in America&quot; (New London Librarium, 2007)
* Fraser, Rebecca. &quot;The Mayflower Generation: the Winslow Family and the Fight for the New World&quot; (Vintage, 2017)
* Tompkins, Stephen. &quot;The Journey to the Mayflower: God’s Outlaws and the Invention of Freedom &quot; (Hodder and Stoughton, 2020)
* Vandrei, Martha. &quot;The Pilgrim&#x27;s Progress,&quot; &quot;History Today&quot; (May 2020) 70#5 pp 28–41. Covers the historiography 1629 to 2020; online
* Whittock, Martyn. &quot;Mayflower Lives&quot; (Simon and Schuster, 2019).

==External links==
* Pilgrim Archives, Searchable municipal and court records from Leiden Regional Archive
* Church of the Pilgrimage, founded after an 1801 schism
* Pilgrim Hall Museum Pilgrim history and artifacts
* &quot;Mayflower&quot; Steps All about the &quot;Mayflower&quot; and Pilgrim Fathers with a Plymouth (UK) focus. Many pictures
* The Mayflower Pub London The original mooring point of The Pilgrim Fathers’ &quot;Mayflower&quot; ship in Rotherhithe, London and the oldest pub on the River Thames
* Pilgrim ships from 1602 to 1638 Pilgrim ships searchable by ship name, sailing date and passengers.
* The Pilgrim Fathers, BBC Radio 4 discussion with Kathleen Burk, Harry Bennett &amp; Tim Lockley (&quot;In Our Time&quot;, July 5, 2007)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q855700" start="4" end="12" title="Pilgrims (Plymouth Colony)" label="Pilgrims"/>
<link wikidata="Q855700" start="32" end="47" title="Pilgrims (Plymouth Colony)" label="Pilgrim Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="92" end="105" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q187093" start="124" end="133" title="Mayflower" label="Mayflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q126195" start="160" end="175" title="Plymouth Colony" label="Plymouth Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q326295" start="191" end="229" title="Plymouth, Massachusetts" label="Plymouth, Massachusetts, United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q228024" start="231" end="241" title="John Smith (explorer)" label="John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q43382" start="352" end="376" title="Plymouth" label="Plymouth, Devon, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976589" start="445" end="453" title="Brownist" label="Brownist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195178" start="458" end="469" title="English Dissenters" label="Separatists"/>
<link wikidata="Q102911" start="550" end="557" title="Holland" label="Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="561" end="576" title="Netherlands" label="the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="619" end="628" title="Calvinist" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="650" end="658" title="Puritans" label="Puritans"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="703" end="721" title="established church" label="established church"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="792" end="809" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="1083" end="1097" title="Congregationalism" label="Congregational"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="1154" end="1178" title="Massachusetts Bay Colony" label="Massachusetts Bay Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q23092" start="1383" end="1398" title="Nottinghamshire" label="Nottinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q723274" start="1415" end="1428" title="John Robinson (pastor)" label="John Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324804" start="1430" end="1445" title="Richard Clyfton" label="Richard Clyfton"/>
<link wikidata="Q928195" start="1451" end="1461" title="John Smyth (Baptist minister)" label="John Smyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195178" start="1497" end="1507" title="English Dissenters" label="Separatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976589" start="1534" end="1542" title="Brownist" label="Brownist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033352" start="1652" end="1665" title="Robert Browne (Brownist)" label="Robert Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612254" start="1667" end="1681" title="John Greenwood (Puritan)" label="John Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q728968" start="1687" end="1700" title="Henry Barrowe" label="Henry Barrowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620229" start="1964" end="1986" title="Act of Uniformity 1559" label="Act of Uniformity 1559"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311118" start="2235" end="2263" title="Seditious Sectaries Act 1592" label="Seditious Sectaries Act 1592"/>
<link wikidata="Q363711" start="2526" end="2536" title="John Penry" label="John Penry"/>
<link wikidata="Q544394" start="2555" end="2563" title="sedition" label="sedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q52101" start="2618" end="2628" title="Middelburg, Zeeland" label="Middelburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299736" start="2781" end="2795" title="Matthew Hutton (Archbishop of York)" label="Matthew Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q704171" start="2854" end="2866" title="Robert Cecil, 1st Earl of Salisbury" label="Robert Cecil"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="2890" end="2897" title="James I of England" label="James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646183" start="3460" end="3484" title="Hampton Court Conference" label="Hampton Court Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q623398" start="3580" end="3612" title="King James Version of the Bible" label="English translation of the Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q651099" start="3629" end="3645" title="Richard Bancroft" label="Richard Bancroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530145" start="4148" end="4162" title="Tobias Matthew" label="Tobias Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q864709" start="4633" end="4649" title="William Brewster (Pilgrim)" label="William Brewster"/>
<link wikidata="Q864742" start="4725" end="4732" title="Scrooby" label="Scrooby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363910" start="4808" end="4826" title="Archbishop of York" label="Archbishop of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q928195" start="4924" end="4934" title="John Smyth (1570–1612)" label="John Smyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q288082" start="4938" end="4964" title="Gainsborough, Lincolnshire" label="Gainsborough, Lincolnshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q723274" start="5118" end="5131" title="John Robinson (pastor)" label="John Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210370" start="5546" end="5562" title="William Bradford (governor)" label="William Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873628" start="5566" end="5577" title="Austerfield" label="Austerfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049106" start="5667" end="5689" title="Of Plymouth Plantation" label="Of Plymouth Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43631" start="6299" end="6305" title="Leiden" label="Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q156598" start="6447" end="6464" title="Leiden University" label="Leiden University"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="7608" end="7617" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q13446873" start="7625" end="7636" title="Arminianism" label="Arminianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q284561" start="7677" end="7689" title="Remonstrants" label="Remonstrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q837721" start="7710" end="7721" title="typesetting" label="typesetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q864808" start="9479" end="9493" title="Edward Winslow" label="Edward Winslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q164432" start="10260" end="10282" title="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q650667" start="10390" end="10396" title="The Guianas" label="Guiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368792" start="10469" end="10478" title="Essequibo (colony)" label="Essequibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="10512" end="10520" title="Colony of Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061207" start="10817" end="10831" title="London Company" label="London Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="10954" end="10966" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q382593" start="11009" end="11023" title="New Netherland" label="New Netherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343266" start="11202" end="11216" title="Robert Cushman" label="Robert Cushman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186537" start="11221" end="11232" title="John Carver (Mayflower passenger)" label="John Carver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="11439" end="11448" title="Old Style" label="Old Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795013" start="12279" end="12292" title="Thomas Weston (merchant adventurer)" label="Thomas Weston"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="12715" end="12726" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6351314" start="12826" end="12858" title="Plymouth Council for New England" label="Plymouth Council for New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386096" start="13679" end="13701" title="Five Articles of Perth" label="Five Articles of Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q745833" start="14046" end="14061" title="Dudley Carleton, 1st Viscount Dorchester" label="Dudley Carleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308528" start="15496" end="15505" title="Speedwell (1577 ship)" label="Speedwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q187093" start="15726" end="15735" title="Mayflower" label="Mayflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308528" start="15818" end="15827" title="Speedwell (1577 ship)" label="Speedwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184149" start="15990" end="16000" title="Delfshaven" label="Delfshaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="16105" end="16116" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="16118" end="16127" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q187093" start="16152" end="16161" title="Mayflower" label="Mayflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="16288" end="16297" title="Old Style" label="Old Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007083" start="16436" end="16452" title="Dartmouth, Devon" label="Dartmouth, Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43382" start="16581" end="16589" title="Plymouth" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="16591" end="16596" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210370" start="16785" end="16801" title="William Bradford (Plymouth Colony governor)" label="William Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="17437" end="17446" title="Old Style" label="Old Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q6240151" start="17944" end="17956" title="John Howland" label="John Howland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076252" start="18177" end="18184" title="Oceanus Hopkins" label="Oceanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q864709" start="18342" end="18358" title="William Brewster (Mayflower passenger)" label="William Brewster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068829" start="18379" end="18388" title="Psalm 100" label="Psalm 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q49152" start="18423" end="18431" title="Cape Cod" label="Cape Cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="18548" end="18560" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901764" start="18658" end="18672" title="Monomoy Island" label="Monomoy Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q651694" start="18733" end="18752" title="Provincetown Harbor" label="Provincetown Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q868502" start="19344" end="19361" title="Mayflower Compact" label="Mayflower Compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186537" start="19948" end="19959" title="John Carver (Mayflower passenger)" label="John Carver"/>
<link wikidata="Q28232061" start="20444" end="20451" title="shallop" label="shallop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236143" start="20455" end="20462" title="pinnace (ship&amp;#x27;s boat)" label="pinnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q865313" start="20723" end="20737" title="Myles Standish" label="Myles Standish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078535" start="20766" end="20773" title="Chorley" label="Chorley"/>
<link wikidata="Q501660" start="20888" end="20905" title="Christopher Jones (sailor)" label="Christopher Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210370" start="21502" end="21518" title="William Bradford (Plymouth Colony governor)" label="William Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049106" start="21552" end="21574" title="Of Plymouth Plantation" label="Of Plymouth Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q163865" start="22391" end="22397" title="scurvy" label="scurvy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813500" start="22778" end="22784" title="Nauset" label="Nauset"/>
<link wikidata="Q911438" start="22809" end="22817" title="Brewster, Massachusetts" label="Brewster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774812" start="22819" end="22826" title="Chatham, Massachusetts" label="Chatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303096" start="22828" end="22835" title="Eastham, Massachusetts" label="Eastham"/>
<link wikidata="Q971430" start="22837" end="22844" title="Harwich, Massachusetts" label="Harwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q997147" start="22850" end="22857" title="Orleans, Massachusetts" label="Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q711498" start="23609" end="23620" title="Thomas Hunt (slaver)" label="Thomas Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q711498" start="23800" end="23807" title="Squanto" label="Squanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429627" start="24217" end="24224" title="Duxbury, Massachusetts" label="Duxbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468181" start="24644" end="24665" title="Forefathers&amp;#x27; Day" label="Forefathers&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072391" start="24707" end="24720" title="Plymouth Rock" label="Plymouth Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047264" start="24932" end="24948" title="Wampanoag people" label="Wampanoag people"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="25137" end="25145" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210370" start="26725" end="26741" title="William Bradford (Plymouth Colony governor)" label="William Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186537" start="26784" end="26795" title="John Carver (Mayflower passenger)" label="John Carver"/>
<link wikidata="Q739194" start="26875" end="26884" title="Massasoit" label="Massasoit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047264" start="26892" end="26902" title="Wampanoag people" label="Wampanoags"/>
<link wikidata="Q126195" start="26939" end="26954" title="Plymouth Colony" label="Plymouth Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500983" start="26962" end="26969" title="Freeman (Colonial)" label="freemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q54082" start="27161" end="27175" title="Bristol County, Massachusetts" label="Bristol County"/>
<link wikidata="Q54086" start="27177" end="27192" title="Plymouth County, Massachusetts" label="Plymouth County"/>
<link wikidata="Q54089" start="27198" end="27230" title="Barnstable County, Massachusetts" label="Barnstable County, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="27236" end="27260" title="Massachusetts Bay Colony" label="Massachusetts Bay Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079909" start="27309" end="27338" title="Province of Massachusetts Bay" label="Province of Massachusetts Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210370" start="27547" end="27563" title="William Bradford (Plymouth Colony governor)" label="William Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049106" start="27582" end="27604" title="Of Plymouth Plantation" label="Of Plymouth Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12486210" start="27699" end="27709" title="Hebrews 11" label="Hebrews 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="27735" end="27748" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q15441072" start="28385" end="28401" title="Nathaniel Morton" label="Nathaniel Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q380719" start="28416" end="28429" title="Cotton Mather" label="Cotton Mather"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468181" start="28545" end="28566" title="Forefathers&amp;#x27; Day" label="Forefathers&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468181" start="28764" end="28785" title="Forefathers&amp;#x27; Day" label="Forefathers&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="29121" end="29127" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q106231" start="29506" end="29520" title="Daniel Webster" label="Daniel Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664367" start="29659" end="29681" title="Harriet Vaughan Cheney" label="Harriet Vaughan Cheney"/>
<link wikidata="Q272537" start="29831" end="29845" title="Felicia Hemans" label="Felicia Hemans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515074" start="29931" end="29948" title="Mayflower Society" label="Mayflower Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4343546" start="29951" end="29987" title="National Monument to the Forefathers" label="National Monument to the Forefathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319468" start="29990" end="30009" title="Pilgrim Hall Museum" label="Pilgrim Hall Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q25067171" start="30012" end="30044" title="Pilgrim Tercentenary half dollar" label="Pilgrim Tercentenary half dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913791" start="30047" end="30075" title="Thanksgiving (United States)" label="Thanksgiving (United States)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3833924" start="30078" end="30118" title="List of Mayflower passengers" label="List of &amp;quot;Mayflower&amp;quot; passengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797245" start="30121" end="30200" title="List of Mayflower passengers who died at sea November/December 1620" label="List of &amp;quot;Mayflower&amp;quot; passengers who died at sea November/December 1620"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589514" start="30203" end="30277" title="List of Mayflower passengers who died in the winter of 1620–21" label="List of &amp;quot;Mayflower&amp;quot; passengers who died in the winter of 1620–21"/>
<link wikidata="Q42309331" start="31612" end="31625" title="Kathleen Burk" label="Kathleen Burk"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40443" wikidata="Q508421" url="?curid=40443" title="Ivan Vidav">
<text>Ivan Vidav (January 17, 1918 – October 6, 2015) was a Slovenian mathematician.

Ivan Vidav was born in Villa Opicina near Trieste, Italy. He was a student of Josip Plemelj. Vidav received his Ph.D. with Plemelj as his advisor in 1941 at the University of Ljubljana with the dissertation &quot;Kleinovi teoremi v teoriji linearnih diferencialnih enačb&quot; (Klein&#x27;s Theorems in the Theory of Linear Differential Equations).

Vidav&#x27;s main research interest were differential equations, functional analysis, and algebra. He was a regular member of the Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts. He received the Prešeren Award in recognition of his work.

In 1988, he became an honorary member of the Society of Mathematicians, Physicists and Astronomers of Slovenia (DMFA).

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q508421" start="0" end="10" title="Ivan Vidav" label="Ivan Vidav"/>
<link wikidata="Q15863" start="54" end="63" title="Slovenians" label="Slovenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="64" end="77" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q425566" start="103" end="116" title="Villa Opicina" label="Villa Opicina"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="122" end="129" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="131" end="136" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q554492" start="158" end="171" title="Josip Plemelj" label="Josip Plemelj"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="192" end="197" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="Ph.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q1377" start="241" end="264" title="University of Ljubljana" label="University of Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q76641" start="358" end="363" title="Felix Klein" label="Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="404" end="425" title="Differential Equation" label="Differential Equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="471" end="493" title="differential equations" label="differential equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q190549" start="495" end="514" title="functional analysis" label="functional analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968" start="520" end="527" title="algebra" label="algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q266063" start="560" end="598" title="Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts" label="Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861609" start="616" end="630" title="Prešeren Award" label="Prešeren Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552557" start="705" end="770" title="Society of Mathematicians, Physicists and Astronomers of Slovenia" label="Society of Mathematicians, Physicists and Astronomers of Slovenia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40444" wikidata="Q487315" url="?curid=40444" title="Monterey, California">
<text>Monterey ( ; ) is a city situated on the southern edge of Monterey Bay, on the Central Coast of California. Located in Monterey County, the city occupies a land area of and recorded a population of 30,218 in the 2020 census.

The city was founded by the Spanish in 1770, when Gaspar de Portolá and Junípero Serra established the Presidio of Monterey and the Cathedral of San Carlos Borromeo. Monterey was elevated to capital of the Province of the Californias in 1777, servings as the administrative and military headquarters of both Alta California and Baja California, as well as its only official port of entry. Following the Mexican War of Independence, Monterey continued as the capital of the Mexican Department of the Californias.

During the United States conquest of California, part of the Mexican-American War, Monterey was seized by the American military in the Battle of Monterey in 1846. Following its capture, Monterey continued to serve as the capital of the American interim government of California until 1849, during which it hosted the California&#x27;s 1st Constitutional Convention. In the late 19th century, Monterey and its surrounding area began to attract communities of artists, writers, and other creatives, leading to the creation of an art colony. 

Today, Monterey is a popular tourist destination on the Central Coast, hosting notable attractions such as the Monterey Bay Aquarium, Cannery Row, Fisherman&#x27;s Wharf, California Roots Music and Arts Festival, and the annual Monterey Jazz Festival. The city is also an important hub for the military and higher education, home to the Defense Language Institute, the Naval Postgraduate School, the Middlebury Institute of International Studies at Monterey and California State University, Monterey Bay.

== History ==

=== Ohlone period ===

Long before the arrival of Spanish explorers, the Rumsen Ohlone tribe, one of seven linguistically distinct Ohlone groups in California, inhabited the area now known as Monterey. Ohlone villages in the area included Ichxenta (Point Lobos), Calendaruc, Wacharon (Moss Landing), and Rumsien (Carmel-by-the-Sea), among others. They subsisted by hunting, fishing and gathering food on and around the biologically rich Monterey Peninsula. 

Researchers have found a number of shell middens in the area and, based on the archaeological evidence, concluded the Ohlone&#x27;s primary marine food consisted of various types of mussels and abalone. A number of midden sites have been located along about of rocky coast on the Monterey Peninsula from the current site of Fishermans&#x27; Wharf in Monterey to Carmel.

=== Spanish period ===

The city is named after Monterey Bay. The bay&#x27;s name was given by Sebastián Vizcaíno in 1602. He anchored in what is now Monterey harbor on December 16, and named it &quot;Puerto de Monterrey&quot;, in honor of the Conde de Monterrey, then the viceroy of New Spain. Monterrey is an alternate spelling of Monterrei, a municipality in the Galicia region of Spain from which the viceroy and his father (the Fourth Count of Monterrei) originated. Some variants of the city&#x27;s name are recorded as Monte Rey and Monterey. Monterey Bay had been described earlier by Juan Rodríguez Cabrillo as La Bahia de los Pinos (Bay of the Pines). Despite the explorations of Cabrillo and Vizcaino, and despite Spain&#x27;s frequent trading voyages between Asia and Mexico, the Spanish did not make Monterey Bay into a settled permanent harbor before the 18th century because it was too exposed to rough ocean currents and winds.

Despite Monterey&#x27;s limited use as a maritime port, the encroachments of other Europeans near California in the 18th century prompted the Spanish monarchy to try to better secure the region. As a result, it commissioned the Portola exploration and Alta California mission system. In 1769, the first European land exploration of Alta California, the Spanish Portolá expedition, traveled north from San Diego. They sought Vizcaíno&#x27;s Port of Monterey, which he had described as &quot;a fine harbor sheltered from all winds&quot; 167 years earlier. The explorers failed to recognize the place when they came to it on October 1, 1769. The party continued north as far as San Francisco Bay before turning back. On the return journey, they camped near one of Monterey&#x27;s lagoons on November 27, still not convinced they had found the place Vizcaíno had described. Franciscan missionary Juan Crespí noted in his diary, &quot;We halted in sight of the Point of Pines (recognized, as was said, in the beginning of October) and camped near a small lagoon which has rather muddy water, but abounds in pasture and firewood.&quot; 

Gaspar de Portolá returned by land to Monterey the next year, having concluded that he must have been at Vizcaíno&#x27;s Port of Monterey after all. The land party was met at Monterey by Junípero Serra, who traveled by sea. Portolá erected the Presidio of Monterey to defend the port and, on June 3, 1770, Serra founded the Cathedral of San Carlos Borromeo inside the presidio enclosure. Portolá returned to Mexico, replaced in Monterey by Captain Pedro Fages, who had been third in command on the exploratory expeditions. Fages became the second governor of Alta California, serving from 1770 to 1774.

Serra&#x27;s missionary aims soon came into conflict with Fages and the soldiers, so he relocated and built a new mission in Carmel the next year to gain greater independence from Fages. The existing wood and adobe church remained in service to the nearby soldiers and became the Royal Presidio Chapel.

Monterey became the capital of the &quot;Province of Both Californias&quot; in 1777, and the chapel was renamed the Royal Presidio Chapel. The original church was destroyed by fire in 1789 and replaced by the present sandstone structure. It was completed in 1794 by Indian labor. In 1840, the chapel was rededicated to the patronage of Saint Charles Borromeo. The cathedral is the oldest continuously operating parish and the oldest stone building in California. It is also the oldest (and smallest) serving cathedral along with St. Louis Cathedral in New Orleans, Louisiana. It is the only existing presidio chapel in California and the only surviving building from the original Monterey Presidio.

The city was originally the only port of entry for all taxable goods in California. All shipments into California by sea were required to go through the Custom House, the oldest governmental building in the state and California&#x27;s Historic Landmark Number One. Built in three phases, the Spanish began construction of the Custom House in 1814, the Mexican government completed the center section in 1827, and the United States government finished the lower end in 1846.

On November 24, 1818, Argentine corsair Hippolyte Bouchard landed away from the Presidio of Monterey in a hidden creek. The fort&#x27;s resistance proved ineffective, and after an hour of combat the Argentine flag flew over it. The Argentines took the city for six days, during which they stole the cattle and burned the fort, the artillery headquarters, the governor&#x27;s residence and the Spanish houses. The town&#x27;s residents were unharmed.

=== Mexican period ===

Mexico gained independence from Spain in 1821, but the civil and religious institutions of Alta California remained much the same until the 1830s, when the secularization of the missions converted most of the mission pasture lands into private land grant ranchos. In 1834, the San Carlos Cemetery was officially opened and interred many of the early local families. Agustín V. Zamorano established the first print shop in California, when he brought a printing press to Monterey, in the summer of 1834.

During the Mexican period, the city was determined the site of District Court of the Territory of Alta California (&quot;Juzgado de Distrito del Territorio de la Alta California&quot;), since 1834, when Luis del Castillo Negrete, the appointed district judge (Juez de Distrito), took possession of the court; until 1836, when due to the rebellion led by Juan Bautista Alvarado, the judge left the city for the territory of Baja California, which &quot;de facto&quot; disqualified that instance and would close definitively until 1841, with a decree by Antonio López de Santa Anna. Subsequently, in 1842, the Superior Court (&quot;Superior Tribunal de Justicia del Departamento de las Californias&quot;) was installed, which had a short life, as it stopped functioning in 1845.

Monterey was the site of the Battle of Monterey on July 7, 1846, during the Mexican–American War. It was on this date that John D. Sloat, Commodore in the United States Navy, raised the U.S. flag over the Monterey Custom House and claimed California for the United States.

In addition, many historic &quot;firsts&quot; occurred in Monterey. These include First theater in California, brick house, publicly funded school, public building, public library, and printing press (which printed &quot;The Californian&quot;, California&#x27;s first newspaper.) Larkin House, one of Monterey State Historic Park&#x27;s National Historic Landmarks, built in the Mexican period by Thomas Oliver Larkin, is an early example of Monterey Colonial architecture. The Old Custom House, the historic district and the Royal Presidio Chapel are also National Historic Landmarks. The Cooper-Molera Adobe is a National Trust Historic Site.

=== American period ===

Colton Hall, built in 1849 by Walter Colton, originally served as both a public school and a government meeting place. It hosted the 1849 Constitutional Convention, where American and Californio delegates drafted the first Constitution of California, in both English and Spanish.

Monterey hosted California&#x27;s first constitutional convention in 1849, which composed the documents necessary to apply to the United States for statehood. Today Colton Hall houses a small museum, while adjacent buildings serve as the seat of local government, and the Monterey post office (opened in 1849).

Pioneer Francis Doud built Doud House in the 1860s, situated at the present-day 117 Van Buren Street. The house is one of the earliest and most well-preserved examples of an early wood frame residences in Monterey. Monterey was incorporated in 1890.

Thomas Albert Work built several of the buildings in Monterey, including the three-story Del Mar hotel in 1895, at the corner of Sixteenth, and in 1900, bought into the First National Bank in Monterey, acquiring it in 1906. He was president of the bank for more than 20 years.

Monterey had long been famous for the abundant fishery in Monterey Bay. That changed in the 1950s when the local fishery business collapsed due to overfishing. A few of the old fishermen&#x27;s cabins from the early 20th century have been preserved as they originally stood along Cannery Row.

The city has a noteworthy history as a center for California painters in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Such painters as Arthur Frank Mathews, Armin Hansen, Xavier Martinez, Rowena Meeks Abdy and Percy Gray lived or visited to pursue painting in the style of either En plein air or Tonalism.

Many noted authors have also lived in and around Monterey, including Robert Louis Stevenson, John Steinbeck, Ed Ricketts, Robinson Jeffers, Robert A. Heinlein, and Henry Miller.

More recently, Monterey has been recognized for its significant involvement in post-secondary learning of languages other than English and its major role in delivering translation and interpretation services around the world. In November 1995, California Governor Pete Wilson proclaimed Monterey &quot;the Language Capital of the World&quot;.

On June 7, 2021, the macOS Monterey operating system was presented at Apple&#x27;s Worldwide Developers Conference (WWDC2021) and named after the Monterey region.

== Geography ==

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has an area of , of which is land and (28.05%) is water. Sand deposits in the northern coastal area comprise the sole known mineral resources. The city has several distinct districts, such as New Monterey, Del Monte, and Cannery Row.

Local soil is Quaternary Alluvium. Common soil series include the Baywood fine sand on the east side, Narlon loamy sand on the west side, Sheridan coarse sandy loam on hilly terrain, and the pale Tangair sand on hills supporting closed-cone pine habitat. The city is in a moderate to high seismic risk zone, the principal threat being the active San Andreas Fault approximately to the east. The Monterey Bay fault, which tracks to the north, is also active, as is the Palo Colorado fault to the south. Also nearby, minor but potentially active, are the Berwick Canyon, Seaside, Tularcitos and Chupines faults.

Monterey Bay&#x27;s maximum credible tsunami for a 100-year interval has been calculated as a wave high. The considerable undeveloped area in the northwest part of the city has a high potential for landslides and erosion.

The city is adjacent to the Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary, a federally protected ocean area extending along the coast. Sometimes this sanctuary is confused with the local bay which is also termed Monterey Bay.

Soquel Canyon State Marine Conservation Area, Portuguese Ledge State Marine Conservation Area, Pacific Grove Marine Gardens State Marine Conservation Area, Lovers Point State Marine Reserve, Edward F. Ricketts State Marine Conservation Area and Asilomar State Marine Reserve are marine protected areas established by the state of California in Monterey Bay. Like underwater parks, these marine protected areas help conserve ocean wildlife and marine ecosystems.

The California sea otter, a threatened subspecies, inhabits the local Monterey Bay marine environment, and a field station of The Marine Mammal Center is located in Monterey to support sea rescue operations in this section of the California coast. The rare San Joaquin kit fox is found in Monterey&#x27;s oak-forest and chaparral habitats. The chaparral, found mainly on the city&#x27;s drier eastern slopes, hosts such plants as manzanita, chamise and ceanothus. Additional species of interest (that is, potential candidates for endangered species status) are the Salinas kangaroo rat and the silver-sided legless lizard.

There is a variety of natural habitat in Monterey: littoral zone and sand dunes; closed-cone pine forest; and Monterey Cypress. There are no dairy farms in the city of Monterey; the semi-hard cheese known as Monterey Jack originated in nearby Carmel Valley, California, and is named after businessman and land speculator David Jacks.

The closed-cone pine habitat is dominated by Monterey pine, Knobcone pine and Bishop pine, and contains the rare Monterey manzanita. In the early 20th century the botanist Willis Linn Jepson characterized Monterey Peninsula&#x27;s forests as the &quot;most important silva ever&quot;, and encouraged Samuel F.B. Morse (a century younger than the inventor Samuel F. B. Morse) of the Del Monte Properties Company to explore the possibilities of preserving the unique forest communities. The dune area is no less important, as it hosts endangered species such as the vascular plants Seaside birds beak, Hickman&#x27;s potentilla and Eastwood&#x27;s Ericameria. Rare plants also inhabit the chaparral: Hickman&#x27;s onion, Yadon&#x27;s piperia (&quot;Piperia yadonii&quot;) and Sandmat manzanita. Other rare plants in Monterey include Hutchinson&#x27;s delphinium, Tidestrom lupine, Gardner&#x27;s yampah and Knotweed, the latter perhaps already extinct.

Monterey&#x27;s noise pollution has been mapped to define the principal sources of noise and to ascertain the areas of the population exposed to significant levels. Principal sources are the Monterey Regional Airport, State Route 1 and major arterial streets such as Munras Avenue, Fremont Street, Del Monte Boulevard, and Camino Aguajito. While most of Monterey is a quiet residential city, a moderate number of people in the northern part of the city are exposed to aircraft noise at levels in excess of 60 dB on the Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) scale. The most intense source is State Route 1: all residents exposed to levels greater than 65 CNEL—about 1,600 people—live near State Route 1 or one of the principal arterial streets.

===Climate===

Monterey&#x27;s climate is regulated by its proximity to the Pacific Ocean, resulting in a warm-summer Mediterranean climate (Köppen climate classification: &quot;Csb&quot;) although with temperatures resembling an oceanic climate. The city&#x27;s average high temperatures range from in December to in September. Average annual precipitation is , with most occurring between October and April; little to no precipitation falls during the summer. There is an average of 72.1 days with measurable precipitation annually. Average temperatures in Monterey are similar to average temperatures found in other parts of the world with oceanic climates, including Puerto Williams, Chile, Ushuaia, Argentina, much of New Zealand, the Atlantic coast of Spain, southeastern Alaska and the western coast of Norway.
Summers in Monterey are often cool and foggy. The cold surface waters cause even summer nights to be unusually cool for the latitude; this is in distinct contrast to the much warmer summer days and nights of the U.S. east coast. The extreme moderation of summer temperatures is further underlined by the fact that Monterey is geographically situated at a similar latitude within California as Death Valley⁠one of the hottest areas in the world. 

During winter, snow occasionally falls in the higher elevations of the Santa Lucia Mountains and Gabilan Mountains that overlook Monterey, but snow in Monterey itself is extremely rare. A few unusual events in January 1962, February 1976, and December 1997 brought a light coating of snow to Monterey. In March 2006, a total of fell in Monterey, including on March 10, 2006. The snowfall on January 21, 1962, of , is remembered for delaying the Bing Crosby golf tournament in nearby Pebble Beach.

The record lowest temperature was on December 24, 1998, and January 13, 2007. Annually, there are an average of 1.3 days with highs that reach or exceed and an average of 1.5 days with lows at or below the freezing mark.

Combining the records for Monterey and Monterey WFO, the wettest &quot;rain year&quot; on record has been from July 1997 to June 1998 with of precipitation, and the driest from July 2013 to June 2014 with . The most precipitation in one month was in February 1998. The record maximum 24-hour precipitation was on December 11, 2014.

== Demographics ==

The headquarters of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Monterey in California is in Monterey, and one of the relatively few Oratorian communities in the United States is located in the city. The city is adjacent to the historic Catholic Carmel Mission.

===2020===
The 2020 United States census reported that Monterey had a population of 30,218 people, with 12,912 households. The racial makeup of Monterey was 71.9% White, 3.7% African American, 0.9% Native American, 7.3% Asian, 0.3% Pacific Islander, and 7.9% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race made up 19.0% of the population.

=== 2010 ===

The 2010 United States Census reported that Monterey had a population of 27,810. The population density was . The racial makeup of Monterey was 21,788 (78.3%) White, 777 (2.8%) African American, 149 (0.5%) Native American, 2,204 (7.9%) Asian, 91 (0.3%) Pacific Islander, 1,382 (5.0%) from other races, and 1,419 (5.1%) from two or more races. There were 3,817 people (13.7%) of Hispanic or Latino origin, of any race.

The Census reported that 25,307 people (91.0% of the population) lived in households, 2,210 (7.9%) lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 293 (1.1%) were institutionalized.

There were 12,184 households, out of which 2,475 (20.3%) had children under the age of 18 living in them, 4,690 (38.5%) were opposite-sex married couples living together, 902 (7.4%) had a female householder with no husband present, 371 (3.0%) had a male householder with no wife present. 4,778 households (39.2%) were made up of individuals, and 1,432 (11.8%) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.08. There were 5,963 families (48.9% of all households); the average family size was 2.81.

The population was spread out, with 4,266 people (15.3%) under the age of 18, 3,841 people (13.8%) aged 18 to 24, 8,474 people (30.5%) aged 25 to 44, 6,932 people (24.9%) aged 45 to 64, and 4,297 people (15.5%) who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36.9 years. For every 100 females, there were 101.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 100.6 males.

There were 13,584 housing units at an average density of , of which 4,360 (35.8%) were owner-occupied, and 7,824 (64.2%) were occupied by renters. The homeowner vacancy rate was 2.0%; the rental vacancy rate was 6.5%. 9,458 people (34.0% of the population) lived in owner-occupied housing units and 15,849 people (57.0%) lived in rental housing units.

=== 2000 ===

As of the census of 2000, there were 29,674 people, 12,600 households, and 6,476 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 13,382 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 80.8% White, 10.9% Hispanic, 7.4% Asian, 2.5% African American, 0.6% Native American, 0.3% Pacific Islander, 3.9% from other races, and 4.5% from two or more races.

There were 12,600 households, out of which 21.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 39.5% were married couples living together, 8.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 48.6% were non-families. 37.0% of all households consisted of individuals, and 11.0% had a lone dweller who is over 64. The average household size was 2.13 and the average family size was 2.82.

The age distribution is as follows: 16.6% under the age of 18, 13.1% from 18 to 24, 33.8% from 25 to 44, 21.7% from 45 to 64, and 14.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 96.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 96.1 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $49,109, and the median income for a family was $58,757. Males had a median income of $40,410 versus $31,258 for females. The per capita income for the city was $27,133. About 4.4% of families and 7.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 6.5% of those under age 18 and 4.8% of those age 65 or over.

==Economy==
According to the city&#x27;s 2015 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the top private-sector employers in the city are (in alphabetical order):

The top public-sector employers are (in alphabetical order):

Other private-sector employers based in Monterey include Monterey Peninsula Unified School District, and Mapleton Communications. Additional military facilities in Monterey include the Fleet Numerical Meteorology and Oceanography Center, and the United States Naval Research Laboratory – Monterey.

==Arts and culture==

=== Attractions ===
Monterey is well known for the abundance and diversity of its marine life, which includes sea lions, sea otters, harbor seals, bat rays, kelp forests, pelicans and dolphins and several species of whales. Only a few miles offshore is the Monterey Canyon, the largest and deepest (at ) underwater canyon off the Pacific coast of North America, which grants scientists access to the deep sea within hours. The cornucopia of marine life makes Monterey a popular destination for scuba divers of all abilities ranging from novice to expert. Scuba classes are held at San Carlos State Beach, which has been a favorite with divers since the 1960s. The Monterey Bay Aquarium on Cannery Row is one of the largest aquariums in North America, and several marine science laboratories, including Hopkins Marine Station are located in the area.

Monterey is home to several museums and more than thirty carefully preserved historic buildings. Most of these buildings are adobes built in the mid-1800s. Some are museums and open to the public, including the Cooper Molera Adobe, Robert Louis Stevenson House, Casa Serrano, The Perry House, The Customs House, Colton Hall, Mayo Hayes O&#x27;Donnell Library and The First Brick House. Many others are only open during Monterey&#x27;s annual adobe tour. The Monterey Museum of Art specializes in Early California Impressionist painting, photography, and contemporary art. Other youth-oriented art attractions include MY Museum, a children&#x27;s museum, and YAC, an arts organization for teens.

What may be the only whalebone sidewalk still in existence in the United States lies in front of the Old Whaling Station, left by New England whalers while California was still part of New Spain.

Cannery Row is a historic industrial district west of downtown Monterey. Several companies operated large sardine canneries and packing houses from the 1920s until the 1950s when the sardines were overfished and the industry collapsed. The neighborhood was a minor tourist attraction until the late 1980s when the Monterey Bay Aquarium bought the former Hovden Cannery and built their aquarium around it. The Aquarium revitalized the neighborhood and it is now the number one tourist destination on the Monterey Peninsula. It is home to more than 600 species of plants and animals. Several of the canneries burnt down in the 1970s and some of their empty foundations are still visible along the oceanfront. A free heritage trolley transports visitors between downtown Monterey and the Aquarium during the summer.

Once called Ocean View Boulevard, the street was renamed Cannery Row in 1953 in honor of writer John Steinbeck, who had written a well-known novel of the same name. It has now become a tourist attraction with numerous establishments located in former cannery buildings, including Cannery Row Antique Mall which is located in the most historically intact cannery building open to the public. Other historical buildings in this district include Wing Chong Market, The American Tin Cannery which is a shopping mall, Doc Rickett&#x27;s lab, next door to the aquarium and only open to the public a few times a year, and some of the water tanks written about by Steinbeck. A few privately owned and operated fishing companies still exist on Cannery Row, housed on piers located a short distance from the historic district frequented by tourists. Cannery Row is now considered the historic cannery district from Foam St. to the ocean.

The Governor Juan Bautista Alvarado House is California Historical Landmark number #348. The adobe house was seriously damaged in January 2023 during the 2022–2023 California floods.

Lake El Estero is a popular Monterey park. Recreation opportunities include paddleboats, the Dennis the Menace Park (named after the comics character Dennis the Menace), and a skate park designed by local skaters. Birders are especially fond of this park due to its easy accessibility and the diversity of birdlife it attracts.

=== Arts ===

Monterey is the home of the Monterey Museum of Art, its annex museum La Mirada and the Salvador Dalí Museum. There are several commercial galleries in the historic district of Cannery Row, New Monterey and Customs House Plaza.

=== Music ===
The Monterey Jazz Festival began in 1958, presenting such artists as Louis Armstrong, Dizzy Gillespie, and Billie Holiday, and now claims to be &quot;the longest running jazz festival in the world&quot; (the Newport Jazz Festival was established in 1954, but has changed venues since its founding).

In June 1967 the city was the venue of the Monterey Pop Festival. Formally known as the Monterey International Pop Music Festival, the three-day concert event was held June 16 to 18, 1967, at the Monterey County Fairgrounds. It was the first widely promoted and heavily attended rock festival, attracting an estimated 200,000 total attendees with 55,000 to 90,000 people present at the event&#x27;s peak at midnight on Sunday. It was notable as hosting the first major American appearances by Jimi Hendrix and The Who, as well as the first major public performances of Janis Joplin and Otis Redding.

The Monterey Pop Festival embodied the themes of San Francisco as a focal point for the counterculture and is generally regarded as one of the beginnings of the &quot;Summer of Love&quot; in 1967. It also became the template for future music festivals, notably the Woodstock Festival two years later.

In 1986, the Monterey Blues Festival was created and ran continuously for over two decades. It filed for bankruptcy in 2012 and was resurrected in 2017 as the Monterey International Blues Festival.

=== Literature ===

Steinbeck&#x27;s friends included some of the city&#x27;s more colorful characters, among them Ed Ricketts, a marine biologist, and Bruce Ariss, artist and theater enthusiast who designed and built the Wharf Theater.

After Ricketts&#x27;s death, the new owner of his lab and a group of friends assembled each Wednesday at the lab for drinks and jazz music. While visiting with the group, San Francisco disc jockey Jimmy Lyons suggested holding a jazz celebration in Monterey, which eventually became the Monterey Jazz Festival.

In 1879, Robert Louis Stevenson spent a short time in Monterey at the French Hotel while writing &quot;The Amateur Emigrant&quot;, &quot;The Old Pacific Capital&quot;, and &quot;Vendetta of the West&quot;. The former hotel, now known as the Stevenson House, stands at 530 Houston Street and features items that belonged to the writer.

=== Theatre ===

The building in which the first paid public dramatic entertainment in California occurred is in Monterey and is called, appropriately, &quot;California&#x27;s First Theater&quot;. In 1847, a sailor, Jack Swan, began construction on an adobe building at the corner of Pacific Street and Scott Avenue, near the Pacific House and Fisherman&#x27;s Wharf. Between 1847 and 1848 several detachments of soldiers were stationed in Monterey and some of the sailors approached Swan with a proposition to lease a section of his building for use as a theater and money-making venture—a proposal Swan accepted. The enterprise collected $500 on its first performance, a considerable sum at that time. The primary mediums presented were melodramas and Olios (a form of musical revue and audience sing-along). In the spring of 1848, the play &quot;Putnam, the Iron Son of &#x27;76&quot;, was presented. After the California Gold Rush of 1849, much of the population, including Swan, traveled to northern California in search of riches. As a result, by the end that year, the company disbanded. In 1896, Swan died and the building was abandoned until 1906 when it was purchased by the California Historic Landmarks League, who deeded it to the State of California. In 1937, the building was leased to Denny-Watrous Management, which revived the tradition of melodrama at the now historic building. A resident company was created, the Troupers of the Gold Coast, which maintained the tradition for over 50 years, closing for renovation in 1999. It is now permanently closed.

The Wharf Theater opened on Fisherman&#x27;s Wharf on May 18, 1950, with a production of &quot;Happy Birthday&quot;, featuring a set designed by Bruce Ariss. The theater also produced one of Ariss&#x27;s plays and was successful enough to draw the attention of MGM, which brought Ariss to Hollywood to work for several years. The theater was destroyed by fire on December 31, 1959. The company reopened in 1960 in a new location on Alvarado Street (formerly &quot;The Monterey Theater&quot;) which in 1963 was renamed &quot;The Old Monterey Opera House&quot;. It continued until the mid-1960s when it fell to urban renewal. In the early 1970s, discussions began about rebuilding back on the wharf itself, and theater plans began to take shape. Ariss and Angelo Di Girolamo began construction on The New Wharf Theater in 1975. The New Wharf Theater opened its doors on December 3, 1976, with a community theater production of &quot;Guys and Dolls&quot;, directed by Monterey Peninsula College Drama Department chairman, Morgan Stock. At the northwest end of old Fisherman&#x27;s Wharf, the theater is now known as the Bruce Ariss Wharf Theater..

In 2005, the Golden State Theatre, a former movie palace on Alvarado Street, was refurbished to produce live theatrical events. The Forest Theater Guild produced several plays at the Golden State, including &quot;Aida&quot;, &quot;Grease&quot;, &quot;Zoot Suit&quot;, and &quot;Fiddler on the Roof&quot;. The theater&#x27;s new owners, Eric and Lori Lochtefeld, have produced several musicals in the theater in conjunction with Broadway By the Bay.

==Sports==

The Monterey Amberjacks are a professional baseball team that competes in the independent Pecos League which is not affiliated with Major League Baseball or Minor League Baseball. They play their home games at Sollecito Ballpark.

Monterey Bay FC plays in the USL Championship, the second tier of professional soccer in the US, and plays its home matches at Cardinale Stadium in Seaside, California.

The Monterey Peninsula Soccer League is an adult amateur soccer league featuring teams from Monterey and the surrounding region.

The PURE Insurance Championship is a gold championship held in Monterey and neighboring Pebble Beach.

== Government ==
Monterey is governed by a mayor and four city council members. As of December 2021, the mayor is Tyller Williamson and the city council members are Kim Barber, Gino Garcia, Alan Haffa, and Ed Smith.

The City of Monterey provides base maintenance support services for the Presidio of Monterey and the Naval Postgraduate School, including streets, parks, and building maintenance. Additional support services include traffic engineering, inspections, construction engineering and project management. This innovative partnership has become known as the &quot;Monterey Model&quot; and is now being adopted by communities across the country. This service reduces maintenance costs by millions of dollars and supports a continued military presence in Monterey.

The city government&#x27;s Recreation and Community Services department runs the Monterey Sports Center.

=== County, state, and federal representatives ===
Monterey is represented on the Monterey County Board of Supervisors by Supervisor Mary Adams.

In the California State Legislature, Monterey is in , and .

In the United States House of Representatives, Monterey is part of .

== Media ==
Local radio stations include KPIG-FM 107.5, KAZU-FM – 90.3 KDON-FM – 102.5, KCDU-FM – 101.7, KWAV-FM – 96.9, KDFG-FM – 103.9, KMBY – 1240 AM, KRML 94.7 FM jazz, and 1610-AM the city information station. Television service for the community comes from the Monterey-Salinas-Santa Cruz designated market area (DMA). Local newspapers include the &quot;Monterey County Herald&quot; and the &quot;Monterey County Weekly&quot;.

==Infrastructure==

=== Transportation ===

The city is serviced by CA 1, also known as the Cabrillo Highway, as it runs along the coastline of the rest of Monterey Bay to the north and Big Sur to the south. CA 68, also known as the Monterey-Salinas Highway, connects the city to US 101 at Salinas and to Pacific Grove.

Local bus service is provided by Monterey-Salinas Transit.

Monterey Regional Airport connects the city to the large metropolitan areas in California, Arizona, Colorado, and Nevada.

Monterey train station was served until 1971, when Amtrak took over intercity train service and the &quot;Del Monte&quot; was discontinued.

== Education ==

Several institutions of higher education in the area: the Defense Language Institute, located on the Presidio of Monterey, California; the Naval Postgraduate School, on the site of a former resort hotel; the Middlebury Institute of International Studies at Monterey (a graduate school of Middlebury College); and Monterey Peninsula College, part of the California Community Colleges system. The federal institutions (the Defense Language Institute (DLI) and the Naval Postgraduate School (NPS)) are important employers in and strongly associated with the city.

California State University, Monterey Bay and the Monterey College of Law are located at the site of the former Fort Ord in neighboring Seaside. CSU Monterey Bay has developed several programs in marine and watershed sciences.

The Monterey Peninsula Unified School District operates a high school, a middle school and three elementary schools. Private schools include Santa Catalina School (girls, co-ed elementary and middle school) and Trinity Christian High School (co-ed).

== Notable people ==
* Mike Aldrete, major league baseball player (1986–96); coach, St. Louis Cardinals
* Gina Aliotti, IFBB professional figure champion
* John Whitby Allen, model railroader
* Bruce Ariss, artist 
* Jean Arthur, actress
* Art Bell, resident in the 1970s
* Tory Belleci, &quot;MythBusters&quot; presenter
* Josh Billings (pen name of Henry Wheeler Shaw, 1818–1885), second most famous humorist (after Mark Twain) of the mid-to-late 19th century; died at Monterey
* Lisa Bruce, film producer
* Walter Colton (1797–1851), first Alcalde (mayor) of Monterey
* Juan B. R. Cooper, rancher, merchant, land owner, builder of the Cooper-Molera Adobe
* Claude Crabb pro football player 1962 – 1968
* Nick Cunningham, Team USA bobsledder; 2010–2014 Winter Olympian (2-Man &amp; 4-Man)
* Peter J. Cutino, educator and head coach of University of California, Berkeley, water polo program
* Salvador Dalí, artist; had a studio in the 1940s on the present-day Santa Catalina School grounds
* Doris Day (1922–2019), actress, singer.
* Olin Dutra, 1934 U.S. Open golf champion
* Clint Eastwood, film actor, Oscar-winning director, and producer
* Darcie Edgemon, children&#x27;s author
* Herman Edwards, NFL player for Philadelphia Eagles (1977–1986); head coach with New York Jets (2001–2005) and Kansas City Chiefs (2006–2009); TV commentator
* Abe Espinosa, professional golfer, winner of Western Open
* Chris Feigenbaum, Puerto Rican international soccer player
* Joan Fontaine, Oscar-winning actress, &quot;Rebecca&quot;, &quot;Suspicion&quot;
* John W. Frost, professional tennis player
* Percy Gray, artist, early California impressionist
* Harry Ashland Greene, businessman and philanthropist
* Milton B. Halsey, U.S. Army major general
* Richard Hamming, mathematician whose work influenced computer science and telecommunications
* Lou Henry Hoover (1874–1944), wife of U.S. President Herbert Hoover; First Lady of the United States, 1929–33
* Pete Incaviglia, major league baseball player (1986–98); manager, Grand Prairie AirHogs (minor league baseball)
* Ron Johnson, American football player
* Christopher Kasparek, author, translator, physician
* Edward Kennedy, journalist
* Gary Kildall (1942–1994), founder of Digital Research, designer of the CP/M operating system, and teacher at the Naval Postgraduate School; lived in Pacific Grove and later Pebble Beach
* Major General Walter E. Lauer (1893–1966), served in World War I and II, commanded 99th Infantry Division in the Battle of the Bulge
* Henry Littlefield, author, historian, former headmaster of the York School
* Sondra Locke (1944–2018), Oscar-nominated actress, director
* James Lofton, football player for Green Bay Packers, Los Angeles Raiders, Buffalo Bills, Los Angeles Rams, and Philadelphia Eagles; member of Pro Football Hall of Fame
* Jack London (1876–1916), author
* Katerina Moutsatsou, Greek actress
* Michael Nesmith, member of the band The Monkees, songwriter
* Kim Novak, actress
* Leon Panetta, Congressman (1977–93); White House Chief of Staff (1994–97); Director of the Central Intelligence Agency (2009–2011); Secretary of Defense (2011–2013)
* Wayne Rainey, three-time 500 cc Grand Prix champion (1990, 1991, 1992)
* Ed Ricketts (1897–1948), marine biologist, pioneer ecologist, influence on John Steinbeck and Joseph Campbell
* Moqut Ruffins, American football player
* Allison Scagliotti, actress
* Charles R. Schwab, businessman
* Jean Bruce Scott, actress
* William Tecumseh Sherman (1820–1891), later U.S. Civil War Union general, lived in Monterey 1847–49.
* Vera Steadman, actress
* John Steinbeck (1902–1968), Nobel Prize-winning author of &quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot; and &quot;Of Mice and Men&quot;
* Robert Louis Stevenson (1850–1894)), Scottish author of &quot;The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde&quot; and &quot;Treasure Island&quot;; stayed in Monterey, 1879
* Jeremy Sumpter, actor
* Edward Weston (1886–1958), photographer
* Douglas Yeo, bass trombonist, Boston Symphony Orchestra (1985–2012)
* Frank Zappa, composer and musician

==Sister cities==

Monterey is twinned with:
*Dubrovnik, Croatia (2006)
*Isola delle Femmine, Italy (2017)
*Cervia, Italy (2014)
*Kuşadası, Turkey (2007)
*Lankaran, Azerbaijan (2011)
*Lleida, Spain (1980)
*Nanao, Japan (1995)

== See also ==

* Coastal California
* &quot;Monterey&quot;, a famous song by Eric Burdon &amp; The Animals
* Hula&#x27;s Island Grill
* Montrio Bistro
* macOS Monterey

== References ==
=== Works cited ===

== Further reading ==

* Augusta Fink, &quot;Monterey: The Presence of the Past&quot;, Chronicle Books, San Francisco, California (1972) 
* &quot;California State Waters Map Series—Offshore of Monterey, California,&quot; U.S. Geological Survey (2015)
* &quot;City of Monterey Parks and Recreation Master Plan&quot;, City of Monterey Parks and Recreation Department (1986)
* &quot;Environmental Hazards Element, city of Monterey&quot;, A part of the General Plan, February 1977
* &quot;Flora and Fauna Resources: City of Monterey General Plan Technical Study&quot;, prepared for City of Monterey by Bainbridge Behrens Moore Inc., November 2, 1977
* &quot;General Plan, the City of Monterey&quot;, (1980)
* Helen Spangenberg, &quot;Yesterday&#x27;s Artists of the Monterey Peninsula, Monterey museum of Art&quot; (1976)
* &quot;Prehistoric Sources Technical Study&quot;, prepared for the city of Monterey by Bainbridge Behrens Moore Inc., May 23, 1977

== External links ==

* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q487315" start="0" end="8" title="Monterey, California" label="Monterey"/>
<link wikidata="Q584588" start="58" end="70" title="Monterey Bay" label="Monterey Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413435" start="79" end="106" title="Central Coast (California)" label="Central Coast of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q108072" start="119" end="134" title="Monterey County, California" label="Monterey County"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="212" end="223" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="254" end="261" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q461023" start="276" end="293" title="Gaspar de Portolá" label="Gaspar de Portolá"/>
<link wikidata="Q522107" start="298" end="312" title="Junípero Serra" label="Junípero Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q734577" start="329" end="349" title="Presidio of Monterey, California" label="Presidio of Monterey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756005" start="358" end="390" title="Cathedral of San Carlos Borromeo (Monterey, California)" label="Cathedral of San Carlos Borromeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q301467" start="432" end="459" title="the Californias" label="Province of the Californias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422806" start="534" end="549" title="Alta California" label="Alta California"/>
<link wikidata="Q58731" start="554" end="569" title="Baja California" label="Baja California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075664" start="600" end="613" title="port of entry" label="port of entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="629" end="656" title="Mexican War of Independence" label="Mexican War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="707" end="736" title="The_Californias#Department_of_Mexico" label="Department of the Californias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411096" start="750" end="786" title="Conquest of California" label="United States conquest of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="800" end="820" title="Mexican-American War" label="Mexican-American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772061" start="874" end="892" title="Battle of Monterey" label="Battle of Monterey"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790899" start="984" end="1016" title="interim government of California" label="interim government of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164283" start="1056" end="1103" title="California Constitutional Conventions" label="California&amp;#x27;s 1st Constitutional Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558054" start="1266" end="1276" title="art colony" label="art colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754233" start="1391" end="1412" title="Monterey Bay Aquarium" label="Monterey Bay Aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033387" start="1414" end="1425" title="Cannery Row" label="Cannery Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454907" start="1427" end="1449" title="Fisherman&amp;#x27;s Wharf (Monterey, California)" label="Fisherman&amp;#x27;s Wharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878891" start="1451" end="1491" title="California Roots Music and Arts Festival" label="California Roots Music and Arts Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780617" start="1508" end="1530" title="Monterey Jazz Festival" label="Monterey Jazz Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102209" start="1617" end="1643" title="Defense Language Institute" label="Defense Language Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515048" start="1649" end="1674" title="Naval Postgraduate School" label="Naval Postgraduate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946114" start="1680" end="1737" title="Middlebury Institute of International Studies at Monterey" label="Middlebury Institute of International Studies at Monterey"/>
<link wikidata="Q624686" start="1742" end="1783" title="California State University, Monterey Bay" label="California State University, Monterey Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091328" start="1874" end="1880" title="Rumsen people" label="Rumsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q598406" start="1881" end="1887" title="Ohlone" label="Ohlone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2003" end="2018" title="List_of_Ohlone_villages#Monterey_Bay_area" label="Ohlone villages"/>
<link wikidata="Q38055382" start="2050" end="2061" title="Point Lobos State Reserve" label="Point Lobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004754" start="2086" end="2098" title="Moss Landing, California" label="Moss Landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q625458" start="2114" end="2131" title="Carmel-by-the-Sea" label="Carmel-by-the-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772349" start="2238" end="2256" title="Monterey Peninsula" label="Monterey Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152199" start="2301" end="2307" title="midden" label="midden"/>
<link wikidata="Q13042834" start="2442" end="2448" title="mussel" label="mussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857439" start="2454" end="2461" title="abalone" label="abalone"/>
<link wikidata="Q584588" start="2679" end="2691" title="Monterey Bay" label="Monterey Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q141710" start="2726" end="2744" title="Sebastián Vizcaíno" label="Sebastián Vizcaíno"/>
<link wikidata="Q932238" start="2875" end="2893" title="Gaspar de Zúñiga, 5th Count of Monterrey" label="Conde de Monterrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="2915" end="2924" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452663" start="2964" end="2973" title="Monterrei" label="Monterrei"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908" start="2997" end="3011" title="Galicia (Spain)" label="Galicia region"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="3015" end="3020" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q182491" start="3224" end="3247" title="Juan Rodríguez Cabrillo" label="Juan Rodríguez Cabrillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422806" start="3908" end="3923" title="Alta California" label="Alta California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966440" start="3937" end="3955" title="Portolá expedition" label="Portolá expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="3977" end="3986" title="San Diego, California" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q232264" start="4251" end="4268" title="San Francisco Bay" label="San Francisco Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="4446" end="4456" title="Franciscan" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712954" start="4468" end="4479" title="Juan Crespí" label="Juan Crespí"/>
<link wikidata="Q461023" start="4708" end="4725" title="Gaspar de Portolá" label="Gaspar de Portolá"/>
<link wikidata="Q522107" start="4895" end="4909" title="Junípero Serra" label="Junípero Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q734577" start="4952" end="4972" title="Presidio of Monterey" label="Presidio of Monterey"/>
<link wikidata="Q389243" start="5156" end="5167" title="Pedro Fages" label="Pedro Fages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689743" start="5437" end="5443" title="Mission San Carlos Borromeo" label="Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q183496" start="5521" end="5526" title="adobe" label="adobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756005" start="5592" end="5613" title="Royal Presidio Chapel" label="Royal Presidio Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756005" start="5732" end="5753" title="Royal Presidio Chapel" label="Royal Presidio Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="5833" end="5842" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q216946" start="5952" end="5974" title="Saint Charles Borromeo" label="Saint Charles Borromeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q167538" start="6145" end="6164" title="St. Louis Cathedral, New Orleans" label="St. Louis Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="6168" end="6190" title="New Orleans, Louisiana" label="New Orleans, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083808" start="6469" end="6481" title="Old Customhouse (Monterey, California)" label="Custom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365041" start="6813" end="6822" title="Argentine" label="Argentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q850220" start="6823" end="6830" title="Buccaneer" label="corsair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2848406" start="6831" end="6849" title="Hippolyte Bouchard" label="Hippolyte Bouchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q734577" start="6871" end="6891" title="Presidio of Monterey, California" label="Presidio of Monterey"/>
<link wikidata="Q27250" start="6904" end="6909" title="Creek (tidal)" label="creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q130774" start="6990" end="7004" title="Flag of Argentina" label="Argentine flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q85502" start="7422" end="7436" title="secularization" label="secularization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679045" start="7521" end="7528" title="Ranchos of California" label="ranchos"/>
<link wikidata="Q115517612" start="7543" end="7562" title="San Carlos Cemetery (Monterey, California)" label="San Carlos Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q331055" start="7589" end="7597" title="interred" label="interred"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694703" start="7632" end="7651" title="Agustín V. Zamorano" label="Agustín V. Zamorano"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="7718" end="7732" title="printing press" label="printing press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187571" start="8124" end="8146" title="Juan Bautista Alvarado" label="Juan Bautista Alvarado"/>
<link wikidata="Q189145" start="8322" end="8349" title="Antonio López de Santa Anna" label="Antonio López de Santa Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772061" start="8577" end="8595" title="Battle of Monterey" label="Battle of Monterey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="8624" end="8644" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q634931" start="8671" end="8684" title="John D. Sloat" label="John D. Sloat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="8703" end="8721" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42537" start="8734" end="8743" title="Flag of the United States" label="U.S. flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q78456938" start="8904" end="8931" title="First theater in California" label="First theater in California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720986" start="9037" end="9064" title="The Californian (1840s newspaper)" label="&amp;quot;The Californian&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905350" start="9123" end="9151" title="Monterey State Historic Park" label="Monterey State Historic Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="9159" end="9185" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061100" start="9219" end="9239" title="Thomas Oliver Larkin" label="Thomas Oliver Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905299" start="9264" end="9281" title="Monterey Colonial" label="Monterey Colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083808" start="9300" end="9316" title="Old Custom House (Monterey, California)" label="Old Custom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967792" start="9437" end="9451" title="National Trust for Historic Preservation" label="National Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149467" start="9493" end="9504" title="Colton Hall" label="Colton Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964586" start="9523" end="9536" title="Walter Colton" label="Walter Colton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164283" start="9626" end="9656" title="California Constitutional Conventions" label="1849 Constitutional Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285219" start="9677" end="9687" title="Californio" label="Californio"/>
<link wikidata="Q196195" start="9716" end="9742" title="Constitution of California" label="Constitution of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="9922" end="9931" title="statehood" label="statehood"/>
<link wikidata="Q121140432" start="10094" end="10106" title="Francis Doud" label="Francis Doud"/>
<link wikidata="Q121140432" start="10113" end="10123" title="Doud House" label="Doud House"/>
<link wikidata="Q110629898" start="10337" end="10355" title="Thomas Albert Work" label="Thomas Albert Work"/>
<link wikidata="Q331828" start="10762" end="10773" title="overfishing" label="overfishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033387" start="10895" end="10906" title="Cannery Row" label="Cannery Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q74987" start="11039" end="11059" title="Arthur Frank Mathews" label="Arthur Frank Mathews"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793516" start="11061" end="11073" title="Armin Hansen" label="Armin Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q204093" start="11075" end="11090" title="Xavier Martinez" label="Xavier Martinez"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371903" start="11092" end="11109" title="Rowena Meeks Abdy" label="Rowena Meeks Abdy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070251" start="11114" end="11124" title="Percy Gray" label="Percy Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q829298" start="11184" end="11196" title="En plein air" label="En plein air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786363" start="11200" end="11208" title="Tonalism" label="Tonalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512" start="11280" end="11302" title="Robert Louis Stevenson" label="Robert Louis Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q39212" start="11304" end="11318" title="John Steinbeck" label="John Steinbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282471" start="11320" end="11331" title="Ed Ricketts" label="Ed Ricketts"/>
<link wikidata="Q734955" start="11333" end="11349" title="Robinson Jeffers" label="Robinson Jeffers"/>
<link wikidata="Q123078" start="11351" end="11369" title="Robert A. Heinlein" label="Robert A. Heinlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q187765" start="11375" end="11387" title="Henry Miller" label="Henry Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q714909" start="11654" end="11665" title="Pete Wilson" label="Pete Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q107140155" start="11755" end="11769" title="macOS Monterey" label="macOS Monterey"/>
<link wikidata="Q824504" start="11817" end="11848" title="Worldwide Developers Conference" label="Worldwide Developers Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="11932" end="11959" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q14683481" start="12162" end="12174" title="New Monterey, Monterey, California" label="New Monterey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252936" start="12176" end="12185" title="Del Monte, Monterey, California" label="Del Monte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033387" start="12191" end="12202" title="Cannery Row" label="Cannery Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q26185" start="12219" end="12229" title="Quaternary" label="Quaternary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185405" start="12230" end="12238" title="Alluvium" label="Alluvium"/>
<link wikidata="Q191218" start="12551" end="12568" title="San Andreas Fault" label="San Andreas Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="12853" end="12860" title="tsunami" label="tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q5767000" start="13067" end="13105" title="Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary" label="Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563248" start="13259" end="13303" title="Soquel Canyon State Marine Conservation Area" label="Soquel Canyon State Marine Conservation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232655" start="13305" end="13352" title="Portuguese Ledge State Marine Conservation Area" label="Portuguese Ledge State Marine Conservation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122471" start="13354" end="13413" title="Pacific Grove Marine Gardens State Marine Conservation Area" label="Pacific Grove Marine Gardens State Marine Conservation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077587" start="13415" end="13448" title="Lovers Point State Marine Reserve" label="Lovers Point State Marine Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342845" start="13450" end="13499" title="Edward F. Ricketts State Marine Conservation Area" label="Edward F. Ricketts State Marine Conservation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806958" start="13504" end="13533" title="Asilomar State Marine Reserve" label="Asilomar State Marine Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367500" start="13538" end="13559" title="marine protected area" label="marine protected area"/>
<link wikidata="Q41407" start="13737" end="13746" title="sea otter" label="sea otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521787" start="13848" end="13872" title="The Marine Mammal Center" label="The Marine Mammal Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q745751" start="13991" end="13998" title="kit fox" label="kit fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q842123" start="14042" end="14051" title="chaparral" label="chaparral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287159" start="14152" end="14161" title="manzanita" label="manzanita"/>
<link wikidata="Q627027" start="14163" end="14170" title="chamise" label="chamise"/>
<link wikidata="Q311139" start="14175" end="14184" title="ceanothus" label="ceanothus"/>
<link wikidata="Q120094" start="14295" end="14307" title="kangaroo rat" label="kangaroo rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135307" start="14427" end="14450" title="closed-cone pine forest" label="closed-cone pine forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137183" start="14456" end="14472" title="Monterey Cypress" label="Monterey Cypress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056415" start="14554" end="14567" title="Monterey Jack cheese" label="Monterey Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q49785301" start="14589" end="14614" title="Carmel Valley, California" label="Carmel Valley, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235522" start="14667" end="14678" title="David Jacks (businessman)" label="David Jacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q748888" start="14726" end="14739" title="Monterey pine" label="Monterey pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703208" start="14741" end="14754" title="Knobcone pine" label="Knobcone pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q866150" start="14759" end="14770" title="Bishop pine" label="Bishop pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787678" start="14794" end="14812" title="Arctostaphylos montereyensis" label="Monterey manzanita"/>
<link wikidata="Q324259" start="14853" end="14871" title="Willis Linn Jepson" label="Willis Linn Jepson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411379" start="14981" end="14998" title="Samuel Finley Brown Morse" label="Samuel F.B. Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q75698" start="15036" end="15054" title="Samuel F. B. Morse" label="Samuel F. B. Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170108" start="15261" end="15279" title="Cordylanthus rigidus" label="Seaside birds beak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231573" start="15281" end="15306" title="Hickman&amp;#x27;s potentilla" label="Hickman&amp;#x27;s potentilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761521" start="15327" end="15337" title="Ericameria" label="Ericameria"/>
<link wikidata="Q28816713" start="15429" end="15444" title="Piperia yadonii" label="Piperia yadonii"/>
<link wikidata="Q160107" start="15531" end="15541" title="delphinium" label="delphinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q156811" start="15553" end="15559" title="Lupinus" label="lupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q14861537" start="15561" end="15582" title="Gardner&amp;#x27;s yampah" label="Gardner&amp;#x27;s yampah"/>
<link wikidata="Q242573" start="15587" end="15595" title="Polygonum aviculare" label="Knotweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3612524" start="15825" end="15850" title="Monterey Regional Airport" label="Monterey Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q550419" start="15852" end="15865" title="State Route 1 (California)" label="State Route 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q48968383" start="16153" end="16185" title="CNEL" label="Community Noise Equivalent Level"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="16487" end="16520" title="warm-summer Mediterranean climate" label="warm-summer Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="16522" end="16551" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="16611" end="16626" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251087" start="17052" end="17067" title="Puerto Williams" label="Puerto Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="17069" end="17074" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q44254" start="17076" end="17083" title="Ushuaia" label="Ushuaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="17085" end="17094" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="17104" end="17115" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="17121" end="17129" title="Atlantic" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="17139" end="17144" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q198710" start="17146" end="17165" title="southeastern Alaska" label="southeastern Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="17191" end="17197" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q118388" start="17592" end="17604" title="Death Valley" label="Death Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422677" start="17717" end="17738" title="Santa Lucia Mountains" label="Santa Lucia Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961852" start="17743" end="17760" title="Gabilan Mountains" label="Gabilan Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q72984" start="18091" end="18102" title="Bing Crosby" label="Bing Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376505" start="18129" end="18141" title="Pebble Beach, California" label="Pebble Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q872544" start="18743" end="18791" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Monterey in California" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Monterey in California"/>
<link wikidata="Q247132" start="18838" end="18847" title="Oratory of Saint Philip Neri" label="Oratorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689743" start="18951" end="18965" title="Mission San Carlos Borromeo de Carmelo" label="Carmel Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="19336" end="19361" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="19491" end="19496" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="19509" end="19525" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="19538" end="19553" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="19568" end="19573" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="19585" end="19601" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="19621" end="19632" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="19710" end="19718" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="19722" end="19728" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905343" start="22993" end="23035" title="Monterey Peninsula Unified School District" label="Monterey Peninsula Unified School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754077" start="23041" end="23064" title="Mapleton Communications" label="Mapleton Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458411" start="23121" end="23172" title="Fleet Numerical Meteorology and Oceanography Center" label="Fleet Numerical Meteorology and Oceanography Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499258" start="23182" end="23221" title="United States Naval Research Laboratory" label="United States Naval Research Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887135" start="23367" end="23375" title="sea lion" label="sea lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q41407" start="23378" end="23387" title="sea otter" label="sea otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q26913" start="23390" end="23402" title="harbor seals" label="harbor seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722247" start="23404" end="23411" title="bat ray" label="bat ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q575913" start="23414" end="23425" title="kelp forest" label="kelp forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q19413" start="23428" end="23435" title="pelican" label="pelican"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369" start="23441" end="23448" title="dolphin" label="dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q774378" start="23514" end="23529" title="Monterey Canyon" label="Monterey Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q963729" start="23561" end="23578" title="submarine canyon" label="underwater canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754233" start="23921" end="23942" title="Monterey Bay Aquarium" label="Monterey Bay Aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q43518" start="24020" end="24034" title="marine science" label="marine science"/>
<link wikidata="Q14682339" start="24059" end="24081" title="Hopkins Marine Station" label="Hopkins Marine Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905328" start="24566" end="24588" title="Monterey Museum of Art" label="Monterey Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141254" start="25107" end="25114" title="sardine" label="sardine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829280" start="25715" end="25731" title="Tourist trolley" label="heritage trolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q570116" start="26000" end="26018" title="tourist attraction" label="tourist attraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187571" start="26757" end="26779" title="Juan Bautista Alvarado" label="Juan Bautista Alvarado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933979" start="26789" end="26819" title="California Historical Landmark" label="California Historical Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q116003835" start="26898" end="26925" title="2022–2023 California floods" label="2022–2023 California floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q6475702" start="26928" end="26942" title="Lake El Estero" label="Lake El Estero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022996" start="27078" end="27095" title="Dennis the Menace (U.S.)" label="Dennis the Menace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905328" start="27299" end="27321" title="Monterey Museum of Art" label="Monterey Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033387" start="27447" end="27458" title="Cannery Row" label="Cannery Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779" start="27582" end="27597" title="Louis Armstrong" label="Louis Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q49575" start="27599" end="27614" title="Dizzy Gillespie" label="Dizzy Gillespie"/>
<link wikidata="Q104358" start="27620" end="27634" title="Billie Holiday" label="Billie Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q577042" start="27721" end="27742" title="Newport Jazz Festival" label="Newport Jazz Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q203159" start="27856" end="27877" title="Monterey Pop Festival" label="Monterey Pop Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905302" start="28009" end="28036" title="Monterey County Fairgrounds" label="Monterey County Fairgrounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154859" start="28092" end="28105" title="rock festival" label="rock festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928" start="28306" end="28318" title="Jimi Hendrix" label="Jimi Hendrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="28323" end="28330" title="The Who" label="The Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514" start="28382" end="28394" title="Janis Joplin" label="Janis Joplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q217839" start="28399" end="28411" title="Otis Redding" label="Otis Redding"/>
<link wikidata="Q188976" start="28502" end="28516" title="counterculture" label="counterculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q932701" start="28581" end="28595" title="Summer of Love" label="Summer of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q164815" start="28679" end="28697" title="Woodstock Festival" label="Woodstock Festival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28875" end="28912" title="Monterey International Blues Festival" label="Monterey International Blues Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282471" start="29030" end="29041" title="Ed Ricketts" label="Ed Ricketts"/>
<link wikidata="Q15514042" start="29067" end="29078" title="Bruce Ariss" label="Bruce Ariss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990665" start="29137" end="29150" title="Wharf Theater" label="Wharf Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="29281" end="29285" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="29338" end="29349" title="disc jockey" label="disc jockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137607" start="29350" end="29361" title="James L. Lyons" label="Jimmy Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780617" start="29440" end="29462" title="Monterey Jazz Festival" label="Monterey Jazz Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512" start="29474" end="29496" title="Robert Louis Stevenson" label="Robert Louis Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205310" start="29568" end="29588" title="The Amateur Emigrant" label="The Amateur Emigrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905350" start="29706" end="29721" title="Stevenson House (Monterey, California)" label="Stevenson House"/>
<link wikidata="Q78456938" start="29959" end="29990" title="First theater in California" label="California&amp;#x27;s First Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q121333588" start="30017" end="30026" title="Jack Swan" label="Jack Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25100348" start="30650" end="30682" title="Putnam, the Iron Son of &amp;#x27;76" label="Putnam, the Iron Son of &amp;#x27;76"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="30715" end="30735" title="California Gold Rush" label="California Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="31045" end="31064" title="State of California" label="State of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777570" start="31451" end="31461" title="Theatrical production" label="production"/>
<link wikidata="Q5652525" start="31471" end="31485" title="Happy Birthday (play)" label="Happy Birthday"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="31637" end="31640" title="MGM" label="MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q920600" start="31985" end="31998" title="urban renewal" label="urban renewal"/>
<link wikidata="Q796988" start="32307" end="32321" title="Guys and Dolls" label="Guys and Dolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905338" start="32341" end="32367" title="Monterey Peninsula College" label="Monterey Peninsula College"/>
<link wikidata="Q16891752" start="32535" end="32555" title="Golden State Theatre" label="Golden State Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926878" start="32566" end="32578" title="movie palace" label="movie palace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32654" end="32674" title="Forest Theater#Threat of Closure and revival of Forest Theater Guild" label="Forest Theater Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q403810" start="32735" end="32739" title="Aida (musical)" label="Aida"/>
<link wikidata="Q611626" start="32753" end="32759" title="Grease (musical)" label="Grease"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074219" start="32773" end="32782" title="Zoot Suit (play)" label="Zoot Suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q487330" start="32800" end="32819" title="Fiddler on the Roof" label="Fiddler on the Roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q28449629" start="32988" end="33007" title="Monterey Amberjacks" label="Monterey Amberjacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7158798" start="33074" end="33086" title="Pecos League" label="Pecos League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="33116" end="33137" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="33141" end="33162" title="Minor League Baseball" label="Minor League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q105560247" start="33215" end="33230" title="Monterey Bay FC" label="Monterey Bay FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362411" start="33244" end="33260" title="USL Championship" label="USL Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q112119020" start="33342" end="33359" title="Cardinale Stadium" label="Cardinale Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q986900" start="33363" end="33382" title="Seaside, California" label="Seaside, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905342" start="33389" end="33421" title="Monterey Peninsula Soccer League" label="Monterey Peninsula Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453872" start="33519" end="33546" title="PURE Insurance Championship" label="PURE Insurance Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376505" start="33603" end="33615" title="Pebble Beach, California" label="Pebble Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="33661" end="33666" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="33676" end="33688" title="city council" label="city council"/>
<link wikidata="Q102396504" start="34620" end="34641" title="Mary Adams (politician)" label="Supervisor Mary Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084210" start="34651" end="34679" title="California State Legislature" label="California State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="34712" end="34750" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191482" start="34816" end="34829" title="KPIG-FM" label="KPIG-FM 107.5"/>
<link wikidata="Q6325557" start="34831" end="34835" title="KAZU" label="KAZU"/>
<link wikidata="Q6328006" start="34846" end="34861" title="KDON" label="KDON-FM – 102.5"/>
<link wikidata="Q6326671" start="34863" end="34878" title="KCDU" label="KCDU-FM – 101.7"/>
<link wikidata="Q6340399" start="34880" end="34894" title="KWAV" label="KWAV-FM – 96.9"/>
<link wikidata="Q6326106" start="34896" end="34911" title="KDFG" label="KDFG-FM – 103.9"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334535" start="34913" end="34927" title="KMBY (AM)" label="KMBY – 1240 AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6336877" start="34929" end="34933" title="KRML" label="KRML"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752110" start="35135" end="35157" title="Monterey County Herald" label="Monterey County Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905305" start="35178" end="35200" title="Monterey County Weekly" label="Monterey County Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q550419" start="35277" end="35281" title="California State Route 1" label="CA 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q584588" start="35365" end="35377" title="Monterey Bay" label="Monterey Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q859413" start="35395" end="35402" title="Big Sur" label="Big Sur"/>
<link wikidata="Q666386" start="35417" end="35422" title="California State Route 68" label="CA 68"/>
<link wikidata="Q400444" start="35489" end="35495" title="U.S. Route 101 in California" label="US 101"/>
<link wikidata="Q488125" start="35499" end="35506" title="Salinas, California" label="Salinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q117514" start="35514" end="35527" title="Pacific Grove, California" label="Pacific Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982191" start="35563" end="35587" title="Monterey-Salinas Transit" label="Monterey-Salinas Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3612524" start="35590" end="35615" title="Monterey Regional Airport" label="Monterey Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q85786178" start="35713" end="35735" title="Monterey station" label="Monterey train station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252938" start="35819" end="35828" title="Del Monte (train)" label="Del Monte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102209" start="35929" end="35955" title="Defense Language Institute" label="Defense Language Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q734577" start="35972" end="36004" title="Presidio of Monterey, California" label="Presidio of Monterey, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515048" start="36010" end="36035" title="Naval Postgraduate School" label="Naval Postgraduate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946114" start="36079" end="36136" title="Middlebury Institute of International Studies at Monterey" label="Middlebury Institute of International Studies at Monterey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357891" start="36159" end="36177" title="Middlebury College" label="Middlebury College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905338" start="36184" end="36210" title="Monterey Peninsula College" label="Monterey Peninsula College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460112" start="36224" end="36260" title="California Community Colleges system" label="California Community Colleges system"/>
<link wikidata="Q624686" start="36433" end="36474" title="California State University, Monterey Bay" label="California State University, Monterey Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905297" start="36483" end="36506" title="Monterey College of Law" label="Monterey College of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q943136" start="36545" end="36553" title="Fort Ord" label="Fort Ord"/>
<link wikidata="Q986900" start="36569" end="36576" title="Seaside, California" label="Seaside"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905343" start="36665" end="36707" title="Monterey Peninsula Unified School District" label="Monterey Peninsula Unified School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905316" start="36717" end="36730" title="Monterey High School (Monterey, California)" label="a high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419270" start="36802" end="36823" title="Santa Catalina School" label="Santa Catalina School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842644" start="36872" end="36901" title="Trinity Christian High School (Monterey)" label="Trinity Christian High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313188" start="36935" end="36947" title="Mike Aldrete" label="Mike Aldrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="36949" end="36970" title="major league baseball" label="major league baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="36996" end="37015" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562830" start="37018" end="37030" title="Gina Aliotti" label="Gina Aliotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q511252" start="37032" end="37036" title="International Federation of BodyBuilding &amp;amp; Fitness" label="IFBB"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182732" start="37068" end="37085" title="John Whitby Allen" label="John Whitby Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15514042" start="37106" end="37117" title="Bruce Ariss" label="Bruce Ariss"/>
<link wikidata="Q229338" start="37129" end="37140" title="Jean Arthur" label="Jean Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355602" start="37152" end="37160" title="Art Bell" label="Art Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q335136" start="37186" end="37198" title="Tory Belleci" label="Tory Belleci"/>
<link wikidata="Q486844" start="37206" end="37217" title="MythBusters" label="MythBusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q955265" start="37236" end="37249" title="Josh Billings" label="Josh Billings"/>
<link wikidata="Q127843" start="37251" end="37259" title="pen name" label="pen name"/>
<link wikidata="Q19609798" start="37394" end="37404" title="Lisa Bruce" label="Lisa Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964586" start="37422" end="37435" title="Walter Colton" label="Walter Colton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6220090" start="37485" end="37502" title="Juan B. R. Cooper" label="Juan B. R. Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128778" start="37572" end="37584" title="Claude Crabb" label="Claude Crabb"/>
<link wikidata="Q287305" start="37619" end="37634" title="Nick Cunningham" label="Nick Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174857" start="37705" end="37720" title="Peter J. Cutino" label="Peter J. Cutino"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="37749" end="37783" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577" start="37806" end="37819" title="Salvador Dalí" label="Salvador Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419270" start="37874" end="37895" title="Santa Catalina School" label="Santa Catalina School"/>
<link wikidata="Q104372" start="37906" end="37915" title="Doris Day" label="Doris Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5625954" start="37948" end="37958" title="Olin Dutra" label="Olin Dutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q259776" start="37965" end="37974" title="U.S. Open (golf)" label="U.S. Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="37975" end="37979" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q43203" start="37991" end="38005" title="Clint Eastwood" label="Clint Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852014" start="38099" end="38113" title="Herman Edwards" label="Herman Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="38115" end="38118" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q219714" start="38130" end="38149" title="Philadelphia Eagles" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q219602" start="38179" end="38192" title="New York Jets" label="New York Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q223522" start="38209" end="38227" title="Kansas City Chiefs" label="Kansas City Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4666384" start="38258" end="38270" title="Abe Espinosa" label="Abe Espinosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690974" start="38303" end="38315" title="Western Open" label="Western Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106536" start="38318" end="38334" title="Chris Feigenbaum" label="Chris Feigenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q95076" start="38379" end="38392" title="Joan Fontaine" label="Joan Fontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q204212" start="38423" end="38430" title="Rebecca (1940 film)" label="Rebecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509470" start="38444" end="38453" title="Suspicion (1941 film)" label="Suspicion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16095604" start="38462" end="38475" title="John W. Frost" label="John W. Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070251" start="38506" end="38516" title="Percy Gray" label="Percy Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="38543" end="38556" title="impressionist" label="impressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q41450124" start="38559" end="38579" title="Harry Ashland Greene" label="Harry Ashland Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q113163036" start="38614" end="38630" title="Milton B. Halsey" label="Milton B. Halsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q92619" start="38658" end="38673" title="Richard Hamming" label="Richard Hamming"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="38711" end="38727" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="38732" end="38750" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q233669" start="38753" end="38769" title="Lou Henry Hoover" label="Lou Henry Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="38806" end="38820" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172035" start="38865" end="38880" title="Pete Incaviglia" label="Pete Incaviglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="38882" end="38903" title="major league baseball" label="major league baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q20317040" start="38931" end="38952" title="Grand Prairie AirHogs" label="Grand Prairie AirHogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="38954" end="38975" title="minor league baseball" label="minor league baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q21229090" start="38979" end="38990" title="Ron Johnson (wide receiver, born 1958)" label="Ron Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112658" start="39019" end="39039" title="Christopher Kasparek" label="Christopher Kasparek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343914" start="39073" end="39087" title="Edward Kennedy (journalist)" label="Edward Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q92627" start="39102" end="39114" title="Gary Kildall" label="Gary Kildall"/>
<link wikidata="Q185608" start="39139" end="39155" title="Digital Research" label="Digital Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q219528" start="39173" end="39177" title="CP/M" label="CP/M"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515048" start="39215" end="39240" title="Naval Postgraduate School" label="Naval Postgraduate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q117514" start="39251" end="39264" title="Pacific Grove, California" label="Pacific Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376505" start="39275" end="39287" title="Pebble Beach" label="Pebble Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q20811153" start="39304" end="39319" title="Walter E. Lauer" label="Walter E. Lauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="39343" end="39354" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="39359" end="39361" title="World War II" label="II"/>
<link wikidata="Q277245" start="39373" end="39395" title="99th Infantry Division (United States)" label="99th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q151018" start="39403" end="39422" title="Battle of the Bulge" label="Battle of the Bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5724973" start="39425" end="39442" title="Henry Littlefield" label="Henry Littlefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055542" start="39488" end="39499" title="York School (California)" label="York School"/>
<link wikidata="Q284166" start="39502" end="39514" title="Sondra Locke" label="Sondra Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680714" start="39564" end="39576" title="James Lofton" label="James Lofton"/>
<link wikidata="Q213837" start="39598" end="39615" title="Green Bay Packers" label="Green Bay Packers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417643" start="39617" end="39636" title="Los Angeles Raiders" label="Los Angeles Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q221626" start="39638" end="39651" title="Buffalo Bills" label="Buffalo Bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q337377" start="39653" end="39669" title="Los Angeles Rams" label="Los Angeles Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q219714" start="39675" end="39694" title="Philadelphia Eagles" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q778412" start="39706" end="39731" title="Pro Football Hall of Fame" label="Pro Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q45765" start="39734" end="39745" title="Jack London" label="Jack London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375981" start="39768" end="39787" title="Katerina Moutsatsou" label="Katerina Moutsatsou"/>
<link wikidata="Q954997" start="39805" end="39820" title="Michael Nesmith" label="Michael Nesmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q464036" start="39841" end="39852" title="The Monkees" label="The Monkees"/>
<link wikidata="Q212879" start="39867" end="39876" title="Kim Novak" label="Kim Novak"/>
<link wikidata="Q244631" start="39888" end="39900" title="Leon Panetta" label="Leon Panetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q14761450" start="39902" end="39913" title="Congressman" label="Congressman"/>
<link wikidata="Q786242" start="39925" end="39951" title="White House Chief of Staff" label="White House Chief of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q27656" start="39963" end="40006" title="Director of the Central Intelligence Agency" label="Director of the Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q735015" start="40020" end="40040" title="United States Secretary of Defense" label="Secretary of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q464680" start="40055" end="40067" title="Wayne Rainey" label="Wayne Rainey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817141" start="40080" end="40097" title="500 cc Grand Prix" label="500 cc Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282471" start="40128" end="40139" title="Ed Ricketts" label="Ed Ricketts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173" start="40153" end="40169" title="marine biologist" label="marine biologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150" start="40179" end="40188" title="ecologist" label="ecologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q39212" start="40203" end="40217" title="John Steinbeck" label="John Steinbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q295516" start="40222" end="40237" title="Joseph Campbell" label="Joseph Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q23883293" start="40240" end="40253" title="Moqut Ruffins" label="Moqut Ruffins"/>
<link wikidata="Q263737" start="40282" end="40300" title="Allison Scagliotti" label="Allison Scagliotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066027" start="40312" end="40329" title="Charles R. Schwab" label="Charles R. Schwab"/>
<link wikidata="Q465566" start="40345" end="40361" title="Jean Bruce Scott" label="Jean Bruce Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q188936" start="40373" end="40397" title="William Tecumseh Sherman" label="William Tecumseh Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="40417" end="40431" title="U.S. Civil War" label="U.S. Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980114" start="40476" end="40489" title="Vera Steadman" label="Vera Steadman"/>
<link wikidata="Q39212" start="40501" end="40515" title="John Steinbeck" label="John Steinbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q215983" start="40565" end="40584" title="The Grapes of Wrath" label="The Grapes of Wrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q457977" start="40601" end="40616" title="Of Mice and Men" label="Of Mice and Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512" start="40625" end="40647" title="Robert Louis Stevenson" label="Robert Louis Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q217352" start="40687" end="40728" title="The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde" label="The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q185118" start="40745" end="40760" title="Treasure Island" label="Treasure Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q316964" start="40795" end="40809" title="Jeremy Sumpter" label="Jeremy Sumpter"/>
<link wikidata="Q346988" start="40819" end="40832" title="Edward Weston" label="Edward Weston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302140" start="40861" end="40872" title="Douglas Yeo" label="Douglas Yeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q127330" start="40931" end="40942" title="Frank Zappa" label="Frank Zappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="40998" end="41005" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722" start="41013" end="41022" title="Dubrovnik" label="Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q489865" start="41040" end="41059" title="Isola delle Femmine" label="Isola delle Femmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q52975" start="41075" end="41081" title="Cervia" label="Cervia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211952" start="41097" end="41105" title="Kuşadası" label="Kuşadası"/>
<link wikidata="Q228811" start="41122" end="41130" title="Lankaran" label="Lankaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q15090" start="41151" end="41157" title="Lleida" label="Lleida"/>
<link wikidata="Q695892" start="41173" end="41178" title="Nanao, Ishikawa" label="Nanao"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138257" start="41212" end="41230" title="Coastal California" label="Coastal California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980370" start="41239" end="41247" title="Monterey (Eric Burdon and the Animals song)" label="Monterey"/>
<link wikidata="Q131422" start="41272" end="41301" title="Eric Burdon &amp;amp; The Animals" label="Eric Burdon &amp;amp; The Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q60053753" start="41304" end="41328" title="Hula&amp;#x27;s Island Grill" label="Hula&amp;#x27;s Island Grill"/>
<link wikidata="Q60061637" start="41331" end="41345" title="Montrio Bistro" label="Montrio Bistro"/>
<link wikidata="Q107140155" start="41348" end="41362" title="macOS Monterey" label="macOS Monterey"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40449" wikidata="Q697949" url="?curid=40449" title="1788–89 United States presidential election">
<text>Presidential elections were first held in the United States from December 15, 1788 to January 7, 1789, under the new Constitution ratified in 1788. George Washington was unanimously elected for the first of his two terms as president and John Adams became the first vice president. This was the only U.S. presidential election that spanned two calendar years without a contingent election and the first national presidential election in American history.

Under the Articles of Confederation, which were ratified in 1781, the United States had no head of state. The executive function of government remained with the legislative similar to countries that use a parliamentary system. Federal power, strictly limited, was reserved to the Congress of the Confederation whose &quot;President of the United States in Congress Assembled&quot; was also chair of the Committee of the States which aimed to fulfill a function similar to that of the modern Cabinet.

The Constitution created the offices of President and Vice President, fully separating these offices from Congress. The Constitution established an Electoral College, based on each state&#x27;s congressional representation, in which each elector would cast two votes for two candidates, a procedure modified in 1804 by the ratification of the Twelfth Amendment. States had varying methods for choosing presidential electors. In five states, the state legislature chose electors. The other six chose electors through some form involving a popular vote, though in only two states did the choice depend directly on a statewide vote.

The enormously popular Washington was distinguished as the former Commander of the Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War. After he agreed to come out of retirement, he was elected with ease unanimously; Washington did not select a running mate as that concept was not yet developed.

No formal political parties existed, though an informally organized consistent difference of opinion had already manifested between Federalists and Anti-Federalists. Thus, the contest for the vice-presidency was open. Thomas Jefferson predicted that a popular Northern leader such as Governor John Hancock of Massachusetts or John Adams, a former minister to Great Britain who had represented Massachusetts in Congress, would be elected vice president. Anti-Federalist leaders such as Patrick Henry, who did not run, and George Clinton, who had opposed ratification of the Constitution, also represented potential choices.

All 69 electors present cast one vote for Washington, making his election unanimous. Adams won 34 electoral votes and the vice presidency. The remaining 35 electoral votes were split among 10 candidates, including John Jay, who finished third with nine electoral votes. Three states were ineligible to participate in the election: New York&#x27;s legislature did not choose electors on time, and North Carolina and Rhode Island had not ratified the constitution yet. Washington was inaugurated in New York City on April 30, 1789, 57 days after the First Congress convened.

==Candidates==

Though no organized political parties yet existed, political opinion loosely divided between those who had more stridently and enthusiastically endorsed ratification of the Constitution, called Federalists or Cosmopolitans, and Anti-Federalists or Localists who had only more reluctantly, skeptically, or conditionally supported, or who had outright opposed ratification. Both factions supported Washington for president. Limited, primitive political campaigning occurred in states and localities where swaying public opinion might matter. For example, in Maryland, a state with a statewide popular vote, unofficial parties campaigned locally, advertising.

===Federalist candidates===
===Anti-Federalist candidates===
==General election==
No nomination process existed at the time of planning, and thus, the framers of the Constitution presumed that Washington would be elected unopposed. For example, Alexander Hamilton spoke for national opinion when in a letter to Washington attempting to persuade him to leave retirement on his farm in Mount Vernon to serve as the first president, he wrote that &quot;...the point of light in which you stand at home and abroad will make an infinite difference in the respectability in which the government will begin its operations in the alternative of your being or not being the head of state.&quot;

Another uncertainty was the choice for the vice presidency, which contained no definite job description beyond being the president&#x27;s designated successor and presiding over the Senate. The Constitution stipulated that the position would be awarded to the runner-up in the presidential election. Because Washington was from Virginia, then the largest state, many assumed that electors would choose a vice president from a northern state. In an August 1788 letter, U.S. Minister to France Thomas Jefferson wrote that he considered John Adams and John Hancock, both from Massachusetts, to be the top contenders. Jefferson suggested John Jay, John Rutledge, and Virginian James Madison as other possible candidates. Adams received 34 electoral votes, one short of a majority – because the Constitution did not require an outright majority in the Electoral College prior to ratification of the Twelfth Amendment to elect a runner-up as vice president, Adams was elected to that post.

Congress announced the procedure for the election on September 13, 1788, stipulating that all electors must be chosen on the first Wednesday in January (January 7, 1789), and that the electors must assemble to cast their votes for president and vice president on the first Wednesday in February (February 4). However, the states differed in their interpretations of this procedure and of the relevant portions of the new Constitution. New Hampshire and Massachusetts held a popular vote for their presidential electors alongside the elections for their congressional representatives, on December 15 and December 18, respectively. In these two states, the legislatures ultimately chose the electors based on the voting results on the appointed day, January 7. In Delaware, Maryland, Pennsylvania, and Virginia, the electors were chosen directly by the popular vote on January 7. In Connecticut, Georgia, and South Carolina, the electors were appointed by the legislature alone on January 7, while in New Jersey the governor and council selected them on that day. The legislature in New York was unable to agree on a method for choosing the electors before January 7, and so the state could not appoint any electors.

Voter turnout comprised a low single-digit percentage of the adult population. Though all states allowed some rudimentary form of popular vote, only six ratifying states allowed any form of popular vote specifically for presidential electors. In most states only white men, and in many only those who owned property, could vote. Free black men could vote in four Northern states, and women could vote in New Jersey until 1804. In some states, there was a nominal religious test for voting. For example, in Massachusetts and Connecticut, the Congregational Church was established, supported by taxes. Voting was hampered by poor communications and infrastructure and the labor demands imposed by farming. Two months passed after the election before the votes were counted and Washington was notified that he had been elected president. Washington spent eight days traveling from Virginia to New York for the inauguration. Congress took twenty-eight days to assemble.

As the electors were selected, politics intruded, and the process was not free of rumors and intrigue. For example, Hamilton aimed to ensure that Adams did not inadvertently tie Washington in the electoral vote. Also, Federalists spread rumors that Anti-Federalists plotted to elect Richard Henry Lee or Patrick Henry president, with George Clinton as vice president. However, Clinton received only three electoral votes.

==Results==
===Popular vote===

Source: &quot;United States Presidential Elections, 1788-1860: The Official Results&quot; by Michael J. Dubin

 &quot;Only six of the 11 states eligible to cast electoral votes chose electors by any form of popular vote.&quot;
 &quot;Less than 1.8% of the population voted: the 1790 census would count a total population of 3.0 million with a free population of 2.4 million and 600,000 slaves in those states casting electoral votes.&quot;
 &quot;Those states that did choose electors by popular vote had widely varying restrictions on suffrage via property requirements.&quot;

===Electoral vote===





Source: 
Source (popular vote): &quot;A New Nation Votes: American Election Returns 1787–1825&quot;

 &quot;Only 6 of the 10 states casting electoral votes chose electors by any form of the popular vote.&quot;
 &quot;Less than 1.8% of the population voted: the 1790 census would count a total population of 3.0 million with a free population of 2.4 million and 600,000 slaves in those states casting electoral votes.&quot;
 &quot;Those states that did choose electors by popular vote had widely varying restrictions on suffrage via property requirements.&quot;
 &quot;As the New York legislature failed to appoint its allotted eight electors in time, there were no voting electors from New York.&quot;
 &quot;Two electors from Maryland did not vote.&quot;
 &quot;One elector from Virginia did not vote and another elector from Virginia was not chosen because an election district failed to submit returns.&quot;
 &quot;The identity of this candidate comes from &quot;The Documentary History of the First Federal Elections&quot; (Gordon DenBoer (ed.), University of Wisconsin Press, 1984, p. 441). Several respected sources, including the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress and the Political Graveyard, show this individual to be James Armstrong of Pennsylvania. However, primary sources, such as the Senate Journal, list only Armstrong&#x27;s name, not his state. Skeptics observe that Armstrong received his single vote from a Georgia elector. They find this improbable because Armstrong of Pennsylvania was not nationally famous—his public service to that date consisted of being a medical officer during the American Revolution and, at most, a single year as a Pennsylvania judge.&quot;


===Results by state===
====Popular vote====
Elections in this period were vastly different from modern day presidential elections. The actual presidential candidates were rarely mentioned on tickets and voters were voting for particular electors who were pledged to a particular candidate. There was sometimes confusion as to who the particular elector was actually pledged to. Results are reported as the highest result for an elector for any given faction. For example, if three federalist electors received 100, 50, and 25 votes, federalist electors would be recorded as having 100 votes. Confusion surrounding the way results are reported may lead to discrepancies between the sum of all state results and national results.

In Maryland, the state was effectively split into two districts: the western shore and the eastern shore. Five electors were chosen from the western shore and three from the eastern shore. All electors, however, were elected at-large by all Maryland voters.

In Delaware, no candidate received the majority of votes, throwing the election to the legislature, who chose the five best-performing elector candidates.

Virginian electors John Pride and Patrick Henry had previously voted against ratification of the Constitution. John Roane was one of three Clinton Electors.

The vote totals of Virginia and Delaware appear to be incomplete. In several states candidates of unknown affiliation received votes.
====Electoral vote====
Sixty-nine electors voted out of a possible 91: Two electors from Maryland and two from Virginia did not vote, the New York State Legislature was deadlocked and the state&#x27;s 8 electors were not appointed (see below), and North Carolina and Rhode Island with 7 and 3 electoral votes respectively had not yet ratified the Constitution. As per the terms of the unamended constitution, each elector was permitted two votes for president, with a majority of &quot;the whole number of electors appointed&quot; necessary to elect a president. Of the 69 participating electors, each cast one vote for Washington, who was elected president. Of the remaining candidates, only Adams, Jay, and Hancock received votes from more than one state; with 34 votes, Adams finished second behind only Washington, and by virtue of which fact was elected vice president.
Source: 

====Failure of New York to appoint electors====
Control of the bicameral New York State Legislature was divided following ratification of the federal constitution, and lawmakers could not reach an agreement to appoint electors for the forthcoming presidential contest. Federalists, backed by the great landed families and the city commercial interests, were the largest faction in the Senate, the smaller of the two chambers for which roughly a quarter of the state&#x27;s free white male population was eligible to vote; but in the House of Representatives, with its larger membership and electorate, Anti-federalists representing the middling interests held the majority. The fight to ratify the United States Constitution was still fresh in the memories of the legislators, and the Anti-Federalists were resentful for having been forced by events to accept the constitution without amendments. Bills to govern the selection of electors were proposed in each house and rejected by the other, leading to an impasse. The deadlock still stood on January 7, 1789, the last day for electors to be chosen by the states, and New York thus failed to appoint the eight electors allocated to it by the constitution.

=== Maps ===

==Electoral college selection==
The Constitution, in Article II, Section 1, provided that the state legislatures should decide the manner in which their Electors were chosen. State legislatures chose different methods:




 &quot;New York&#x27;s legislature did not choose electors on time.&quot;
 &quot;One electoral district failed to choose an elector.&quot;

==See also==
* 1788–89 United States House of Representatives elections
* 1788–89 United States Senate elections
* History of the United States (1789–1849)

==Notes==

==References==
==Bibliography==

* Bowling, Kenneth R., and Donald R. Kennon. &quot;A New Matrix for National Politics.&quot; Inventing Congress: Origins and Establishment of the First Federal Congress. Athens, O.: United States Capitol Historical Society by Ohio U, 1999. 110–37. Print.
* Chernow, Ron (2004). &quot;Alexander Hamilton&quot;. London, UK: Penguin Books. .
* Collier, Christopher. &quot;Voting and American Democracy.&quot; The American People as Christian White Men of Property:Suffrage and Elections in Colonial and Early National America. N.p.: U of Connecticut, n.d, 1999.
* Dinkin, Robert J. Voting in Revolutionary America: A Study of Elections in the Original Thirteen States, 1776–1789. Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1982.
* 
* Novotny, Patrick. &quot;The Parties in American Politics, 1789–2016&quot;.
* Paullin, Charles O. &quot;The First Elections Under The Constitution.&quot; The Iowa Journal of History and Politics 2 (1904): 3-33. Web. February 20, 2017.
* Shade, William G., and Ballard C. Campbell. &quot;The Election of 1788-89.&quot; American Presidential Campaigns and Elections. Ed. Craig R. Coenen. Vol. 1. Armonk, NY: Sharpe Reference, 2003. 65–77. Print.
==External links==

* Presidential Election of 1789: A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress
* A New Nation Votes: American Election Returns, 1787–1825 
* Election of 1789 in Counting the Votes </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q47566" start="0" end="22" title="United States presidential election" label="Presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="46" end="59" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="117" end="129" title="Constitution of the United States" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="148" end="165" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="224" end="233" title="President of the United States" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="238" end="248" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="266" end="280" title="Vice President of the United States" label="vice president"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404720" start="369" end="388" title="contingent election" label="contingent election"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="466" end="491" title="Articles of Confederation" label="Articles of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="547" end="560" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="661" end="681" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195929" start="736" end="765" title="Congress of the Confederation" label="Congress of the Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153035" start="859" end="882" title="Committee of the States" label="Committee of the States"/>
<link wikidata="Q639738" start="947" end="954" title="Cabinet of the United States" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="961" end="973" title="Constitution of the United States" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="997" end="1006" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="1011" end="1025" title="Vice President of the United States" label="Vice President"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="1105" end="1122" title="United States Electoral College" label="Electoral College"/>
<link wikidata="Q172099" start="1300" end="1317" title="Twelfth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twelfth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="1671" end="1687" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="1699" end="1725" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="1899" end="1916" title="political party" label="political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="2107" end="2123" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q272774" start="2182" end="2194" title="John Hancock" label="John Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="2198" end="2211" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="2215" end="2225" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="2248" end="2261" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q257855" start="2342" end="2357" title="Anti-Federalism" label="Anti-Federalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q311885" start="2374" end="2387" title="Patrick Henry" label="Patrick Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q201646" start="2410" end="2424" title="George Clinton (vice president)" label="George Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q310847" start="2727" end="2735" title="John Jay" label="John Jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270268" start="2844" end="2871" title="New York State Legislature" label="New York&amp;#x27;s legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="2909" end="2923" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="2928" end="2940" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824580" start="2995" end="3006" title="Presidency of George Washington" label="inaugurated"/>
<link wikidata="Q162932" start="3061" end="3075" title="1st United States Congress" label="First Congress"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3297" end="3308" title="Federalism in the United States#Federalism in the early Republic" label="Federalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q257855" start="3331" end="3347" title="Anti-Federalism" label="Anti-Federalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="3659" end="3667" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="4006" end="4024" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375384" start="4145" end="4157" title="Mount Vernon, Virginia" label="Mount Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="4491" end="4506" title="Vice President of the United States" label="vice presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="4940" end="4956" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q370781" start="5092" end="5105" title="John Rutledge" label="John Rutledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195929" start="5433" end="5441" title="Congress of the Confederation" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339847" start="6649" end="6662" title="Voter turnout" label="Voter turnout"/>
<link wikidata="Q405566" start="6779" end="6791" title="Voting rights in the United States" label="popular vote"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7216" end="7227" title="Separation of church and state in the United States#Patrick Henry, Massachusetts, and Connecticut" label="established"/>
<link wikidata="Q725907" start="7899" end="7916" title="Richard Henry Lee" label="Richard Henry Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q311885" start="7920" end="7933" title="Patrick Henry" label="Patrick Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q201646" start="7950" end="7964" title="George Clinton (vice president)" label="George Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896633" start="9727" end="9756" title="University of Wisconsin Press" label="University of Wisconsin Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150348" start="9814" end="9866" title="Biographical Directory of the United States Congress" label="Biographical Directory of the United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757656" start="9875" end="9894" title="Political Graveyard" label="Political Graveyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203314" start="11549" end="11559" title="John Pride" label="John Pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q311885" start="11564" end="11577" title="Patrick Henry" label="Patrick Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934473" start="11607" end="11639" title="Virginia Ratifying Convention" label="ratification of the Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270268" start="11960" end="11986" title="New York State Legislature" label="New York State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="13033" end="13037" title="New York City" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13394" end="13431" title="History of the United States Constitution#Ratification of the Constitution" label="ratify the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13983" end="14004" title="Article Two of the United States Constitution#Section 1, Clause 2" label="Article II, Section 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354807" start="14308" end="14364" title="1788–89 United States House of Representatives elections" label="1788–89 United States House of Representatives elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510662" start="14367" end="14405" title="1788–89 United States Senate elections" label="1788–89 United States Senate elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192542" start="14408" end="14448" title="History of the United States (1789–1849)" label="History of the United States (1789–1849)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24302" start="14751" end="14763" title="Ron Chernow" label="Chernow, Ron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112133" start="14835" end="14855" title="Christopher Collier (historian)" label="Collier, Christopher"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40451" wikidata="Q698073" url="?curid=40451" title="1792 United States presidential election">
<text>Presidential elections were held in the United States from November 2 to December 5, 1792. Incumbent President George Washington was elected to a second term by a unanimous vote in the electoral college, while John Adams was reelected as vice president. Washington was essentially unopposed, but Adams faced a competitive re-election against Governor George Clinton of New York.

Electoral rules of the time required each presidential elector to cast two votes without distinguishing which was for president and which for vice president. The recipient of the most votes would then become president, and the runner-up vice president. The Democratic-Republican Party, which had organized in opposition to the policies of Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton, supported Clinton for the position of vice president. Adams, meanwhile, was backed by the Federalist Party in his bid for another term. Neither party had fully organized, and partisan divisions had not yet solidified.

Washington received 132 electoral votes, one from each elector. Adams won 77 electoral votes, enough to win re-election. Clinton finished in third place with 50 electoral votes, taking his home state of New York as well as three Southern states. Two other candidates won the five remaining electoral votes. This election was the first in which each of the original 13 states appointed electors, as did the newly added states of Kentucky and Vermont.

==Candidates==
In 1792, presidential elections were still conducted according to the original method established under the U.S. Constitution. Under this system, each elector cast two votes: the candidate who received the greatest number of votes (so long as they won a majority) became president, while the runner-up became vice president. The Twelfth Amendment would eventually replace this system, requiring electors to cast one vote for president and one vote for vice president, but this change did not take effect until 1804. Because of this, it is difficult to use modern-day terminology to describe the relationship among the candidates in this election.

Washington is generally held by historians to have run unopposed. Indeed, the incumbent president enjoyed bipartisan support and received one vote from every elector. The choice for vice president was more divisive. The Federalist Party threw its support behind the incumbent vice president, John Adams of Massachusetts, while the Democratic-Republican Party backed the candidacy of New York Governor George Clinton. Because few doubted that Washington would receive the greatest number of votes, Adams and Clinton were effectively competing for the vice presidency; under the letter of the law, however, they were technically candidates for president competing against Washington.

===Federalist nomination===
* George Washington, President of the United States (1789–1797)
* John Adams, Vice President of the United States (1789–1797)

===Democratic-Republican nomination===
* George Clinton, Governor of New York (1777–1795, 1801–1804)
* George Washington, President of the United States (1789–1797)

Born out of the Anti-Federalist faction that had opposed the Constitution in 1788, the Democratic-Republican Party was the main opposition to the agenda of Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton. They had no chance of unseating Washington, but hoped to win the vice presidency by defeating the incumbent, Adams. Many Democratic-Republicans would have preferred to nominate Thomas Jefferson, their ideological leader and Washington&#x27;s Secretary of State. However, this would have cost them the state of Virginia, as electors were not permitted to vote for two candidates from their home state and Washington was also a Virginian. Clinton, the Governor of New York and a former anti-Federalist leader, became the party&#x27;s nominee after he won the backing of Jefferson and James Madison. Clinton was from an electorally important swing state, and he convinced party leaders that he would be a stronger candidate than another New Yorker, Senator Aaron Burr. A group of Democratic-Republican leaders met in Philadelphia in October 1792 and selected Clinton as the party&#x27;s vice presidential candidate.

==Campaign==
By 1792, a party division had emerged between Federalists led by Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton, who desired a stronger federal government with a leading role in the economy, and the Democratic-Republicans led by Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson and Representative James Madison of Virginia, who favored states&#x27; rights and opposed Hamilton&#x27;s economic program. Madison was at first a Federalist until he opposed the establishment of Hamilton&#x27;s First Bank of the United States in 1791. He formed the Democratic-Republican Party along with Anti-Federalist Thomas Jefferson in 1792.

The elections of 1792 were the first ones in the United States to be contested on anything resembling a partisan basis. In most states, the congressional elections were recognized in some sense as a &quot;struggle between the Treasury department and the republican interest,&quot; to use the words of Jefferson strategist John Beckley. In New York, the race for governor was fought along these lines. The candidates were Chief Justice John Jay, a Hamiltonian, and incumbent George Clinton, the party&#x27;s vice presidential nominee.

Although Washington had been considering retiring, both sides encouraged him to remain in office to bridge factional differences. Washington was supported by practically all sides throughout his presidency and gained more popularity with the passage of the Bill of Rights. However, the Democratic-Republicans and the Federalists contested the vice-presidency, with incumbent John Adams as the Federalist nominee and George Clinton as the Democratic-Republican nominee. Federalists attacked Clinton for his past association with the anti-Federalists. Adams easily secured re-election.

==Results==
Washington was re-elected unanimously, receiving one vote from each of the 132 participating electors. Adams received votes from 77 electors and Clinton 50; the four electors from Kentucky voted for Thomas Jefferson, and one South Carolina elector voted for Aaron Burr. The distribution of the electoral vote between the four runners-up showed a high degree of party discipline, with only two electors voting contrary to the majority in their state. Adams received the support of New England, South Carolina, and the Mid-Atlantic states (excepting New York), while Clinton carried New York and most of the South. Adams as the second-place finisher was elected vice president, serving until his election to the presidency in 1797; each of his three rivals would go on to serve as vice president in turn, Jefferson from 1797 to 1801 (when he alike succeeded to the presidency), Burr from 1801 to 1805, and Clinton from 1805 until his death in 1812.

Nine of the 15 states eligible to choose representatives to the electoral college did so by a vote of the state legislature; the remaining six employed some form of popular vote. Of these, complete returns from Maryland, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Pennsylvania survive; surviving returns from Virginia are incomplete, and popular vote records from Kentucky are not known to exist. Of the states with complete returns, only Pennsylvania saw real partisan competition; a Federalist electoral slate pledged to Washington and Adams was selected, although one elector voted for Washington and Clinton. At the time, party organizations were still in their infancy, and the partisan allegiance of the candidates was not always evident: it is therefore difficult to say whether the Pennsylvania vote for Clinton was an instance of a faithless elector, or an elector voting as pledged.

===Electoral vote===


(a) &quot;Only 6 of the 15 states chose electors by any form of popular vote, while pre-Twelfth Amendment electoral vote rules obscure the intentions of the voters, and those states that did choose electors by popular vote restricted the vote via property requirements.&quot;&lt;br&gt;
(b) &quot;Two electors from Maryland and one elector from Vermont did not cast votes.&quot;

===Popular vote===
Source (Popular Vote): &quot;A New Nation Votes: American Election Returns 1787-1825&quot;

(a) &quot;Only 6 of the 15 states chose electors by any form of popular vote.&quot;&lt;br&gt;
(b) &quot;Pre-Twelfth Amendment electoral vote rules obscure the intentions of the voters&quot;&lt;br&gt;
(c) &quot;Those states that did choose electors by popular vote had widely varying restrictions on suffrage via property requirements.&quot;&lt;br&gt;
(d) &quot;Returns for several states are incomplete.&quot;

=== Popular vote by state ===
Elections in this period were vastly different from modern day presidential elections. The actual presidential candidates were rarely mentioned on tickets and voters were voting for particular electors who were pledged to a particular candidate. There was sometimes confusion as to who the particular elector was actually pledged to. Results are reported as the highest result for an elector for any given faction. For example, if three Federalist electors received 100, 50, and 25 votes, Federalist electors would be recorded as having 100 votes. Confusion surrounding the way results are reported may lead to discrepancies between the sum of all state results and national results.

In Massachusetts, the best performing elector candidate for the Eastern District, Thomas Rice, was not selected by the Massachusetts General Court to be an elector. Rice was a Federalist and his returns have been included into the state total below instead of the second best performing elector candidate.

The totals for Kentucky, Pennsylvania, and Virginia appear to be incomplete. In several states candidates of unknown affiliation received votes.
===Electoral votes by state===
The states chose 135 electors, out of whom 132 cast ballots. (Two electors from Maryland and one from Vermont were absent and did not vote.) As per the terms of the unamended constitution, each elector was permitted two votes for president, with a majority of &quot;the whole number of electors appointed&quot; necessary to elect a president. Each of the participating electors cast one vote for Washington, who was elected president. The electors were split on their second choice: Adams received 77 votes to Clinton&#x27;s 50, enough to secure a second-place finish behind Washington and the vice presidency.
Source: &quot;A New Nation Votes: American Election Returns 1787-1825&quot;


=== Maps ===

==Electoral college selection==
The Constitution, in Article II, Section 1, provided that the state legislatures should decide the manner in which their Electors were chosen. Different state legislatures chose different methods:



==See also==
* First Party System
* History of the United States (1789–1849)
* Presidency of George Washington
* 1792–93 United States House of Representatives elections
* 1792–93 United States Senate elections
* List of 1792 United States presidential electors
* List of George Washington articles

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* A New Nation Votes: American Election Returns, 1787-1825

==External links==

* Presidential Election of 1792: A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress
* Election of 1792 in Counting the Votes </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q47566" start="0" end="22" title="United States presidential election" label="Presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="40" end="53" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="101" end="110" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="111" end="128" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="185" end="202" title="Electoral College (United States)" label="electoral college"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="210" end="220" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="238" end="252" title="Vice President of the United States" label="vice president"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347975" start="342" end="350" title="Governor of New York" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q201646" start="351" end="365" title="George Clinton (vice president)" label="George Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="369" end="377" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="522" end="536" title="Vice President of the United States" label="vice president"/>
<link wikidata="Q42186" start="637" end="664" title="Democratic-Republican Party (United States)" label="Democratic-Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="745" end="763" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="855" end="871" title="Federalist Party" label="Federalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="1213" end="1221" title="Southern United States" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="1412" end="1420" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="1425" end="1432" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382648" start="1704" end="1712" title="majority" label="majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q172099" start="1779" end="1796" title="Twelfth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twelfth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q698133" start="1960" end="1964" title="1804 United States presidential election" label="1804"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="2318" end="2334" title="Federalist Party" label="Federalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q42186" start="2429" end="2456" title="Democratic-Republican Party" label="Democratic-Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347975" start="2481" end="2498" title="Governor of New York" label="New York Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="2811" end="2828" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="2830" end="2860" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="2875" end="2885" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="2887" end="2922" title="Vice President of the United States" label="Vice President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q201646" start="2977" end="2991" title="George Clinton (vice president)" label="George Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="3005" end="3013" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="3039" end="3056" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="3058" end="3088" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q257855" start="3781" end="3796" title="Anti-Federalism" label="anti-Federalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="3879" end="3892" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q179090" start="4051" end="4061" title="Aaron Burr" label="Aaron Burr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="4111" end="4123" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="4270" end="4281" title="United States Federalist Party" label="Federalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215834" start="4289" end="4307" title="United States Secretary of the Treasury" label="Treasury Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="4308" end="4326" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q42186" start="4414" end="4436" title="Democratic-Republican Party (United States)" label="Democratic-Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="4444" end="4462" title="United States Secretary of State" label="Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645296" start="4570" end="4602" title="Hamiltonian economic program" label="Hamilton&amp;#x27;s economic program"/>
<link wikidata="Q934187" start="4692" end="4723" title="First Bank of the United States" label="First Bank of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q257855" start="4786" end="4801" title="Anti-Federalist" label="Anti-Federalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q706071" start="5151" end="5163" title="John Beckley" label="John Beckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="5250" end="5263" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="Chief Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q310847" start="5264" end="5272" title="John Jay" label="John Jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="5621" end="5635" title="US Bill of Rights" label="Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="8131" end="8139" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="8161" end="8168" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426794" start="9515" end="9526" title="Thomas Rice (Massachusetts politician, born 1768)" label="Thomas Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453540" start="9552" end="9579" title="Massachusetts General Court" label="Massachusetts General Court"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10672" end="10693" title="Article Two of the United States Constitution#Section 1, Clause 2" label="Article II, Section 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453498" start="10866" end="10884" title="First Party System" label="First Party System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192542" start="10887" end="10927" title="History of the United States (1789–1849)" label="History of the United States (1789–1849)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824580" start="10930" end="10961" title="Presidency of George Washington" label="Presidency of George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511151" start="10964" end="11020" title="1792–93 United States House of Representatives elections" label="1792–93 United States House of Representatives elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510675" start="11023" end="11061" title="1792–93 United States Senate elections" label="1792–93 United States Senate elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q24965990" start="11064" end="11112" title="List of 1792 United States presidential electors" label="List of 1792 United States presidential electors"/>
<link wikidata="Q58175865" start="11115" end="11149" title="List of George Washington articles" label="List of George Washington articles"/>
</links>
</doc>
