<doc id="64044" wikidata="Q332314" url="?curid=64044" title="Michael Heseltine">
<text>Michael Ray Dibdin Heseltine, Baron Heseltine, (; born 21 March 1933) is a British politician. Having begun his career as a property developer, he became one of the founders of the publishing house Haymarket. Heseltine served as a Conservative Member of Parliament from 1966 to 2001. He was a prominent figure in the governments of Margaret Thatcher and John Major, and served as Deputy Prime Minister and First Secretary of State under Major from 1995 to 1997.

Heseltine entered the Cabinet in 1979 as Secretary of State for the Environment, where he promoted the &quot;Right to Buy&quot; campaign that allowed people to purchase their council houses. He was considered an adept media performer and a charismatic minister, although he was frequently at odds with Thatcher on economic issues. He was one of the most visible &quot;wets&quot;, whose &quot;One Nation&quot; views were epitomised by his support for the regeneration of Liverpool in the early 1980s when it was facing economic collapse; this later earned him the award of Freeman of the City of Liverpool in 2012. As Secretary of State for Defence from 1983 to 1986, he was instrumental in the political battle against the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament. He resigned from the Cabinet in 1986 over the Westland affair and returned to the backbenches, becoming a vocal critic of Thatcher, mostly because of her Eurosceptic views and confrontational approach in Parliament. Following Geoffrey Howe&#x27;s resignation speech in November 1990, Heseltine challenged Thatcher for the party leadership, polling well enough to deny her an outright victory on the first ballot. Following Thatcher&#x27;s subsequent resignation, Heseltine lost to John Major on the second ballot, but returned to the Cabinet in his former post of Environment Secretary when Major became prime minister.

As a key ally of Major, Heseltine was appointed President of the Board of Trade and Secretary of State for Trade and Industry following the 1992 general election. He supported Major when his leadership was challenged in 1995, and was promoted to Deputy Prime Minister and First Secretary of State in return for his support. He declined to seek the leadership of the party following Major&#x27;s 1997 election defeat, and served in Major&#x27;s shadow cabinet as Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Shadow Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster and Shadow Secretary of State for Trade and Industry while the leadership election to succeed him was taking place.

Heseltine was created a life peer in 2001 and has remained a vocal advocate for modernisation within the party. He has continued to make political interventions, criticising Brexit and Boris Johnson following the 2016 Brexit referendum result. In 2019, Heseltine had the whip suspended after saying he would vote for the Liberal Democrats, rather than the Conservatives, at the 2019 European Parliament election. Heseltine had the whip restored in July 2024.

==Early life==
Michael Heseltine was born at Eaton Crescent, in Swansea in Wales on 21 March 1933. He was the son of Territorial Army Colonel Rupert Dibdin Heseltine (1902–1957), TD, of the Royal Engineers during the Second World War, a factory owner and South Wales local director of Dawnays Ltd, bridge and structural engineers, and Eileen Ray (&quot;née&quot; Pridmore). The Heseltine family were in the tea trade: Michael Heseltine&#x27;s great-grandfather, William Heseltine, was a clerk who worked his way up to being manager of Tetley, later being involved in establishing a chain of grocers; he killed himself after suffering the loss of his fortune through debt and bad investments. Michael Heseltine&#x27;s grandfather, John William Dibdin Heseltine (whose mother was a great-granddaughter of the composer and songwriter Charles Dibdin), became a tea salesman and relocated from Huntingdonshire to Swansea, the docks being a major arrival point for tea shipments. Earlier generations had been farm labourers in Pembrey.

Heseltine&#x27;s mother originated in West Wales, daughter of James Pridmore, a dock labourer who unloaded coal from ships, later hiring others to do so and founding West Glamorgan Collieries Ltd, a short-lived company that briefly worked two small mines on the outskirts of Swansea (1919–1921); his father, also James, worked at the Swansea docks. Due to this heritage Heseltine was later made an honorary member of the Swansea Dockers Club.

Heseltine was brought up in relative luxury at No. 1, Eaton Crescent, Swansea (now No. 5). He told &quot;Tatler&quot; interviewer Charlotte Edwardes in 2016: &quot;At prep school, I started a birdwatching club called the Tit Club. Every member was named after a member of the tit family: the Marsh Tit, the Blue Tit. I was the Great Tit&quot;. He once feared the story might reach the press: &quot;I just know if that had got out when I was in active politics, I would never have recovered&quot;. Heseltine enjoyed angling in Brynmill Park and won a junior competition. He was educated at Broughton Hall in Eccleshall, Staffordshire, when it was briefly amalgamated with Brockhurst Preparatory school, Bromsgrove School, Worcestershire, and Shrewsbury School, Shropshire.

==Oxford==
Heseltine campaigned briefly as a volunteer in the October 1951 general election before going up to Pembroke College, Oxford. While there, in frustration at his inability to be elected to the committee of the Oxford University Conservative Association, he founded the breakaway Blue Ribbon Club. Along with undergraduates Guy Arnold, Julian Critchley and Martin Morton he canvassed workers at the gates of the Vickers Shipyard in Barrow-in-Furness. Julian Critchley recounted a story from his student days of how he plotted his future on the back of an envelope, a future that would culminate as prime minister in the 1990s. A more detailed apocryphal version has him writing down: &#x27;millionaire 25, cabinet member 35, party leader 45, prime minister 55,&#x27; though Heseltine himself disputes this and instead recalls a lack of self-belief. He became a millionaire and was a member of the shadow cabinet from the age of 41, but did not manage to become Party Leader or prime minister.

His biographers Michael Crick and Julian Critchley (who was a contemporary of Heseltine&#x27;s at Brockhurst Prep School) recount how, despite not having an innate gift for public speaking, he became a strong orator through much effort, which included practising his speeches in front of a mirror, listening to tape recordings of speeches by television administrator Charles Hill, and taking voice-coaching lessons from a vicar&#x27;s wife. (In the 1970s and 1980s, Heseltine&#x27;s conference speech was often the highlight of the Conservative Party Conference, despite his views being well to the left of the then leader Margaret Thatcher.) He was eventually elected to the Library Committee of the Oxford Union for Hilary (Spring) Term 1953. The Oxford Union minutes record after a debate on 12 February 1953 that &quot;Mr Heseltine should guard against artificial mannerisms of voice and calculated flourishes of self-conscious histrionics; this is only worth saying because he has the makings of a first class speaker&quot;.

Heseltine was then elected to the Standing Committee of the Oxford Union for Trinity (summer) Term 1953. On 30 April 1953 he opposed the setting up of the Western European Union (a European defence treaty), not least because it might antagonise the USSR following the supposed &quot;recent change of Soviet attitudes&quot; (i.e. after Stalin&#x27;s death). On 4 June 1953, he called for the development of the British Commonwealth as a third major power in the world (after the US and USSR). At the end of that summer term he stood unsuccessfully for the Presidency but was instead elected to the top place on the committee. In his third year (1953–54) he served in top place on the committee, then as Secretary, and finally as Treasurer. As Treasurer he attempted to solve the Union&#x27;s financial problems not by cost-cutting but by an ultimately successful &quot;Brighter Union&quot; policy of bringing in more students for food and drink, and by converting the Union cellars into a venue for events. The Union&#x27;s Senior Member (the university don that every society was required to have) resigned in protest at what he saw as Heseltine&#x27;s profligacy, and was replaced by the young Maurice Shock.

At the end of the Trinity (summer) Term 1954, Heseltine was elected President of the Oxford Union for Michaelmas term 1954, largely on the strength of his business management, and with the assistance of Union contemporaries Jeremy Isaacs and Anthony Howard, the then chairman and chairman-elect of the Oxford University Labour Club; Heseltine had even, for a brief period that term, joined a protest group against the Conservative government&#x27;s testing of an H-Bomb. He had done little study at University, and passed his finals with the help of last-minute coaching from friends. After graduating with a second-class degree in Philosophy, politics and economics, described by his tutor Neville Ward-Perkins as &quot;a great and undeserved triumph&quot;, he was permitted to stay on for an extra term to serve as Union President.

The Union cellars were opened on 30 October 1954, and Heseltine persuaded the visiting Sir Bernard and Lady Docker to contribute to the considerable cost. Debates over which he presided included censorship of the Arts (no vote taken), welcoming the decline of British Imperialism (defeated 281–381) and calling for a &quot;change in the principles and practice of British Trade Unions&quot; (carried 358–200). Guest speakers that term included Rajani Palme Dutt, Lady Violet Bonham Carter, his old headmaster John Wolfenden and Jacob Bronowski, whilst Aneurin Bevan addressed a packed meeting of the University Labour Club, chaired by Anthony Howard, in the Union Chamber.

==Business career==
===Early business career===
Heseltine began articles at Peat Marwick &amp; Mitchell in January 1955. Whilst training as an accountant, he also built up a property business in the London property boom of the late 1950s. He and his Oxford roommate Ian Josephs had each inherited around £1,000 (around £23,000 at 2016 prices). They formed a property company called &quot;Michian&quot; (after their first names) and with the aid of a mortgage bought a 13-year lease on the so-called Thurston Court Hotel at 39 Clanricarde Gardens (near Notting Hill) for £3,750. They evicted the existing tenants so that Josephs&#x27; father could renovate the property and let out the rooms for a total rent of around £30 per week. A year later, they were able to sell the property at a profit, doubling their capital to £4,000.

With the aid of a £23,000 mortgage, Heseltine and Josephs now bought a group of five adjacent houses for £27,000 in Inverness Terrace, Bayswater. They arranged for some medical students to decorate and remodel the property into a 45-bedroom boarding house, which they called the &quot;New Court Hotel&quot;. Heseltine would sometimes cook breakfast himself, although he rejects tales that he would get up early to mix margarine in with the butter. Many of the tenants were American servicemen who, he later recorded, were for the most part respectful but sometimes rowdy at weekends.

Edward Heath, then a government whip whom he had met at the Oxford Union, was his referee when he applied for the Conservative Party Parliamentary Candidates&#x27; List in October 1956. Heseltine bought his first Jaguar, second hand and cheap because of the rise in the price of petrol owing to the Suez Crisis, for £1,750 in December 1956, upgrading to newer and more expensive models in future years.

New Court Hotel was sold in 1957. At this point Heseltine went into business with another Oxford friend, Clive Labovitch, who brought out &quot;Opportunities for Graduates&quot; that year. Heseltine arranged for this to be distributed free, expanded from 40 pages to a 169-page hardback book, to final year students at all British universities, paid for by advertising. Heseltine ended his partnership with Josephs and with the aid of a £4,500 investment by Heseltine&#x27;s mother (following the death of his father in 1957) he and Labovitch were able to buy a group of houses at 29–31 Tregunter Road (south of Earl&#x27;s Court), adding two more in neighbouring Cathcart Road.

===National service===
Heseltine had transferred his articles to a partner at a smaller firm of accountants located off Haymarket, feeling that this would allow him more chance of hands-on involvement in the affairs of the firms whose books he examined, rather than being a cog in a bigger machine. It took him three attempts and special coaching to pass his intermediate exams, and he had little immediate prospect of passing his accountancy finals. He also estimated that he was earning more from his property business than the partner to whom he was articled. With the expiry of his articles in January 1958 he could no longer avoid conscription into National Service.

Heseltine later wrote that he admired the military, for his father had been a lieutenant-colonel in the Royal Engineers in the Second World War and active in the Territorial Army thereafter, but that he had felt that his business career was too important to be disrupted. He and his father had taken the precaution of arranging interviews to increase his chances of attaining an officer&#x27;s commission in case he had to serve. He had been lucky not to be called up for the Korean War in the early 1950s or the Suez Crisis in 1956; and in the final years of National Service, already due for abolition by 1960, an effort was made to call up men who had so far managed to postpone service. Despite having almost reached maximum call-up age, recently reduced from thirty to twenty-six, Heseltine was conscripted into the Welsh Guards in January 1959.

Heseltine spent nine weeks in the ranks as a Guardsman before being sent for three months of officer training at Mons Officer Cadet School, Aldershot, alongside men from other regiments. He was a capable cadet, reaching the rank of Junior Under-Officer and graduating with an A-Grade, but he was not awarded the Sword of Honour or promoted to the rank of Senior Under-Officer, as it was felt his age had given him an unfair advantage over younger cadets. Throughout his training he had been troubled by an old ankle sprain, but he declined the offer of a medical discharge. He was commissioned as a second lieutenant on 11 June 1959.

Heseltine was granted leave to contest the general election in October that year; according to Ian Josephs this had been his plan from the start. Afterward he applied on business grounds for exemption from return to the Army, in part because of difficulties caused by an employee&#x27;s embezzlement, and partly including the need to sort out his late father&#x27;s affairs, and was exempted from his remaining sixteen months of service. During the 1980s his habit of wearing a Guards regimental tie, sometimes incorrectly knotted with a red stripe on the neck, was the subject of much acerbic comment from military figures and from older MPs with distinguished war records. Crick estimated that he must have worn the tie on more days than he actually served in the Guards.

===Business career: expansion and near disaster===
By now the property boom was in full swing. Heseltine and Labovitch established first one, then a group of companies under the name &quot;Bastion Properties&quot;. Heseltine later recorded that he and Labovitch bought at least three properties in W1 and W2 which they were able to sell at a profit before they had completed the original purchases. They also built eight small houses in Queensborough Mews, Bayswater. They bought a 58-year lease on a block of seven properties at Stafford Terrace, off Kensington High Street, which they converted into flats and built houses for Stepney Borough Council. Bastion also planned to build an estate of up to 126 houses at Tenterden, Kent, which failed to sell. In order to attract other buyers to the empty estate Heseltine had to accept an offer of £4,000 for the first house, which had been valued at £7,250. The estate was beset with repair problems until after Heseltine&#x27;s election to Parliament.

Heseltine and Labovitch also founded the magazine publishing company Cornmarket, and brought out &quot;Directory of Opportunities for School Leavers&quot; and &quot;Directory of Opportunities for Qualified Men&quot;, which earned a steady income from advertising. Canadian, French and German versions were also launched, although these were less profitable. In late 1959, using £10,000 of a £30,000 profit on selling a freehold site off Regents Park, they acquired the famous (but unprofitable) magazine &quot;Man About Town&quot; whose title was shortened to &quot;About Town&quot; then simply &quot;Town&quot;. In 1962, they paid £10,000 for &quot;Topic&quot;, a weekly newspaper that had been launched the previous year by a group of entrepreneurs including the Prime Minister&#x27;s son Maurice Macmillan, and which was now owned by Norman Mascall (a pyramid scheme fraudster of the era). By then the economic climate was too difficult, and like many publishers they found that there is limited appetite for weekly papers in the UK. &quot;Topic&quot; ceased publication at the end of 1962, but its journalists later became &quot;The Sunday Times&quot; Insight Team.

Heseltine became managing director of Bow Group Publications in 1960, mainly looking after advertising and circulation for its &quot;Crossbow&quot; magazine (he does not seem to have written any articles or pamphlets himself). He contemplated suing &quot;The Observer&quot; for a limerick mocking his dress sense (spelling &quot;Bow&quot; as &quot;Beau&quot;) for implying him to be homosexual, but was talked out of it. He remained a director until 1965.

Bastion Properties was in trouble because of building costs and an unsatisfactory building manager. After rapid expansion, Heseltine&#x27;s businesses were badly hit by the Selwyn Lloyd financial squeeze of 1961 and, still not yet thirty years old, he eventually owed £250,000 (around £4.5 million at 2016 prices). He states he was lent a badly needed £85,000 in December 1962 by a bank manager who retired the same day. He avoided bankruptcy by such tactics as paying bills only when threatened with legal action, although he eventually settled all his debts. It was during this stressful period of his life that he took up gardening as a serious hobby. Later, during the 1990s, Heseltine committed a minor gaffe when he joked in a speech about how he had strung creditors along.

Between 1960 and 1964, Heseltine also worked as a part-time interviewer for ITV, very likely, in Crick&#x27;s view, to maintain his public profile as an aspiring politician.

===Formation of Haymarket===
Despite Heseltine&#x27;s later insistence on management controls in government departments which he ran, Cornmarket was a highly disorganised company, with little in the way of accounting or business plans and cheques and invoices often going astray. One of its most lucrative ventures, the &quot;Graduates Appointments Register&quot; (albums of anonymous graduate CV; companies had to pay for the names and addresses of those whom they wished to interview), went ahead after an employee simply ignored Heseltine&#x27;s instructions to abandon the project. Heseltine and Labovitch brought a great deal of energy and openness to new ideas (for example the in-house magazine for Hilton Hotels, or new owners&#x27; packs for people who bought Ford cars), talent-spotting able young men and leaving it to them to sort out the details.

Lindsay Masters, who had joined the Heseltine-Labovitch publishing business as an advertising manager in spring 1958, and Simon Tindall, who had joined in his early twenties as an advertising salesman while Heseltine had been doing his National Service, played an increasingly large role in managing the company. Masters kept a tight grip on the selling of advertising space, banning boozy lunches and setting targets for calling of clients, followed by chase-up calls, whilst keeping a public league table of salesmens&#x27; success rates; these were relatively innovative techniques at the time.

By 1964, Cornmarket owed a great deal of money to their printers, Hazell Watson &amp; Viney, which was then merging with the British Printing Corporation (BPC). Heseltine was summoned by BPC to be told to sort out his firm&#x27;s debts, but instead persuaded them to accept, instead of payment, an equity stake of at least 40% in a new, merged business. The portmanteau name &quot;Haymarket&quot; was suggested by Sir Geoffrey Crowther, chairman of BPC.

===Haymarket grows===
From the autumn of 1964, Haymarket set out aggressively to acquire magazines, approaching them from the list in the media directory BRAD. They acquired small, modestly profitable magazines for tape recorder and camera, and camping and caravan, enthusiasts, and using a loan from BPC bought a series of leisure and medical publications for £250,000 from a Canadian publisher, in competition with Thomson Group.

In 1965 Heseltine&#x27;s businesses had a turnover of around £700,000 per annum, and employed around 50 staff. Although the &quot;Opportunities for Graduates&quot; series continued to generate profits, &quot;Town&quot; magazine continued to lose money, hampered by the cost of printing (much more expensive at that time than nowadays) and by Heseltine&#x27;s reluctance, for political reasons, to include pictures of nude girls or cartoons disrespectful of the Royal Family.

Haymarket launched a bid for the British Institute of Management&#x27;s magazine &quot;The Manager&quot;, again in competition with Thomson Group, in late 1965. It was envisaged that Haymarket would take a 25% stake, as would the &quot;Financial Times&quot; and &quot;The Economist&quot;, of both of which Crowther was also chairman. Over the weekend Heseltine, inspired by how Donald Stokes had once won a Scandinavian bus contract for British Leyland by building a model bus, had a team led by Labovitch prepare a 96-page mock copy of what they envisaged, mostly using text cut from &quot;The Economist&quot;. Robert Heller was brought in as the first editor of what became &quot;Management Today&quot; – Heseltine initially irritated him by taking him to lunch at the Carlton Club and talking of his political aspirations, but Heller soon recognised that Labovitch was the front man whose job was to impress those who needed to be impressed, and Heseltine was &quot;the dynamic and real entrepreneurial brain&quot;. The first edition came out in April 1966, just after Heseltine&#x27;s election to Parliament. Haymarket went on to publish similar magazines for Marketing, Personnel Management and Computing Institutes.

Labovitch left Haymarket at the end of 1965. Heseltine stated he spent three days trying to persuade him to stay. Labovitch wanted to establish himself as a successful educational and careers publisher, and may well have been pushed by his then wife, the socialist journalist Penny Perrick, who disliked Heseltine both personally (as best man at their wedding he had, she said, welcomed various business figures in his speech as if he were at a board meeting) and politically and whom he had refused to include on the Haymarket board. Labovitch was a generator of ideas but he lacked Heseltine&#x27;s business skills. Although he took his profitable &quot;Directories&quot; with him, he had to sell them back to Haymarket when his business failed in 1973, causing him to attempt suicide. Heseltine offered him a position as consultant to Haymarket. The two former partners remained on friendly terms until Labovitch&#x27;s death in 1994.

Very few staff left with Labovitch. Lindsay Masters stayed behind, very likely in the knowledge that he might soon be running the company as Heseltine&#x27;s political career took off. However, Heseltine continued as managing director of Haymarket even after being elected to Parliament in March 1966, and based himself at the company offices near Oxford Circus rather than in the House of Commons. Heseltine&#x27;s Oxford friend Julian Critchley was editor of &quot;Town&quot; for around a year from 1966 until he was sacked by Masters, ending his friendship with Heseltine who had shrunk from delivering the blow himself.

===Further growth===
In April 1967, Heseltine persuaded BPC to inject a further £150,000 into Haymarket, increasing its ownership stake to 60%, whilst Heseltine and other directors retained smaller shareholdings. Haymarket doubled their magazine portfolio by taking over the management of twenty of BPC&#x27;s magazines (many of which had been acquired by BPC in lieu of bad debts by other publishers), including &quot;Autosport&quot;. However, they were now effectively a subsidiary of BPC; Heseltine, Masters and Tindall could potentially be outvoted or even sacked by the four BPC directors on the board. BPC installed a new financial controller who installed cost and cashflow management for the first time, and insisted on finally closing &quot;Town&quot; magazine at the end of 1967. &quot;Town&quot; had never made a profit, but Heseltine writes that its quality was instrumental in establishing Haymarket&#x27;s reputation as a publishing house. Around that time, &quot;Management Today&quot; became Haymarket&#x27;s first big success. A BPC manager recorded that Heseltine kept the initiative at board meetings by &quot;poker-faced nit-picking&quot; about the quality and timing of BPC&#x27;s printing, rather than by employing what came to be considered his usual &quot;I will transform the world&quot; rhetoric.

In 1968, there were rumours that BPC was planning to sack Heseltine. Another of the titles acquired from BPC was &quot;World&#x27;s Press News&quot;, largely a compilation of world press releases, which was relaunched by Masters and Robert Heller as &quot;Campaign&quot; in September 1968 (Heseltine initially opposed the title, thinking it sounded too political). It rapidly became standard reading in the world of advertising and Public Relations, for its gossipy reporting, often obtained by trading information, of who was gaining or losing accounts or being promoted or sacked. Within a year it had overtaken &quot;Advertisers Weekly&quot; for its volume of classified ads. Heseltine was forced, in the face of a strike, to recognise the National Union of Journalists among his staff. Josephine Hart (later a novelist and the wife of Maurice Saatchi, who was Heseltine&#x27;s assistant at this time), further improved the advertising sales operation by recruiting a team of largely female sales staff.

As part of his ongoing campaign to buy titles off other publishers, Heseltine noticed a magazine called &quot;The Accountant&quot; which was easily paid for by vast amounts of advertising. Robert Heller produced a dummy edition of a Haymarket version, modelled on the &quot;Daily Telegraph&quot;, which became &quot;Accountancy Age&quot;. Following an international phone call between Heller, who was on holiday in Portugal, and Heseltine who was on a political trip to Singapore, the launch date was brought forward by three months on learning that a rival publication was to be launched. &quot;Accountancy Age&quot; was launched in December 1969, largely by Haymarket&#x27;s business development manager Maurice Saatchi, and was profitable from the start.

Buoyed by the success of &quot;Management Today&quot;, &quot;Campaign&quot; and &quot;Accountancy Age&quot;, Haymarket made pre-tax profits of £3,000 in 1968, £136,000 in 1969 and £265,000 in 1970. Heseltine resigned as managing director of Haymarket on his promotion to principal opposition spokesman on transport in 1969, although he continued as chairman of the board until he became a minister in 1970, at which point he resigned from the board altogether, whilst remaining a major shareholder.

===1970s: Heseltine takes ownership of Haymarket===
In 1970, Heseltine turned down the chance to invest £25,000 in the advertising agency Saatchi &amp; Saatchi when it was set up (his former employee Maurice Saatchi said that he had learned a great deal from Heseltine&#x27;s aggressive techniques of acquiring magazine titles, and from publicity in &quot;Campaign&quot; magazine), believing wrongly that it was against the code for ministers to make such an investment. Lindsay Masters did invest, but was eventually bought out by the Saatchi brothers; Heseltine later believed that he and Masters together could have made another fortune if they had reinforced one another with large shareholdings in Saatchi and Saatchi.

With Heseltine a government minister from June 1970, Haymarket was being run by Masters and Tindall, who had secured another coup by publishing &quot;Computing&quot; for the British Computing Society. BPC was in financial trouble in 1971, and Heseltine, Masters and Tindall assembled a consortium of County Bank, Charterhouse Development, ICFC and Wren Investments to help buy out BPC&#x27;s 60% stake for £1m, a very low price given that Haymarket had made over £250,000 the previous year. The consortium took a 40% stake in Haymarket, and loaned the company £820,000, while Heseltine took out a large personal loan at this time to buy both another 20% of Haymarket&#x27;s shares (the rest of the BPC shareholding, bringing Heseltine&#x27;s own shareholding to just under 50%). At the meeting to close the deal, one of the bankers recorded, &quot;Michael thought he was President of the Oxford Union again, and entered into a grand oration and bored everyone stiff&quot;. In 1971 Heseltine placed his shares in a trust controlled by his ministerial boss Peter Walker and by his solicitor Charles Corman. Haymarket&#x27;s pretax profits were £453,000 in 1971 and £704,000 in 1972. Haymarket was due to be floated as a public company in the autumn of 1973, although this was cancelled because of the rise in the oil price, which reduced the profitability of the publishing industry. They thus avoided the stock market crash which followed. The company remains privately owned to this day.

Heseltine acted as a consultant to Haymarket during his period out of government office between 1974 and 1979. His role was to bring in new publishing ideas. He believed he increased performance, although Robert Heller later recorded that he did very little, for he was too busy as a member of the Shadow Cabinet. He worked from an office at Haymarket, near Regent Street, rather than in the House of Commons. Under the management of Masters and Tindall, Haymarket continued to grow. By 1976 it was making annual profits of round £1.75m. In 1976–1977 Heseltine, Masters, Tindall and the Finance Director David Fraser bought out the consortium&#x27;s 40% share, using money borrowed from them, giving Heseltine and his family over 50% control of Haymarket. Heseltine had taken out large personal loans both to increase his stake in the company and to buy his country mansion Thenford House. Masters had also done the same to buy himself a property. Several titles, including &quot;Accountancy Age&quot; and &quot;Computing&quot; were sold to the rival company VNU in 1980. The transaction raised £17m, half of which went to Heseltine, but in Crick&#x27;s view was a bad move for Haymarket. During Heseltine&#x27;s second period out of office (1986–1990), Masters threatened to resign if Heseltine returned to Haymarket, but once again he became a consultant on £100,000 per annum.

===After 1997: return to business===
By 1997, when his career as a Cabinet minister ended, Haymarket was making an annual profit of over £10m and employing around 1,000 people. Heseltine resumed management of the company after Masters&#x27; retirement in 1999. Haymarket has seen reduced profitability in the UK since 1999, but has expanded further into foreign markets (for example India). It has also laboured under heavy borrowings of over £100 million to buy back Masters&#x27; and Tindall&#x27;s large minority shareholdings, which have been reduced to some extent by the sale of properties. Heseltine has now retired from day-to-day management, handing over to his son Rupert.

Heseltine&#x27;s ownership of Haymarket has made him a large personal fortune. As of 2013 he was ranked 311th in &quot;The Sunday Times&quot; Rich List with an estimated wealth, including shareholdings held by members of his immediate family, of £264 million.

==Electoral history and Parliamentary career==
===Gower 1959 and Coventry 1964===
Heseltine contested the safe Labour seat of Gower at the October 1959 general election. He had been the only applicant for the Conservative (technically, Conservative and National Liberal) candidacy. He would at times attend Labour meetings and attempt to heckle the speakers, including Aneurin Bevan and the Labour candidate Ifor Davies, whom he kept trying to challenge to a debate. He obtained plenty of publicity in the local paper and obtained a swing to the Conservatives slightly better than the national average.

In 1961, Heseltine was one of 29 applicants—of whom half were interviewed—for the Conservative candidacy in the marginal constituency of Coventry North. He clinched the selection after bringing his fiancée Anne Williams to the meeting. He got on well with the incumbent Labour member Maurice Edelman (whose daughter was a friend of Anne Heseltine, as she became in 1962) and they met for dinner sometimes during the campaign. Many of his Oxford contemporaries had already entered Parliament, but, to his disappointment, in the 1964 general election he was defeated by 3,530 votes. The swing to Labour was slightly less than the national average.

===Selection for Tavistock===
In March 1965, Heseltine applied to be candidate for the safe Conservative seat of Tavistock in Devon, where the incumbent MP had announced his retirement two months earlier. Of the 51 applicants, 14 were considered, six of whom had local connections. Heseltine reached the final short list of three, the others being a dairy farmer in a senior position at the Milk Marketing Board (thought to be the favourite), and a local authority lawyer, who later recalled that on the train down from London Heseltine kept jumping out at every stop to check that his magazines were on display at the station newsagents. Heseltine had already spent several days driving round talking to locals and had ordered a year&#x27;s worth of back copies of Tavistock&#x27;s two weekly papers. Such effort is nowadays common in Parliamentary selections but was unusual at the time. He was selected by a clear majority of the Tavistock Conservative Association&#x27;s Finance and General Purposes Committee (which contained between 100 and 120 people).

Heseltine was picked in part as a young, dynamic candidate who could face the challenge of the resurgent Liberal Party in the West Country, where Jeremy Thorpe, Peter Bessell and Mark Bonham Carter had recently won seats. The Liberals had halved the Conservative majority at Tavistock in 1964.

Trouble then arose at his adoption by a full general meeting of the Conservative Association, which should have been a formality. Criticism arose that a person with farming links should have been chosen, for the bikini-clad girls on the cover of &quot;Town&quot; magazine, which were considered risqué at the time, and for jokes in the magazine at the expense of the Royal Family. He was selected after a stirring speech to around 540 assembled members of the local Conservative Association on Friday 26 March 1965. Crick believes that this is a rare example in politics of a single speech determining a career. Only 27 members supported an amendment to refer the matter back to the selection committee and 14 opposed Heseltine&#x27;s adoption altogether. Thereafter his name stopped appearing as &quot;publisher&quot; on his magazines. He had to learn about farming, an important issue in the seat, about which he knew almost nothing.

===MP for Tavistock: 1966–74===
In the March 1966 general election both the Conservative leader Edward Heath and Liberal leader Jo Grimond spoke at Tavistock. Heseltine stressed his agreement with Liberal principles and fought extremely hard, achieving a small swing to the Conservatives, bucking the national trend. He was elected Member of Parliament (MP) for Tavistock.

Heseltine&#x27;s liberal stance on race issues and his opposition to hanging (he felt it was barbaric and not an effective deterrent, although he later expressed openness to the idea of hanging terrorists) was unpopular with many of his constituents, as was his continued unease with agricultural issues, and his dressing as a city businessman in pale grey suits, kipper ties and driving a Jaguar. Despite the huge demands on his time as both an MP and running Haymarket Press, and the distance of the seat from London, he remained relatively active at constituency casework at weekends and during the late summer recess, touring rural areas in a caravan and using a small tape recorder (relatively new technology at the time) to dictate answers to constituents&#x27; problems in front of them.

As soon as Heseltine was elected in March 1966, the seat of Tavistock was recommended for abolition by the Boundary Commission, divided between the new seats of West Devon (effectively a rural seat, where Heseltine would have had to compete for the candidacy with the sitting MP Peter Mills who had a strong local following) and Plymouth Sutton (which had a strong Powellite/Monday Club element—they eventually selected the right-winger Alan Clark). Several of his activists attempted to persuade him to apply for Plymouth Sutton, but he was not interested, wanting a seat nearer London.

In the event, the implementation of the Boundary Review was postponed for partisan reasons until after the next general election by Home Secretary James Callaghan (on the pretext of waiting until after the Redcliffe-Maud Report on local government reorganisation). Heseltine therefore defended Tavistock at the 1970 general election, achieving a better than average swing to the Conservatives.

===MP for Henley: 1974–2001===
Heseltine, by now a junior minister in the Heath government, was now forced to apply for a new candidacy, often in competition with other sitting Conservative MPs whose seats were also due for abolition. He applied for Mid Sussex in competition with Ian Gilmour, but they lost to Tim Renton. He also applied for Mid-Oxfordshire but lost to Douglas Hurd.

In 1972, Edward Heath attempted to persuade Heseltine, a strong supporter of his, to challenge Powellite MP Ronald Bell for the Conservative nomination for the new seat of Beaconsfield. Heseltine wrote that he was &quot;tempted&quot; to enter the lists at Beaconsfield, but did not actually do so. Crick writes that he reached the final shortlist of four against Bell, before being &quot;apparently persuaded&quot; to withdraw. Bell&#x27;s campaign within the local Conservative ranks was masterminded by Hugh Simmonds, chairman of the Young Conservatives, and he narrowly won.

Heseltine was one of 180 applicants for the safe Conservative seat of Henley (the constituency association of which was known as North Oxfordshire), whose MP John Hay was stepping down. He reached the final shortlist of three along with two other sitting MPs, William Shelton and Norman Fowler, and in September 1972 was selected as candidate with a clear majority at the first ballot. Part of the reason was that the Association wanted a wealthy MP who would not be distracted by the need to earn money in business as Hay had been. He maintained a constituency home in Crocker End, near Nettlebed, and still maintained a London home at Wilton Crescent. The constituency is around 40 miles west of central London, and has excellent transport links, making it a prime residential area for London-based professionals.

Heseltine was MP for Henley from February 1974 until his retirement from the House of Commons in 2001.

==Career under Heath: 1966–74==
===Opposition front bencher: 1967–70===
In 1967, Peter Walker invited Heseltine to be opposition spokesman on transport (not a Shadow Cabinet-level position, but reporting to Walker), after he had arranged a successful speaking tour of the West Country for him. Heseltine&#x27;s duties included opposing Barbara Castle&#x27;s 1967 Transport Bill (which eventually became the Transport Act 1968). Heseltine led opposition to the parts of the bill which nationalised small bus companies into the National Bus Company (UK) and set up Passenger transport executives (PTEs) in major urban areas. He criticised Castle for wanting to give PTEs the right to manufacture or produce anything necessary for their function, which as she pointed out was almost word-for-word identical to a clause in the Conservatives&#x27; Transport Act 1962. In 1968 Margaret Thatcher became Heseltine&#x27;s boss for a year; he found her &quot;embarrassingly rude&quot;. Unusually for the time, he employed a full-time researcher, Eileen Strathnaver.

Heath allowed his shadow ministers more leeway than would be normal nowadays. Heseltine was one of a group of 15 Conservative MPs to vote against the 1968 Commonwealth Immigration Bill on second reading (Conservative whips advised their MPs to support it, but it was a free vote). He also voted against the bill on three subsequent votes, arguing that it was based on &quot;sheer naked racialism&quot; and that Britain should honour promises previously made to the Kenyan Asians. Following Enoch Powell&#x27;s Rivers of Blood speech Heseltine publicly urged Heath to deal firmly with him—to the consternation of many in his local party at Tavistock, where Powell enjoyed strong support. Three days later, Heseltine was one of around two dozen Conservative MPs who defied the whip to abstain rather than vote against the second reading of the 1968 Race Relations Bill (which banned racial discrimination). He argued that the Conservatives should state their own alternative policy rather than just oppose.

Heseltine was promoted to principal opposition spokesman on transport in November 1969, although unlike his predecessors Thatcher and Walker, he was not a member of the Shadow Cabinet. He went on a six-week tour of India, Hong Kong, Singapore, Australia and the US to study how their docks were run, in readiness for Labour&#x27;s planned 1970 Docks Bill (which in the event was cancelled because of that year&#x27;s general election).

===Minister: 1970–74===
====Transport and Local Government====
Following the Conservative victory in the 1970 general election, new Prime Minister Edward Heath appointed Heseltine a junior minister at the Department of Transport. Transport had been demoted from a Cabinet position in 1969, when Barbara Castle had been replaced by Fred Mulley. To his disappointment Heseltine, who had been principal spokesman in opposition, was appointed a Parliamentary Under-Secretary, the lowest rung on the ministerial ladder, to John Peyton (himself only a Minister of State rather than a Cabinet Minister). Officials found him brash, arrogant and overbearing, with a very limited attention span for paperwork, although quick to complain if he was not told about things (the trick, they found, was to submit the two-page summaries on each topic which he demanded, but with extensive background documents). He complained to Lord Jellicoe, Minister for the Civil Service, about being given inexperienced civil servants fresh out of university to work in his office. &quot;Pussy – that&#x27;s what they called us. The scum of the earth, tolerated by civil servants&quot; he told the &quot;Sunday Times&quot; (1 May 1983). One of his first duties was to open the Westway A40 (M), and he also opened the stretch of the M4 west of Maidenhead, on which he was shortly afterwards fined £20 for speeding. He insisted on being shown maps&#x27; of where protesters lived, so that he could see the reasons for public concerns at new roads and motorways.

After four months Transport was absorbed into the new &quot;monster ministry&quot; of the Department for the Environment, under Heseltine&#x27;s ally Peter Walker. Heseltine was still responsible for transport, but also for local government reform, covered in the Local Government Act 1972. Redcliffe-Maude&#x27;s proposals for unitary councils (i.e. merging the two layers of county and borough/district councils) were abandoned. Many historic counties were abolished. Large Metropolitan counties were created around the big cities, but many smaller cities lost their county borough status. One such was Plymouth, the eastern suburbs of which lay in Heseltine&#x27;s seat of Tavistock. Plymouth opinion was particularly angry that education was now to be run by Devon County Council in Exeter, 40 miles away. Heseltine declined to support a campaign by Plymouth MP Dame Joan Vickers to create a Tamarside Metropolitan county, and was rebuked by Sir Henry Studholme, his predecessor as MP for Tavistock, for declining to support (on the grounds that as minister he might have to adjudicate any dispute) Plymouth Council&#x27;s attempt to buy more land near Sparkwell to develop light industry under its control.

====Aerospace====
In April 1972 Heseltine was promoted to be Minister for Aerospace, a Minister of State rather than a Cabinet minister but effectively running his own department within the Department of Trade and Industry, another of Heath&#x27;s new mega ministries. The department had been given major new powers by the 1972 Industry Act. Later in the year Peter Walker was appointed Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, making him Heseltine&#x27;s boss once again. Heseltine appointed Cecil Parkinson, whom he had met on an accountancy course in the mid-1950s, as his Parliamentary Private Secretary, ostensibly on the grounds that he knew even less about aerospace than he did. Parkinson was impressed by Heseltine&#x27;s vigour and his insistence that civil servants produce results for him quickly, later writing in his memoirs (1992) &quot;in his constructive and deliberate unreasonableness he reminds me in many ways of Mrs Thatcher&quot;. Heseltine arguably did not make aerospace policy any more interventionist than it already was.

One of Heseltine&#x27;s main jobs was to sell Concorde, which was difficult because of its cost and limited range (it could fly from New York to London or Paris, but not the short extra distance to Rome or Frankfurt) and capacity (a quarter that of a Boeing 747). It had been initiated by Macmillan in 1962 as an Anglo-French project to try to get Britain into the EEC, although by the early 1970s Heath was already broaching cancellation with President Pompidou. BOAC threatened to cancel its order, and Heseltine several times summoned the board, who had threatened to resign &quot;en masse&quot;, to his office, impressing Parkinson by his skills of persuasion. Civil Servants were happy that his love of generating headlines helped the cause of Concorde sales. The Queen, Princess Margaret and Princess Anne were all seen accompanying Heseltine on board Concorde to drum up publicity. In the summer of 1972 he sent Concorde 002 on a tour of Iran, India, Singapore, Japan and Australia. Heseltine and his wife Anne accompanied the plane as far as Singapore (the press joked that Lee Kuan Yew might not let him in with such long hair), and he met it at Toulouse on the way back, but not a single plane was sold. By this stage there were options to sell 74 Concordes to 17 airlines around the world (the original hope had been to sell 30), but this went wrong because of the rises in the oil price in 1973 and 1979; in the event only 10 were ever sold, five each to British Airways (as BOAC had become in 1974) and Air France. Heseltine won praise for his efforts at salesmanship, but some civil servants felt that he was more committed to the plane than Tony Benn had been, and that he should have acted decisively to cut back marketing efforts sooner than he did. He did not mention Concorde at all in his books &quot;Where There&#x27;s A Will&quot; or &quot;The Challenge of Europe&quot;.

Heseltine was a key mover in the setting up of the European Space Agency (ESA) in 1973. He cancelled the British Geostationary Technological satellite and handed back the grant to the Treasury. He was less successful in persuading colleagues to centralise British space expenditure, which was split between the DTI, Defence, the Post Office and the Science Research Council – his attempt to get Margaret Thatcher, Secretary of State for Education and Science, to give up control of the latter, soured their relations. He also favoured pan European cooperation on civil aviation.

Heseltine had almost daily dealings with the industrialist Arnold Weinstock, Head of GEC – as transport minister Heseltine had once summoned him in to the ministry to ask why the electronic signs on the motorway, built by GEC, did not work properly. By May 1973, Weinstock was thought by Cecil King to have a very low opinion of Heseltine, but this later improved and they became friends. Heseltine had started almost from nothing, but Haymarket had only succeeded when bought out by the big conglomerate BPC. This may explain his corporatism, in Crick&#x27;s view, although unlike Jim Prior or Heath, Heseltine had never shown much interest in involving trade unions.

During this period, Heseltine&#x27;s opponent Stanley Clinton-Davis coined his nickname of Tarzan, due to his similarity to Johnny Weissmuller, the actor who had played Tarzan in a number of films in the 1930s and 1940s. The media were quick to follow in Clinton-Davis&#x27;s example. He was caricatured as such, complete with loin-cloth, in the &quot;If&quot; series drawn by satirical political cartoonist Steve Bell. Heseltine has claimed never to have been bothered what people called him, although the nickname amused his wife: &quot;It was quite fun to be married to Johnny Weissmuller&quot;.

====Hovertrain====
Early in 1973, rumours began to circulate that the Tracked Hovercraft (known as the &quot;Hovertrain&quot;), a planned 300 mph floating train on which work had begun in 1967, was to be cancelled. On 12 February 1973, Heseltine gave a written answer on Peter Walker&#x27;s behalf to a written question from Labour MP David Stoddart, that a further injection of government money was still &quot;under consideration&quot;. However, two days later Heseltine appeared before the Select Committee, and revealed that the government had already decided to pull the plug on the Hovertrain on 29 January. Airey Neave believed Heseltine had been lying and urged Stoddart to pursue the matter. The Hovertrain incident came to be regarded as the worst example of lying to the House of Commons since the Profumo affair a decade earlier, and Heseltine survived because full details only emerged during the Parliamentary summer recess.

The committee&#x27;s report in September accused Heseltine of having given an &quot;untrue&quot; answer on 12 February. Heseltine immediately gave a press conference (7 September 1973) in which he denied that he had lied. On the orders of Chief Whip Francis Pym he apologised to the House of Commons on 16 October 1973 for having made a statement which was open to &quot;more than one interpretation&quot;. Heseltine said that his statement that further investment was &quot;under consideration&quot; was not just the normal euphemism for a decision that had not yet been announced, but was actually technically true, as at that time he was still talking to Hawker Siddeley and British Rail about buying part of the Hovertrain business. The row deflected attention from the committee&#x27;s anger at the cancellation decision. Neave&#x27;s real target, in the view of Heseltine&#x27;s PPS Cecil Parkinson, was Heath, whom Neave detested and later helped to topple as party leader in 1975, but he and Sir Harry Legge-Bourke, both of whom had distinguished war records, also deplored Heseltine&#x27;s cutting short of his National Service and his brashness and new money.

Heath does not appear to have been overly bothered about the cancellation of Hovertrain, but was bothered about the mooted third London Airport at Maplin Sands on the Essex Coast, which was seen as a major prestige project along with the Channel Tunnel which was begun at this time. The Bill was threatened by a revolt of Tory backbenchers whose seats were affected, and Heath gave Heseltine a dressing down for his lack of energy in promoting it.

====Assessments====
Heseltine was not popular with his ministerial peers at this time. A story was told of how ministers had volunteered him to be the one &quot;taken hostage by terrorists&quot; in a mooted training exercise. Nonetheless, Heseltine emerged from the Heath government with an enhanced reputation. He had avoided the worst crises of that government: the two miners&#x27; strikes, incomes policy, industrial relations policy and Northern Ireland, as well as any direct involvement in British entry into the EEC. Heseltine&#x27;s career under Heath&#x27;s ministry saw him associated with local government reorganisation, prestige projects, Europe and state aid to industries, themes which would recur throughout his career. He had attained a higher public profile than many Cabinet ministers, and by 1974 he was being seriously tipped as a future prime minister.

Heseltine was promoted to the Shadow Cabinet in June 1974 as Industry spokesman. If the Conservatives had won either of the general elections in 1974 (February or October) he would almost certainly have joined the Cabinet. He was shadowing Tony Benn, who planned a major expansion of public ownership through the National Enterprise Board. In the summer of 1974, Heseltine put together a team of over 20 Conservative MPs, each a specialist in a particular industry, to campaign against Benn&#x27;s plans.

===1975 leadership election===
Heseltine had lost faith in Heath over the second miners&#x27; strike and over Heath&#x27;s personal abrasiveness (Heath had apparently once told him to his face that he was too openly ambitious); his patron Peter Walker had also come to have similar doubts about Heath. Ten days before the October 1974 election, at which Heseltine bucked the national swing by increasing his majority at Henley, he urged Heath to consider his position by the end of the year.

It is unclear how Heseltine voted in the first ballot of the 1975 Conservative leadership election, in which the challenger Margaret Thatcher defeated Heath. Norman Tebbit stated that he and John Nott persuaded him to vote for Thatcher so as to open up the way for his preferred candidate Willie Whitelaw to stand on the second ballot. Another (anonymous) close friend later told Michael Crick that Heseltine voted for Thatcher. The Thatcher team had him down as an abstainer, while he refused at the time to reveal how he voted. In his memoirs Heseltine wrote that he abstained in the first ballot, but that he would have voted for Whitelaw in the first ballot had he stood against Heath. Whitelaw admired his drive and energy but looked down on him as &quot;new Money&quot; and is said to have commented that Heseltine was &quot;the sort of man who combs his hair in public&quot;.

Heseltine toyed with standing himself for the second ballot (in Crick&#x27;s view his vote would very likely have been derisory), but voted for Whitelaw. Thatcher, whom Heseltine like many others had initially regarded as something of a joke candidate, defeated Whitelaw and became party leader.

==Career under Thatcher: 1975–86==
===Opposition: 1975–79===
Heseltine did not work easily with women as senior colleagues, as was shown by the difficulty experienced by Elinor Goodman in obtaining promotion from secretary to journalist at &quot;Campaign&quot;, and his reluctance to let Josephine Hart sit on the Haymarket Board. Heseltine fully expected to be sacked from the Shadow Cabinet by the new leader (as Peter Walker was at this time), but was retained, in part because Thatcher was impressed by his fierce opposition to Benn&#x27;s Industry Bill, and partly because a senior figure, possibly Geoffrey Howe, argued for his retention.

Heseltine first emerged as a platform orator at the Conservative National Council in March 1975, and then at the autumn conferences in 1975 and 1976 (where he likened Labour to a one-legged army marching &quot;Left, left, left&quot;). He dictated his speech ideas beforehand to his scriptwriters, who had to discard a good deal of unintelligible material. His reputation was derived not from any factual content or argument, but from the force and brio of his delivery – it was said of him that he could &quot;find the party&#x27;s clitoris&quot;. There was talk of his being appointed Party Chairman (in charge of the party organisation and of campaigning across the country) in place of Peter Thorneycroft.

In the summer of 1975, Heseltine persuaded the Shadow Cabinet not to oppose the Labour Government&#x27;s bailout of British Leyland because of the risk to marginal seats (including some Cowley workers in northern wards of his own Henley seat). Industry Secretary Tony Benn thought Heseltine intellectually shallow (describing one of his speeches as &quot;an awful old flop&quot; and another as &quot;another flayling attack&quot;) but admired his ability to make headlines in opposition.

The infamous mace incident took place on 27 May 1976 during the Aircraft and Shipbuilding Industries Bill, a measure whose passage had already lasted a year and seen 58 Committee sessions. The Speaker had ruled the bill to be hybrid, as it excluded one shipbuilding company (although there was dispute as to whether the company in question actually was a shipbuilder). All interested parties were therefore entitled to put their case to a special select committee. An earlier vote in favour of the Speaker&#x27;s ruling had been tied, and defeated after the Speaker had been obliged by convention to use his casting vote against his own ruling. The Labour Government now moved to suspend the normal Parliamentary standing order to allow the bill to proceed as normal. This time the Conservatives expected the Speaker to use his casting vote &quot;against&quot; the government&#x27;s motion to suspend the standing order. Instead the Labour motion was carried, after a Labour whip broke his pair. Amid riotous scenes of Labour left-wingers singing &quot;The Red Flag&quot; Heseltine picked up the Mace, the symbol of Parliament&#x27;s authority, until Jim Prior grabbed it off him. Accounts of exactly what happened vary but it seems likely that he was mockingly offering it to the Labour benches, not, as some alleged, &quot;brandishing&quot; it – an illusion caused by Prior pulling his other arm down. Thatcher was furious. Speaker Thomas suspended the sitting and made Heseltine wait until next day to apologise so that tempers could cool. Heseltine was faced with calls for his resignation from the Shadow Cabinet; he thought it would play well with the public, but in Crick&#x27;s view it helped to cement a reputation for impulsiveness and poor judgement.

In autumn 1976 Heseltine was reshuffled, against his will, to the job of Shadow Environment Secretary. He was particularly cross at having to give up the job of Shadow Industry Secretary to John Biffen. He accepted on condition that he would not have to take the Environment job when the Conservatives returned to office. As Benn had given way to Eric Varley there was no longer such a need for aggressive campaigning on Industry, and Thatcher, who had herself been Shadow Environment Secretary in 1974, wanted campaigning on council house sales (Heseltine offered up to 50% discounts for tenants who bought their homes) and reform of the rates, and thought his predecessor Timothy Raison ineffective.

===Secretary of State for the Environment 1979–83===

====Appointment and political stance====
Thatcher was impressed by Heseltine&#x27;s campaigning and love of headlines during the May 1979 election, in contrast to most of the Shadow Cabinet. After the Conservatives had won, and mindful of her earlier promise that he need not take on the Environment job in government, she offered him the Energy Department (an important job following the 1979 energy crisis caused by the Iranian Revolution). He preferred to be Secretary of State for the Environment after all, entering the Cabinet for the first time.

During the macroeconomic disputes of the early 1980s, Heseltine was sometimes associated with the Cabinet &quot;wets&quot; (Peter Walker, Jim Prior, Ian Gilmour, Lord Carrington and Norman St John Stevas) but was not seen as one of them, nor was he invited to their private meetings. Both Nigel Lawson and Cecil Parkinson agreed in their memoirs (1992) that he accepted in principle the need to control public expenditure. He opposed the abolition of exchange controls in 1979 and opposed Geoffrey Howe&#x27;s tight budget in 1981, suggesting a public sector pay freeze instead.

Heseltine favoured privatisation of state owned industries, a novel idea in 1979 as the Conservatives were initially only proposing to denationalise the industries nationalised by Labour in the 1970s.

Despite his initial reluctance to take on the job, Heseltine later described it as &quot;four of the happiest years of my life&quot;. He passed the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981, a conservation measure. He also vetoed the &quot;Green Giant&quot;, a skyscraper on the South Bank, initiated plans for the National Gallery extension (the winning entry was famously described by Prince Charles as &quot;a monstrous carbuncle&quot; and was never built) and signed off on the building of the Queen Elizabeth II Centre on a bomb site near Westminster; when he was unable to secure private funding as planned the Treasury were forced to pay for the building. Some of the DoE&#x27;s responsibilities were hived off into English Heritage, a new body.

====Administering the department====
The Permanent Under-Secretary at the Environment Department, Sir John Garlick, described Heseltine&#x27;s arrival as a change from &quot;a very conservative Labour Secretary of State, Peter Shore, to a very radical Conservative Secretary of State&quot;. On his first day Heseltine took him out to lunch at the Connaught and drew up a list of what he wanted to accomplish in office (the list appears in Heseltine&#x27;s book &quot;Where There&#x27;s A Will&quot;, and was returned to him at the end of his time at the Environment). Only a quarter of Heseltine&#x27;s agenda consisted of manifesto commitments and other political goals; the rest of it consisted of administrative and organisational changes. Peter Hennessy observed that Heseltine was more interested in the nuts and bolts of Whitehall reform than any minister since David Lloyd George. Heseltine was quite ruthless about moving civil servants with whom he was dissatisfied, but nonetheless staff thought he had mellowed somewhat since the early 1970s, and was more relaxed and fun to work with. His permanent secretaries Sir John Garlick and Sir George Moseley thought highly of him. He preferred to reach decisions through informal discussion rather than wading through paperwork. He instituted Peter Walker&#x27;s custom of morning &quot;prayer&quot; meetings (ministers and PPSs with no civil servants present), now common in Whitehall but an innovation at the time.

The department had a budget of £14 billion a year and employed 52,000 people. The Conservatives were pledged to cut 100,000 off the 730,000 strong civil service. On the advice of his junior minister Lord Bellwin, a former leader of Leeds City Council, Heseltine ordered that nobody was to be hired without his personal approval.

Heseltine instituted an internal audit system called &quot;MINIS&quot; (&quot;management information system for ministers&quot;), ironically, in Crick&#x27;s view, as Heseltine&#x27;s own company Haymarket had often been chaotically organised. Peter Hennessy likened it to &quot;a Domesday Book&quot;. Heseltine personally interrogated the heads of department (many of whom felt he was interfering in internal civil service matters). The lengthy reports, showing organisation charts of each of the 66 directorates, expenditure, staff costs and forward plans, were made publicly available. Staff numbers were cut more deeply than in any other Whitehall department; one in twelve had gone within a year and nearly 30%, 15,000, by 1983; local government finance, under Terry Heiser, was the only department to receive extra resources. Thatcher was impressed by MINIS, and in February 1983 Heseltine was invited to give a presentation about them to other senior ministers and civil servants, in the hope that they might be adopted by other departments. There was little interest, but similar concepts were later adopted by Derek Rayner&#x27;s Financial Management Initiative across Whitehall.

====Council house sales====
Heseltine was a convert to the sale of council houses, a policy pioneered by some Conservative local authorities, e.g. Birmingham. He also favoured the policy of giving away houses, a policy first mooted from the backbenches by Peter Walker in the mid-1970s, not least as some local authorities were spending more on maintenance than they were recouping in rents. Thatcher, who was concerned at the reaction from those who had made financial sacrifices to buy their homes, was initially sceptical. After taking office Heseltine issued a circular enabling councils, if they chose, to sell houses at 30% discount and to offer 100% mortgages. The Housing Act 1980 enacting Right to Buy was delayed by a Lords amendment and did not reach the statute book until the end of 1980. Some councils were slow in processing applications (one even threatened to house &quot;problem&quot; families next door to those who bought) and Heseltine made an example of Norwich by setting up a DOE sales office there; Norwich council took him to court and lost. At the time Heseltine permitted councils to use up to 75% of sales receipts for renovating the housing stock, and was angry in later years when this was cut back by the Treasury. Heseltine also insisted on the doubling of rents to encourage buying.

During the 1980s over a million council houses, around 20% of the stock, were sold, and by 1987 Labour had dropped their opposition to the Right to Buy. This was an enormous social change, doing much to increase Conservative support amongst new homeowners and which Heseltine often cites as one of his major achievements. Heseltine noted that, &quot;no single piece of legislation has enabled the transfer of so much capital wealth from the state to the people.&quot; He said that the &#x27;right to buy&#x27; policy had two main objectives: to give people what they had wanted, and to reverse the trend of ever-increasing dominance of the State over the life of the individual. He said: &quot;There is in this country a deeply ingrained desire for home ownership. The Government believe that this spirit should be fostered. It reflects the wishes of the people, ensures the wide spread of wealth through society, encourages a personal desire to improve and modernize one&#x27;s own home, enables parents to accrue wealth for their children and stimulates the attitudes of independence and self-reliance that are the bedrock of a free society.&quot; Many of the homes sold were &quot;street properties&quot; rather than flats, which arguably helped to ghettoise the remaining council tenants on run-down inner city estates. In fact, in Crick&#x27;s view, he deserves only limited credit; it had been a Conservative commitment since 1974, and much of the detailed work was done by his juniors Hugh Rossi (in opposition) and John Stanley (in government).

====Local government finance====
In 1979 the Conservatives were strongly represented in local government, as a result of the unpopularity of the outgoing Labour government. Four of the five council associations were Conservative-controlled. Heseltine was able to persuade them to rein in their spending by 1% each year. Whereas previously overspending councils had received extra rate support grants from Whitehall, after six months Heseltine announced a list of fourteen overspending councils who were to have their grant &quot;cut&quot;, most of them inner London councils and only one of them, Hammersmith &amp; Fulham, Conservative controlled. The move appeared blatantly political as many of the other 114 overspenders were Conservative councils. Council leaders who came to appeal to Heseltine were often humiliated by being interrogated about their budget, to demonstrate their lack of detailed knowledge, before the council treasurer was allowed to speak.

From 1980 to 1981 relations with local government became increasingly confrontational, as Labour made large gains in local elections, with a new generation of council leaders such as Ken Livingstone in London and David Blunkett in Sheffield seeking to generate employment through their councils. Council spending now began to rise again, largely as a result of increases by the GLC, Merseyside and West Midlands councils; whereas Labour votes tended to be poorer and eligible for rate rebates, the burden of higher spending tended to fall on businesses and middle class homeowners. Although councils had already suffered deep cuts under Labour in the 1970s, Heseltine was under pressure from Thatcher and from Conservative MPs and newspapers to cut more. Heseltine&#x27;s initial suggestion, that councils who wanted to increase the rates be forced to submit to re-election, was rejected by the Cabinet, in favour of a proposal that such increases be put to referendum (in Coventry, voters had recently voted by over 7:1 for spending cuts rather than a supplementary rate increase). This proposal in turn was attacked by Conservative backbenchers, both as an infringement of council freedom and a risky precedent for national taxation, both in the Environment Committee and in the debate on a bill which Heseltine introduced and had to withdraw. Heseltine then banned supplementary rates and imposed stiffer sanctions on overspending councils.

Thatcher&#x27;s 1974 pledge to abolish the rates and replace them with a new form of local government funding was still in force. However, the 1979 manifesto made clear that income tax cuts took priority over rates reform. Thatcher also blocked the upward revaluation of property rating values in 1982. A review of rates reform was begun in 1981, in which his junior minister Tom King personally spoke to every single backbench Conservative MP to canvass opinion about the various options. A Green Paper was produced in December 1981, recommending that no single alternative to the rates suggested itself. Thatcher wrote &quot;I will not tolerate failure in this area&quot; in the margin of the report and in the summer of 1982 a new committee was set up under Willie Whitelaw, only to come to much the same conclusion (The eventual solution, a &quot;poll tax&quot;, was rejected both by the Green Paper and by Whitelaw&#x27;s committee).

Heseltine resisted demands by Leon Brittan, the Chief Secretary to the Treasury with whom he already enjoyed a somewhat antagonistic relationship, that central government have power to cap the spending of local authorities. He argued that the worst offenders were the large metropolitan counties (which, ironically, he had helped to create a decade earlier) and that the simplest solution was simply to abolish them. In the event, the 1983 manifesto, after Heseltine had moved to his next job, committed the Conservatives both to abolition of the metropolitan boroughs and to rate capping. When Heseltine objected after the election, Thatcher gave him &quot;one of the most violent rebukes I have ever witnessed in Cabinet&quot; according to Jim Prior, who believed that the issue helped fuel the hostility between Heseltine and Thatcher and Brittan, which would later exhibit itself as the Westland Affair.

In opposition, in the late 1970s, Heseltine had been committed to reducing central government control over local government. In the 1980s, the opposite happened, with no less than 50 Acts of Parliament reducing the powers of local government. In Crick&#x27;s view, although he opposed both rate capping and the poll tax, the overall trend towards centralisation was too strong for him to resist. During his time at Environment Heseltine also brought in compulsory competitive tendering for council services, and helped set up the Audit Commission, whose initial role was to act as an independent supervisor of district auditors of council activities.

====Riots====
Heseltine became the troubleshooter to deal with the explosion of violence in Britain&#x27;s inner cities in the aftermath of the Brixton and Toxteth riots of 1981. Unemployment had reached 20% in Liverpool as a whole, but 60% among young black residents in Toxteth. Tear gas had had to be used, and the Cabinet contemplated deploying the Army. A few weeks before the riots, a Cabinet thinktank had proposed that the area be left to go into &quot;managed decline&quot;. Thatcher visited Merseyside and it was decided that a minister should go for a longer visit. Heseltine was already chairman of the Merseyside Partnership, set up by his predecessor Peter Shore, to channel government money into Liverpool (six other partnerships existed).

Heseltine visited Liverpool accompanied by a dozen or so officials from different ministries. Timothy Raison, a junior Home Office minister, went ostensibly to check on race matters but actually to ensure that Heseltine did not interfere in police matters. Heseltine visited council estates, often accompanied by gangs of grinning children trying to be noticed on television, and his flamboyance as a self-made man went down surprisingly well in a City famous for turning out flamboyant figures in the entertainment industry. He talked to black community leaders, who complained about police bias and brutality, and he later had an awkward private meeting with the Chief constable Kenneth Oxford about the matter. He arranged for the bosses of the leading banks and building societies to tour the area in a coach (they were reluctant until Heseltine&#x27;s PPS Tim Sainsbury persuaded Robin Leigh-Pemberton of NatWest to come), and asked them to each second a bright young manager to the DOE for a year.

Heseltine circulated a 21-page minute to Cabinet on his return, entitled &quot;It Took a Riot&quot;. He proposed a regional office and a review of the status of the Metropolitan Counties, as well as greater government emphasis on Merseyside in future. He had prepared the ground with a small dinner for Whitehall mandarins including Robert Armstrong (Cabinet Secretary) and Ian Bancroft (Head of the Civil Service). However, Thatcher was not impressed, although she agreed to his appointment as Minister for Merseyside for twelve months. Neither was Keith Joseph (Secretary of State for Industry) nor Howe (Chancellor of the Exchequer), who favoured enterprise zones where businesses would be given favourable tax treatment.

Shortly after his appointment as Minister for Merseyside, Heseltine gave his annual party conference speech, in which he condemned talk of repatriation and called for more public spending on inner cities. Although he felt he had taken a risk – the speech was in marked contrast to Norman Tebbit&#x27;s &quot;On Your Bike&quot; speech a few hours later – he received his usual standing ovation and later recorded that it was the one of his speeches of which he was most proud.

In autumn 1981 he visited Liverpool again, this time with a thirty-strong task force of representatives of local employers and civil servants (unusually for the time, drawn from different departments – DOE, DTI and Employment, but not the Home Office this time – Heseltine had been pushing for greater cooperation between departments since the setting up of the European Space Agency in 1973). For the next fifteen months he visited Liverpool for a day almost every week, refusing police protection and often driving himself, persuading business and local government to work together. Colette Bowe, a DTI official who was deputy director of the task force, recorded that Heseltine was the most effective minister she had ever seen at getting the official machine to do his bidding through a mixture of charm and tough questions.

====Inner city development====
Heseltine faced initial suspicion from Labour-led Merseyside Council, but got on well with Sir Trevor Jones, Liberal leader of Liverpool City Council. Jones, also a self-made businessman, got on well with Heseltine, and Jones claimed that Heseltine admitted to him late one night that he was a Liberal at heart, but could not bear the thought of having no realistic chance to win power.

Inspired by the Bundesgartenschauen which had helped to regenerate German cities after the war, Heseltine arranged for the first of five biennial National garden festivals to be held in Liverpool in 1984 (Jones arranged for the council to delegate the bid to the Merseyside Development Corporation, of which he was a director). More than 3 million people eventually attended.

Heseltine arranged for Liverpool to receive unused government grants for other cities (from the Urban Programme), although the money was less than had been clawed back from Liverpool through council spending cuts. He also played an important role in the redevelopment of Albert Dock, the development of Wavertree Technology Park (the land purchased by £10 million of public money) and the development of Cantril Farm estate into Stockbridge Village, arranging for Barratt Developments to build many new houses for owner occupiers.

Heseltine also played an important role in the development of Urban Development Corporations, directly appointed by the minister and overriding local authority planning controls to spend government money on infrastructure. This was a controversial measure in Labour strongholds such as East London, Merseyside and North East England. He obtained a Treasury grant of £77 million to build the Docklands Light Railway, although transport links to Docklands remained inadequate. He opened Britain&#x27;s first Enterprise Zone at Corby in Northamptonshire.

Some criticism was made of his time in Liverpool that he spent a lot of money but generated little in the way of new employment (&quot;I would not blame him for that: Liverpool had defeated better men than Michael Heseltine&quot; commented Lady Thatcher acidly in her memoirs in 1993). Local Labour politicians tended to feel that he had accomplished little, although they acknowledged his good intentions. However a more positive assessment was offered by Michael Parkinson, Professor of Urban Affairs at John Moores University: although he had been sceptical in the 1980s, by 1997 he had come to favour the policies championed by Heseltine: assignment of ministers to regions, development of housing associations and cooperatives, and the channelling of government money through business-led agencies rather than through local government.

===Secretary of State for Defence 1983–86===
====Appointment====
In October 1982 Secretary of State for Defence John Nott announced that he was stepping down from Parliament at the next election. As defence was expected to be a major issue at the election, it made sense to appoint his successor as soon as possible, and Heseltine&#x27;s name was widely touted. Over the winter of 1982–1983 there were frequent rumours that military top brass were lobbying against his appointment, strongly denied to the press by Willie Whitelaw (Home Secretary and &quot;de facto&quot; Deputy Prime Minister) and Chief of Defence Staff Edwin Bramall. Heseltine was appointed in January 1983, with the backing of Nott and Party Chairman Cecil Parkinson.

Bramall had hoped for a period of consolidation after the reorganisations of the early 1980s and the Falklands War. Thatcher felt that Heseltine was &quot;restless&quot; at the Environment, and that he would bring efficiency reforms to Defence, whilst she also wanted to keep him away from economic and social issues. She appointed her Principal Private Secretary Clive Whitmore as Permanent Under-Secretary for Defence (head civil servant for the department – the job had coincidentally fallen vacant).

====Nuclear disarmament and 1983 election====
One of Heseltine&#x27;s main jobs was to campaign against the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND), which had grown in size from 3,000 to 10,000 in three years amid public disquiet about the deployment of Trident and Cruise missiles, and the hawkish rhetoric often employed by Thatcher and US President Ronald Reagan. Nott had had little interest in campaigning and had left the matter to the Minister of State, Peter Blaker, Heseltine&#x27;s contemporary from Oxford. Heseltine put together a small group of seven civil servants called Defence Section 19 (DS19) to brief MPs and other opinion formers, and argue the case for Britain to have nuclear weapons. Some, both in the civil service and out of it, had qualms about using civil servants for what amounted to a political campaigning role. Opinion polls showed the public to be opposed to Trident and Cruise missiles, but also opposed to &quot;unilateral&quot; (&quot;one-sided&quot; as Heseltine insisted on calling it) disarmament, so Heseltine steered the debate away from the former and towards the latter.

At the advice of John Ledlie Heseltine visited at the US Air Base at RAF Greenham Common, and after long prior discussion Heseltine insisted on wearing a combat jacket (not, as was often wrongly asserted, a Flak jacket; Ledlie does not accept Heseltine&#x27;s later claim that he was simply handed it by a military figure to protect his coat from the rain). The jacket was a gift to cartoonists and he wore it on several subsequent visits to military bases. In February 1983 he fell over in the melée (he said at the time that he was pushed) when CND protestors surrounded a meeting of Newbury Conservatives, a propaganda gift, and on Good Friday 1983 he was filmed in West Berlin looking over the wall to the communist east, distracting attention from CND&#x27;s linking of arms round Greenham Common that day.

With a general election looming, Heseltine was keen to associate Labour with CND, and CND with communists and the Soviet Union (ignoring earlier comments by Party Chairman Cecil Parkinson that this was &quot;manifest nonsense&quot; – the media did not pick up on this). He made such a claim in a speech at Exeter in April 1983, and distributed to Tory candidates information about the background of leading members of CND. This had been assembled by Ray Whitney MP, but some of it was suspected of having come from intelligence sources. MI5 agent Cathy Massiter later wrote, in 1985 in &quot;The Observer&quot;, that from 1981 onwards and especially from 1983 she had been asked to pass on to DS19 (the propaganda unit at the Ministry of Defence) information obtained by wiretaps and by an MI5 mole in CID. MI5 bosses refused to pass on classified material about security matters but agreed to pass on information about the political links of CND members. Even this was in breach of the 1952 Directive from Home Secretary David Maxwell-Fyfe that the security services not provide information for party political purposes. Heseltine allowed his deputy Peter Blaker to debate with CND, but refused to do so himself, believing that he would be at a disadvantage against the attractive Joan Ruddock. Blaker did much of the work while Heseltine got the publicity. DS19 was wound up three months after the 1983 election, at which Heseltine was widely credited with helping the Conservatives achieve a landslide victory.

====Administering the department====
Although the Ministry of Defence already had its own &quot;Management Audit&quot; system, Heseltine insisted on introducing his own version of the MINIS system which he had introduced at the Environment. The Ministry of Defence had a budget of £17 million per annum, and employed 246,000 civilians as well as 300,000 in uniform. Whereas the Department of the Environment had 66 directorates, Defence had 156, each headed by a two-star officer or a civil servant of equivalent seniority. The organisation chart took months to design and covered four large sheets of paper. In the event Heseltine was too preoccupied by the political matters to pay much attention to the MINIs reports which had taken so long to produce. Heseltine disliked dealing with paperwork, and insisted on having plenty of time to take decisions, and that all reports sent to him had to be first run past one of his advisers for comments. Staff numbers fell by 20,000 (one in twelve) during Heseltine&#x27;s time at Defence, and many services were privatised, including the Royal Ordnance Factories whilst the Royal Navy Dockyards at Devonport and Rosyth were put under private management.

The three separate service ministries (Admiralty, War and Air) had merged into a single Ministry of Defence in 1981. Heseltine drew up plans on a flight back from Kuwait to merge the services further, so that the three chiefs of staff reported directly to the Chief of Defence Staff instead of being treated as colleagues, whilst some supply services were to be merged. The plans were bounced onto the Chief of Defence Staff, Field Marshal &quot;Dwin&quot; Bramall, over a weekend before publication on Monday, so senior officers had minimal time to drum up opposition in Parliament and the press. There was around three months of protest in the press, including from Bramall&#x27;s predecessor Admiral of the Fleet Sir Henry Leach. Bramall obtained the concession that the individual service chiefs would be allowed to retain small staffs of their own and have a right of appeal to the Prime Minister. The changes took effect at the start of 1985.

Bramall admired Heseltine&#x27;s &quot;great drive&quot; and his &quot;style, energy and vision about Europe&quot;, but was displeased at Heseltine&#x27;s rudeness. It was not uncommon for Heseltine to summon him to a meeting early in the day, then keep Bramall &quot;on hold&quot; all day as he kept putting back the meeting, and eventually earning himself a rebuke for failing to display the respect with which every officer in the armed forces is trained to treat his subordinates. A number of senior officers spoke of Heseltine in scathing terms, for example for his self-centredness, to Michael Crick when he was researching his biography. Crick observes that with the exception of some defence chiefs, many people who worked with Heseltine came to &quot;admire and respect him&quot;, although those who see him from afar are more suspect.

====The sinking of the &quot;Belgrano&quot;====
Heseltine took a hard line on civil liberties issues. He supported Thatcher&#x27;s attempt to ban trade unions from GCHQ. He supported the prosecution of Sarah Tisdall for leaking his public relations plans for the arrival of cruise missiles in 1983.

Before Heseltine&#x27;s arrival at the Ministry of Defence, Tam Dalyell had exposed inconsistencies in ministerial accounts of the sinking of the Argentinian warship &quot;ARA General Belgrano&quot; during the Falklands War of 1982, and alleged that the ship had been sunk to sabotage Foreign Office attempts to negotiate peace via Washington and Peru. Heseltine, apparently worried that there might be a scandal comparable to Watergate, asked Clive Ponting, a civil servant who had played an important role in Derek Rayner&#x27;s efficiency reforms, to draw up a detailed report into the sinking of the &quot;Belgrano&quot;. At the end of March 1984 Ponting attended a series of meetings with Heseltine. He and the Permanent Under-Secretary Clive Whitmore wanted to disclose further information to reveal that the &quot;Belgrano&quot; had been spotted a day earlier than had previously been admitted. John Stanley, thought to be Thatcher&#x27;s eyes and ears in the Ministry of Defence, initially opposed it, but Thatcher was persuaded that a letter should be sent to the Opposition Defence Spokesman Denzil Davies. However, both Heseltine and Thatcher rejected Ponting&#x27;s draft which would have admitted for the first time that the Belgrano had been sighted a day earlier and stated that she was sailing away from the British taskforce when sunk. Ponting later stated that Stanley had asked Thatcher to overrule Heseltine on the matter; he withheld information not just from Dalyell but from the Commons Foreign Affairs Committee, which was conducting its own inquiry, citing national security considerations.

Six days after Heseltine&#x27;s letter to Denzil Davies, Ponting sent Davies an anonymous note stating that the letter had been written according to the advice of John Stanley, but contrary to the advice of civil servants, and suggesting other potential lines of inquiry. Three months later he sent two documents exposing the alleged cover up. Heseltine strongly supported, and by some accounts pushed for, the prosecution of Ponting (Ministry of Defence police had advised against, but the Solicitor-General Sir Patrick Mayhew urged that he should be). Heseltine later said that Thatcher had not been involved in the decision to prosecute. Neither Heseltine nor Stanley were called as witnesses at Ponting&#x27;s trial in January 1985 (Richard Mottram, Heseltine&#x27;s Private Secretary, gave evidence on behalf of the Ministry of Defence). To general surprise Ponting was acquitted. A week later Heseltine launched a stinging seventy-minute attack on Ponting in the House of Commons, and a year later he walked out of a Channel 4 News studio on being told that a recorded interview with Ponting was also to be shown. Stanley was seen as the villain of the piece, whereas Heseltine had merely declined to correct false statements made by others.

====NATO====
The Foreign Secretary, Geoffrey Howe, spoke highly of Heseltine&#x27;s contribution to NATO and WEU conferences. Heseltine was as angry as Thatcher at the US invasion of Grenada, a Commonwealth country. He wanted warmer relations with the Soviets and was sceptical about the US Strategic Defense Initiative (&quot;Star Wars&quot;), putting in a brief and grudging appearance at Caspar Weinberger&#x27;s Ditchley Park Conference about the topic in 1985.

Heseltine came close to misleading the House of Commons over the meeting of NATO defence ministers at Montebello, Quebec, in October 1983. He stated that no &quot;specific&quot; proposals had been made to update NATO short range and tactical nuclear weapons. In fact a decision had been made &quot;in principle&quot; to do so. Crick describes Heseltine&#x27;s answers as &quot;highly disingenuous and deceitful&quot;. At the time NATO was claiming to be cutting back on such weapons, and the peace movement was still powerful in Germany where such weapons might be used.

====Defence procurement====
The Defence budget was protected by a NATO commitment to increase defence spending by 3% per annum until 1986, but was still subjected to cuts in the proposed budget during Heseltine&#x27;s tenure. Some senior military figures felt that Heseltine was obsessed with the minutiae of running the department rather than thinking strategically about defence priorities and procurement. Dwin Bramall recalled that Heseltine never showed an interest in the strategy papers he sent him. Thatcher was highly critical of him for failing to take a decision on the development of the Nimrod early-warning plane, on which £660 million was spent over a ten-year period, only for the project to be cancelled by his successor. Some accusations were raised (the Commons Select Committee on Defence thought him &quot;vague and evasive&quot; on the issue in 1985) that the accounts were being massaged to push costs into the period after 1986, when cuts would become inevitable. The journalist Hugo Young later recalled Heseltine briefing journalists confidentially that spending and funding could be reconciled until 1986, by which time he expected &quot;to be gone&quot;.

In Cabinet, Heseltine resented being kept out of economic debates and suspected he might be reshuffled to the job of Secretary of State for Northern Ireland as Jim Prior had been. He had tried to pursue a one-man industrial policy, as defence spent £17 billion per annum, 5% of UK GDP, half of it on procurement, and 90% of that in the UK, with 700,000 British jobs dependent on it. Heseltine was unhappy at the way defence contracts were often awarded on a cost-plus basis (i.e. agreeing to pay the supplier a certain amount over and above his costs, leaving no incentive to keep costs to a minimum). In 1985 he promoted his special adviser Peter Levene to be Chief of Defence Procurement; special arrangements had to be made to ensure that Levene did not make decisions affecting his own defence company United Scientific Holdings, of which the former Permanent Secretary Sir Frank Cooper was now chairman, and he was paid £95,000 per annum plus £12,000 in pension contributions, more than the Prime Minister or senior civil servants. Thatcher agreed to Levene&#x27;s appointment over civil service objections. He abolished cost-plus pricing of contracts and stated that he had trimmed 10% off the defence equipment budget by 1989 through greater competitive tendering; enough, as Heseltine put it, to pay for the Trident nuclear missile programme.

It had been agreed to spend £280m for two Type 22 frigates. Norman Tebbit (Trade and Industry Secretary), with the backing of the Cabinet, wanted them built at Swan Hunter in the North East, but Heseltine threatened resignation in January 1985 unless at least one was built at Cammell Laird on Merseyside, at a cost of an extra £7 million, where Type 22s had been built before. Thatcher let him have his way after he persuaded her that it would reward shipyard workers who had crossed picket lines during a recent strike, but was privately furious, and keen to keep defence costs down in future by buying American equipment.

Heseltine also favoured European cooperation in defence procurement, feeling that this allowed Europe to compete with US firms which receive huge orders from The Pentagon. Crick argues that his experience of Concorde in the early 1970s should have warned him that such multinational ventures are problematic and, because of the political capital invested, hard to cancel when things go wrong. Heseltine played an important role in persuading West German defence minister Manfred Wörner to back the joint Anglo-German-Spanish-Italian Eurofighter, and contrary to the wishes of Thatcher (and previous defence secretary John Nott) who preferred an American or British fighter. Cabinet refused to allow a loosening of the specifications to allow French company Dassault to become involved in the consortium. Agreement was reached at Turin in August 1985.

Heseltine also sold 132 Tornados for £4bn to Saudi Arabia later in 1985, accepting oil instead of cash (to the displeasure of Peter Walker, Energy Secretary) so that they would buy British rather than US aircraft. This later formed part of the controversial Al-Yamamah arms deal, the main part of which was signed in 1988.

===Westland Affair===
====Background====
In spring 1985 Heseltine displayed little interest in Westland helicopters when approached by Tebbit (then Secretary of State for Trade and Industry) at the time of Alan Bristow&#x27;s bid for the company, as plenty of American helicopters were available to meet Britain&#x27;s defence requirements. He attended two meetings about the company&#x27;s future in June 1985, chaired by Thatcher. Heseltine, who had a poor opinion of Westland&#x27;s management, was willing to inject £30 million, provided the Treasury contributed half. The idea was not approved.

Heseltine took against the new chairman Sir John Cuckney&#x27;s plan that Westland merge with United Technologies Corporation, of which the US company Sikorsky was a subsidiary, after realising that Westland would probably become responsible for assembling the Sikorsky UH-60 Black Hawk helicopter, which the Ministry of Defence would then be under great pressure to buy, whereas he preferred Westland to go into receivership so that GEC and British Aerospace could buy the viable parts of the business.

In mid-October Heseltine suggested a European consortium (which would include French Aérospatiale, German MBB and Italian Agusta). The new Trade and Industry Secretary Leon Brittan at first urged Thatcher to consider a European option (Heseltine later said Brittan &quot;preferred&quot; this option, although Brittan denied this). The Government was officially neutral (i.e. arguing that it was a matter for Westland directors and shareholders) but by November Heseltine was pushing the European option hard. In late November Peter Levene, Chief of Procurement, had a meeting at the Ministry of Defence with his French, German and Italian counterparts (the National Armaments Directors) and the representatives of the consortium, and agreed to &quot;buy European&quot; for certain classes of helicopters, although Heseltine was not actually present. The meeting was later praised by the House of Commons Defence Select Committee. Thatcher, who only learned of the meeting through Cuckney, was displeased, as were Brittan and the Treasury, who thought the US option might be cheaper.

====The cancelled meeting====
In early December Thatcher had two &quot;ad hoc&quot; meetings with Heseltine, Brittan, Tebbit, William Whitelaw (Deputy Prime Minister), Geoffrey Howe (Foreign Secretary) and Nigel Lawson (Chancellor of the Exchequer). Howe and Tebbit were not unsympathetic to Heseltine&#x27;s proposed consortium, and the decision was deferred to the Cabinet Economic Affairs Committee (E(A)) on Monday 9 December 1985. After that meeting Thatcher, who complained that three hours had been spent discussing a company with a market capitalisation of only £30m (a tiny amount in government terms), allowed Heseltine until 4pm on Friday 13 December to submit a viable proposal for a European deal. He did (with British Aerospace and GEC now part of his consortium), but Westland&#x27;s directors rejected it. Heseltine had expected that there would be a second meeting of E(A) to discuss his consortium, but no such meeting was called; Thatcher later stated that the Monday meeting had agreed to leave the decision to Westland to take, but it later emerged that Ridley and Lord Young &quot;had&quot; placed such a meeting in their diaries and had been told by Number Ten that it had been cancelled. Heseltine threatened resignation for the first time.

Heseltine raised his concerns with Tebbit, Whitelaw and John Wakeham (Chief Whip). At Cabinet on Thursday 12 December he had an angry exchange with Thatcher about the cancelled meeting, but Westland was not on the agenda for the meeting and Thatcher refused to permit a discussion on the matter, arguing that Cabinet could not do so without the necessary papers. Heseltine asked for his dissent to be minuted, and this was not done, although Cabinet Secretary Robert Armstrong stated that this had been an error and added it himself. On Monday 16 December Heseltine sat on the front bench with obvious disapproval when Brittan told the House that it was up to Westland to decide; on Wednesday 18 December he won the backing of the Commons Defence Committee for the European Consortium. On Thursday 19 December the matter was discussed at Cabinet for ten minutes: Cabinet approved leaving the decision to Westland and Heseltine was ordered to cease campaigning for the European option. Heseltine had failed to drum up enough support among possible allies like Tebbit, Howe, Walker, Norman Fowler and Tom King. A ministerial colleague at the time described him as &quot;absolutely looney, completely hyped up with the thing&quot; and of having a &quot;persecution mania&quot;.

====Mayhew&#x27;s leaked letter====
By now the political row was being discussed in the media, partly because of the lack of other news in December. Cuckney wrote to Thatcher, at her behest, asking for reassurance that the Sikorsky deal would not damage Westland&#x27;s business prospects in Europe. Heseltine was not satisfied with Thatcher&#x27;s draft reply when he saw it and consulted Sir Patrick Mayhew (Solicitor-General and acting Attorney-General as Sir Michael Havers was ill) on the grounds that the government might be legally liable for any incorrect advice. Heseltine supplied extra material about the risk of losing European business, which Thatcher did not include in her reply to Cuckney. Heseltine then wrote to David Horne of Lloyds Merchant Bank, who was advising the European consortium (in reply to planted questions from Horne which had been dictated to him over the phone by one of Heseltine&#x27;s staff), giving him the advice which Thatcher had declined to include in her letter to Cuckney (that the Sikorsky deal would be &quot;incompatible with participation&quot; in European helicopter projects). Heseltine&#x27;s letter was also leaked to the press. This was a blatant challenge to Thatcher&#x27;s authority as Heseltine had not consulted Downing Street, the Department of Trade and Industry or Mayhew before writing to Horne.

Thatcher discussed sacking Heseltine with close colleagues over Christmas; but, as she later admitted in her memoir, refrained from doing so as he was too popular and important as a political figure. She also decided against sending him a letter threatening him with the sack, which had been drafted. Instead she asked Mayhew to write to Heseltine complaining of what he thought were &quot;material inaccuracies&quot; in his letter to Horne, and asking Heseltine to write to Horne again, correcting them. Mayhew&#x27;s letter of rebuke to Heseltine – marked &quot;Confidential&quot; – reached Heseltine at lunchtime on Monday 6 January and was immediately leaked to the press by Colette Bowe, an information officer at the Department of Trade and Industry, at Brittan&#x27;s request (some years later he admitted that he acted on the &quot;express&quot; instructions of Charles Powell and Bernard Ingham, Thatcher&#x27;s two senior advisers). Heseltine was able to produce extra documents which Mayhew accepted as backing up his letter to Horne, but not before &quot;The Sun&quot; had called Heseltine &quot;You Liar!&quot; on its front page (the newspaper was later required to make a donation to charity in lieu of libel damages).

====Resignation====
Cabinet met on the morning of Thursday 9 January, with Thatcher already having agreed her position with close colleagues at Chequers that weekend, and arranged that Scottish Secretary George Younger should take over as Defence Secretary if Heseltine resigned. Westland was first on the agenda, and Heseltine and Brittan were permitted to put their cases. Heseltine had won the moral high ground over the leaking saga, but Lawson recorded that he seemed obsessive at Cabinet and attracted little sympathy. Thatcher then reiterated her position, which had already been endorsed by the Cabinet, that Westland&#x27;s future was a matter for Westland to decide, and announced that on grounds of Collective responsibility all answers to questions about Westland must in be cleared through the Cabinet Office. In response to a question by Nicholas Ridley (a friend of Heseltine) she confirmed that this also applied to statements which had &quot;already&quot; been made. After further questions from Heseltine, and another summing up by Thatcher, Heseltine protested that there had been no collective responsibility, gathered up his papers and left the Cabinet Room. Eyewitness accounts differ as to his exact words, or even whether he explicitly resigned. By one account he declared, &quot;I can no longer be a member of this Cabinet&quot;. Having allegedly paid a quick visit to the lavatory to straighten his hair and his Guards tie, Heseltine announced his resignation to the waiting press outside Number Ten, the first Cabinet minister to resign from a Cabinet meeting since Joseph Chamberlain in 1886. Some ministers (for example Peter Walker) and civil servants believed Heseltine could have been persuaded to return had it not been for the public announcement.

At 4pm that day Heseltine delivered a 3,000 word, 22 minute resignation statement at the Ministry of Defence (rather than waiting to make a statement to the House of Commons when it resumed four days later). He may well have prepared this earlier, although his private secretary Richard Mottram says not. To Thatcher&#x27;s fury Defence officials had helped him throughout the crisis and in preparing this document. His statement denounced Thatcher&#x27;s managerial style and suggested she was a liar who lacked integrity. Thatcher later said during a television interview that she had not sacked him or called him to order before the incident because, “Had I done that, I know exactly what the press would have said: there you are, old bossyboots at it again.”

====Fallout from the affair====
Unlike when Peter Thorneycroft (Chancellor of the Exchequer) resigned in 1958 or Lord Carrington (Foreign Secretary) in 1982, Heseltine&#x27;s junior ministers Norman Lamont and John Lee did not resign with him. Heseltine was portrayed by &quot;Spitting Image&quot; as a swivel-eyed lunatic holding a toy helicopter.

Brittan had to resign, partly as a result of fallout from the leak of the Mayhew letter, and partly because of his failure to give an entirely truthful answer to the House of Commons about Heseltine&#x27;s accusation that he had pressured British Aerospace to withdraw from the European Consortium. Thatcher survived the Westland debate on 27 January, aided by a poor and long-winded speech by Opposition Leader Neil Kinnock. Sikorsky bought Westland.

Up until Westland, Thatcher had approved of most of what Heseltine had done, even though their politics were rather different. Heseltine and Thatcher had quarrelled openly over a question of relations between Britain and the European Community (as it then was). Apart from the clash of personalities, and the escalation of small issues into bigger issues, it has been suggested that Heseltine, concerned at impending Defence cuts in 1986, and worried that Thatcher was unlikely to promote him further, was looking for an excuse for a resignation, which would put him in good stead to be elected party leader after, as seemed likely at the time, the Conservatives would lose the next election due by summer 1988.

==Out of office: 1986–90==
===Campaigning===
Heseltine was not one to befriend and gossip with colleagues or backbenchers. He did not regard this as an insurmountable problem, as neither Heath nor Thatcher had been particularly &quot;clubbable&quot; either. From about the mid-1970s, he began a campaign of addressing local associations, sometimes using a helicopter to speak to several in one day. Heseltine had often had a reputation for being very cold and aloof with backbench MPs and party activists (Steven Norris said that after a visit to his constituency in 1983, local activists used a poster of Heseltine as a dartboard). However, in 1986–1990 he was a frequent visitor to local constituency dinners, although he usually attacked Labour rather than the Conservative government, and he used his wealth to afford a chauffeur and a helicopter.

Heseltine campaigned in 100 constituencies in the 1987 election, attracting more publicity than many Cabinet ministers, although seldom mentioning Thatcher by name.

During this period Heseltine enjoyed excellent relations with the media: among TV journalists he was in regular touch with Elinor Goodman of &quot;Channel 4 News&quot; (herself a former Haymarket employee), James Mates of ITN (son of his lieutenant Michael Mates) and John Cole, whilst among print journalists he was close to his old friend Anthony Howard (Deputy Editor of the Observer), Peter Jenkins, and especially close to Anthony Bevins of &quot;The Independent&quot; and the young Alastair Campbell of the &quot;Daily Mirror&quot;.

===Books===
Heseltine&#x27;s book &quot;Where There&#x27;s A Will&quot; was written by a team of ghostwriters directed by Keith Hampson and Julian Haviland (former political editor of ITN and &quot;The Times&quot;). Academics, businessmen and economists contributed, and he often had them thresh out ideas in front of him. &quot;He acquires by social intercourse the knowledge that other people acquire by reading&quot;, one adviser commented. The collated drafts were then rewritten by Haviland to &quot;give it one voice&quot;. Hugo Young called it &quot;the most impressive [book of its kind] I&#x27;ve read by a modern Conservative&quot;.

Heseltine&#x27;s second book, &quot;The Challenge of Europe: Can Britain Win?&quot;, appeared in 1989. Heseltine was in close touch with President of the European Commission Jacques Delors, who paid a 3-hour visit to his Victoria office, diplomats Nicholas Henderson and Antony Acland and economist Christopher Johnson, who is thought to have persuaded him of the merits of European monetary union. The book won a £10,000 Adolphe Bentincke prize for advancing European unity. Heseltine was a qualified supporter of the social charter (a stronger precursor to the Social Chapter from which John Major would later opt out in the Maastricht Treaty). He was seen as devoted to Europe as a matter of what he perceived as Britain&#x27;s self-interest, not on an emotional level like Edward Heath, Roy Jenkins or Kenneth Clarke.

===Policies===
Out of office Heseltine called for money, including the receipts from council house sales, to be spent on infrastructure investment instead of tax cuts. He also called for reductions in tax relief on mortgage interest payments and pension contributions, in the hope of encouraging investment into industry rather than into property and finance, echoing views being promoted by Will Hutton at the time.

Heseltine also took an interest in the reduction of long-term unemployment, advocating Swedish-style Workfare. A pamphlet by Richard Layard on the topic would have been published under Heseltine&#x27;s name had it not been for his return to government at the end of 1990. Several of Heseltine&#x27;s advisers at this time were SDP supporters, and in some cases later defected to Labour; Crick commented (in 1997) that Heseltine&#x27;s views at this time were very similar to those later advocated by Tony Blair&#x27;s New Labour.

===Differences with the government===
Heseltine&#x27;s resignation in January 1986 had been just before the only occasion on which the Poll Tax was discussed in Cabinet. He spoke against the tax when it was enacted into law in 1987–1988, but abstained rather than voting against as Edward Heath did, although he voted for Michael Mates&#x27; amendment which tried to introduce an element of banding according to ability to pay. Heseltine remained aloof from factional plotting in the Commons, and voted with the left-wing Lollard faction in backbench committee elections. Heseltine later said that he regretted resigning from the Cabinet in 1986, as he subsequently often wondered if he and Nigel Lawson might have been able to persuade Thatcher to abandon the tax.

Heseltine clashed bitterly at this time with his former friend Nicholas Ridley. Ridley was a Eurosceptic, a free marketer, a champion of the poll tax and a key ally of Thatcher. Heseltine argued that there was too much green belt building (although in fact only slightly more so than he had himself authorised as Environment Secretary) and stated that as a property developer he had never built on a &quot;green&quot; site, forgetting that he had done so in Tenterden in the early 1960s.

===Leadership rival===
Although (or perhaps because) many of Heseltine&#x27;s policy positions were not far removed from those of Labour, which was shifting to the right under Kinnock, he kept up his Conservative credentials at this time. In alliance with Norman Tebbit he persuaded ministers to abolish the Inner London Education Authority. He also supported the government&#x27;s planned market-led reforms to the NHS and water privatisation in 1989. He also spoke out frequently on defence matters, supported the government&#x27;s ban on &quot;Spycatcher&quot;, the new Official Secrets Act 1989 and called for an independent Bank of England, although perhaps as a stepping stone to the setting up of a European Central Bank.

One of the reasons which Thatcher gave to close confidants for not retiring on her tenth anniversary as Prime Minister (May 1989) was worry that Heseltine would defeat Geoffrey Howe in any subsequent leadership election. Opinion polls showed that Heseltine would boost Conservative support by 13 percentage points – enough to overtake Labour. Sir Anthony Meyer wanted to see Heseltine as leader and only went ahead with his December 1989 leadership challenge to Thatcher on being assured by Keith Hampson that it would not damage Heseltine&#x27;s chances; in the event Heseltine apparently walked up and down the corridor outside the voting booth making clear that he was abstaining. While Thatcher won the contest, winning the votes of 85% of Conservative MPs, the next day&#x27;s &quot;Glasgow Herald&quot; reported that Heseltine&#x27;s supporters predicted that unless she changed &quot;her style of leadership&quot;, she would &quot;be on her way out next year&quot;.

In spring 1990 Thatcher&#x27;s political fortunes were looking weaker, as the Conservatives were badly defeated at the Mid Staffordshire by-election and the Poll tax riots took place. But despite Conservative losses at the local elections, Party Chairman Kenneth Baker spun the result as a success by pointing to the Conservative hold of Westminster and Wandsworth Councils, where the poll tax was low. In May 1990, following the elections, Heseltine wrote an article in &quot;The Times&quot; proposing reform of the poll tax – he called for the tax to be banded according to income, for councils which spent more than a certain level to face mandatory elections, for elected local mayors and for the restoration of the unitary county boroughs (i.e. making smaller cities into counties in their own right, so ending the confusion as to whether county or district council were responsible for high spending) which he himself had abolished. However, the Iraqi Invasion of Kuwait in August 1990, which made war seem likely, boosted Thatcher&#x27;s popularity.

===1990 leadership contest===

Heseltine was being quietly urged to challenge Thatcher for the party leadership by David Mellor, the Arts Minister, but in a carefully worded formula Heseltine had repeatedly insisted that he could &quot;not foresee ... circumstances&quot; in which he would do so. Then came the Conservative defeat at the Eastbourne by-election (18 October) and the resignation of Deputy Prime Minister Geoffrey Howe (1 November).

Heseltine wrote a six-page public letter to his local Association chairman, calling for more regard for the wide range of opinions in the party. Heseltine then left for the Middle East to visit King Hussein of Jordan and Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir. Association officers sent him a 97-word reply (5 November) saying that they supported Thatcher&#x27;s leadership. The party&#x27;s regional agent had been present at their meeting, but they insisted he had not interfered with their reply. Round about the same time Thatcher&#x27;s press secretary Bernard Ingham briefed journalists that Heseltine had &quot;lit the blue touch paper then retired&quot;, although he denied having demanded that Heseltine &quot;put up or shut up&quot;; the &quot;Daily Mail&quot; front page asked &quot;does he have the courage?&quot; and &quot;The Times&quot; commented that if he did not throw his hat into the ring he would deserve to have it &quot;stuffed down his throat&quot;. Thatcher brought the annual leadership election forward by a fortnight, causing Alastair Campbell to write in the &quot;Daily Mirror&quot; that &quot;Tarzan the Tory Ape Man had made a right monkey of himself&quot;. A week later, after meeting Heseltine, the constituency officers issued another letter saying that they regretted how their reply had been construed as criticism.

Then came Howe&#x27;s resignation speech in the Commons on 13 November, in which he launched a strong attack on Thatcher; next morning Heseltine announced his candidacy for the leadership, saying that over 100 MPs had asked him to stand and that he was better placed than Thatcher to lead the Tories to a fourth election victory.

During the subsequent leadership election on 20 November, he polled 152 votes (40.9%) in the first round of voting by Conservative MPs, enough to prevent an outright Thatcher victory. (The rules required an incumbent leader to obtain a majority of at least 15% on a first ballot; Thatcher polled 204 votes, equal to 54.8%). Heseltine was thought by many pundits to be on course to beat her in the second ballot as many Conservative MPs were now rumoured to be ready to switch support from Thatcher and only 27 would had to have done so to give Heseltine the overall majority he would need in the second ballot.

With lukewarm support from her Cabinet, most of whom had told her that she could not win and faced with the bitter prospect of a Heseltine premiership, Thatcher withdrew from the contest and announced her resignation on the morning of 22 November, although she continued to serve as prime minister until a new party leader had been chosen.

Heseltine was disappointed not to receive the support of old allies on the second ballot; these included Secretary of State for Defence Tom King (whom he asked in vain to second his nomination, but who was angry at a leadership contest when British troops were soon to go to war in Kuwait and supported Douglas Hurd), Cecil Parkinson and Norman Lamont (who managed John Major&#x27;s campaign). Over the weekend on 24–25 November, many Conservative MPs were faced with the anger of their local party members who overwhelmingly supported Thatcher but did not at that time have a vote in leadership elections, and opinion polls showed that chancellor John Major would also boost Conservative support if leader (previously Heseltine&#x27;s unique selling-point). Heseltine had never done much to court support among younger MPs the way Major had, and was seen as aloof even by his own supporters. In the second ballot, a week after the first, Heseltine&#x27;s vote actually fell to 131 (just over 35%) as some MPs had voted for him in the first ballot as a protest against or to try to oust Thatcher but preferred to vote for other candidates now that they had a wider choice. John Major, with 185 votes, was only two votes short of an overall majority. Heseltine immediately and publicly conceded defeat, announcing that he would vote for Major if the third ballot went ahead (it did not, as Hurd, who had finished a distant third, also conceded).

Although for the rest of his career Heseltine&#x27;s role in Thatcher&#x27;s downfall earned him enmity from Thatcher&#x27;s supporters in the Conservative party, this opprobrium was not universal. In a reference to the reluctance of the Cabinet to support Thatcher on the second ballot, Edward Leigh said of Heseltine: &quot;At least he stabbed her in the front&quot;.

Heseltine believed that he would have defeated Thatcher if she had contested the second ballot. It has been suggested that &quot;he&quot; should have withdrawn after weakening her on the first ballot, and that he would have been restored to the Cabinet whether or not she continued as prime minister; he writes that this was never seriously suggested at the time.

==Career under Major: 1990–1997==
===Second term as Environment Secretary: 1990–1992===
Heseltine disappointed many of his supporters by not pushing for them to get jobs in Major&#x27;s new administration. Ian Grist was sacked from the Welsh Office and Michael Mates was eventually given a Minister of State position following the 1992 election. There were suggestions that Heseltine might be appointed Home Secretary, but Heseltine advertised his lack of interest in the position, and Major insisted that he had not offered it to him. By contrast, his enthusiasm for industrial policy made it impossible for him to be appointed Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, the job he most coveted.

After a handshake of reconciliation on the steps of 10 Downing Street, Major appointed Heseltine to the Environment, the same job he had held a decade earlier. Civil servants found him a more secure and mature character the second time round, and keener to conciliate local councils, but at the same time a grander and more detached individual, aware that he had already earned a place in history and had the aura of a political heavyweight.

In a May 1990 article Heseltine had proposed that the Poll Tax be reformed rather than abolished. He now had a remit to reform it, and invited the opposition parties to take part in his review of options (Labour did not; the Liberal Democrats did, and proposed a local income tax). Heseltine insisted that Michael Portillo, who had been a major cheerleader for the tax, be retained as Minister of State for Local Government. Portillo and Robert Key handled the detail and presented Heseltine with a list of options. Various options were leaked to the press to test public reaction, and at one point Heseltine appeared to have settled on a tax graded both according to the size of the property and the number of adults living in it. Major was exasperated by the lack of progress and intervened, and – at Major&#x27;s insistence – Chancellor Norman Lamont increased VAT by 2.5 percentage points to 17.5% in his April 1991 budget so as to provide a £4.5bn subsidy to bring poll tax bills down. Eventually, as expected, the poll tax was abolished and the new Council Tax was graded according to the size of a property, with the only concession to headcount being a single-person discount. In Crick&#x27;s view, the outcome was much more Sarah Hogg&#x27;s and Portillo&#x27;s and Major&#x27;s doing than Heseltine&#x27;s.

Heseltine was permitted by his colleagues to explore the option of elected city mayors, although it did not meet with Cabinet approval; other ministers were concerned at the likelihood that cities would elect Labour mayors or that there might be deadlock between mayors and local councils. Heseltine also explored the option of unitary authorities (i.e. merging district and county councils), setting up what came to be known as the Banham Commission. Crick regards the commission as a mistake for which Heseltine has received too little blame. The proposals rumbled on for several years, causing annoyance to many Conservative councillors and to their backers in Parliament. The commission was reconstituted and scaled down by the then Environment Secretary John Gummer in 1995.

In the summer of 1991 Heseltine also launched a City Challenge process, whereby cities competed for government grants for capital projects, and played a key role in Major&#x27;s decision to back Manchester&#x27;s (unsuccessful as it turned out) bid to host the 1996 Olympic Games. He also proposed plans for developing an East Thames corridor (christened &quot;Hezzaville&quot; or &quot;Heseltown&quot; by the media).

Heseltine received a standing ovation at the October 1991 Party Conference, seen as a sign of his rehabilitation with party activists, and was included on the A-Team to prepare for the 1992 election. He mocked Shadow Chancellor John Smith&#x27;s &quot;prawn cocktail offensive&quot; to try to butter up City opinion (&quot;Never have so many crustaceans died in vain&quot;). He was a leading performer in the election and it was felt that had the Conservatives lost he might well have won the party leadership and been Leader of the Opposition, while if they won he would probably be given Trade and Industry, the job he had always wanted.

===President of the Board of Trade: 1992-1995===
====Industrial policy====

Following the 1992 general election he was appointed Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, choosing to be known by the title, dormant since 1974, of &quot;President of the Board of Trade&quot;. He insisted on being addressed as &quot;President&quot; (&quot;not&quot; &quot;Mr President&quot;) and being referred to as &quot;the President&quot;. The Board had not met since 1850, but it did not need to as it had a quorum of one.

On the backbenches Heseltine had praised the Japanese MITI, and had been planning a book on the subject. He promised to intervene &quot;before breakfast, dinner and tea&quot; to help British companies, but had little opportunity for intervention as the DTI budget had dropped from over £3bn in the early 1980s to £1bn in 1992–1993, a fifth the budget of the Welsh Office. NEDO, which had been set up to coordinate industrial policy in the early 1960s, was abolished by Chancellor Norman Lamont in June 1992, although Heseltine was able to absorb some of the staff into the DTI to set up working parties to shadow specific industries. His junior ministers were Neil Hamilton and Edward Leigh, both Thatcherites. Gordon Brown mocked him (6 July 1992) as having &quot;absolute power over a department which has become absolutely powerless&quot; and &quot;the tiger that was once the king of the jungle is now just the fireside rug – decorative and ostentatious, but essentially there to be walked all over&quot;.

Heseltine was seen as more interested in large than in small and medium-sized companies, and in 1992 was only with difficulty persuaded to refer Lloyds Bank&#x27;s takeover bid for Midland Bank to the Office of Fair Trading.

====Pit closures====
Heseltine&#x27;s responsibilities also included Energy, as the separate Energy ministry was abolished.

Electricity companies now decided on their own contracts, rather than being obligated by the government to choose British coal. With plans being made for the privatisation of British Coal, on 13 October 1992 Heseltine and British Coal both separately announced that 31 of British Coal&#x27;s 50 pits were to close, with the loss of 30,000 jobs. Most of the detailed work had been done by the Minister of State Tim Eggar. Many of the mines in Nottinghamshire that had continued working during the 1984–1985 strike were to close. Although this policy was seen by the Nottinghamshire miners as a betrayal, there was hardly any organised resistance to the programme. The government stated that since the pits were losing money they could be sustained only through unjustifiable government subsidies. Mine supporters pointed to the mines&#x27; high productivity rates and to the fact that their monetary losses were due to the large subsidies that other European nations were giving to their coal industries.

An early leak had seen little reaction but Heseltine was taken aback by the public anger. Over 100 pits had closed since the 1984–1985 strike. The closures were to be rushed because the Treasury, under pressure from Major, had agreed to make money for generous redundancy settlements available only in the 1992–1993 fiscal year. It looked terrible coming at the fag end of the recession, when the government had a tiny majority, and just after the fiasco of Black Wednesday and the scandal of David Mellor&#x27;s resignation. Heseltine was attacked by Marcus Fox, Jim Pawsey, Nicholas Winterton, Bill Cash, Rhodes Boyson and his former supporter David Evans who called openly for him to be sacked.

The High Court found that Heseltine and British Coal had acted &quot;unlawfully and irrationally&quot;. Faced with likely defeat in the House of Commons, Heseltine was forced to agree to a moratorium, during which time he attempted, largely unsuccessfully, to seek new markets for British coal and to obtain government subsidies for pits.

The band Chumbawamba released the critical song &quot;Mr Heseltine meets the public&quot; that portrayed Heseltine as an out-of-touch figure; the same group had once dedicated a song to the village of Fitzwilliam, West Yorkshire, which was reduced to a ghost village by the closure of the local coal pits.

In February 1993, Heseltine announced that unlike the Dutch and Belgian governments, Britain would not be contributing to any bailout of Anglo-Dutch DAF Trucks (which in the event went bankrupt in June). By early 1993 Heseltine&#x27;s fortunes were at a low ebb, with his future as a minister being called into question.

A review into the pit closures appeared in March 1993. By this time, public anger had cooled. By the start of 1997, British Coal had been reduced to 28 pits.

====Heart attack====
On 21 June 1993, Heseltine suffered a serious heart attack in Venice (especially worrying as Heseltine was sixty, and his father had died of a heart attack aged fifty-five). The pains had already stopped by the time he reached hospital. Heseltine was shown looking unwell and using a wheelchair – in fact the result of gout in his foot from the medication which he was taking. He took four months off from work, and did not make a speech at the party conference in October 1993, instead amusing the audience by appearing on the platform and performing mock exercises with his arms.

There were concerns about his ability to remain in government. In 1994 Chris Morris jokingly implied on BBC Radio 1 that Heseltine had died, and persuaded MP Jerry Hayes to broadcast an on-air tribute. Morris was subsequently suspended.

====Political resurgence====
Heseltine, who had been seen as an &quot;arriviste&quot; in his younger days, was now something of a grandee and elder statesman. In 1994 he re-emerged as a serious political player, beginning with his testimony for the Scott Report during the Arms-to-Iraq Inquiry (whose report eventually appeared in 1996). It was revealed that he had refused to sign the Public Interest Immunity Certificates (attempting to withhold evidence from the trial in 1992, on grounds of national security) as demanded by the Attorney-General Sir Nicholas Lyell, who advised him that ministers were &quot;obligated&quot; to sign such a certificate. In fact after half a dozen meetings over the course of a week, and Heseltine insisting on reading Bingham LJ&#x27;s judgement in the Makanjuola case, Heseltine had agreed to sign a slightly different version of the PII which made clear his reservations. However, this was not picked up on at the trial, nor were Heseltine&#x27;s concerns – contrary to assurances given to him by Lyell – that some of the documents might be useful to the defence passed on to the trial judge.

Nonetheless, his evidence in February 1994 was seen as an attack on Lyell and on the ministers (Kenneth Clarke, his potential rival for the leadership, Rifkind and Tristan Garel-Jones) who had signed the certificates without demur. The cover of &quot;Private Eye&quot; announced &quot;A Legend Lives&quot; and one major newspaper ended an editorial by proclaiming that the &quot;balance of probability&quot; was that Heseltine would be prime minister before the end of the year – this being at a time when John Major&#x27;s leadership had lost much credibility after the scandals following the &quot;Back to Basics&quot; campaign the previous autumn.

Heseltine also acted to enforce a squeaky clean image at this time, by announcing an inquiry in July 1994, into allegations of insider dealing by Jeffrey Archer (there was insufficient evidence to prosecute), and by personally (rather than in writing) announcing an inquiry into whether a weapons manufacturing company called BMARC had broken government guidelines on trading with Iraq in the late 1980s.

Heseltine launched a White Paper on Competitiveness in 1994. He was active in leading British trade delegations to South Africa, South America, India and Russia, but despite his enthusiasm for European Unity was seen to display little interest in the nuts and bolts of trade negotiations with the continent.

In 1994 Heseltine planned to privatise 40% of the Post Office, a move which the Conservatives had previously shied away from. He was seen as imperious and intolerant by backbench opponents concerned at the threat to local postal services (&quot;he seemed to have lost touch&quot; one commented after a meeting), and the plan was abandoned by the Cabinet as unlikely to pass the House of Commons, as the Major government&#x27;s majority had dropped to 14 by then. However, Heseltine was gaining some popularity with the Tory Right at this time, helped by his opposition to lowering the gay age of consent from 21 to 18, and his attack on the European Community as overregulated and sclerotic. (The popularity of his rival Kenneth Clarke, by contrast, was suffering among Tory MPs after his unpopular autumn 1994 budget and his overt enthusiasm for the mooted Single European Currency). However, there was to be no leadership election that autumn.

Eurosceptics had been floating the idea of a referendum on membership of the Single Currency or even of membership of the European Community, since at least 1994. In November 1994 Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd, with Major&#x27;s approval and supported by Malcolm Rifkind, had advocated a referendum on joining the euro or on the upcoming 1996 Intergovernmental Conference, but Heseltine and Clarke were opposed (only these five senior ministers appear to have been involved) and the proposal was shelved for the time being.

===1995 leadership election===
John Major was consistently opposed by Eurosceptics in his party (known as the Maastricht Rebels – a small minority of MPs before 1997, but enjoying much wider support among party activists). Heseltine always stated categorically that he would &quot;never&quot; stand for party leader against Major.

In mid-1995 Major challenged his critics to &quot;put up or shut up&quot; by resubmitting himself to a leadership election in which he was unsuccessfully opposed by John Redwood the Secretary of State for Wales. There was speculation that Heseltine&#x27;s supporters would engineer Major&#x27;s downfall in the hope that their man would take over, but they stayed loyal to Major. Heseltine had been listening to regular reports about his potential support from his lieutenants Keith Hampson, Richard Ottaway, Michael Mates and Peter Temple-Morris, and in the event of a second ballot hoped to receive Major&#x27;s endorsement. Peter Tapsell refused to support him because of the European issue. Hampson believed that Heseltine might have won, as did Philip Stephens of the &quot;Financial Times&quot;. Michael Crick does not agree, pointing out that many of Heseltine&#x27;s supporters from 1990 had retired from the Commons and the 1992 intake was more right-wing and eurosceptic.

Heseltine, who showed his ballot paper to the returning officers to prove that he had voted for Major, commented that &quot;John Major deserves a great deal better than that from his colleagues&quot;. Major was re-elected leader.

===Deputy Prime Minister: 1995–1997===
Heseltine had a two-hour meeting with Major on the morning of the leadership vote. He was promoted to Deputy Prime Minister and First Secretary of State. He was given a swipe card to enter 10 Downing Street whenever he liked and the right to attend any committee he wished. He chaired four Cabinet Committees, including Environment and Local Government, and two new committees: Competitiveness Committee (effectively, industrial strategy) and the Coordination and Presentation of Government Policy (EDCP) which met every weekday at 8.30am.

The matter of a referendum on joining the euro, after much press speculation, was raised again at Cabinet by Douglas Hogg in the spring of 1996, very likely (in Clarke&#x27;s view) with Major&#x27;s approval; Clarke records that Heseltine spoke &quot;with passionate intensity&quot; at Cabinet against a referendum, believing both that referendums were pernicious and that no concession would be enough to please the Eurosceptics. Clarke, who had already threatened resignation over the issue, also opposed the measure and, although Clarke and Heseltine were in a small minority, Major once again deferred a decision. Major, Heseltine and Clarke eventually reached agreement in April 1996, in what Clarke describes as &quot;a tense meeting … rather like a treaty session&quot;, that there would be a commitment to a referendum before joining the euro, but that the pledge would be valid for one Parliament only (i.e. until the general election after next), with the Government&#x27;s long-term options remaining completely open; Clarke threatened to resign if this formula were departed from. Heseltine had opposed a referendum on euro membership when Thatcher proposed it in 1990. Clarke, writing in 2016 after the Brexit Referendum, comments that he and Heseltine later agreed that they had separately decided to give way because of the pressure Major was under, and that the referendum pledge &quot;was the biggest single mistake&quot; of their careers, giving &quot;legitimacy&quot; to such a device.

Heseltine made several visits to Manchester in the aftermath of the IRA bomb on 15 June 1996 – he won the praise of opposition politicians for cutting red tape to arrange remedial measures. However, Crick recounts complaints about his aloofness from small shopkeepers, and Crick comments that he seemed to have lost the common touch which he had displayed in Liverpool in the early 1980s.

In 1996 Heseltine was also one of the more hawkish ministers in urging non-cooperation with the European Community over the beef ban. However, after press speculation in December 1996 that he might abandon the government&#x27;s &quot;wait and see&quot; policy on the euro in the hope of winning Eurosceptic votes, he took to the airwaves – in apparent unison with Clarke – to insist that the government retained a free choice as to whether or not to join, angering Eurosceptics.

Heseltine played an important role in taking charge of the Millennium Exhibition in Greenwich and ensuring that it happened, even having a meeting with Tony Blair, Leader of the Opposition, in January 1997 to agree that a Labour Government would back it.

===After government===
On 3 May, the day after the government was defeated at the 1997 general election, Heseltine suffered an attack of angina and had a tube inserted into an artery; at 64, and twenty years older than the new prime minister, he declined to stand for the Conservative Party leadership again. However, he was less unpopular with eurosceptics than Clarke, and on the third ballot of the subsequent leadership election Clarke, facing imminent defeat by William Hague, offered to stand aside in Heseltine&#x27;s favour, but he declined on medical advice. He became active in promoting the benefits for Britain of joining the Single European Currency, appearing on the same stage as Tony Blair, Gordon Brown and Robin Cook as part of an all-party campaign to promote Euro membership. He was also made a Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour in the 1997 resignation Honours List. In November 1999 Heseltine was invited by Hague to be the Conservative candidate for the new position of Mayor of London (in place of Jeffrey Archer who had had to stand down because of scandal), but he declined.

In the interim Shadow Cabinet of John Major he served as Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Shadow Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster and Shadow Secretary of State for Trade and Industry.

==Retirement==

Heseltine stood down from his Henley constituency at the 2001 election, being succeeded by &quot;Spectator&quot; editor and future prime minister Boris Johnson, but he remained outspoken on British politics. He was created a life peer on 12 July 2001 taking the title Baron Heseltine, &quot;of Thenford in the County of Northamptonshire&quot;.

In December 2002, Heseltine controversially called for Iain Duncan Smith to be replaced as leader of the Conservatives by the &quot;dream-ticket&quot; of Clarke as leader and Michael Portillo as deputy. He suggested the party&#x27;s MPs vote on the matter rather than party members as currently required by party rules. Without the replacement of Duncan Smith, the party &quot;has not a ghost of a chance of winning the next election&quot; he said. Duncan Smith was removed the following year. In the 2005 party leadership election, Heseltine backed young moderniser David Cameron.

Following Cameron&#x27;s election to the leadership he set up a wide-ranging policy review. Chairmen of the various policy groups included ex-Chancellor Kenneth Clarke and other former Cabinet ministers John Redwood, John Gummer, Stephen Dorrell and Michael Forsyth as well as ex-leader Iain Duncan Smith. Heseltine was appointed to head the cities task force having been responsible for urban policy twice as Environment Secretary under Thatcher and Major.

In 2008 Heseltine took part in the BBC Wales programme &quot;Coming Home&quot; about his Welsh family history. He said in this programme that he regarded Wales as his home and identified strongly with his Welsh ancestry.

In March 2012, he was asked to head an audit of the UK&#x27;s industrial performance for Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne and HM Treasury, upon which—after 11 years as a member of the House of Lords—he made his maiden speech in the chamber.

Heseltine was interviewed in 2012 as part of The History of Parliament&#x27;s oral history project.

In 2023, Heseltine appeared as the guest star in the first episode of The Rest Is Politics: Leading, a podcast hosted by Alastair Campbell and Rory Stewart.

===No stone unturned===

Following the arrival of the Coalition into power in 2010, he was commissioned to draw up &quot;Plan H&quot; or &quot;No Stone Left Unturned&quot; to stimulate growth in local areas. Since then, 81 out of his 89 recommendations have been adopted. At the 2013 Budget, the Coalition pledged to pool billions of pounds of regional spending into a single fund in a bid to de-centralise public spending and boost economic growth outside London.

===Other Heseltine comments===
Heseltine criticised the Coalition&#x27;s policy on Europe, but he did support the tightening of immigration laws. He also supported George Osborne&#x27;s Budget measures in 2013 and Iain Duncan Smith&#x27;s welfare reforms, but showed concerns over the legalisation of same-sex marriage. In June 2013, he voted against Lord Dear&#x27;s wrecking amendment, thus ratifying the same-sex marriage act.

=== Views on Brexit and involvement in the campaign for a People&#x27;s Vote ===

He described the 2016 Brexit referendum result to leave the European Union as &quot;the greatest constitutional crisis of modern times&quot; and condemned Leave campaigner Boris Johnson as a coward for pulling out of the Conservative leadership election after winning the referendum, likening him to &quot;a general who has led his troops to the sound of guns, and, at first sight of battle, has left the field.&quot; Lord Heseltine queried the way Theresa May as home secretary campaigned to remain in the EU though &quot;within a few weeks&quot; of becoming PM, she insisted &quot;Brexit means Brexit&quot;. Heseltine mentioned a speech by Theresa May before the EU referendum, where she urged Britain to &quot;stand tall and lead in Europe&quot;. Heseltine said: &quot;I don&#x27;t know how someone who made that speech can, within a few weeks, say Brexit is Brexit and ask the nation to unite behind it...[unlike Margaret Thatcher] this lady was for turning.&quot;

In March 2017 he was sacked from a number of advisory roles within government after rebelling over the article 50 legislation in the House of Lords, but said he would continue working to avert the &quot;disaster&quot; of Brexit. He later said that it was &quot;quite unacceptable&quot; for Germany to be in dominant position in Europe, having lost the Second World War. Heseltine feels the 48% of British voters who voted &#x27;remain&#x27; are being ignored. He sees Brexit as a historic loss of power for Britain and feels Britain&#x27;s interests are in Europe.

In March 2018 Heseltine expressed concern over Theresa May&#x27;s Brexit negotiations, commenting: &quot;Why is it that after 18 months since the referendum we have not got any closer with these issues? The answer is simple: because no one has got any answer about how to do it.&quot; He also said the gulf between what May wanted and what the EU was willing to give was not narrowing and may be widening, adding &quot;While that gap remains industry will continue to make assumptions that will involve moving investment from here to the continent. (...) The downsides are becoming more evident as time passes. We have had a serious devaluation of the currency. We have turned ourselves from the fastest growing to the slowest growing economy in Europe and we have made a complete Horlicks of the Irish border. I am totally with the view of Tony Blair and John Major that this matter has got to go back to parliament and possibly to a referendum or a general election.&quot;

Heseltine was one of the signatories of a statement by senior Conservatives calling for a second referendum over Brexit. This stated, &quot;If we are to remain a party of government, it is absolutely critical that we increase our support among younger generations. To do this, we must listen to and engage with their concerns on Brexit. They voted overwhelmingly to Remain in the European Union in 2016 – and since then have become even stronger in their views. Since the referendum, nearly 2 million young people are now of voting age. Of those in this group who are certain to vote, an astounding 87% support the United Kingdom staying in the European Union. If we do not hear their voices, who could blame them for feeling excluded and powerless on this most vital issue. The truth is that if Brexit fails this generation, we risk losing young people for good. Our party&#x27;s electoral future will be irrevocably blighted.&quot;
Heseltine participated in various events organised by the People&#x27;s Vote organisation, including a rally in December 2018 which called for a vote on the Brexit withdrawal agreement. In July 2019, he addressed a rally for a People&#x27;s Vote in Birmingham and expressed himself critically of the government of Boris Johnson which he accused of being &quot;sworn to an extreme interpretation of the 2016 referendum, bound to articulation based on unfounded and reckless optimism, unrealistic assertions defended by evasion and bombast, blind to the world in which we live&quot;.

===Conservative whip suspension===

In May 2019, he had the Conservative Party whip suspended after saying he would vote for the Liberal Democrats, rather than the Conservatives, at the 2019 European Parliament election.

On 26 November 2019, in preparation for the 2019 general election, Heseltine said he could not support Boris Johnson because the Prime Minister was pursuing an &quot;utterly disastrous&quot; policy that would make Britain poorer and less influential, and he called on voters to back the Liberal Democrats to deny Johnson a majority in Parliament.

In June 2023, following the report by the Commons Privileges Committee, he said that Johnson had lied to parliament. Speaking on &quot;Sky News&quot;, he said that Johnson had resigned before the Partygate report was published because he &quot;saw it coming&quot;, adding &quot;We&#x27;ve had four days of this report and the story doesn&#x27;t change: Boris Johnson told a pack of lies. Boris Johnson got out from under, he saw it coming, he knew he hadn&#x27;t a case to defend. So he resigned before the suspension that he feared could be relevant.&quot; In July 2024, the Conservatives restored Heseltine&#x27;s whip.

==Family and personal life==

Heseltine married Anne Harding Williams in 1962. They have three children: Annabel (born in 1963), Alexandra (born in 1966), and Rupert (born in 1967), as well as nine grandchildren. During the period Heseltine was the MP for Tavistock in Devon (from 1966 to 1974), he became part of a local &#x27;fishing gang&#x27; with poet Ted Hughes. His wife was delighted, as an admirer of the poet, but Heseltine himself did not initially know who he was.

At the beginning of November 2016, drawing on an interview with &quot;Tatler&quot; magazine, it was reported that Heseltine had confessed to strangling his mother&#x27;s Alsatian in 1964, after the animal had drawn blood, which was falsely interpreted as him having killed the dog. A rumour about such an incident had been in circulation since a 1990 article in &quot;The Observer&quot; and an unauthorised biography. Heseltine later stated that he had, in fact, subdued the animal using its choke collar after it had attacked him. In an interview with the Press Association, Heseltine said the dog was put down the next day at the vet&#x27;s insistence, because it had become dangerous and a threat to his pregnant wife and elderly mother.

In January 2017, Heseltine was convicted of careless driving and fined £5,000, following an incident on 19 June 2016 in which he pulled out into the path of a cyclist, causing serious injuries, including a broken arm and shattered knees, which required plates and pins.

==Thenford gardens and arboretum==
The Heseltines purchased Thenford House and its grounds in 1976. The house was bought privately with the aid of a large loan, and they are thought to have paid around £750,000 (approximately £4.5m at 2016 prices), and to have spent a similar sum on renovating the property. They also own a number of farms in the area.

Over the next 25 years they restored of woodland together with the walled garden, medieval fish-ponds, and a lake. There is also a sculpture garden, which includes a large bronze bust of Lenin, from Latvia. At the turn of the century they decided to create various ornamental features in the garden and increase the range of trees and shrubs in the arboretum. Covering over the arboretum is stocked with over 3,000 different species. Their arboretum was featured in a one-off documentary on BBC Two in December 2005. In October 2016 the Heseltines were featured on BBC&#x27;s &quot;Gardeners&#x27; World&quot;, discussing their garden at Thenford House, parts of which were modelled after the gardens at Château de Villandry. The garden is open to the public by appointment only.

==Honours==
* List of awards and honours received by Michael Heseltine

==Books==
*Kenneth Clarke, &quot;Kind of Blue&quot;, Macmillan, 2016, 
* Michael Heseltine, &quot;Raising The Sights – A Tory Perspective&quot;, in the &quot;Primrose League Gazette&quot;, vol.91, no.2, Aug/Sept 1987 edition, London.
* Julian Critchley, &quot;Heseltine – The Unauthorised Biography&quot;, André Deutsch, London, September 1987, .
* Michael Crick, &quot;Michael Heseltine: A Biography&quot;, Hamish Hamilton, 1997, .
* Michael Heseltine, &quot;Life in the Jungle&quot;, Hodder &amp; Stoughton, 2000, , Heseltine&#x27;s autobiography, written with the acknowledged assistance of his lifelong friend Anthony Howard.
* Edward Pearce, &quot;The Golden Talking-Shop&quot;, Oxford University Press, 2016, , a history of the Oxford Union Society during the first half of the twentieth century, based on official minutes.
* Alexander Stevenson, &quot;The Public Sector: Managing the Unmanageable&quot;, 2013 (Contributor)
* Anne Heseltine, Michael Heseltine, &quot;Thenford: The Creation of an English Garden&quot;, Head of Zeus, 2016, 
* Michael Heseltine, &quot;From Acorns to Oaks: An Urgent Agenda to Rebuild Britain&quot;, Biteback Publishing, 2025, 

==See also==
*Opposition to Brexit
*People&#x27;s Vote

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

*House of Lords: Lord Heseltine
*Haymarket Group
*BBC: Heseltine: Political CV
*&quot;Guardian&quot;: Aristotle article on Michael Heseltine
*&quot;Guardian&quot; interview with Michael Heseltine by Simon Hattenstone
*Interview about battling CND for the WGBH series,
*War and Peace in the Nuclear Age
*Thatcher&#x27;s First Cabinet
*2009 New Statesman interview
*2012 interview as part of the History of Parliament oral history project
*Thenford Gardens &amp; Arboretum
*Photos of the garden
*Thenford: The Creation of an English garden
*



|-


|-


|-



|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q332314" start="0" end="45" title="Michael Heseltine" label="Michael Ray Dibdin Heseltine, Baron Heseltine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457596" start="198" end="207" title="Haymarket Media Group" label="Haymarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="231" end="243" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="244" end="264" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="332" end="349" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="354" end="364" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507619" start="380" end="401" title="Deputy Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Deputy Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068024" start="406" end="430" title="First Secretary of State" label="First Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q112014" start="485" end="492" title="Cabinet of the United Kingdom" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122313" start="504" end="542" title="Secretary of State for the Environment" label="Secretary of State for the Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333655" start="572" end="584" title="Right to Buy" label="Right to Buy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306184" start="638" end="651" title="council house" label="council house"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990147" start="825" end="841" title="Wets and dries" label="&amp;quot;wets&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728959" start="849" end="871" title="One-nation conservatism" label="&amp;quot;One Nation&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="933" end="942" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747647" start="1080" end="1110" title="Secretary of State for Defence" label="Secretary of State for Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q178511" start="1186" end="1218" title="Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament" label="Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989023" start="1266" end="1281" title="Westland affair" label="Westland affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q731591" start="1302" end="1313" title="backbenches" label="backbenches"/>
<link wikidata="Q223200" start="1374" end="1385" title="Eurosceptic" label="Eurosceptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q332323" start="1446" end="1459" title="Geoffrey Howe" label="Geoffrey Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="1701" end="1711" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q27037814" start="1889" end="1920" title="President of the Board of Trade" label="President of the Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858507" start="1925" end="1966" title="Secretary of State for Trade and Industry" label="Secretary of State for Trade and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q543609" start="1981" end="2002" title="1992 United Kingdom general election" label="1992 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163065" start="2028" end="2065" title="1995 Conservative Party leadership election" label="his leadership was challenged in 1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="2223" end="2256" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="Major&amp;#x27;s 1997 election defeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460464" start="2272" end="2299" title="Shadow Cabinet of John Major" label="Major&amp;#x27;s shadow cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741536" start="2303" end="2334" title="Leader of the Opposition (United Kingdom)" label="Deputy Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q25906187" start="2336" end="2379" title="Shadow Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster" label="Shadow Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q15039982" start="2384" end="2432" title="Shadow Secretary of State for Trade and Industry" label="Shadow Secretary of State for Trade and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163066" start="2439" end="2477" title="1997 Conservative Party leadership election" label="the leadership election to succeed him"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914468" start="2521" end="2530" title="life peer" label="life peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="2671" end="2677" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="2682" end="2695" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="2710" end="2732" title="2016 Brexit referendum" label="2016 Brexit referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433693" start="2768" end="2772" title="Whip (politics)" label="whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="2818" end="2835" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q22001091" start="2875" end="2908" title="2019 European Parliament election in the United Kingdom" label="2019 European Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q23051" start="3021" end="3028" title="Swansea" label="Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609672" start="3074" end="3090" title="Army Reserve (United Kingdom)" label="Territorial Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617783" start="3136" end="3138" title="Territorial Decoration" label="TD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098650" start="3147" end="3162" title="Royal Engineers" label="Royal Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3174" end="3190" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425276" start="3492" end="3498" title="Tetley" label="Tetley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064116" start="3788" end="3802" title="Charles Dibdin" label="Charles Dibdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23330" start="3846" end="3861" title="Huntingdonshire" label="Huntingdonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161927" start="3978" end="3985" title="Pembrey" label="Pembrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094812" start="4026" end="4036" title="West Wales" label="West Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078212" start="4537" end="4543" title="Tatler" label="Tatler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194492" start="4947" end="4954" title="angling" label="angling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4981018" start="4958" end="4971" title="Brynmill Park" label="Brynmill Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975831" start="5021" end="5035" title="Broughton Hall, Staffordshire" label="Broughton Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123282" start="5039" end="5049" title="Eccleshall" label="Eccleshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q17553035" start="5103" end="5132" title="Brockhurst and Marlston House School" label="Brockhurst Preparatory school"/>
<link wikidata="Q4096908" start="5134" end="5151" title="Bromsgrove School" label="Bromsgrove School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280221" start="5173" end="5190" title="Shrewsbury School" label="Shrewsbury School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722280" start="5267" end="5296" title="1951 United Kingdom general election" label="October 1951 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q82606" start="5316" end="5340" title="Pembroke College, Oxford" label="Pembroke College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115302" start="5425" end="5467" title="Oxford University Conservative Association" label="Oxford University Conservative Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5622058" start="5538" end="5548" title="Guy Arnold" label="Guy Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q6307083" start="5665" end="5681" title="Julian Critchley" label="Julian Critchley"/>
<link wikidata="Q303329" start="6111" end="6125" title="shadow cabinet" label="shadow cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829545" start="6224" end="6237" title="Michael Crick" label="Michael Crick"/>
<link wikidata="Q333392" start="6575" end="6587" title="Charles Hill, Baron Hill of Luton" label="Charles Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="6831" end="6848" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157937" start="6909" end="6921" title="Oxford Union" label="Oxford Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q189946" start="7394" end="7416" title="Western European Union" label="Western European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="7574" end="7580" title="Stalin" label="Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="7649" end="7669" title="British Commonwealth" label="British Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793468" start="8434" end="8447" title="Maurice Shock" label="Maurice Shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594838" start="8518" end="8547" title="President of the Oxford Union" label="President of the Oxford Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360565" start="8552" end="8562" title="Michaelmas" label="Michaelmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110410" start="8674" end="8687" title="Jeremy Isaacs" label="Jeremy Isaacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q573388" start="8692" end="8706" title="Anthony Howard (journalist)" label="Anthony Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995806" start="8752" end="8781" title="Oxford University Labour Club" label="Oxford University Labour Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="8913" end="8919" title="H-Bomb" label="H-Bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777850" start="9082" end="9116" title="Philosophy, politics and economics" label="Philosophy, politics and economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893066" start="9372" end="9383" title="Bernard Docker" label="Sir Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7050197" start="9388" end="9399" title="Lady Docker" label="Lady Docker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631452" start="9729" end="9746" title="Rajani Palme Dutt" label="Rajani Palme Dutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527461" start="9753" end="9773" title="Violet Bonham Carter" label="Violet Bonham Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q731835" start="9794" end="9808" title="John Wolfenden" label="John Wolfenden"/>
<link wikidata="Q374117" start="9813" end="9828" title="Jacob Bronowski" label="Jacob Bronowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q325403" start="9837" end="9850" title="Aneurin Bevan" label="Aneurin Bevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q493751" start="10035" end="10062" title="KPMG" label="Peat Marwick &amp;amp; Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q215354" start="10511" end="10523" title="Notting Hill" label="Notting Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q41890" start="10924" end="10933" title="Bayswater" label="Bayswater"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="11374" end="11386" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q30055" start="11587" end="11593" title="Jaguar Cars" label="Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="11673" end="11684" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q597906" start="12390" end="12407" title="Earl&amp;#x27;s Court" label="Earl&amp;#x27;s Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q893034" start="12578" end="12587" title="Haymarket, London" label="Haymarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162774" start="13094" end="13106" title="Conscription in the United Kingdom" label="conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089965" start="13112" end="13128" title="National Service" label="National Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4368198" start="13209" end="13227" title="Lieutenant colonel (United Kingdom)" label="lieutenant-colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098650" start="13235" end="13250" title="Royal Engineers" label="Royal Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="13258" end="13274" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609672" start="13293" end="13309" title="Army Reserve (United Kingdom)" label="Territorial Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="13607" end="13617" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="13644" end="13655" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806308" start="13952" end="13964" title="Welsh Guards" label="Welsh Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902481" start="14096" end="14121" title="Mons Officer Cadet School" label="Mons Officer Cadet School"/>
<link wikidata="Q56826567" start="14582" end="14599" title="second lieutenant" label="second lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500369" start="14965" end="14991" title="Probate" label="late father&amp;#x27;s affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q44416" start="15103" end="15117" title="regimental tie" label="regimental tie"/>
<link wikidata="Q614560" start="16110" end="16119" title="Tenterden" label="Tenterden"/>
<link wikidata="Q18161698" start="16905" end="16919" title="Man About Town (magazine)" label="Man About Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q332897" start="17186" end="17203" title="Maurice Macmillan" label="Maurice Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q214242" start="17250" end="17264" title="pyramid scheme" label="pyramid scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q221986" start="17528" end="17544" title="The Sunday Times" label="The Sunday Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950638" start="17604" end="17613" title="Bow Group" label="Bow Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q204698" start="17846" end="17854" title="Limerick (poetry)" label="limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q333080" start="18196" end="18208" title="Selwyn Lloyd" label="Selwyn Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="18881" end="18884" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q186649" start="19374" end="19376" title="Curriculum vitae" label="CV"/>
<link wikidata="Q598884" start="19686" end="19699" title="Hilton Hotels" label="Hilton Hotels"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="19749" end="19753" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796086" start="20565" end="20593" title="British Printing Corporation" label="British Printing Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457596" start="20821" end="20830" title="Haymarket Media Group" label="Haymarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534547" start="20854" end="20875" title="Sir Geoffrey Crowther" label="Sir Geoffrey Crowther"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141267" start="21312" end="21325" title="Thomson Reuters" label="Thomson Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q162861" start="22182" end="22195" title="Donald Stokes, Baron Stokes" label="Donald Stokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046187" start="22241" end="22256" title="British Leyland" label="British Leyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16018783" start="22416" end="22429" title="Robert Heller (journalist)" label="Robert Heller"/>
<link wikidata="Q931825" start="22575" end="22587" title="Carlton Club" label="Carlton Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996213" start="24314" end="24327" title="Oxford Circus" label="Oxford Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027734" start="26171" end="26179" title="Campaign (magazine)" label="Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843420" start="26658" end="26687" title="National Union of Journalists" label="National Union of Journalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q336777" start="26754" end="26769" title="Maurice Saatchi" label="Maurice Saatchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672760" start="27239" end="27254" title="Accountancy Age" label="Accountancy Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="27338" end="27346" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="27393" end="27402" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q336777" start="27629" end="27644" title="Maurice Saatchi" label="Maurice Saatchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207680" start="28320" end="28341" title="Saatchi &amp;amp; Saatchi" label="Saatchi &amp;amp; Saatchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28963183" start="29207" end="29218" title="NatWest Markets" label="County Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q229764" start="29246" end="29250" title="ICFC" label="ICFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123106" start="30754" end="30767" title="Regent Street" label="Regent Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q540891" start="31455" end="31458" title="Verenigde Nederlandse Uitgeverijen" label="VNU"/>
<link wikidata="Q612780" start="32574" end="32612" title="Sunday Times Rich List" label="&amp;quot;The Sunday Times&amp;quot; Rich List"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077357" start="32848" end="32853" title="Gower (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Gower"/>
<link wikidata="Q918420" start="32861" end="32890" title="1959 United Kingdom general election" label="October 1959 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354368" start="32975" end="32991" title="National Liberal Party (UK, 1931)" label="National Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5991237" start="33130" end="33141" title="Ifor Davies" label="Ifor Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760429" start="33438" end="33446" title="Marginal seat" label="marginal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179104" start="33463" end="33477" title="Coventry North (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Coventry North"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793046" start="33610" end="33625" title="Maurice Edelman" label="Maurice Edelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q220208" start="33853" end="33874" title="1964 United Kingdom general election" label="1964 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689122" start="34086" end="34095" title="Tavistock (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Tavistock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314228" start="34364" end="34384" title="Milk Marketing Board" label="Milk Marketing Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="35139" end="35152" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344070" start="35160" end="35172" title="West Country" label="West Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q334102" start="35180" end="35193" title="Jeremy Thorpe" label="Jeremy Thorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172808" start="35195" end="35208" title="Peter Bessell" label="Peter Bessell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766776" start="35213" end="35231" title="Mark Bonham Carter" label="Mark Bonham Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q918430" start="36305" end="36332" title="1966 United Kingdom general election" label="March 1966 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="36362" end="36374" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q335812" start="36394" end="36404" title="Jo Grimond" label="Jo Grimond"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="36598" end="36618" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949922" start="37543" end="37562" title="Boundary commissions (United Kingdom)" label="Boundary Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984962" start="37597" end="37607" title="West Devon (UK Parliament constituency)" label="West Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175897" start="37715" end="37726" title="Peter Mills (British politician)" label="Peter Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120305" start="37765" end="37780" title="Plymouth Sutton" label="Plymouth Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236142" start="37801" end="37810" title="Powellism" label="Powellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163053" start="37811" end="37822" title="Monday Club" label="Monday Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894842" start="37873" end="37883" title="Alan Clark" label="Alan Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484309" start="38157" end="38171" title="Home Secretary" label="Home Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q9576" start="38172" end="38187" title="James Callaghan" label="James Callaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305570" start="38231" end="38252" title="Redcliffe-Maud Report" label="Redcliffe-Maud Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q918442" start="38336" end="38357" title="1970 United Kingdom general election" label="1970 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q373667" start="38670" end="38680" title="Mid Sussex (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Mid Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q333362" start="38701" end="38712" title="Ian Gilmour" label="Ian Gilmour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434248" start="38731" end="38741" title="Tim Renton" label="Tim Renton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11797272" start="38763" end="38778" title="Mid Oxfordshire (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Mid-Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q337375" start="38791" end="38803" title="Douglas Hurd" label="Douglas Hurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="38815" end="38827" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364676" start="38914" end="38925" title="Ronald Bell (politician)" label="Ronald Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q586563" start="38978" end="38990" title="Beaconsfield (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Beaconsfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q25173260" start="39342" end="39361" title="Young Conservatives (UK)" label="Young Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080330" start="39455" end="39461" title="Henley (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Henley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6238337" start="39543" end="39551" title="John Hay (Henley MP)" label="John Hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910846" start="39645" end="39660" title="Bill Shelton (politician)" label="William Shelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q332919" start="39665" end="39678" title="Norman Fowler" label="Norman Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7000536" start="39973" end="39982" title="Nettlebed" label="Nettlebed"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023371" start="40022" end="40037" title="Wilton Crescent" label="Wilton Crescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q119524" start="40235" end="40248" title="February 1974 United Kingdom general election" label="February 1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q590740" start="40299" end="40303" title="2001 United Kingdom general election" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q333858" start="40387" end="40399" title="Peter Walker, Baron Walker of Worcester" label="Peter Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883936" start="40642" end="40656" title="Barbara Castle" label="Barbara Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834854" start="40713" end="40731" title="Transport Act 1968" label="Transport Act 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971164" start="40832" end="40857" title="National Bus Company (UK)" label="National Bus Company (UK)"/>
<link wikidata="Q514989" start="40869" end="40898" title="Passenger transport executive" label="Passenger transport executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q285716" start="41149" end="41167" title="Transport Act 1962" label="Transport Act 1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="41177" end="41194" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153790" start="41513" end="41547" title="Commonwealth Immigrants Act 1968" label="1968 Commonwealth Immigration Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024095" start="41828" end="41841" title="Kenyan Asians" label="Kenyan Asians"/>
<link wikidata="Q333028" start="41853" end="41865" title="Enoch Powell" label="Enoch Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030207" start="41873" end="41895" title="Rivers of Blood speech" label="Rivers of Blood speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278916" start="42205" end="42229" title="Race Relations Act 1968" label="1968 Race Relations Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q918442" start="42911" end="42932" title="1970 United Kingdom general election" label="1970 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="42953" end="42965" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982287" start="43011" end="43034" title="Department for Transport" label="Department of Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q334362" start="43137" end="43148" title="Fred Mulley" label="Fred Mulley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701413" start="43324" end="43335" title="John Peyton, Baron Peyton of Yeovil" label="John Peyton"/>
<link wikidata="Q82278" start="43718" end="43731" title="George Jellicoe, 2nd Earl Jellicoe" label="Lord Jellicoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989817" start="44054" end="44069" title="Westway, London" label="Westway A40 (M)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989817" start="44109" end="44111" title="Westway (London)" label="M4"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122313" start="44428" end="44458" title="Secretary of State for the Environment" label="Department for the Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q333858" start="44488" end="44500" title="Peter Walker, Baron Walker of Worcester" label="Peter Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510461" start="44602" end="44627" title="Local Government Act 1972" label="Local Government Act 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q6205517" start="45209" end="45221" title="Joan Vickers" label="Joan Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q578127" start="45234" end="45243" title="River Tamar" label="Tamarside"/>
<link wikidata="Q13530051" start="45288" end="45303" title="Henry Studholme" label="Henry Studholme"/>
<link wikidata="Q327810" start="46046" end="46061" title="Cecil Parkinson" label="Cecil Parkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505" start="46649" end="46657" title="Concorde" label="Concorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q846885" start="47067" end="47071" title="BOAC" label="BOAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q131248" start="47685" end="47697" title="Lee Kuan Yew" label="Lee Kuan Yew"/>
<link wikidata="Q8766" start="48070" end="48085" title="British Airways" label="British Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q131005" start="48119" end="48129" title="Air France" label="Air France"/>
<link wikidata="Q332412" start="48259" end="48268" title="Tony Benn" label="Tony Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="48548" end="48569" title="European Space Agency" label="European Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="48892" end="48909" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795302" start="49136" end="49152" title="Arnold Weinstock" label="Arnold Weinstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208203" start="49162" end="49165" title="General Electric Company" label="GEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056109" start="49365" end="49375" title="Cecil Harmsworth King" label="Cecil King"/>
<link wikidata="Q333412" start="49659" end="49668" title="Jim Prior" label="Jim Prior"/>
<link wikidata="Q333554" start="49793" end="49814" title="Stanley Clinton-Davis" label="Stanley Clinton-Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q170241" start="49838" end="49844" title="Tarzan" label="Tarzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q151284" start="49871" end="49889" title="Johnny Weissmuller" label="Johnny Weissmuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5990253" start="50099" end="50101" title="If... (comic)" label="If"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305065" start="50155" end="50165" title="Steve Bell (cartoonist)" label="Steve Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q12071362" start="50417" end="50435" title="Tracked Hovercraft" label="Tracked Hovercraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176748" start="50682" end="50696" title="David Stoddart, Baron Stoddart of Swindon" label="David Stoddart"/>
<link wikidata="Q334302" start="50961" end="50972" title="Airey Neave" label="Airey Neave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401251" start="51156" end="51170" title="Profumo affair" label="Profumo affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307072" start="51526" end="51536" title="Chief Whip" label="Chief Whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q332759" start="51537" end="51548" title="Francis Pym" label="Francis Pym"/>
<link wikidata="Q952062" start="51945" end="51960" title="Hawker Siddeley" label="Hawker Siddeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q605169" start="51965" end="51977" title="British Rail" label="British Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q13529968" start="52291" end="52309" title="Harry Legge-Bourke" label="Harry Legge-Bourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6027712" start="53317" end="53344" title="Industrial Relations Act 1971" label="industrial relations policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q332412" start="54024" end="54033" title="Tony Benn" label="Tony Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967090" start="54097" end="54122" title="National Enterprise Board" label="National Enterprise Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q333858" start="54529" end="54541" title="Peter Walker, Baron Walker of Worcester" label="Peter Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q918508" start="54612" end="54633" title="October 1974 United Kingdom general election" label="October 1974 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163063" start="54844" end="54881" title="1975 Conservative Party leadership election" label="1975 Conservative leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="54907" end="54924" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q336011" start="54941" end="54954" title="Norman Tebbit" label="Norman Tebbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q333406" start="54974" end="54983" title="John Nott" label="John Nott"/>
<link wikidata="Q333963" start="55072" end="55087" title="Willie Whitelaw" label="Willie Whitelaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829545" start="55163" end="55176" title="Michael Crick" label="Michael Crick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361146" start="56134" end="56148" title="Elinor Goodman" label="Elinor Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q333858" start="56379" end="56391" title="Peter Walker, Baron Walker of Worcester" label="Peter Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q332323" start="56568" end="56581" title="Geoffrey Howe" label="Geoffrey Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q873072" start="57142" end="57150" title="clitoris" label="clitoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q334282" start="57299" end="57317" title="Peter Thorneycroft" label="Peter Thorneycroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046187" start="57436" end="57451" title="British Leyland" label="British Leyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201486" start="57506" end="57512" title="Plant Oxford" label="Cowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q332412" start="57583" end="57592" title="Tony Benn" label="Tony Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698531" start="57873" end="57914" title="Aircraft and Shipbuilding Industries Act 1977" label="Aircraft and Shipbuilding Industries Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5953169" start="58035" end="58041" title="Hybrid instrument" label="hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046512" start="58799" end="58803" title="Pair (parliamentary convention)" label="pair"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58856" end="58880" title="The Red Flag#The song &amp;quot;The Red Flag&amp;quot;" label="&amp;quot;The Red Flag&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432431" start="58905" end="58909" title="ceremonial mace" label="Mace"/>
<link wikidata="Q333919" start="59243" end="59249" title="George Thomas, 1st Viscount Tonypandy" label="Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623933" start="59250" end="59271" title="List of incidents of grave disorder in the British House of Commons" label="suspended the sitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q332691" start="59762" end="59773" title="John Biffen" label="John Biffen"/>
<link wikidata="Q334327" start="59919" end="59930" title="Eric Varley" label="Eric Varley"/>
<link wikidata="Q333401" start="60246" end="60260" title="Timothy Raison" label="Timothy Raison"/>
<link wikidata="Q918450" start="60458" end="60475" title="1979 United Kingdom general election" label="May 1979 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925730" start="60718" end="60736" title="1979 energy crisis" label="1979 energy crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="60751" end="60769" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Iranian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q333858" start="61007" end="61019" title="Peter Walker, Baron Walker of Worcester" label="Peter Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q333412" start="61021" end="61030" title="Jim Prior" label="Jim Prior"/>
<link wikidata="Q333362" start="61032" end="61043" title="Ian Gilmour" label="Ian Gilmour"/>
<link wikidata="Q335038" start="61045" end="61060" title="Lord Carrington" label="Lord Carrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q333578" start="61065" end="61086" title="Norman St John Stevas" label="Norman St John Stevas"/>
<link wikidata="Q335078" start="61172" end="61184" title="Nigel Lawson" label="Nigel Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q327810" start="61189" end="61204" title="Cecil Parkinson" label="Cecil Parkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q332323" start="61372" end="61385" title="Geoffrey Howe" label="Geoffrey Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001340" start="61813" end="61846" title="Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981" label="Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q154322" start="61936" end="61946" title="South Bank" label="South Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q180788" start="61972" end="61988" title="National Gallery" label="National Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="62044" end="62058" title="Prince Charles" label="Prince Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918339" start="62155" end="62180" title="Queen Elizabeth II Centre" label="Queen Elizabeth II Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q936287" start="62380" end="62396" title="English Heritage" label="English Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176922" start="62632" end="62643" title="Peter Shore" label="Peter Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075616" start="63154" end="63168" title="Peter Hennessy" label="Peter Hennessy"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="63279" end="63297" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q333858" start="63709" end="63721" title="Peter Walker, Baron Walker of Worcester" label="Peter Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q15820422" start="64083" end="64095" title="Irwin Bellow, Baron Bellwin" label="Lord Bellwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="64495" end="64508" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262296" start="65333" end="65345" title="Derek Rayner" label="Derek Rayner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306184" start="65471" end="65484" title="council house" label="council house"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916067" start="66076" end="66092" title="Housing Act 1980" label="Housing Act 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333655" start="66861" end="66873" title="Right to Buy" label="Right to Buy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5932555" start="68214" end="68224" title="Hugh Rossi" label="Hugh Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q389109" start="68245" end="68257" title="John Stanley (Tonbridge and Malling MP)" label="John Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q220723" start="69424" end="69439" title="Ken Livingstone" label="Ken Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476542" start="69443" end="69449" title="Greater London Council" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q264196" start="69454" end="69468" title="David Blunkett" label="David Blunkett"/>
<link wikidata="Q333312" start="71062" end="71070" title="Tom King, Baron King of Bridgwater" label="Tom King"/>
<link wikidata="Q332607" start="71656" end="71668" title="Leon Brittan" label="Leon Brittan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096927" start="71674" end="71705" title="Chief Secretary to the Treasury" label="Chief Secretary to the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q333412" start="72368" end="72377" title="Jim Prior" label="Jim Prior"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819945" start="73065" end="73081" title="Audit Commission (United Kingdom)" label="Audit Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739536" start="73294" end="73306" title="inner cities" label="inner cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478311" start="73331" end="73338" title="1981 Brixton riot" label="Brixton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580026" start="73343" end="73356" title="Toxteth riots" label="Toxteth riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q190512" start="73468" end="73476" title="Tear gas" label="Tear gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q333401" start="74037" end="74051" title="Timothy Raison" label="Timothy Raison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448143" start="74344" end="74357" title="self-made man" label="self-made man"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820586" start="74528" end="74534" title="Merseyside Police" label="police"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242291" start="74608" end="74623" title="Chief constable" label="Chief constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390559" start="74624" end="74638" title="Kenneth Oxford" label="Kenneth Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804223" start="74804" end="74817" title="Tim Sainsbury" label="Tim Sainsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747305" start="74828" end="74849" title="Robin Leigh-Pemberton" label="Robin Leigh-Pemberton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156391" start="75281" end="75297" title="Robert Armstrong, Baron Armstrong of Ilminster" label="Robert Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015472" start="75299" end="75316" title="Cabinet Secretary (United Kingdom)" label="Cabinet Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5980835" start="75322" end="75334" title="Ian Bancroft" label="Ian Bancroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q336011" start="75955" end="75968" title="Norman Tebbit" label="Norman Tebbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5144684" start="76736" end="76748" title="Colette Bowe" label="Colette Bowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839243" start="77103" end="77119" title="Trevor Jones (British politician)" label="Sir Trevor Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6658351" start="77139" end="77161" title="Liverpool City Council" label="Liverpool City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q643918" start="77416" end="77433" title="Bundesgartenschau" label="Bundesgartenschau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972853" start="77546" end="77570" title="National garden festival" label="National garden festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3920908" start="77663" end="77697" title="Merseyside Development Corporation" label="Merseyside Development Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831123" start="78048" end="78059" title="Royal Albert Dock, Liverpool" label="Albert Dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q591090" start="78241" end="78261" title="Barratt Developments" label="Barratt Developments"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266682" start="78371" end="78401" title="Development Corporation" label="Urban Development Corporations"/>
<link wikidata="Q216360" start="78700" end="78723" title="Docklands Light Railway" label="Docklands Light Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344719" start="78815" end="78830" title="Enterprise Zone" label="Enterprise Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q994925" start="78834" end="78839" title="Corby" label="Corby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627967" start="79368" end="79390" title="John Moores University" label="John Moores University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747647" start="79785" end="79815" title="Secretary of State for Defence" label="Secretary of State for Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q333406" start="79816" end="79825" title="John Nott" label="John Nott"/>
<link wikidata="Q333963" start="80218" end="80233" title="Willie Whitelaw" label="Willie Whitelaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962001" start="80302" end="80324" title="Chief of the Defence Staff (United Kingdom)" label="Chief of Defence Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q335631" start="80325" end="80338" title="Edwin Bramall" label="Edwin Bramall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122316" start="80410" end="80424" title="Chairman of the Conservative Party" label="Party Chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q327810" start="80425" end="80440" title="Cecil Parkinson" label="Cecil Parkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q48249" start="80544" end="80557" title="Falklands War" label="Falklands War"/>
<link wikidata="Q111759032" start="80779" end="80806" title="Permanent secretary" label="Principal Private Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q28037412" start="80807" end="80821" title="Clive Whitmore" label="Clive Whitmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q111759032" start="80825" end="80862" title="Permanent Secretary" label="Permanent Under-Secretary for Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q178511" start="81056" end="81088" title="Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament" label="Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073517" start="81201" end="81208" title="Trident (missile)" label="Trident"/>
<link wikidata="Q181860" start="81213" end="81227" title="Cruise missile" label="Cruise missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="81299" end="81312" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q333650" start="81408" end="81420" title="Peter Blaker" label="Peter Blaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275353" start="82132" end="82151" title="RAF Greenham Common" label="RAF Greenham Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592590" start="82270" end="82281" title="Flak jacket" label="Flak jacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="82732" end="82743" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q327810" start="83048" end="83063" title="Cecil Parkinson" label="Cecil Parkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298285" start="83326" end="83337" title="Ray Whitney (politician)" label="Ray Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="83468" end="83480" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q334337" start="83898" end="83916" title="David Maxwell-Fyfe" label="David Maxwell-Fyfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q479115" start="84158" end="84170" title="Joan Ruddock" label="Joan Ruddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q918466" start="84276" end="84289" title="1983 United Kingdom general election" label="1983 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q111953793" start="84854" end="84870" title="two-star officer" label="two-star officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446003" start="85474" end="85498" title="Royal Ordnance Factories" label="Royal Ordnance Factories"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374547" start="85510" end="85529" title="Royal Navy Dockyard" label="Royal Navy Dockyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207020" start="85534" end="85543" title="HMNB Devonport" label="Devonport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2956391" start="85548" end="85554" title="Rosyth Dockyard" label="Rosyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501631" start="86286" end="86306" title="Admiral of the Fleet (Royal Navy)" label="Admiral of the Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606978" start="86311" end="86322" title="Henry Leach" label="Henry Leach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829545" start="87133" end="87146" title="Michael Crick" label="Michael Crick"/>
<link wikidata="Q39050143" start="87518" end="87555" title="GCHQ trade union ban" label="attempt to ban trade unions from GCHQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422839" start="87589" end="87602" title="Sarah Tisdall" label="Sarah Tisdall"/>
<link wikidata="Q333784" start="87747" end="87758" title="Tam Dalyell" label="Tam Dalyell"/>
<link wikidata="Q540580" start="87859" end="87879" title="ARA General Belgrano" label="ARA General Belgrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q48249" start="87897" end="87910" title="Falklands War" label="Falklands War"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="88114" end="88123" title="Watergate" label="Watergate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912042" start="88131" end="88144" title="Clive Ponting" label="Clive Ponting"/>
<link wikidata="Q28037412" start="88429" end="88443" title="Clive Whitmore" label="Clive Whitmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q389109" start="88589" end="88601" title="John Stanley (Tonbridge and Malling MP)" label="John Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q338044" start="88789" end="88802" title="Denzil Davies" label="Denzil Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q338044" start="89346" end="89359" title="Denzil Davies" label="Denzil Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q389109" start="89467" end="89479" title="John Stanley (Tonbridge and Malling MP)" label="John Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q583809" start="89795" end="89812" title="Solicitor General for England and Wales" label="Solicitor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q334163" start="89817" end="89831" title="Patrick Mayhew" label="Patrick Mayhew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327922" start="90041" end="90056" title="Richard Mottram" label="Richard Mottram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707372" start="90327" end="90341" title="Channel 4 News" label="Channel 4 News"/>
<link wikidata="Q332323" start="90589" end="90602" title="Geoffrey Howe" label="Geoffrey Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q189946" start="90662" end="90665" title="WEU" label="WEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q501866" start="90721" end="90743" title="US invasion of Grenada" label="US invasion of Grenada"/>
<link wikidata="Q211031" start="90844" end="90872" title="Strategic Defense Initiative" label="Strategic Defense Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q434142" start="90944" end="90961" title="Caspar Weinberger" label="Caspar Weinberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q128993" start="92192" end="92198" title="Hawker Siddeley Nimrod" label="Nimrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q13060280" start="92595" end="92605" title="Hugo Young" label="Hugo Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369302" start="92893" end="92932" title="Secretary of State for Northern Ireland" label="Secretary of State for Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q333412" start="92936" end="92945" title="Jim Prior" label="Jim Prior"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076647" start="93418" end="93430" title="Peter Levene" label="Peter Levene"/>
<link wikidata="Q281506" start="93582" end="93608" title="United Scientific Holdings" label="United Scientific Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q18526901" start="93650" end="93666" title="Frank Cooper (civil servant)" label="Sir Frank Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q922727" start="94170" end="94185" title="Type 22 frigate" label="Type 22 frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q336011" start="94188" end="94201" title="Norman Tebbit" label="Norman Tebbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061530" start="94288" end="94299" title="Swan Hunter" label="Swan Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029631" start="94405" end="94418" title="Cammell Laird" label="Cammell Laird"/>
<link wikidata="Q11208" start="94912" end="94924" title="The Pentagon" label="The Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q60777" start="95225" end="95239" title="Manfred Wörner" label="Manfred Wörner"/>
<link wikidata="Q151384" start="95287" end="95298" title="Eurofighter" label="Eurofighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434948" start="95511" end="95519" title="Dassault" label="Dassault"/>
<link wikidata="Q152200" start="95630" end="95638" title="Panavia Tornado" label="Tornados"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829432" start="95864" end="95884" title="Al-Yamamah arms deal" label="Al-Yamamah arms deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858507" start="96078" end="96119" title="Secretary of State for Trade and Industry" label="Secretary of State for Trade and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706245" start="96136" end="96148" title="Alan Bristow" label="Alan Bristow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045758" start="96625" end="96656" title="United Technologies Corporation" label="United Technologies Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q549189" start="96682" end="96690" title="Sikorsky Aircraft" label="Sikorsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q189491" start="96792" end="96817" title="Sikorsky UH-60 Black Hawk" label="Sikorsky UH-60 Black Hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208203" start="96965" end="96968" title="General Electric Company" label="GEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q918733" start="96973" end="96990" title="British Aerospace" label="British Aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q650639" start="97121" end="97133" title="Aérospatiale" label="Aérospatiale"/>
<link wikidata="Q836325" start="97142" end="97145" title="Messerschmitt-Bölkow-Blohm" label="MBB"/>
<link wikidata="Q398845" start="97158" end="97164" title="Agusta" label="Agusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q332607" start="97204" end="97216" title="Leon Brittan" label="Leon Brittan"/>
<link wikidata="Q333963" start="98246" end="98262" title="William Whitelaw" label="William Whitelaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q332323" start="98288" end="98301" title="Geoffrey Howe" label="Geoffrey Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q335078" start="98326" end="98338" title="Nigel Lawson" label="Nigel Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q334298" start="99442" end="99454" title="John Wakeham" label="John Wakeham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015472" start="99828" end="99845" title="Cabinet Secretary (United Kingdom)" label="Cabinet Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156391" start="99846" end="99862" title="Robert Armstrong, Baron Armstrong of Ilminster" label="Robert Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q334163" start="101056" end="101070" title="Patrick Mayhew" label="Patrick Mayhew"/>
<link wikidata="Q583809" start="101072" end="101089" title="Solicitor General for England and Wales" label="Solicitor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631987" start="101101" end="101117" title="Attorney General for England and Wales" label="Attorney-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q333350" start="101125" end="101139" title="Michael Havers" label="Michael Havers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152847" start="101407" end="101427" title="Lloyds Bank" label="Lloyds Merchant Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5144684" start="102701" end="102713" title="Colette Bowe" label="Colette Bowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065805" start="102892" end="102906" title="Charles Powell, Baron Powell of Bayswater" label="Charles Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893252" start="102911" end="102925" title="Bernard Ingham" label="Bernard Ingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q208875" start="103089" end="103096" title="The Sun (United Kingdom)" label="The Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q333145" start="103460" end="103474" title="George Younger" label="George Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046415" start="103966" end="103991" title="Collective responsibility" label="Collective responsibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q315999" start="104849" end="104867" title="Joseph Chamberlain" label="Joseph Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q333858" start="104905" end="104917" title="Peter Walker, Baron Walker of Worcester" label="Peter Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q334282" start="105847" end="105865" title="Peter Thorneycroft" label="Peter Thorneycroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q335038" start="105916" end="105931" title="Lord Carrington" label="Lord Carrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q332546" start="105995" end="106008" title="Norman Lamont" label="Norman Lamont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306769" start="106013" end="106021" title="John Lee, Baron Lee of Trafford" label="John Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837662" start="106080" end="106094" title="Spitting Image" label="Spitting Image"/>
<link wikidata="Q317258" start="106565" end="106577" title="Neil Kinnock" label="Neil Kinnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615093" start="107825" end="107838" title="Steven Norris" label="Steven Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q918472" start="108222" end="108235" title="1987 United Kingdom general election" label="1987 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707372" start="108485" end="108499" title="Channel 4 News" label="Channel 4 News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139062" start="108545" end="108556" title="James Mates" label="James Mates"/>
<link wikidata="Q13529989" start="108587" end="108600" title="Michael Mates" label="Michael Mates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226613" start="108606" end="108615" title="John Cole (journalist)" label="John Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174965" start="108727" end="108740" title="Peter Jenkins (journalist)" label="Peter Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772109" start="108766" end="108780" title="Anthony Bevins" label="Anthony Bevins"/>
<link wikidata="Q653236" start="108826" end="108843" title="Alastair Campbell" label="Alastair Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6384448" start="109000" end="109013" title="Keith Hampson" label="Keith Hampson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6307234" start="109018" end="109033" title="Julian Haviland" label="Julian Haviland"/>
<link wikidata="Q13060280" start="109408" end="109418" title="Hugo Young" label="Hugo Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q8882" start="109659" end="109695" title="President of the European Commission" label="President of the European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q153425" start="109696" end="109710" title="Jacques Delors" label="Jacques Delors"/>
<link wikidata="Q558063" start="109770" end="109788" title="Nicholas Henderson" label="Nicholas Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4059659" start="109793" end="109806" title="Antony Acland" label="Antony Acland"/>
<link wikidata="Q368611" start="110085" end="110099" title="Social Chapter" label="Social Chapter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="110111" end="110121" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q11146" start="110149" end="110166" title="Maastricht Treaty" label="Maastricht Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="110299" end="110311" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q323488" start="110313" end="110324" title="Roy Jenkins" label="Roy Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q271889" start="110328" end="110342" title="Kenneth Clarke" label="Kenneth Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430036" start="110737" end="110748" title="Will Hutton" label="Will Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q204065" start="110864" end="110872" title="Workfare" label="Workfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q266408" start="110888" end="110902" title="Richard Layard" label="Richard Layard"/>
<link wikidata="Q40052" start="111090" end="111093" title="Social Democratic Party (UK)" label="SDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="111263" end="111273" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396591" start="111281" end="111291" title="New Labour" label="New Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395309" start="111429" end="111437" title="Poll tax (Great Britain)" label="Poll Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="111576" end="111588" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q13529989" start="111616" end="111629" title="Michael Mates" label="Michael Mates"/>
<link wikidata="Q335078" start="111985" end="111997" title="Nigel Lawson" label="Nigel Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q324805" start="112124" end="112139" title="Nicholas Ridley, Baron Ridley of Liddesdale" label="Nicholas Ridley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552255" start="112280" end="112290" title="green belt" label="green belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q336011" start="112806" end="112819" title="Norman Tebbit" label="Norman Tebbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6035456" start="112858" end="112890" title="Inner London Education Authority" label="Inner London Education Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="112966" end="112969" title="NHS" label="NHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973672" start="112974" end="112993" title="Water privatisation in England and Wales" label="water privatisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787608" start="113097" end="113107" title="Spycatcher" label="Spycatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079572" start="113123" end="113148" title="Official Secrets Act 1989" label="Official Secrets Act 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q8901" start="113256" end="113277" title="European Central Bank" label="European Central Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q332323" start="113448" end="113461" title="Geoffrey Howe" label="Geoffrey Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526020" start="113623" end="113640" title="Sir Anthony Meyer" label="Sir Anthony Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163062" start="113718" end="113750" title="1989 Conservative Party leadership election" label="leadership challenge to Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q6384448" start="113771" end="113784" title="Keith Hampson" label="Keith Hampson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179178" start="114068" end="114082" title="Glasgow Herald" label="Glasgow Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841008" start="114373" end="114402" title="1990 Mid Staffordshire by-election" label="Mid Staffordshire by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225532" start="114411" end="114425" title="Poll tax riots" label="Poll tax riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q333390" start="114509" end="114522" title="Kenneth Baker, Baron Baker of Dorking" label="Kenneth Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q856650" start="115212" end="115230" title="Invasion of Kuwait" label="Invasion of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q333537" start="115427" end="115439" title="David Mellor" label="David Mellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329831" start="115650" end="115672" title="1990 Eastbourne by-election" label="Eastbourne by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q332323" start="115731" end="115744" title="Geoffrey Howe" label="Geoffrey Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q146906" start="115959" end="115976" title="Hussein of Jordan" label="Hussein of Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q184351" start="116004" end="116018" title="Yitzhak Shamir" label="Yitzhak Shamir"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893252" start="116317" end="116331" title="Bernard Ingham" label="Bernard Ingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q653236" start="116813" end="116830" title="Alastair Campbell" label="Alastair Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747647" start="118502" end="118532" title="Secretary of State for Defence" label="Secretary of State for Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q333312" start="118533" end="118541" title="Tom King, Baron King of Bridgwater" label="Tom King"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="118666" end="118685" title="Gulf War" label="go to war in Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q337375" start="118700" end="118712" title="Douglas Hurd" label="Douglas Hurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q327810" start="118715" end="118730" title="Cecil Parkinson" label="Cecil Parkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q332546" start="118735" end="118748" title="Norman Lamont" label="Norman Lamont"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="118762" end="118772" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="119045" end="119055" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="119570" end="119580" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q749980" start="120131" end="120143" title="Edward Leigh" label="Edward Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5981710" start="120785" end="120794" title="Ian Grist" label="Ian Grist"/>
<link wikidata="Q13529989" start="120832" end="120845" title="Michael Mates" label="Michael Mates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395309" start="121774" end="121782" title="Poll tax (Great Britain)" label="Poll Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q333525" start="122026" end="122042" title="Michael Portillo" label="Michael Portillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5391268" start="122158" end="122168" title="Robert Key (politician)" label="Robert Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q332546" start="122560" end="122573" title="Norman Lamont" label="Norman Lamont"/>
<link wikidata="Q322148" start="122775" end="122786" title="Council Tax" label="Council Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224383" start="122953" end="122963" title="Sarah Hogg" label="Sarah Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664108" start="123471" end="123488" title="Banham Commission" label="Banham Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q333635" start="123797" end="123808" title="John Gummer" label="John Gummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8531" start="124080" end="124098" title="1996 Olympic Games" label="1996 Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q543609" start="124423" end="124436" title="1992 United Kingdom general election" label="1992 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q332377" start="124466" end="124476" title="John Smith (Labour Party leader)" label="John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776982" start="124490" end="124504" title="prawn cocktail" label="prawn cocktail"/>
<link wikidata="Q543609" start="124969" end="124990" title="1992 United Kingdom general election" label="1992 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858507" start="125109" end="125152" title="Secretary of State for Business and Trade" label="&amp;quot;President of the Board of Trade&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q526999" start="125374" end="125380" title="quorum" label="quorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867297" start="125444" end="125448" title="Ministry of International Trade and Industry" label="MITI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972373" start="125762" end="125766" title="National Economic Development Council" label="NEDO"/>
<link wikidata="Q332546" start="125870" end="125883" title="Norman Lamont" label="Norman Lamont"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337819" start="126050" end="126063" title="Neil Hamilton (politician)" label="Neil Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q749980" start="126068" end="126080" title="Edward Leigh" label="Edward Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="126101" end="126113" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152847" start="126546" end="126557" title="Lloyds Bank" label="Lloyds Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q994112" start="126582" end="126594" title="Midland Bank" label="Midland Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079218" start="126602" end="126624" title="Office of Fair Trading" label="Office of Fair Trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q262509" start="126711" end="126735" title="Department of Energy (United Kingdom)" label="separate Energy ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969651" start="126927" end="126939" title="British Coal" label="British Coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807180" start="127162" end="127171" title="Tim Eggar" label="Tim Eggar"/>
<link wikidata="Q400500" start="128215" end="128230" title="Black Wednesday" label="Black Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q333537" start="128250" end="128262" title="David Mellor" label="David Mellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758169" start="128309" end="128319" title="Marcus Fox" label="Marcus Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197404" start="128321" end="128331" title="Jim Pawsey" label="Jim Pawsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q337577" start="128333" end="128351" title="Nicholas Winterton" label="Nicholas Winterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q269449" start="128353" end="128362" title="Bill Cash" label="Bill Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321005" start="128364" end="128377" title="Rhodes Boyson" label="Rhodes Boyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089523" start="128805" end="128816" title="Chumbawamba" label="Chumbawamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455748" start="128997" end="129024" title="Fitzwilliam, West Yorkshire" label="Fitzwilliam, West Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q74047" start="129049" end="129062" title="ghost village" label="ghost village"/>
<link wikidata="Q27489" start="129252" end="129262" title="DAF Trucks" label="DAF Trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="129667" end="129673" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q552780" start="130259" end="130271" title="Chris Morris (satirist)" label="Chris Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="130292" end="130303" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6183709" start="130346" end="130357" title="Jerry Hayes" label="Jerry Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325485" start="130374" end="130388" title="List of prematurely reported obituaries" label="on-air tribute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437124" start="130675" end="130687" title="Scott Report" label="Scott Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793837" start="130699" end="130711" title="Arms-to-Iraq" label="Arms-to-Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q334638" start="130980" end="130994" title="Nicholas Lyell" label="Nicholas Lyell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424692" start="131180" end="131207" title="Tom Bingham, Baron Bingham of Cornhill" label="Bingham LJ&amp;#x27;s judgement"/>
<link wikidata="Q271889" start="131654" end="131668" title="Kenneth Clarke" label="Kenneth Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q168235" start="131722" end="131741" title="Tristan Garel-Jones" label="Tristan Garel-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195701" start="131809" end="131820" title="Private Eye" label="Private Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="132064" end="132074" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839387" start="132158" end="132172" title="Back to Basics (campaign)" label="Back to Basics"/>
<link wikidata="Q313489" start="132356" end="132370" title="Jeffrey Archer" label="Jeffrey Archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835930" start="132536" end="132541" title="BMARC" label="BMARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="133949" end="133964" title="Euro" label="Single Currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q337375" start="134070" end="134082" title="Douglas Hurd" label="Douglas Hurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q333487" start="134128" end="134143" title="Malcolm Rifkind" label="Malcolm Rifkind"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="134429" end="134439" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721256" start="134508" end="134525" title="Maastricht Rebels" label="Maastricht Rebels"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163065" start="134833" end="134852" title="1995 Conservative Party leadership election" label="leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q333846" start="134895" end="134907" title="John Redwood" label="John Redwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846384" start="134912" end="134940" title="Secretary of State for Wales" label="Secretary of State for Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q6384448" start="135207" end="135220" title="Keith Hampson" label="Keith Hampson"/>
<link wikidata="Q576147" start="135222" end="135237" title="Richard Ottaway" label="Richard Ottaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q13529989" start="135239" end="135252" title="Michael Mates" label="Michael Mates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078620" start="135257" end="135276" title="Peter Temple-Morris" label="Peter Temple-Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q272526" start="135357" end="135370" title="Peter Tapsell (British politician)" label="Peter Tapsell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829545" start="135532" end="135545" title="Michael Crick" label="Michael Crick"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="135837" end="135847" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507619" start="136085" end="136106" title="Deputy Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Deputy Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q333964" start="136633" end="136645" title="Douglas Hogg" label="Douglas Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="137740" end="137757" title="Brexit Referendum" label="Brexit Referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4591514" start="138098" end="138122" title="1996 Manchester bombing" label="IRA bomb on 15 June 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q29014" start="138959" end="138980" title="Millennium Dome" label="Millennium Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="139052" end="139062" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="139238" end="139259" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q180762" start="139293" end="139299" title="angina" label="angina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325542" start="139310" end="139338" title="stent" label="tube inserted into an artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163066" start="139569" end="139588" title="1997 Conservative Party leadership election" label="leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q58282" start="139623" end="139636" title="William Hague" label="William Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="139851" end="139861" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="139863" end="139875" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q311214" start="139880" end="139890" title="Robin Cook" label="Robin Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="139935" end="139939" title="Euro" label="Euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137694" start="139971" end="140018" title="Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour" label="Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243284" start="140031" end="140050" title="resignation Honours" label="resignation Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q38931" start="140162" end="140177" title="Mayor of London" label="Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q313489" start="140191" end="140205" title="Jeffrey Archer" label="Jeffrey Archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460464" start="140286" end="140314" title="Shadow Cabinet of John Major" label="Shadow Cabinet of John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741536" start="140328" end="140359" title="Leader of the Opposition (United Kingdom)" label="Deputy Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q25906187" start="140361" end="140404" title="Shadow Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster" label="Shadow Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q15039982" start="140409" end="140457" title="Shadow Secretary of State for Trade and Industry" label="Shadow Secretary of State for Trade and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790750" start="140573" end="140582" title="The Spectator" label="Spectator"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="140622" end="140635" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914468" start="140701" end="140710" title="life peer" label="life peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216331" start="140770" end="140778" title="Thenford" label="Thenford"/>
<link wikidata="Q302486" start="140876" end="140893" title="Iain Duncan Smith" label="Iain Duncan Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q333525" start="140996" end="141012" title="Michael Portillo" label="Michael Portillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163069" start="141322" end="141352" title="2005 Conservative Party leadership election" label="2005 party leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q192" start="141388" end="141401" title="David Cameron" label="David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q271889" start="141557" end="141571" title="Kenneth Clarke" label="Kenneth Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q333846" start="141607" end="141619" title="John Redwood" label="John Redwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q333635" start="141621" end="141632" title="John Gummer" label="John Gummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q300349" start="141634" end="141649" title="Stephen Dorrell" label="Stephen Dorrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q334357" start="141654" end="141669" title="Michael Forsyth, Baron Forsyth of Drumlean" label="Michael Forsyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q302486" start="141691" end="141708" title="Iain Duncan Smith" label="Iain Duncan Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000845" start="141898" end="141907" title="BBC Wales" label="BBC Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q14954376" start="141924" end="141935" title="Coming Home (UK TV series)" label="Coming Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="142174" end="142201" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q332493" start="142202" end="142216" title="George Osborne" label="George Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q578269" start="142221" end="142232" title="HM Treasury" label="HM Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="142279" end="142293" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735422" start="142306" end="142319" title="maiden speech" label="maiden speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739799" start="142382" end="142407" title="The History of Parliament" label="The History of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q119684099" start="142508" end="142537" title="Leading (podcast)" label="The Rest Is Politics: Leading"/>
<link wikidata="Q653236" start="142559" end="142576" title="Alastair Campbell" label="Alastair Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q328892" start="142581" end="142593" title="Rory Stewart" label="Rory Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241331" start="142875" end="142886" title="2013 United Kingdom budget" label="2013 Budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q332493" start="143226" end="143240" title="George Osborne" label="George Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q302486" start="143276" end="143293" title="Iain Duncan Smith" label="Iain Duncan Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772820" start="143347" end="143362" title="Marriage (Same Sex Couples) Act 2013" label="legalisation of"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="143363" end="143380" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3121" start="143413" end="143422" title="Lord Dear" label="Lord Dear"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="143469" end="143490" title="Marriage (Same Sex Couples) Act 2013#Second Reading 2" label="same-sex marriage act"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="143592" end="143614" title="2016 Brexit referendum" label="2016 Brexit referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="143747" end="143760" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q264766" start="144024" end="144035" title="Theresa May" label="Theresa May"/>
<link wikidata="Q264766" start="144217" end="144228" title="Theresa May" label="Theresa May"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="144492" end="144509" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777041" start="144511" end="144536" title="The lady&amp;#x27;s not for turning" label="this lady was for turning"/>
<link wikidata="Q27629701" start="144648" end="144670" title="United Kingdom invocation of Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union" label="article 50 legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="144897" end="144913" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q264766" start="145158" end="145169" title="Theresa May" label="Theresa May"/>
<link wikidata="Q29077263" start="145177" end="145196" title="Brexit negotiations" label="Brexit negotiations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="145892" end="145900" title="Horlicks#Alternative word usage" label="Horlicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="145952" end="145962" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="145967" end="145977" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q28412792" start="146044" end="146056" title="Proposed referendum on the Brexit withdrawal agreement" label="a referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="146200" end="146206" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="147335" end="147348" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433693" start="147683" end="147697" title="Whip (politics)" label="whip suspended"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="147733" end="147750" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q22001091" start="147790" end="147823" title="2019 European Parliament election in the United Kingdom" label="2019 European Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q30173038" start="147870" end="147891" title="2019 United Kingdom general election" label="2019 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="147929" end="147942" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q117284252" start="148216" end="148244" title="Commons Privileges Committee investigation into Boris Johnson" label="Commons Privileges Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q217228" start="148309" end="148317" title="Sky News" label="Sky News"/>
<link wikidata="Q110128765" start="148370" end="148379" title="Partygate" label="Partygate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767677" start="148902" end="148909" title="Annabel Heseltine" label="Annabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q272194" start="149154" end="149164" title="Ted Hughes" label="Ted Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078212" start="149345" end="149351" title="Tatler" label="Tatler"/>
<link wikidata="Q38280" start="149445" end="149453" title="German Shepherd" label="Alsatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="149643" end="149655" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402475" start="149832" end="149849" title="Press Association" label="Press Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q652653" start="149878" end="149886" title="Animal euthanasia" label="put down"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308138" start="150061" end="150077" title="careless driving" label="careless driving"/>
<link wikidata="Q17527196" start="150348" end="150362" title="Thenford House" label="Thenford House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="150830" end="150835" title="Lenin" label="Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="150842" end="150848" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q272231" start="150992" end="151001" title="arboretum" label="arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="151134" end="151141" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522442" start="151225" end="151246" title="Gardeners&amp;#x27; World" label="Gardeners&amp;#x27; World"/>
<link wikidata="Q477613" start="151347" end="151367" title="Château de Villandry" label="Château de Villandry"/>
<link wikidata="Q59773360" start="151438" end="151494" title="List of awards and honours received by Michael Heseltine" label="List of awards and honours received by Michael Heseltine"/>
<link wikidata="Q271889" start="151507" end="151521" title="Kenneth Clarke" label="Kenneth Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q920355" start="151654" end="151669" title="Primrose League" label="Primrose League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6307083" start="151732" end="151748" title="Julian Critchley" label="Julian Critchley"/>
<link wikidata="Q518311" start="151802" end="151815" title="André Deutsch" label="André Deutsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829545" start="151845" end="151858" title="Michael Crick" label="Michael Crick"/>
<link wikidata="Q14175176" start="151982" end="152004" title="Hodder &amp;amp; Stoughton" label="Hodder &amp;amp; Stoughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q573388" start="152110" end="152124" title="Anthony Howard (journalist)" label="Anthony Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344798" start="152128" end="152141" title="Edward Pearce (journalist)" label="Edward Pearce"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="152180" end="152203" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q21061467" start="152632" end="152651" title="Biteback Publishing" label="Biteback Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q55394406" start="152675" end="152695" title="Opposition to Brexit" label="Opposition to Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q55074877" start="152697" end="152715" title="People&amp;#x27;s Vote" label="People&amp;#x27;s Vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q28474619" start="152961" end="152978" title="Simon Hattenstone" label="Simon Hattenstone"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64045" wikidata="Q244145" url="?curid=64045" title="Chromosomal crossover">
<text>Chromosomal crossover, or crossing over, is the exchange of genetic material during sexual reproduction between two homologous chromosomes&#x27; non-sister chromatids that results in recombinant chromosomes. It is one of the final phases of genetic recombination, which occurs in the &quot;pachytene&quot; stage of prophase I of meiosis during a process called synapsis. Synapsis begins before the synaptonemal complex develops and is not completed until near the end of prophase I. Crossover usually occurs when matching regions on matching chromosomes break and then reconnect to the other chromosome.

Crossing over was described, in theory, by Thomas Hunt Morgan; the term crossover was coined by Morgan and Eleth Cattell. Hunt relied on the discovery of Frans Alfons Janssens who described the phenomenon in 1909 and had called it &quot;chiasmatypie&quot;. The term &quot;chiasma&quot; is linked, if not identical, to chromosomal crossover. Morgan immediately saw the great importance of Janssens&#x27; cytological interpretation of chiasmata to the experimental results of his research on the heredity of &quot;Drosophila&quot;. The physical basis of crossing over was first demonstrated by Harriet Creighton and Barbara McClintock in 1931.

The linked frequency of crossing over between two gene loci (markers) is the &quot;crossing-over value&quot;. For fixed set of genetic and environmental conditions, recombination in a particular region of a linkage structure (chromosome) tends to be constant and the same is then true for the crossing-over value which is used in the production of genetic maps.

When Hotta et al. in 1977 compared meiotic crossing-over (recombination) in lily and mouse they concluded that diverse eukaryotes share a common pattern. This finding suggested that chromosomal crossing over is a general characteristic of eukaryotic meiosis.

==Origins==
There are two popular and overlapping theories that explain the origins of crossing-over, coming from the different theories on the origin of meiosis. The first theory rests upon the idea that meiosis evolved as another method of DNA repair, and thus crossing-over is a novel way to replace possibly damaged sections of DNA. The second theory comes from the idea that meiosis evolved from bacterial transformation, with the function of propagating diversity.

In 1931, Barbara McClintock discovered a triploid maize plant. She made key findings regarding corn&#x27;s karyotype, including the size and shape of the chromosomes. McClintock used the prophase and metaphase stages of mitosis to describe the morphology of corn&#x27;s chromosomes, and later showed the first ever cytological demonstration of crossing over in meiosis. Working with student Harriet Creighton, McClintock also made significant contributions to the early understanding of codependency of linked genes.

===DNA repair theory===
Crossing over and DNA repair are very similar processes, which utilize many of the same protein complexes.
In her report, &quot;The Significance of Responses of the Genome to Challenge&quot;, McClintock studied corn to show how corn&#x27;s genome would change itself to overcome threats to its survival. She used 450 self-pollinated plants that received from each parent a chromosome with a ruptured end. She used modified patterns of gene expression on different sectors of leaves of her corn plants to show that transposable elements (&quot;controlling elements&quot;) hide in the genome, and their mobility allows them to alter the action of genes at different loci. These elements can also restructure the genome, anywhere from a few nucleotides to whole segments of chromosome.
Recombinases and primases lay a foundation of nucleotides along the DNA sequence. One such particular protein complex that is conserved between processes is RAD51, a well conserved recombinase protein that has been shown to be crucial in DNA repair as well as cross over. Several other genes in &quot;D. melanogaster&quot; have been linked as well to both processes, by showing that mutants at these specific loci cannot undergo DNA repair or crossing over. Such genes include mei-41, mei-9, hdm, , and brca2. This large group of conserved genes between processes supports the theory of a close evolutionary relationship.
Furthermore, DNA repair and crossover have been found to favor similar regions on chromosomes. In an experiment using radiation hybrid mapping on wheat&#x27;s (&quot;Triticum aestivum L.&quot;) 3B chromosome, crossing over and DNA repair were found to occur predominantly in the same regions. Furthermore, crossing over has been correlated to occur in response to stressful, and likely DNA damaging, conditions. 

===Links to bacterial transformation===
The process of bacterial transformation also shares many similarities with chromosomal cross over, particularly in the formation of overhangs on the sides of the broken DNA strand, allowing for the annealing of a new strand. Bacterial transformation itself has been linked to DNA repair many times. The second theory comes from the idea that meiosis evolved from bacterial transformation, with the function of propagating genetic diversity. Thus, this evidence suggests that it is a question of whether cross over is linked to DNA repair or bacterial transformation, as the two do not appear to be mutually exclusive. It is likely that crossing over may have evolved from bacterial transformation, which in turn developed from DNA repair, thus explaining the links between all three processes. 

==Chemistry==
Meiotic recombination may be initiated by double-stranded breaks that are introduced into the DNA by exposure to DNA damaging agents, or the Spo11 protein. One or more exonucleases then digest the 5&#x27; ends generated by the double-stranded breaks to produce 3&#x27; single-stranded DNA tails (see diagram). The meiosis-specific recombinase Dmc1 and the general recombinase Rad51 coat the single-stranded DNA to form nucleoprotein filaments. The recombinases catalyze invasion of the opposite chromatid by the single-stranded DNA from one end of the break. Next, the 3&#x27; end of the invading DNA primes DNA synthesis, causing displacement of the complementary strand, which subsequently anneals to the single-stranded DNA generated from the other end of the initial double-stranded break. The structure that results is a &quot;cross-strand exchange&quot;, also known as a Holliday junction. The contact between two chromatids that will soon undergo crossing-over is known as a &quot;chiasma&quot;. The Holliday junction is a tetrahedral structure which can be &#x27;pulled&#x27; by other recombinases, moving it along the four-stranded structure.
===MSH4 and MSH5===
The MSH4 and MSH5 proteins form a hetero-oligomeric structure (heterodimer) in yeast and humans. In the yeast &quot;Saccharomyces cerevisiae&quot;, MSH4 and MSH5 act specifically to facilitate crossovers between homologous chromosomes during meiosis. The MSH4/MSH5 complex binds and stabilizes double Holliday junctions and promotes their resolution into crossover products. An MSH4 hypomorphic (partially functional) mutant of &quot;S. cerevisiae&quot; showed a 30% genome-wide reduction in crossover numbers and a large number of meioses with non-exchange chromosomes. Nevertheless, this mutant gave rise to spore viability patterns suggesting that segregation of non-exchange chromosomes occurred efficiently. Thus in &quot;S. cerevisiae&quot; proper segregation apparently does not entirely depend on crossovers between homologous pairs. In humans, biallelic loss of function variants to MSH4 and MSH5 are compatible with life, but are associated with azospermia in males (spermatogenic failure) and premature ovarian failure in females. 

===Chiasma===
The grasshopper &quot;Melanoplus femur-rubrum&quot; was exposed to an acute dose of X-rays during each individual stage of meiosis, and chiasma frequency was measured. Irradiation during the leptotene-zygotene stages of meiosis (that is, prior to the pachytene period in which crossover recombination occurs) was found to increase subsequent chiasma frequency. Similarly, in the grasshopper &quot;Chorthippus brunneus&quot;, exposure to X-irradiation during the zygotene-early pachytene stages caused a significant increase in mean cell chiasma frequency. Chiasma frequency was scored at the later diplotene-diakinesis stages of meiosis. These results suggest that X-rays induce DNA damages that are repaired by a crossover pathway leading to chiasma formation.

===Class I and class II crossovers===
Double strand breaks (DSBs) are repaired by two pathways to generate crossovers in eukaryotes. The majority of them are repaired by MutL homologs MLH1 and MLH3, which defines the class I crossovers. The remaining are the result of the class II pathway, which is regulated by MUS81 endonuclease and FANCM translocase. There are interconnections between these two pathways—class I crossovers can compensate for the loss of class II pathway. In MUS81 knockout mice, class I crossovers are elevated, while total crossover counts at chiasmata are normal. However, the mechanisms underlining this crosstalk are not well understood. A recent study suggests that a scaffold protein called SLX4 may participate in this regulation. Specifically, SLX4 knockout mice largely phenocopies the MUS81 knockout—once again, an elevated class I crossovers while normal chiasmata count. In FANCM knockout mice, the class II pathway is hyperactivated, resulting in increased numbers of crossovers that are independent of the MLH1/MLH3 pathway.

==Consequences==

In most eukaryotes, a cell carries two versions of each gene, each referred to as an allele. Each parent passes on one allele to each offspring. An individual gamete inherits a complete haploid complement of alleles on chromosomes that are independently selected from each pair of chromatids lined up on the metaphase plate. Without recombination, all alleles for those genes linked together on the same chromosome would be inherited together. Meiotic recombination allows a more independent segregation between the two alleles that occupy the positions of single genes, as recombination shuffles the allele content between homologous chromosomes.

Recombination results in a new arrangement of maternal and paternal alleles on the same chromosome. Although the same genes appear in the same order, some alleles are different. In this way, it is theoretically possible to have any combination of parental alleles in an offspring, and the fact that two alleles appear together in one offspring does not have any influence on the statistical probability that another offspring will have the same combination. This principle of &quot;independent assortment&quot; of genes is fundamental to genetic inheritance.
However, the frequency of recombination is actually not the same for all gene combinations. This leads to the notion of &quot;genetic distance&quot;, which is a measure of recombination frequency averaged over a (suitably large) sample of pedigrees. Loosely speaking, one may say that this is because recombination is greatly influenced by the proximity of one gene to another. If two genes are located close together on a chromosome, the likelihood that a recombination event will separate these two genes is less than if they were farther apart. Genetic linkage describes the tendency of genes to be inherited together as a result of their location on the same chromosome. Linkage disequilibrium describes a situation in which some combinations of genes or genetic markers occur more or less frequently in a population than would be expected from their distances apart. This concept is applied when searching for a gene that may cause a particular disease. This is done by comparing the occurrence of a specific DNA sequence with the appearance of a disease. When a high correlation between the two is found, it is likely that the appropriate gene sequence is really closer

==Non-homologous crossover==
Crossovers typically occur between homologous regions of matching chromosomes, but similarities in sequence and other factors can result in mismatched alignments. Most DNA is composed of base pair sequences repeated very large numbers of times. These repetitious segments, often referred to as satellites, are fairly homogeneous among a species. During DNA replication, each strand of DNA is used as a template for the creation of new strands using a partially-conserved mechanism; proper functioning of this process results in two identical, paired chromosomes, often called sisters. Sister chromatid crossover events are known to occur at a rate of several crossover events per cell per division in eukaryotes. Most of these events involve an exchange of equal amounts of genetic information, but unequal exchanges may occur due to sequence mismatch. These are referred to by a variety of names, including non-homologous crossover, unequal crossover, and unbalanced recombination, and result in an insertion or deletion of genetic information into the chromosome. While rare compared to homologous crossover events, these mutations are drastic, affecting many loci at the same time. They are considered the main driver behind the generation of gene duplications and are a general source of mutation within the genome.

The specific causes of non-homologous crossover events are unknown, but several influential factors are known to increase the likelihood of an unequal crossover. One common vector leading to unbalanced recombination is the repair of double-strand breaks (DSBs). DSBs are often repaired using homology directed repair, a process which involves invasion of a template strand by the DSB strand (see figure below). Nearby homologous regions of the template strand are often used for repair, which can give rise to either insertions or deletions in the genome if a non-homologous but complementary part of the template strand is used. Sequence similarity is a major player in crossover – crossover events are more likely to occur in long regions of close identity on a gene. This means that any section of the genome with long sections of repetitive DNA is prone to crossover events.

The presence of transposable elements is another influential element of non-homologous crossover. Repetitive regions of code characterize transposable elements; complementary but non-homologous regions are ubiquitous within transposons. Because chromosomal regions composed of transposons have large quantities of identical, repetitious code in a condensed space, it is thought that transposon regions undergoing a crossover event are more prone to erroneous complementary match-up; that is to say, a section of a chromosome containing a lot of identical sequences, should it undergo a crossover event, is less certain to match up with a perfectly homologous section of complementary code and more prone to binding with a section of code on a slightly different part of the chromosome. This results in unbalanced recombination, as genetic information may be either inserted or deleted into the new chromosome, depending on where the recombination occurred.

While the motivating factors behind unequal recombination remain obscure, elements of the physical mechanism have been elucidated. Mismatch repair (MMR) proteins, for instance, are a well-known regulatory family of proteins, responsible for regulating mismatched sequences of DNA during replication and escape regulation. The operative goal of MMRs is the restoration of the parental genotype. One class of MMR in particular, MutSβ, is known to initiate the correction of insertion-deletion mismatches of up to 16 nucleotides. Little is known about the excision process in eukaryotes, but &quot;E. coli&quot; excisions involve the cleaving of a nick on either the 5&#x27; or 3&#x27; strand, after which DNA helicase and DNA polymerase III bind and generate single-stranded proteins, which are digested by exonucleases and attached to the strand by ligase. Multiple MMR pathways have been implicated in the maintenance of complex organism genome stability, and any of many possible malfunctions in the MMR pathway result in DNA editing and correction errors. Therefore, while it is not certain precisely what mechanisms lead to errors of non-homologous crossover, it is extremely likely that the MMR pathway is involved.

== See also ==
* Unequal crossing over
* Coefficient of coincidence
* Genetic distance
* Independent assortment
* Mitotic crossover
* Recombinant frequency

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q244145" start="0" end="21" title="Chromosomal crossover" label="Chromosomal crossover"/>
<link wikidata="Q244145" start="26" end="39" title="Chromosomal crossover" label="crossing over"/>
<link wikidata="Q182353" start="84" end="103" title="sexual reproduction" label="sexual reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q849622" start="116" end="137" title="homologous chromosome" label="homologous chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066168" start="145" end="166" title="sister chromatids" label="non-sister chromatids"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="195" end="205" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q211675" start="241" end="262" title="genetic recombination" label="genetic recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424695" start="315" end="325" title="prophase I" label="prophase I"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424695" start="329" end="336" title="meiosis" label="meiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175967" start="361" end="369" title="synapsis" label="synapsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064069" start="398" end="418" title="synaptonemal complex" label="synaptonemal complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q177681" start="648" end="666" title="Thomas Hunt Morgan" label="Thomas Hunt Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850675" start="759" end="780" title="Frans Alfons Janssens" label="Frans Alfons Janssens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065460" start="877" end="884" title="chiasma (genetics)" label="chiasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q312154" start="1117" end="1127" title="Drosophila" label="Drosophila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586140" start="1197" end="1214" title="Harriet Creighton" label="Harriet Creighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q199654" start="1219" end="1237" title="Barbara McClintock" label="Barbara McClintock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="1298" end="1302" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q767511" start="1309" end="1316" title="genetic marker" label="markers"/>
<link wikidata="Q28147339" start="1331" end="1350" title="crossing-over value" label="crossing-over value"/>
<link wikidata="Q211675" start="1413" end="1426" title="genetic recombination" label="recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="1474" end="1484" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q843863" start="1596" end="1607" title="genetic map" label="genetic map"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424695" start="1646" end="1653" title="meiosis" label="meiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q211675" start="1669" end="1682" title="genetic recombination" label="recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="1730" end="1739" title="eukaryote" label="eukaryote"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424695" start="2025" end="2032" title="meiosis" label="meiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q210538" start="2113" end="2123" title="DNA repair" label="DNA repair"/>
<link wikidata="Q461499" start="2272" end="2296" title="bacterial transformation" label="bacterial transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235015" start="3825" end="3830" title="RAD51" label="RAD51"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280351" start="4408" end="4432" title="radiation hybrid mapping" label="radiation hybrid mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q461499" start="5107" end="5131" title="bacterial transformation" label="bacterial transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18037548" start="5695" end="5700" title="Spo11" label="Spo11"/>
<link wikidata="Q411664" start="5722" end="5733" title="exonuclease" label="exonuclease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995607" start="5751" end="5763" title="Directionality (molecular biology)" label="5&amp;#x27; ends"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172461" start="5885" end="5896" title="recombinase" label="recombinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q18036155" start="5897" end="5901" title="Dmc1" label="Dmc1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235015" start="5930" end="5935" title="Rad51" label="Rad51"/>
<link wikidata="Q623749" start="6049" end="6058" title="chromatid" label="chromatid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624837" start="6431" end="6448" title="Holliday junction" label="Holliday junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065460" start="6542" end="6549" title="chiasma (genetics)" label="chiasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q160003" start="6584" end="6595" title="Tetrahedron" label="tetrahedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589727" start="6789" end="6800" title="Protein dimer" label="heterodimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q719725" start="6842" end="6866" title="Saccharomyces cerevisiae" label="Saccharomyces cerevisiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q849622" start="6938" end="6959" title="homologous chromosome" label="homologous chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424695" start="6968" end="6975" title="meiosis" label="meiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624837" start="7027" end="7044" title="Holliday junction" label="Holliday junction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7109" end="7120" title="Muller&amp;#x27;s morphs#Hypomorph" label="hypomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424695" start="7258" end="7265" title="Meiosis" label="meioses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285695" start="7316" end="7322" title="mutant" label="mutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q177332" start="7336" end="7341" title="spore" label="spore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113927" start="7377" end="7388" title="Chromosome segregation" label="segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q849622" start="7550" end="7560" title="Homologous chromosome" label="homologous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1919026" start="7806" end="7829" title="Melanoplus femurrubrum" label="Melanoplus femur-rubrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="7868" end="7873" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424695" start="7907" end="7914" title="meiosis" label="meiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065460" start="7920" end="7927" title="Chiasma (genetics)" label="chiasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528544" start="7975" end="7984" title="Leptotene stage" label="leptotene"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7985" end="7993" title="Meiosis#zygotene" label="zygotene"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424695" start="8004" end="8011" title="meiosis" label="meiosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8035" end="8044" title="Meiosis#Pachytene" label="pachytene"/>
<link wikidata="Q901035" start="8181" end="8201" title="Chorthippus brunneus" label="Chorthippus brunneus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8382" end="8402" title="Meiosis#diplotene" label="diplotene-diakinesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q21101297" start="8883" end="8888" title="FANCM" label="FANCM"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="9635" end="9644" title="eukaryote" label="eukaryote"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="9649" end="9653" title="cell (biology)" label="cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="9683" end="9687" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q80726" start="9712" end="9718" title="allele" label="allele"/>
<link wikidata="Q211050" start="9786" end="9792" title="gamete" label="gamete"/>
<link wikidata="Q623749" start="9908" end="9917" title="chromatid" label="chromatid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414557" start="10071" end="10078" title="Meiotic non-disjunction" label="Meiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475698" start="10119" end="10130" title="Segregation (materials science)" label="segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q210832" start="10655" end="10666" title="Statistical hypothesis testing" label="statistical"/>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="10667" end="10678" title="probability" label="probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q185055" start="10758" end="10780" title="Mendelian inheritance" label="independent assortment"/>
<link wikidata="Q284100" start="10961" end="10977" title="centiMorgan" label="genetic distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="11021" end="11030" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q47307" start="11074" end="11084" title="Genealogy" label="pedigrees."/>
<link wikidata="Q843863" start="11383" end="11398" title="Genetic linkage" label="Genetic linkage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064311" start="11510" end="11532" title="Linkage disequilibrium" label="Linkage disequilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="11785" end="11792" title="disease" label="disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q863908" start="11849" end="11861" title="DNA sequence" label="DNA sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q414601" start="12076" end="12094" title="Sequence homology" label="homologous regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="12107" end="12117" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q145911" start="12228" end="12237" title="base pair" label="base pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q130996" start="12394" end="12409" title="DNA replication" label="DNA replication"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066168" start="12626" end="12642" title="Sister chromatids" label="Sister chromatid"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="12742" end="12751" title="eukaryote" label="eukaryote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650834" start="13041" end="13050" title="Insertion (genetics)" label="insertion"/>
<link wikidata="Q656732" start="13054" end="13062" title="Deletion (genetics)" label="deletion"/>
<link wikidata="Q106227" start="13203" end="13207" title="locus (genetics)" label="loci"/>
<link wikidata="Q746284" start="13287" end="13303" title="gene duplication" label="gene duplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="13333" end="13341" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="13353" end="13359" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q210538" start="13595" end="13615" title="DNA repair" label="double-strand breaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q177900" start="13719" end="13734" title="template strand" label="template strand"/>
<link wikidata="Q283478" start="13941" end="13954" title="Complementary DNA" label="complementary"/>
<link wikidata="Q121438" start="14258" end="14278" title="transposable element" label="transposable element"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984243" start="15331" end="15346" title="Mismatch repair" label="Mismatch repair"/>
<link wikidata="Q138864" start="15903" end="15915" title="DNA helicase" label="DNA helicase"/>
<link wikidata="Q21119136" start="15920" end="15934" title="DNA polymerase III holoenzyme" label="DNA polymerase"/>
<link wikidata="Q411664" start="16005" end="16016" title="exonuclease" label="exonuclease"/>
<link wikidata="Q410221" start="16048" end="16054" title="ligase" label="ligase"/>
<link wikidata="Q4981195" start="16438" end="16459" title="Unequal crossing over" label="Unequal crossing over"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140574" start="16462" end="16488" title="Coefficient of coincidence" label="Coefficient of coincidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q748695" start="16491" end="16507" title="Genetic distance" label="Genetic distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q185055" start="16510" end="16532" title="Independent assortment" label="Independent assortment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6356161" start="16535" end="16552" title="Mitotic crossover" label="Mitotic crossover"/>
<link wikidata="Q843863" start="16555" end="16576" title="Recombinant frequency" label="Recombinant frequency"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64051" wikidata="Q1790750" url="?curid=64051" title="The Spectator">
<text>The Spectator is a weekly British political and cultural news magazine. It was first published in July 1828, making it the oldest surviving magazine in the world. &quot;The Spectator&quot; is politically conservative, and its principal subject areas are politics and culture. Alongside columns and features on current affairs, the magazine also contains arts pages on books, music, opera, film, and TV reviews. It had an average circulation of 107,812 as of December 2023, excluding Australia.

Editorship of the magazine has often been a step on the ladder to high office in the Conservative Party in the United Kingdom. Past editors include Boris Johnson (1999–2005) and other former cabinet members Ian Gilmour (1954–1959), Iain Macleod (1963–1965), and Nigel Lawson (1966–1970). The former Conservative MP Michael Gove took over from Fraser Nelson as editor on 4 October 2024.

Today, the magazine is a print-digital hybrid. In 2020, &quot;The Spectator&quot; became the longest-lived current affairs magazine in history (overtaking &quot;The Gentleman&#x27;s Magazine&quot;, which published from 1731 to 1922), and was also the first magazine ever to publish 10,000 issues. In September 2024, &quot;The Spectator&quot; was acquired by British investor Paul Marshall, owner of UnHerd and major investor in GB News.

==History==
===Robert Stephen Rintoul===
&quot;The Spectator&quot;″s founder, Scottish reformer Robert Stephen Rintoul, former editor of the &quot;Dundee Advertiser&quot; and the London-based &quot;Atlas&quot;, launched the paper on 6 July 1828. Rintoul consciously revived the title from the celebrated, if short-lived, daily publication by Joseph Addison and Richard Steele. As he had long been determined &quot;to edit a perfect newspaper&quot;, Rintoul initially insisted on &quot;absolute power&quot; over content, commencing a long-lasting tradition of the paper&#x27;s editor and proprietor being one and the same person. Although he wrote little himself, &quot;every line and word passed through the alembic of his brain.&quot;

&quot;The Spectator&quot;″s political outlook in its first thirty years reflected Rintoul&#x27;s liberal-radical agenda. Despite its political stance, it was widely regarded and respected for its non-partisanship, in both its political and cultural criticism. Rintoul initially advertised his new title as a &quot;family paper&quot;, the euphemistic term for a journal free from strong political rhetoric. However, events soon compelled him to confess that it was no longer possible to be &quot;a mere Spectator&quot;. Two years into its existence, &quot;The Spectator&quot; came out strongly for wide-reaching parliamentary reform: it produced supplements detailing vested interests in the Commons and Lords, coined the well-known phrase &quot;The Bill, the whole Bill and nothing but the Bill&quot;, and helped drive through the Great Reform Act of 1832. Virulently anti-Tory in its politics, &quot;The Spectator&quot; strongly objected to the appointment of the Duke of Wellington as prime minister, condemning him as &quot;a Field Marshal whose political career proves him to be utterly destitute of political principle – whose military career affords ample evidence of his stern and remorseless temperament.&quot;

The paper spent its first century at premises on Wellington Street (now Lancaster Place). Despite its robust criticism of the Conservative Party leader Robert Peel for several years, &quot;The Spectator&quot; rallied behind him when he split the Tory party by successfully repealing the Corn Laws. Rintoul&#x27;s fundamental principles were freedom of the individual, freedom of the press and freedom of trade, of religious tolerance and freedom from blind political adherence. The magazine was vocal in its opposition to the First Opium War (1839–1842), commenting that &quot;all the alleged aims of the expedition against China are vague, illimitable, and incapable of explanation, save only that of making the Chinese pay the opium-smugglers.&quot; The magazine further wrote: &quot;There does not appear to be much glory gained in a contest so unequal that hundreds are killed on one side and none on the other. What honour is there in going to shoot men, certain that they cannot hurt you? The cause of the war, be it remembered, is as disreputable as the strength of the parties is unequal. The war is undertaken in support of a co-partnery of opium-smugglers, in which the Anglo-Indian Government may be considered as the principal partner.&quot;

In 1853, &quot;The Spectator&quot;″s lead book reviewer George Brimley published an anonymous and unfavourable notice of Charles Dickens&#x27;s &quot;Bleak House&quot;, typical of the paper&#x27;s enduring contempt for him as a &quot;popular&quot; writer &quot;amusing the idle hours of the greatest number of readers; not, we may hope, without improvement to their hearts, but certainly without profoundly affecting their intellects or deeply stirring their emotions.&quot; Rintoul died in April 1858, having sold the magazine two months earlier. The circulation had already been falling, under particular pressure from its new rival, &quot;The Saturday Review&quot;. Its new owner, the 27-year-old John Addyes Scott, kept the purchase quiet, but Rintoul&#x27;s death made explicit the change of guard. His tenure was unremarkable, and subscribers continued to fall. By the end of the year, Scott sought his escape, selling the title for £4,200 in December 1858 () to two British-based Americans, James McHenry and Benjamin Moran. While McHenry was a businessman, Moran was an assistant secretary to the American ambassador, George M. Dallas; they saw their purchase as a means to influence British opinion on American affairs.

The editor was Thornton Leigh Hunt, a friend of Moran who had also worked for Rintoul. Hunt was also nominally the purchaser, having been given the necessary monies in an attempt by McHenry and Moran to disguise the American ownership. Circulation declined with this loss of independence and inspirational leadership, as the views of James Buchanan, then President of the United States, came to the fore. Within weeks, as the last pre-American ownership issue appears to have been that of 25 December 1858. the editorial line followed Buchanan&#x27;s pronouncements in being &quot;neither pro-slavery nor pro-abolitionist. To unsympathetic observers Buchanan&#x27;s policy seemed to apportion blame for the impasse on the slavery question equally on pro-slavery and abolitionist factions – and rather than work out a solution, simply to argue that a solution would take time. &quot;The Spectator&quot; now would publicly support that &#x27;policy&#x27;&quot;. This set it at odds with most of the British press, but gained it the sympathy of expatriate Americans in the country. Richard Fulton notes that from then until 1861, &quot;the &quot;Spectator&quot;″s commentary on American affairs read like a Buchanan administration propaganda sheet.&quot; and that this represented a &quot;volte-face&quot;. Under Hunt&#x27;s tenure, &quot;The Spectator&quot; may even have been steered by financial support from the court of Napoleon III.

===Meredith Townsend, Richard Holt Hutton, and John St Loe Strachey===
The need to promote the Buchanan position in Britain had been reduced as British papers such as &quot;The Times&quot; and &quot;The Saturday Review&quot; turned in his favour, fearing the potential effects of a split in the Union. As Abraham Lincoln was set to succeed the vacillating Buchanan after the 1860 United States presidential election, the owners decided to stop pumping money into a loss-making publication: as Moran confided to his diary, &quot;it don&#x27;t pay, never did since Hunt became its owner.&quot; On 19 January 1861, &quot;The Spectator&quot; was sold to a journalist, Meredith Townsend, for the marked-down sum of £2,000. Though not yet thirty, Townsend had spent the previous decade as an editor in India, and was prepared to restore to the paper an independent voice in a fast-changing world. From the outset, Townsend took up an anti-Buchanan, anti-slavery position, arguing that his unwillingness to act decisively had been a weakness and a contributor to the problems apparent in the US. He soon went into partnership with Richard Holt Hutton, the editor of &quot;The Economist&quot;, whose primary interests were literature and theology. Hutton&#x27;s close friend William Gladstone later called him &quot;the first critic of the nineteenth century&quot;. Townsend&#x27;s writing in &quot;The Spectator&quot; confirmed him as one of the finest journalists of his day, and he has since been called &quot;the greatest leader writer ever to appear in the English Press.&quot;

The two men remained co-proprietors and joint editors for 25 years, taking a strong stand on some of the most controversial issues of their day. They supported the Union against the Confederacy in the American Civil War, an unpopular position which, at the time, did serious damage to the paper&#x27;s circulation, reduced to some 1,000 readers. The issue of 25 January 1862, published in the wake of the Trent Affair, argued that &quot;The Southern Bid&quot; for active support in return for an Abolition promise, &quot;demands careful examination&quot;. In time, the paper regained readers when the victory of the North validated its principled stance. They also launched an all-out assault on Benjamin Disraeli, accusing him in a series of leaders of jettisoning ethics for politics by ignoring the atrocities committed against Bulgarian civilians by the Ottoman Empire in the 1870s.

In 1886, &quot;The Spectator&quot; parted company with William Ewart Gladstone when he declared his support for Irish Home Rule. Committed to defending the Union ahead of the Liberal Party line, Townsend and Hutton aligned themselves with the Liberal Unionist wing. As a result, H. H. Asquith (the future Prime Minister), who had served as a leader-writer for ten years, left his post. Townsend was succeeded by a young journalist named John St Loe Strachey, who would remain associated with the paper for the next 40 years. When Hutton died in 1897, Strachey became co-owner with Townsend; by the end of the year Strachey was made sole editor and proprietor. As chief leader-writer, general manager, literary critic and all things beside, Strachey embodied the spirit of &quot;The Spectator&quot; until the 1920s. Among his various schemes were the establishment of a Spectator Experimental Company, to show that new soldiers could be trained up to excellence in six months, the running of a Cheap Cottage Exhibition, which laid the foundations for Letchworth Garden City, and the impassioned defence of Free Trade against Joseph Chamberlain&#x27;s protectionist &#x27;Tariff Reform&#x27; programme.

Within two years he had doubled the paper&#x27;s circulation, which peaked at 23,000. In the early decades of the twentieth century it was heralded as &quot;the most influential of all the London weeklies&quot;. The First World War put the paper and its editor under great strain: after the conflict it seemed to be behind the times, and circulation began to fall away. Even the introduction of signed articles, overturning the paper&#x27;s fixed policy of anonymity for its first century, did little to help. After years of illness, Strachey decided at the end of 1924 to sell his controlling interest in the paper to his recently appointed business manager, Sir Evelyn Wrench. Although he gained a second wind as a novelist, Strachey died two years later in 1928.

==1925–1975==
===Evelyn Wrench and Wilson Harris===
For his first year as proprietor, John Evelyn Wrench appointed John (Jack) Atkins his editor, who had worked on the paper for the last two decades, acting as editor during Strachey&#x27;s recurrent bouts of illness. But the relationship did not work: as Atkins lamented to his long-standing friend, Winston Churchill, Wrench &quot;continually wants to interfere and he is very ignorant&quot;. Wrench duly took over the editorship in 1926, successfully channeling the enthusiasm of Strachey. His global connections helped secure interviews with Henry Ford, Mahatma Gandhi and Benito Mussolini. Perhaps his most remembered achievement as editor of &quot;The Spectator&quot; was the campaign to ease unemployment in the mining town of Aberdare, one of the worst hit by the crisis of 1928, when joblessness reached 40% in South Wales. Within three months, the paper&#x27;s appeal for the town&#x27;s relief raised over £12,000 (). A statuette of an Aberdare miner, presented in gratitude to &quot;The Spectator&quot;, still sits in the editor&#x27;s office, bearing the inscription: &quot;From the Townsfolk of Aberdare in Grateful Recognition: &#x27;The Greatest of These is Love&#x27;&quot;.

Wrench retired as editor in 1932 (he remained the magazine&#x27;s proprietor), appointing the political editor Wilson Harris his successor. Under Harris &quot;The Spectator&quot; became increasingly outspoken on developing international politics in the 1930s, in particular on the rise of fascism. Beneath a reader&#x27;s letter referring to the Nazi Party as &quot;peaceful, orderly and kindly&quot;, Harris printed the following reply:
No facts in recent history are established more incontestably ... than the numerous cases of murder, assault, and various forms of intimidation for which the National Socialist Party in Germany has been responsible ... The organized economic boycott of the Jews is the climax. &quot;The Spectator&quot; has consistently shown itself a friend of Germany, but it is a friend of freedom first. Resort to violence is not condoned by styling it revolution. 

Harris broadly supported the European foreign policy of the Chamberlain ministry and Neville Chamberlain&#x27;s appeasement. He praised the Munich agreement, explaining later that he believed &quot;even the most desperate attempt to save the peace was worthwhile&quot;. Harris abandoned the newspaper&#x27;s support for appeasement after the Kristallnacht pogrom, which Harris wrote &quot;obliterated the word appeasement.&quot; When the conflict broke, the team abandoned their Gower Street office for Harmondsworth, but within a few days decided to return to London: the basement caught fire from shrapnel, and the printers were bombed, but the paper continued to appear each week. Although the Second World War required &quot;The Spectator&quot; to downgrade its size and paper quality, its readership doubled during the conflict, exceeding 50,000. From 1945 to 1950, Harris served as MP for Cambridge University; although he stood as an independent, this was the first formal overlap between &quot;The Spectator&quot; and the House of Commons. In February 1947, when a fuel shortage suspended the publication of weekly magazines, &quot;The Spectator&quot; appeared in an abridged form over two successive Thursdays on page 2 of the &quot;Daily Mail&quot;.

===Ian Gilmour===
In 1954, Wrench and his co-owner Angus Watson sold &quot;The Spectator&quot; to the barrister Ian Gilmour, who restored the &quot;Spectator&quot; tradition of simultaneously acting as editor. Having a libertarian and pro-European outlook, he &quot;enlivened the paper and injected a new element of irreverence, fun and controversy&quot;. He was critical of both Anthony Eden&#x27;s and Harold Macmillan&#x27;s governments, and while supporting the Conservatives was also friendly to Hugh Gaitskell and Gaitskellism. Gilmour lent &quot;The Spectator&quot;″s voice to the campaign to end capital punishment in Britain, writing an incensed leader attacking the hanging of Ruth Ellis in 1955, in which he claimed &quot;Hanging has become the national sport&quot;, and that the home secretary Gwilym Lloyd George, for not reprieving the sentence, &quot;has now been responsible for the hanging of two women over the past eight months&quot;.

&quot;The Spectator&quot; opposed Britain&#x27;s involvement in the Suez crisis in 1956, strongly criticising the government&#x27;s handling of the debacle. The paper went on to oppose Macmillan&#x27;s government&#x27;s re-election in the 1959 United Kingdom general election, complaining: &quot;The continued Conservative pretence that Suez was a good, a noble, a wise venture has been too much to stomach ... the Government is taking its stand on a solid principle: &#x27;Never admit a mistake.&#x27;&quot; The paper also says that it was influential in campaigning for the decriminalisation of homosexuality. It gave vocal support to the proposals of the Wolfenden Committee in 1957, condemning the &quot;utterly irrational and illogical&quot; old laws on homosexuality: &quot;Not only is the law unjust in conception, it is almost inevitably unjust in practice.&quot;

In March 1957, Jenny Nicholson, a frequent contributor, wrote a piece on the Italian Socialist Party congress in Venice, which mentioned three Labour Party politicians (Aneurin Bevan, Richard Crossman, and Morgan Phillips) &quot;who puzzled the Italians by filling themselves like tanks with whisky and coffee&quot;. All three sued for libel, the case went to trial, and &quot;The Spectator&quot; was forced to make a large payment in damages and costs, a sum well over the equivalent of £150,000 today. It has since emerged that &quot;all three plaintiffs, to a greater or lesser degree, perjured themselves in court&quot;.

Gilmour gave up the editorship in 1959, in part to abet his chance of selection as a Conservative MP. He appointed his deputy Brian Inglis, who introduced to the magazine a fresh spirit of political satire. In 1959—much to the embarrassment of Gilmour (who remained the owner)—&quot;The Spectator&quot; advised either voting for the Liberal Party or tactically abstaining. Despite a marked increase in sales, Gilmour felt that &quot;The Spectator&quot; was losing its political edge, so replaced him in 1962 with Iain Hamilton. Hamilton successfully balanced a keener focus on current affairs with some more raucous contributions as the young team behind &quot;Private Eye&quot; were commissioned to write a mock eight-page &quot;Child&#x27;s Guide to Modern Culture&quot;. Much to the shock of Hamilton and the &quot;Spectator&quot; staff, Gilmour replaced Hamilton in 1963 with Iain Macleod, the Conservative MP who had resigned from the cabinet on the controversial appointment of Sir Alec Douglas-Home to succeed Harold Macmillan as prime minister. A widely circulated letter, signed by &quot;Spectator&quot; journalists and board members, berated Gilmour for mistreating an admired editor and appointing an active politician who could jeopardise the independence of the magazine: &quot;We believe strongly that &quot;The Spectator&quot;, with its long and honourable history of independent opinion, should not be tossed about at the whim of the proprietor or lose its independence by identification with a narrow political faction.&quot;

===&quot;The Tory Leadership&quot; article===
Two months into his post, in January 1964, Macleod intensified the shock by revealing the behind-the-scenes machinations of the Conservative party. In a long article entitled &quot;The Tory Leadership&quot;, ostensibly a review of a new book (&quot;The Fight for the Tory Leadership&quot;) by Randolph Churchill, Macleod laid out his version of events in great detail. In disclosing, from the horse&#x27;s mouth, the mysterious circumstances of Douglas-Home&#x27;s appointment, the article caused an immediate sensation. Churchill&#x27;s book was all but obliterated by the review, which said that &quot;four fifths&quot; of it &quot;could have been compiled by anyone with a pair of scissors, a pot of paste and a built-in prejudice against Mr Butler and Sir William Haley&quot;. That week&#x27;s edition, bearing the headline &quot;Iain Macleod, What Happened&quot;, sold a record number of copies.

===Nigel Lawson, George Gale, and Harry Creighton===
The &quot;Tory Leadership&quot; article prompted a furious response from many &quot;Spectator&quot; readers and caused Macleod, for a time, to be shunned by political colleagues. He eventually regained his party&#x27;s favour, however, and rejoined the shadow cabinet in the same year. On his appointment as Shadow Chancellor in 1965, he stepped down as editor on the last day of the year, to be replaced by Nigel Lawson. Sometimes called &quot;The Great Procrastinator&quot; because of his tendency to leave writing leaders until the last minute, Lawson had been City editor for &quot;The Sunday Telegraph&quot; and Alec Douglas-Home&#x27;s personal assistant during the 1964 United Kingdom general election. In 1966, largely due to Lawson, &quot;The Spectator&quot; opposed America&#x27;s increasing military commitment in Vietnam. In a signed article he estimated &quot;the risks involved in an American withdrawal from Vietnam are less than the risks in escalating a bloody and brutal war&quot;.

In 1967, Ian Gilmour, who by then had joined parliament and was already finding the proprietorship a hindrance in political life, sold &quot;The Spectator&quot; to Harry Creighton for £75,000 (). In 1970, Creighton replaced Lawson as editor with George Gale; there had been growing resentment between the two men. Gale shared Creighton&#x27;s political outlook, in particular his strong opposition to the EEC, and much of the next five years was spent attacking the pro-EEC prime minister Edward Heath, treating his eventual defeat by Margaret Thatcher with undisguised delight. Gale&#x27;s almost obsessive opposition to the EEC and antagonistic attitude towards Heath began to lose the magazine readers. In 1973 Creighton took over the editorship himself, but was, if possible, even less successful in stemming the losses. Circulation fell from 36,000 in 1966 to below 13,000. As one journalist who joined &quot;The Spectator&quot; at that time said: &quot;It gave the impression, an entirely accurate one, of a publication surviving on a shoestring&quot;. George Gale later remarked that Creighton had only wanted the job to get into &quot;Who&#x27;s Who&quot;.

==1975–2005==
===Henry Keswick and Alexander Chancellor===
In 1975, Creighton sold &quot;The Spectator&quot; to Henry Keswick, again for £75,000 (Creighton sold the 99 Gower Street premises separately, so the magazine moved to 56 Doughty Street). Keswick was chairman of the Jardine Matheson multinational corporation. He was drawn to the paper partly because he harboured political aspirations (the paper&#x27;s perk as a useful stepping stone to Westminster was, by now, well established), but also because his father had been a friend of Peter Fleming, its well-known columnist (under the name &quot;Strix&quot;). Keswick gave the job of editor to &quot;the only journalist he knew&quot;, Alexander Chancellor, an old family friend and his mother&#x27;s godson, with whom he had been at Eton and Cambridge. Before then, Chancellor had worked at Reuters news agency and had been a scriptwriter and reporter for ITN. In spite of his relative inexperience, he was to become known as &quot;one of the best editors in the history of &quot;The Spectator&quot;&quot;.

Chancellor&#x27;s editorship of the paper relied principally on a return to earlier values. He adopted a new format and a more traditional weekly style, with the front page displaying five cover lines above the leader. Most significantly, he recognised the need &quot;to bring together a number of talented writers and, with the minimal of editorial interference, let them write&quot;. To this end he persuaded Auberon Waugh (who had been sacked by Nigel Lawson) to return from the &quot;New Statesman&quot;, and enticed Richard West and Jeffrey Bernard from the same magazine. Another columnist recruited by Chancellor was Taki Theodoracopulos whose column ‘High Life’ was then printed beside Bernard&#x27;s ‘Low Life’. Taki&#x27;s column, frequently criticised for its content by the press, remains in the paper. In September 1978, a 96-page issue was released to mark &quot;The Spectator&quot;″s 150th anniversary. William Rees-Mogg congratulated the paper in a &quot;Times&quot;″s leading article, praising it in particular for its important part in &quot;the movement away from collectivism&quot;.

====Charles Moore====
Chancellor was replaced by the 27-year-old Charles Moore in February 1984, after the magazine&#x27;s then owner Algy Cluff had become concerned that &quot;The Spectator&quot; was &quot;lacking in political weight&quot; and considered Chancellor to be &quot;commercially irresponsible&quot;. Moore had been a leader writer at &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; before Chancellor recruited him to &quot;The Spectator&quot; as political commentator. Under Moore, the paper became more political than it had been under Chancellor. The new editor adopted an approach that was, in general, pro-Margaret Thatcher, while showing no restraint in opposing her on certain issues. The paper called the Anglo-Irish Agreement &quot;a fraudulent prospectus&quot; in 1985, came out against the Single European Act, and in 1989 criticised the handover of Hong Kong to China. Moore wrote that, if Britain failed to allow the city&#x27;s UK passport holders right of abode in Britain, &quot;we shall have to confess that, for the first time in our history, we have forced Britons to be slaves.&quot; Moore also introduced several new contributors, including a restaurant column by Nigella Lawson (the former editor&#x27;s daughter), and a humorous column by Craig Brown. When Taki was briefly imprisoned for cocaine possession Moore refused to accept his resignation, explaining publicly: &quot;We expect our High Life columnist to be high some of the time.&quot;

&quot;The Spectator&quot; changed hands again in 1985, by which time it was facing financial meltdown, having an accumulated an overdraft of over £300,000. Cluff had reached the conclusion that the paper &quot;would be best secured in the hands of a publishing group&quot;, and sold it to Australian company John Fairfax, which promptly paid off the overdraft. With the support of its new proprietor, the paper was able to widen its readership through subscription drives and advertising, reaching a circulation of 30,000 in 1986, exceeding the circulation of the &quot;New Statesman&quot; for the first time. The magazine was again sold in 1988, after an uncertain period during which several candidates, including Rupert Murdoch, attempted to buy the magazine. Moore wrote to Murdoch, saying: &quot;Most of our contributors and many of our readers would be horrified at the idea of your buying &quot;The Spectator&quot;. They believe you are autocratic and that you have a bad effect on journalism of quality – they cite &quot;The Times&quot; as the chief example.&quot;

===Dominic Lawson and Frank Johnson===
As &quot;The Spectator&quot; was bought by the Telegraph Group, Moore resigned the editorship in 1990 to become deputy editor of &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;. He was replaced by his own deputy editor, Dominic Lawson—the former editor&#x27;s son. Shortly after becoming editor, Lawson became responsible for the resignation of a cabinet minister when he interviewed the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, Nicholas Ridley. During the interview, Ridley described the proposed Economic and Monetary Union as &quot;a German racket designed to take over the whole of Europe&quot;, and seemed to draw comparisons between the German Chancellor Helmut Kohl and Adolf Hitler. The interview appeared in the issue of 14 July 1990, the cover of which showed a cartoon by Nicholas Garland that showed Ridley painting a crude comb-over and a Hitler moustache onto a poster of Kohl. Ridley resigned from Thatcher&#x27;s government immediately.

&quot;The Spectator&quot; caused controversy in 1994 when it printed an article entitled &quot;Kings of the Deal&quot; on a claimed Jewish influence in Hollywood, written by William Cash, who at the time was based in Los Angeles and working mainly for &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;, which had considered the article too risky to publish. Lawson thought Cash&#x27;s idea was as old as Hollywood itself and that Lawson&#x27;s being Jewish would mitigate adverse reactions to publication. There was considerable controversy. Although owner Conrad Black did not personally rebuke Lawson, Max Hastings, then editor of &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;, wrote with regard to Black, who also owned &quot;The Jerusalem Post&quot; at the time, &quot;It was one of the few moments in my time with Conrad when I saw him look seriously rattled: &#x27;You don&#x27;t understand, Max. My entire interests in the United States and internationally could be seriously damaged by this&#x27;.&quot;

The article was defended by some conservatives. John Derbyshire, who says he has &quot;complicated and sometimes self-contradictory feelings about Jews&quot;, wrote on &quot;National Review Online&quot; regarding what he saw as the Jewish overreaction to the article that &quot;It was a display of arrogance, cruelty, ignorance, stupidity, and sheer bad manners by rich and powerful people towards a harmless, helpless young writer, and the Jews who whipped up this preposterous storm should all be thoroughly ashamed of themselves&quot;. Lawson left in 1995 to become editor of &quot;The Sunday Telegraph&quot;, and was replaced by a deputy editor of the same newspaper, Frank Johnson. After the 1997 United Kingdom general election, Johnson averted a decline in &quot;The Spectator&quot; sales by recruiting &quot;New Labour contributors&quot;, and shifting the magazine&#x27;s direction slightly away from politics. In 1996, the magazine&#x27;s Christmas issue featured an interview with The Spice Girls, in which the band members gave their &quot;Euro-sceptic and generally anti-labour&quot; views on politics. Shortly before her death Diana, Princess of Wales, was depicted on the magazine&#x27;s cover as the figurehead of Mohamed Al-Fayed&#x27;s boat, The Jonikal.

===Boris Johnson===
Before joining &quot;The Spectator&quot; as editor, Boris Johnson had worked for &quot;The Times&quot;, the Wolverhampton &quot;Express &amp; Star&quot;, and &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;. He had also briefly been political commentator for &quot;The Spectator&quot; under Dominic Lawson, but Frank Johnson replaced him with Bruce Anderson in 1995. Succeeding Frank Johnson in 1999, Johnson increased &quot;Spectator&quot; subscriptions to a record 70,000 per year, and has been described as a &quot;colourful editor&quot;. In the 2001 United Kingdom general election, Johnson was elected MP for Henley, and by 2004 had been made vice-chairman of the Conservative party, with a place in Michael Howard&#x27;s shadow cabinet. In 2003, he explained his editorial policy for &quot;The Spectator&quot; would &quot;always be roughly speaking in favour of getting rid of Saddam, sticking up for Israel, free-market economics, expanding choice&quot; and that the magazine was &quot;not necessarily a Thatcherite Conservative or a neo-conservative magazine, even though in our editorial coverage we tend to follow roughly the conclusions of those lines of arguments.&quot; In February 2003, Johnson was the subject of a Scotland Yard inquiry relating to a column by Taki Theodoracopulos titled &quot;Thoughts on Thuggery&quot; targeting barrister Peter Herbert, a black man. Following the column&#x27;s publication, Herbert had received over 40 racist emails, mostly from the United States, some of which contained death threats. Johnson called the column &quot;a terrible thing&quot; which &quot;should never have gone in.&quot;

In October 2004, a &quot;Spectator&quot; editorial suggested that the death of the hostage Kenneth Bigley was being over-sentimentalised by the people of Liverpool, accusing them of indulging in a &quot;vicarious victimhood&quot; and of possessing a &quot;deeply unattractive psyche&quot;.’ Simon Heffer had written the leader but, as editor, Johnson took full responsibility for it. Michael Howard subsequently ordered him to visit Liverpool on a &quot;penitential pilgrimage&quot;. At this time, the paper began jokingly to be referred to as the &#x27;Sextator&#x27;, owing to the number of sex scandals connected with the magazine during his editorship. These included an affair between columnist Rod Liddle and the magazine&#x27;s receptionist, and Johnson&#x27;s own affair with another columnist, Petronella Wyatt. Johnson at first denied the relationship, dismissing the allegations as &quot;an inverted pyramid of piffle&quot;, but was sacked from the Shadow Cabinet in November 2004 when they turned out to be true. In the same year David Blunkett, the Home Secretary, resigned from the government after it emerged he had been having an affair with the publisher of &quot;The Spectator&quot;, Kimberly Quinn, and had fast-tracked her nanny&#x27;s visa application.

In 2005, circulation was as high as 60,000 by the time Johnson left to be the Shadow Minister for Higher Education. On the announcement of his departure, Andrew Neil, chairman of &quot;The Spectator&quot; paid tribute to his editorship; however, Neil later rebuked Johnson for having delegated most of his responsibilities to an assistant, in a Channel 4 &quot;Dispatches&quot; episode titled &quot;Boris Johnson: Has He Run Out of Road?&quot; During Johnson&#x27;s editorship, Mary Wakefield began working at the magazine: she is now the magazine&#x27;s commissioning editor and is married to Johnson&#x27;s former political advisor Dominic Cummings.

In 2004, the Barclay Brothers purchased the Telegraph Group from Hollinger International which included &quot;The Spectator&quot; within its titles.

==2006–present==
===Matthew d&#x27;Ancona===
D’Ancona had been Deputy Editor at &quot;The Sunday Telegraph&quot;, and before that an assistant editor at &quot;The Times&quot;. During his four years as editor of &quot;The Spectator&quot;, he made several editorial and structural changes to the magazine, &quot;not all of which were universally popular with readers&quot;. He ended the traditional summary of the week&#x27;s events, &quot;Portrait of the Week&quot;, and in 2006 launched a new lifestyle section entitled &quot;You Earned It&quot;. He removed Peter Oborne as political editor, and appointed Fraser Nelson in his place. He decided not to appoint a new media columnist to succeed Stephen Glover, explaining, &quot;I do not think &quot;The Spectator&quot; needs a media columnist. Our pages are precious and I do not think the internal wranglings of our trade are high on the list of &quot;Spectator&quot; readers’ priorities.&quot;

Perhaps the magazine&#x27;s most important innovation under d’Ancona was the Coffee House blog, led by Peter Hoskin and James Forsyth, launched in May 2007. In 2007, &quot;The Spectator&quot; moved its offices from Doughty Street, which had been its home for 32 years, to 22 Old Queen Street in Westminster. &quot;The Spectator Australia&quot; was launched in October 2008. Apparently printed in Australia at the same time as, and with almost all the content of, the parent edition it finds its own cover illustrations and its first dozen pages are Australian. Circulation reached a weekly average of 10,389 in January to December 2020.

===Fraser Nelson===
In August 2009, Fraser Nelson replaced d&#x27;Ancona as editor of &quot;The Spectator&quot;. In 2010, he unveiled a slight redesign of the paper, shrinking the cover illustration slightly, shifting the cover lines, in general, to the bottom, and spreading the contents section over a double-page. Playing down the changes, Nelson described the new look as &quot;a tidy-up ... rather like restoring an old painting.&quot;

An article in November 2011 by Rod Liddle on the trial of two men eventually convicted for the murder of Stephen Lawrence led to the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) deciding to prosecute the magazine for breaching reporting restrictions. The magazine chose not to contest the case, and the publisher Spectator 1828 Ltd pleaded guilty at the court hearing at Westminster Magistrates Court on 7 June 2012. The magazine was fined £3,000, with £2,000 compensation awarded to Stephen Lawrence&#x27;s parents and £625 costs. According to Nelson, readers&#x27; most common reaction to the columnist was &quot;don&#x27;t tone down Rod&quot;, but &quot;our non-readers don&#x27;t like&quot; him. In June 2013, The Spectator Archive was launched, containing 1.5 million pages from 180 years of published articles. In July 2013, the magazine ran a column by Taki Theodoracopulos defending the far-right Greek political party Golden Dawn, which drew criticism. In May 2018, Theodoracopulos published a column defending the Wehrmacht.

In August 2015, &quot;The Spectator&quot; received media attention and criticism after publishing an article by Charles Moore regarding the 2015 Labour Party leadership election titled &quot;Have Yvette Cooper and Liz Kendall got the looks for a leadership contest?&quot;, in which he wrote &quot;there is an understanding that no leader – especially, despite the age of equality, a woman – can look grotesque on television and win a general election&quot; and discussed the looks of the two female candidates in detail. The article was condemned by Liz Kendall; the First Minister of Scotland, Nicola Sturgeon; and the candidate for Labour nomination for Mayor of London and former Minister and MP Tessa Jowell along with several journalists and MPs from various parties.

In 2018, Nelson and deputy editor Freddy Gray launched a digital-only version of &quot;The Spectator USA&quot;. The monthly print magazine &quot;The Spectator US Edition&quot;, alongside the website spectator.us, was launched with the Inaugural Edition in October 2019 and the publication surpassed 10,000 subscribers in 2020. For the October 2020 issue, the title was changed to &quot;The Spectator Est. 1828&quot;, with the website remaining the same. For the June 2021 issue, the website changed to spectatorworld.com as the name changed again to &quot;The Spectator World&quot;.

=== 2024 acquisition by Paul Marshall ===

In June 2023, it was reported that, following a breakdown in discussions relating to a financial dispute, Lloyds Bank was planning to take over control of the companies owning the &quot;Daily Telegraph&quot; and &quot;Spectator&quot; titles and sell them off. Representatives of the Barclay family have described the reports as &quot;irresponsible&quot;. That same month, Telegraph Media Group Limited (TMG) was put up for sale, after its parent company B.UK, a Bermuda-based holding company, went into receivership. Howard and Aidan Barclay were removed as directors. When a company linked to the United Arab Emirates attempted to buy TMG, chairman Andrew Neil threatened to quit, saying: &quot;You cannot have a major mainstream newspaper group owned by an undemocratic government or dictatorship where no one has a vote.&quot; Fraser Nelson, editor of &quot;The Spectator&quot;, also opposed the move, saying &quot;the very reason why a foreign government would want to buy a sensitive asset is the very reason why a national government should be wary of selling them.&quot;

In September 2024, &quot;The Spectator&quot; was purchased by Sir Paul Marshall for £100 million. Andrew Neil resigned with immediate effect with Fraser Nelson to be retained as editor. The deal by Marshall also included &quot;The Spectator&#x27;s&quot; sister title &quot;Apollo&quot; and added both titles to his OQS Media group to be jointed published with the UnHerd website.

On 25 September 2024, Fraser Nelson stepped down as editor of &quot;The Spectator,&quot; taking up the role of Assistant Editor. Former Conservative MP Michael Gove was appointed as the new Editor, with Charles Moore being appointed the company&#x27;s chairman.

==Political ideology and policy positions==
&quot;The Spectator&quot; is politically conservative. Historically, the magazine was liberal in outlook, and over the course of its first century supported the Radical wing of the Whigs, the Liberal Party, and the Liberal Unionists who eventually merged with the Conservatives. In 1957, the magazine was nicknamed &quot;the Bugger&#x27;s Bugle&quot; by &quot;The Sunday Express&quot; following a sustained campaign by &quot;The Spectator&quot; to decriminalise homosexuality. It was the only national publication to endorse and support Margaret Thatcher for leadership of the Conservative Party in the 1975 leadership election.

Particularly since the 7 July 2005 Islamic terrorist attacks on the London Underground, &quot;The Spectator&quot; has been critical of multiculturalism, arguing that it undermines Britain’s national identity and endangers its security through sectarianism and growing Islamic extremism. 

As with its sister publication &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;, &quot;The Spectator&quot; is generally Atlanticist and strongly Eurosceptic in outlook, favouring close ties with the United States and NATO rather than with the European Union. The magazine is a strong supporter of Israel. Some of its articles have opposed the creation of a Palestinian state, with one article arguing that a Palestinian state would be a &quot;Trojan Horse&quot; to destroy Israel. It has also supported Ukraine following its invasion by Russia in 2022. 

Ahead of the 2019 United Kingdom general election, the leading article in the magazine argued that illegal migrants living in the UK should be offered British citizenship. &quot;The Spectator&quot; has been one of the most outspoken supporters of Brexit. The magazine campaigned against Britain joining the European Common Market in the 1975 referendum, and was one of only two national titles (alongside the &quot;Morning Star&quot;) to back a ‘Leave’ vote in the 2016 United Kingdom referendum, though it also provided a platform for ‘Remain’ campaigners to argue for their side in the magazine and hosted a number of debates.

==Cultural influence==
The magazine has popularised or coined the phrases &quot;The Establishment&quot; (1955), &quot;nanny state&quot; (1965), &quot;young fogey&quot; (1984), and &quot;virtue signalling&quot; (2015).

The Shiva Naipaul Memorial Prize for outstanding travel writing offers £2,000 every year.&lt;ref name=&quot;spectator/Tan/prize-open&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The first winner was Hilary Mantel in 1987.&lt;ref name=&quot;spectator/hamra-prize&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=&quot;spectator/tag/prize&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

==Contributors==
In addition to the permanent staff of writers, other contributors included:
==Editors==
The editors of &quot;The Spectator&quot; have been:
==See also==
* &quot;The Salisbury Review&quot;
*&quot;The Spectator&quot; (1711–1714)

==References==
Notes
Citations
==Further reading==
* Butterfield, David (2020), &quot;10,000 Not Out: The History of The Spectator 1828–2020&quot;, London: Unicorn, .
* Courtauld, Simon (1998), &quot;To Convey Intelligence: The Spectator 1928–1998&quot;, London: Profile .
* Thomas, William Beach (and Katharine West, née Leaf) (1928), &quot;The Story of The Spectator 1828–1928&quot;, London: Methuen &amp; Co.
* 
* 

==External links==
* References to &amp; articles by and about C. S. Lewis in &quot;The Spectator&quot;, 1920–1970</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1684600" start="57" end="70" title="news magazine" label="news magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="192" end="216" title="politically conservative" label="politically conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="483" end="492" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="580" end="598" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="643" end="656" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q333362" start="702" end="713" title="Ian Gilmour" label="Ian Gilmour"/>
<link wikidata="Q333182" start="727" end="739" title="Iain Macleod" label="Iain Macleod"/>
<link wikidata="Q335078" start="757" end="769" title="Nigel Lawson" label="Nigel Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="794" end="806" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="807" end="809" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q333937" start="810" end="822" title="Michael Gove" label="Michael Gove"/>
<link wikidata="Q5493649" start="838" end="851" title="Fraser Nelson" label="Fraser Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q153297" start="1043" end="1072" title="The Gentleman&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="The Gentleman&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152223" start="1257" end="1270" title="Paul Marshall (investor)" label="Paul Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q65043815" start="1281" end="1287" title="UnHerd" label="UnHerd"/>
<link wikidata="Q100300992" start="1310" end="1317" title="GB News" label="GB News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6073287" start="1416" end="1438" title="Robert Stephen Rintoul" label="Robert Stephen Rintoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727832" start="1467" end="1484" title="Dundee Courier &amp;amp; Argus" label="Dundee Advertiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q28001508" start="1518" end="1523" title="The Atlas (newspaper)" label="Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q206384" start="1662" end="1676" title="Joseph Addison" label="Joseph Addison"/>
<link wikidata="Q333148" start="1681" end="1695" title="Richard Steele" label="Richard Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q913401" start="2154" end="2169" title="Classical radicalism" label="liberal-radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619120" start="2888" end="2912" title="Reform Act 1832" label="Great Reform Act of 1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433953" start="2930" end="2934" title="Tory" label="Tory"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691" start="3022" end="3040" title="Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington" label="Duke of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483238" start="3349" end="3364" title="Lancaster Place" label="Lancaster Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q181875" start="3429" end="3440" title="Robert Peel" label="Robert Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133144" start="3564" end="3573" title="Corn Laws" label="Corn Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q191282" start="3803" end="3818" title="First Opium War" label="First Opium War"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="4457" end="4480" title="British Raj" label="Anglo-Indian Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537249" start="4588" end="4602" title="George Brimley" label="George Brimley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="4653" end="4668" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q883305" start="4682" end="4693" title="Bleak House" label="Bleak House"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889036" start="5548" end="5562" title="Benjamin Moran" label="Benjamin Moran"/>
<link wikidata="Q310849" start="5658" end="5674" title="George M. Dallas" label="George M. Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796544" start="5777" end="5796" title="Thornton Leigh Hunt" label="Thornton Leigh Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12325" start="6096" end="6110" title="James Buchanan" label="James Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="6355" end="6362" title="Slavery in the United States" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q169390" start="6371" end="6383" title="abolitionist" label="abolitionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="7184" end="7196" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="7372" end="7381" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426743" start="7398" end="7417" title="Saturday Review (London)" label="The Saturday Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="7504" end="7519" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q698842" start="7574" end="7614" title="1860 United States presidential election" label="1860 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818990" start="7863" end="7880" title="Meredith Townsend" label="Meredith Townsend"/>
<link wikidata="Q283313" start="8323" end="8342" title="Richard Holt Hutton" label="Richard Holt Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="8364" end="8377" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="8466" end="8483" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="William Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="8939" end="8944" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="8957" end="8968" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="8976" end="8994" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166330" start="9180" end="9192" title="Trent Affair" label="Trent Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="9471" end="9488" title="Benjamin Disraeli" label="Benjamin Disraeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="9633" end="9647" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="9718" end="9741" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="William Ewart Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7467819" start="9775" end="9790" title="Irish Home Rule movement" label="Irish Home Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="9838" end="9851" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754707" start="9906" end="9922" title="Liberal Unionist Party" label="Liberal Unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q166714" start="9942" end="9955" title="H. H. Asquith" label="H. H. Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6191755" start="10100" end="10120" title="John Strachey (journalist)" label="John St Loe Strachey"/>
<link wikidata="Q315999" start="10787" end="10805" title="Joseph Chamberlain" label="Joseph Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416477" start="11529" end="11542" title="Evelyn Wrench" label="Evelyn Wrench"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416477" start="11718" end="11736" title="Evelyn Wrench" label="John Evelyn Wrench"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="11983" end="12000" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8768" start="12228" end="12238" title="Henry Ford" label="Henry Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="12240" end="12254" title="Mahatma Gandhi" label="Mahatma Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="12259" end="12275" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1835521" start="12381" end="12393" title="Unemployment in the United Kingdom" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q319369" start="12416" end="12424" title="Aberdare" label="Aberdare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286223" start="12502" end="12513" title="South Wales" label="South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023079" start="12986" end="12999" title="Wilson Harris (journalist)" label="Wilson Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q30716970" start="13087" end="13133" title="International relations (1919–1939)" label="developing international politics in the 1930s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="13164" end="13171" title="fascism" label="fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="13221" end="13231" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q466036" start="13536" end="13574" title="Nazi boycott of Jewish businesses" label="organized economic boycott of the Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254377" start="13796" end="13847" title="European foreign policy of the Chamberlain ministry" label="European foreign policy of the Chamberlain ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q10664" start="13852" end="13871" title="Neville Chamberlain" label="Neville Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q620737" start="13879" end="13890" title="appeasement" label="appeasement"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="13907" end="13923" title="Munich agreement" label="Munich agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q36756" start="14109" end="14122" title="Kristallnacht" label="Kristallnacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2230788" start="14270" end="14283" title="Harmondsworth" label="Harmondsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="14398" end="14404" title="The Blitz" label="bombed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025572" start="14662" end="14682" title="Cambridge University (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Cambridge University"/>
<link wikidata="Q210534" start="15009" end="15019" title="Daily Mail" label="Daily Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q333362" start="15140" end="15151" title="Ian Gilmour" label="Ian Gilmour"/>
<link wikidata="Q128995" start="15408" end="15420" title="Anthony Eden" label="Anthony Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q128985" start="15432" end="15448" title="Harold Macmillan" label="Harold Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q337380" start="15529" end="15543" title="Hugh Gaitskell" label="Hugh Gaitskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517397" start="15548" end="15560" title="Gaitskellism" label="Gaitskellism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865659" start="15632" end="15661" title="capital punishment in Britain" label="capital punishment in Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q467755" start="15715" end="15725" title="Ruth Ellis" label="Ruth Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q333823" start="15834" end="15853" title="Gwilym Lloyd George" label="Gwilym Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="16051" end="16062" title="Suez crisis" label="Suez crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q918420" start="16222" end="16258" title="1959 United Kingdom general election" label="1959 United Kingdom general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q64605672" start="16559" end="16593" title="decriminalisation of homosexuality" label="decriminalisation of homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q771738" start="16641" end="16660" title="Wolfenden Committee" label="Wolfenden Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q590750" start="16933" end="16956" title="Italian Socialist Party" label="Italian Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="16969" end="16975" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="16999" end="17011" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q325403" start="17025" end="17038" title="Aneurin Bevan" label="Aneurin Bevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q328681" start="17040" end="17056" title="Richard Crossman" label="Richard Crossman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6911815" start="17062" end="17077" title="Morgan Phillips" label="Morgan Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924922" start="17608" end="17620" title="Brian Inglis" label="Brian Inglis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5980459" start="17995" end="18008" title="Iain Hamilton (journalist)" label="Iain Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195701" start="18143" end="18154" title="Private Eye" label="Private Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q333182" start="18362" end="18374" title="Iain Macleod" label="Iain Macleod"/>
<link wikidata="Q128976" start="18470" end="18487" title="Alec Douglas-Home" label="Alec Douglas-Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q128985" start="18499" end="18515" title="Harold Macmillan" label="Harold Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183105" start="19365" end="19383" title="Randolph Churchill" label="Randolph Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q182035" start="19817" end="19823" title="Rab Butler" label="Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568680" start="19832" end="19845" title="William Haley" label="William Haley"/>
<link wikidata="Q335078" start="20435" end="20447" title="Nigel Lawson" label="Nigel Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q12741725" start="20613" end="20633" title="The Sunday Telegraph" label="The Sunday Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q220208" start="20699" end="20735" title="1964 United Kingdom general election" label="1964 United Kingdom general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="20852" end="20859" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q16015786" start="21192" end="21207" title="Harold Creighton" label="Harry Creighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539592" start="21274" end="21285" title="George Gale (journalist)" label="George Gale"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="21517" end="21529" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="21563" end="21580" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567271" start="22171" end="22185" title="Who&amp;#x27;s Who (UK)" label="Who&amp;#x27;s Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q15990102" start="22306" end="22319" title="Henry Keswick (businessman)" label="Henry Keswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683452" start="22469" end="22485" title="Jardines (company)" label="Jardine Matheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605075" start="22735" end="22748" title="Peter Fleming (writer)" label="Peter Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718568" start="22886" end="22906" title="Alexander Chancellor" label="Alexander Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="22984" end="22988" title="Eton College" label="Eton"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="22993" end="23002" title="Cambridge University" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="23042" end="23049" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210241" start="23107" end="23110" title="ITN" label="ITN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870568" start="23670" end="23683" title="Auberon Waugh" label="Auberon Waugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566255" start="23747" end="23760" title="New Statesman" label="New Statesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329902" start="23780" end="23792" title="Richard West (journalist)" label="Richard West"/>
<link wikidata="Q4085052" start="23797" end="23812" title="Jeffrey Bernard" label="Jeffrey Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q450143" start="23883" end="23903" title="Taki Theodoracopulos" label="Taki Theodoracopulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q194896" start="24177" end="24194" title="William Rees-Mogg" label="William Rees-Mogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="24230" end="24235" title="The Times" label="Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q4430243" start="24342" end="24354" title="Collectivism and individualism" label="collectivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081057" start="24428" end="24441" title="Charles Moore (journalist)" label="Charles Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="24716" end="24735" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="24970" end="24987" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708643" start="25072" end="25093" title="Anglo-Irish Agreement" label="Anglo-Irish Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q622649" start="25160" end="25179" title="Single European Act" label="Single European Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q15251" start="25208" end="25216" title="Transfer of sovereignty over Hong Kong" label="handover"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="25233" end="25238" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290793" start="25301" end="25312" title="UK passport" label="UK passport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333626" start="25321" end="25335" title="Right of abode in the United Kingdom" label="right of abode"/>
<link wikidata="Q264724" start="25544" end="25558" title="Nigella Lawson" label="Nigella Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180778" start="25621" end="25632" title="Craig Brown (satirist)" label="Craig Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393218" start="26136" end="26148" title="Fairfax Media" label="John Fairfax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566255" start="26398" end="26411" title="New Statesman" label="New Statesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q53944" start="26544" end="26558" title="Rupert Murdoch" label="Rupert Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="26857" end="26866" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696245" start="26988" end="27003" title="Telegraph Group" label="Telegraph Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="27076" end="27095" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290578" start="27145" end="27159" title="Dominic Lawson" label="Dominic Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858507" start="27313" end="27354" title="Secretary of State for Trade and Industry" label="Secretary of State for Trade and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q324805" start="27356" end="27371" title="Nicholas Ridley, Baron Ridley of Liddesdale" label="Nicholas Ridley"/>
<link wikidata="Q825026" start="27425" end="27452" title="Economic and Monetary Union" label="Economic and Monetary Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518" start="27588" end="27599" title="Helmut Kohl" label="Helmut Kohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="27604" end="27616" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7025432" start="27710" end="27726" title="Nicholas Garland" label="Nicholas Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="28033" end="28042" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q59622233" start="28055" end="28067" title="William Cash (journalist)" label="William Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="28139" end="28158" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q336444" start="28420" end="28432" title="Conrad Black" label="Conrad Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q726622" start="28467" end="28479" title="Max Hastings" label="Max Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q35438" start="28578" end="28596" title="The Jerusalem Post" label="The Jerusalem Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659427" start="28910" end="28925" title="John Derbyshire" label="John Derbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699649" start="29036" end="29058" title="National Review Online" label="National Review Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q12741725" start="29447" end="29467" title="The Sunday Telegraph" label="The Sunday Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092512" start="29534" end="29547" title="Frank Johnson (journalist)" label="Frank Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="29559" end="29595" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997 United Kingdom general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396591" start="29678" end="29688" title="New Labour" label="New Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641" start="29853" end="29868" title="The Spice Girls" label="The Spice Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413809" start="29913" end="29925" title="Euroscepticism in the United Kingdom" label="Euro-sceptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9685" start="30002" end="30026" title="Diana, Princess of Wales" label="Diana, Princess of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q365913" start="30091" end="30107" title="Mohamed Al-Fayed" label="Mohamed Al-Fayed"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="30207" end="30220" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="30242" end="30251" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421650" start="30283" end="30301" title="Wolverhampton Express and Star" label="Express &amp;amp; Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="30319" end="30338" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977072" start="30481" end="30495" title="Bruce Anderson (columnist)" label="Bruce Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q590740" start="30687" end="30723" title="2001 United Kingdom general election" label="2001 United Kingdom general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080330" start="30752" end="30758" title="Henley (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Henley"/>
<link wikidata="Q325381" start="30843" end="30857" title="Michael Howard" label="Michael Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q877530" start="31149" end="31160" title="Thatcherite" label="Thatcherite"/>
<link wikidata="Q192139" start="31179" end="31195" title="neo-conservative" label="neo-conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q184619" start="31368" end="31381" title="Scotland Yard" label="Scotland Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q450143" start="31414" end="31434" title="Taki Theodoracopulos" label="Taki Theodoracopulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q16239911" start="31495" end="31508" title="Peter Herbert (lawyer)" label="Peter Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117105" start="31870" end="31884" title="Kenneth Bigley" label="Kenneth Bigley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356281" start="32479" end="32489" title="Rod Liddle" label="Rod Liddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7179026" start="32582" end="32598" title="Petronella Wyatt" label="Petronella Wyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q264196" start="32821" end="32835" title="David Blunkett" label="David Blunkett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741632" start="32981" end="32995" title="Kimberly Quinn" label="Kimberly Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758108" start="33208" end="33219" title="Andrew Neil" label="Andrew Neil"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="33399" end="33408" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282550" start="33409" end="33431" title="Dispatches (TV programme)" label="&amp;quot;Dispatches&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q75490076" start="33532" end="33546" title="Mary Wakefield (journalist)" label="Mary Wakefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q24572712" start="33688" end="33704" title="Dominic Cummings" label="Dominic Cummings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173651" start="33720" end="33736" title="Barclay Brothers" label="Barclay Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139370" start="33772" end="33795" title="Hollinger International" label="Hollinger International"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791469" start="33902" end="33910" title="Matthew d&amp;#x27;Ancona" label="D’Ancona"/>
<link wikidata="Q12741725" start="33943" end="33963" title="The Sunday Telegraph" label="The Sunday Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176204" start="34415" end="34427" title="Peter Oborne" label="Peter Oborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5493649" start="34463" end="34476" title="Fraser Nelson" label="Fraser Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609324" start="34550" end="34564" title="Stephen Glover (columnist)" label="Stephen Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q16223367" start="34906" end="34918" title="Peter Hoskin" label="Peter Hoskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160179" start="34923" end="34936" title="James Forsyth (journalist)" label="James Forsyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5493649" start="35477" end="35490" title="Fraser Nelson" label="Fraser Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356281" start="35914" end="35924" title="Rod Liddle" label="Rod Liddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q648413" start="35978" end="36004" title="murder of Stephen Lawrence" label="murder of Stephen Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141790" start="36016" end="36041" title="Crown Prosecution Service" label="Crown Prosecution Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q450143" start="36730" end="36750" title="Taki Theodoracopulos" label="Taki Theodoracopulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q82256" start="36797" end="36808" title="Golden Dawn (Greece)" label="Golden Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="36894" end="36903" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081057" start="37018" end="37031" title="Charles Moore (journalist)" label="Charles Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q20647581" start="37046" end="37083" title="2015 Labour Party leadership election (UK)" label="2015 Labour Party leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q291057" start="37102" end="37115" title="Yvette Cooper" label="Yvette Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q750260" start="37120" end="37131" title="Liz Kendall" label="Liz Kendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362216" start="37473" end="37499" title="First Minister of Scotland" label="First Minister of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q467112" start="37501" end="37516" title="Nicola Sturgeon" label="Nicola Sturgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q38931" start="37562" end="37577" title="Mayor of London" label="Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q272642" start="37605" end="37617" title="Tessa Jowell" label="Tessa Jowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q110500370" start="37714" end="37725" title="Freddy Gray (journalist)" label="Freddy Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152847" start="38413" end="38424" title="Lloyds Bank" label="Lloyds Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="38493" end="38508" title="Daily Telegraph" label="Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152223" start="39448" end="39465" title="Paul Marshall (investor)" label="Sir Paul Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q15109445" start="39659" end="39665" title="Apollo (magazine)" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q65043815" start="39750" end="39756" title="UnHerd" label="UnHerd"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="39903" end="39915" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="39916" end="39918" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q333937" start="39919" end="39931" title="Michael Gove" label="Michael Gove"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081057" start="39970" end="39983" title="Charles Moore, Baron Moore of Etchingham" label="Charles Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="40115" end="40127" title="conservative" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="40160" end="40167" title="Liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687668" start="40235" end="40242" title="Radicals (UK)" label="Radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="40255" end="40260" title="Whigs (British political party)" label="Whigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="40266" end="40279" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754707" start="40289" end="40306" title="Liberal Unionists" label="Liberal Unionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q610190" start="40434" end="40452" title="The Sunday Express" label="The Sunday Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458681" start="40522" end="40549" title="Sexual Offences Act 1967" label="decriminalise homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="40611" end="40628" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163063" start="40677" end="40701" title="1975 Conservative Party leadership election" label="1975 leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10818" start="40727" end="40764" title="7 July 2005 London bombings" label="7 July 2005 Islamic terrorist attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="40772" end="40790" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q190656" start="40839" end="40855" title="multiculturalism" label="multiculturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880695" start="40894" end="40911" title="national identity" label="national identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352121" start="40947" end="40959" title="sectarianism" label="sectarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6082705" start="40972" end="40989" title="Islamic extremism" label="Islamic extremism"/>
<link wikidata="Q388698" start="41096" end="41107" title="Atlanticist" label="Atlanticist"/>
<link wikidata="Q223200" start="41121" end="41132" title="Eurosceptic" label="Eurosceptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="41175" end="41188" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="41193" end="41197" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="41219" end="41233" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="41273" end="41279" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q50193" start="41419" end="41431" title="Trojan Horse" label="Trojan Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="41501" end="41519" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="invasion by Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30173038" start="41544" end="41580" title="2019 United Kingdom general election" label="2019 United Kingdom general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="41847" end="41860" title="European Economic Community" label="Common Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931610" start="41868" end="41883" title="1975 United Kingdom European Communities membership referendum" label="1975 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948306" start="41946" end="41958" title="Morning Star (British newspaper)" label="Morning Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="41996" end="42026" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="2016 United Kingdom referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q574562" start="42241" end="42258" title="The Establishment" label="The Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511637" start="42279" end="42290" title="nanny state" label="nanny state"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058119" start="42311" end="42322" title="young fogey" label="young fogey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5895486" start="42347" end="42364" title="virtue signalling" label="virtue signalling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351168" start="42384" end="42397" title="Shiva Naipaul" label="Shiva Naipaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q465700" start="42556" end="42569" title="Hilary Mantel" label="Hilary Mantel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762115" start="42880" end="42900" title="The Salisbury Review" label="The Salisbury Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q581322" start="42914" end="42927" title="The Spectator (1711)" label="The Spectator"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64054" wikidata="Q990253" url="?curid=64054" title="Henley-on-Thames">
<text>Henley-on-Thames ( ) is a town and civil parish on the River Thames, in the South Oxfordshire district, in Oxfordshire, England, northeast of Reading, west of Maidenhead, southeast of Oxford and west of London (by road), near the tripoint of Oxfordshire, Berkshire and Buckinghamshire. The population at the 2021 Census was 12,186.

==History==
&lt;includeonly&gt;Henley does not appear in Domesday Book of 1086; often it is mistaken for &quot;Henlei&quot; in the book which is in Surrey.&lt;/includeonly&gt;
There is archaeological evidence of people residing in Henley since the second century as part of the Romano-British period. The first record of Henley as a substantial settlement is from 1179, when it is recorded that King Henry II &quot;had bought land for the making of buildings&quot;. King John granted the manor of Benson and the town and manor of Henley to Robert Harcourt in 1199. A church at Henley is first mentioned in 1204. In 1205 the town received a tax for street paving, and in 1234 the bridge is first mentioned. In 1278 Henley is described as a hamlet of Benson with a chapel. The street plan was probably established by the end of the 13th century. As a demesne of the crown it was granted in 1337 to John de Molyns, whose family held it for about 250 years.

The existing Thursday market, it is believed, was granted by a charter of King John. A market was certainly in existence by 1269; however, the jurors of the assize of 1284 said that they did not know by what warrant the Earl of Cornwall held a market and fair in the town of Henley. The existing Corpus Christi fair was granted by a charter of Henry VI. During the Black Death pandemic that swept through England in the 14th century, Henley lost 60% of its population. A variation on its name can be seen as &quot;Henley up a Tamys&quot; in 1485. 

By the beginning of the 16th century, the town extended along the west bank of the Thames from Friday Street in the south to the Manor, now Phyllis Court, in the north and took in Hart Street and New Street. To the west, it included Bell Street and the Market Place.

Henley suffered at the hands of both parties in the Civil War. Later, William III rested here on his march to London in 1688, at the nearby recently rebuilt Fawley Court, and received a deputation from the Lords. The town&#x27;s period of prosperity in the 17th and 18th centuries was due to manufactures of glass and malt, and trade in corn and wool. Henley-on-Thames supplied London with timber and grain. A workhouse to accommodate 150 people was built at West Hill in Henley in 1790, and was later enlarged to accommodate 250 as the Henley Poor Law Union workhouse. 

==Governance==
There are three tiers of local government covering Henley, at civil parish (town), district, and county level: Henley-on-Thames Town Council, South Oxfordshire District Council, and Oxfordshire County Council. The town council is based at Henley Town Hall in the Market Place.

===Administrative history===
Henley-on-Thames was an ancient parish. The town was also an ancient borough from the middle ages. Its date of becoming a borough is not known; it appears to have been a seigneurial borough under the control of the lord of the manor, who allowed the town&#x27;s merchant guild to effectively run the town. The town&#x27;s first municipal charter was granted in 1568 by Elizabeth I.

The borough was left unreformed when most boroughs across the country were standardised under the Municipal Corporations Act 1835. Government commissioners had concluded that Henley&#x27;s corporation had too few functions and the town was too small to justify the cost of reform. The old borough corporation continued to exist, but did not qualify for any subsequent new local government powers. In order to provide more modern forms of local government, notably including the provision of sewers, a separate local government district with an elected local board had to be set up in 1864. The local board then operated alongside the unreformed borough corporation until 1883, when the borough was eventually reformed to become a municipal borough. The reformed borough corporation (also known as the town council) took on the abolished local board&#x27;s functions.

The borough of Henley-on-Thames was abolished in 1974 under the Local Government Act 1972. District-level functions passed to the new South Oxfordshire District Council. A successor parish called Henley-on-Thames was created covering the area of the abolished borough, with its parish council taking the name Henley-on-Thames Town Council.

==Landmarks and structures==

Henley Bridge is a five arched bridge across the river built in 1786. It is a Grade I listed historic structure. During 2011 the bridge underwent a £200,000 repair programme after being hit by the boat &quot;Crazy Love&quot; in August 2010. About upstream of the bridge is Marsh Lock. Henley Town Hall, which occupies a prominent position in the Market Place, was designed by Henry Hare and completed in 1900. Chantry House is the second Grade I listed building in the town. It is unusual in having more storeys on one side than on the other. The Church of England parish church of St Mary the Virgin is nearby and has a 16th-century tower. The Old Bell is a pub in the centre of Henley on Bell Street. The building has been dated from 1325: the oldest-dated building in the town. To celebrate Queen Victoria&#x27;s Diamond Jubilee, 60 oak trees were planted in the shape of a Victoria Cross near Fairmile, the long straight road to the northwest of the town. Two notable buildings just outside Henley, in Buckinghamshire, are:

*Fawley Court, a red-brick building designed by Christopher Wren for William Freeman (1684) with subsequent interior remodelling by James Wyatt and landscaping by Lancelot &quot;Capability&quot; Brown.
*Greenlands, which took its present form when owned by W. H. Smith and is now home to Henley Business School

==Transport==
The town&#x27;s railway station is the terminus of the Henley Branch Line from Twyford. In the past there have been direct services to London Paddington. There are express mainline rail services from Reading () to Paddington. Trains from High Wycombe () go to London Marylebone. The M4 motorway (junction 8/9) and the M40 motorway (junction 4) are both about () away. 

Bus route 850 is operated by Carousel Buses on a 15 minute frequency between High Wycombe, Marlow and Henley, extending every 30 minutes to Reading via Wargrave and Twyford.
==Notable businesses==
Organic baby food manufacturer Ella&#x27;s Kitchen is headquartered in Henley-on-Thames.

==Education==
===Primary===
* Badgemore Primary School, Hop Gardens
* Sacred Heart RC School, Greys Hill
* Trinity CE Primary School, Vicarage Road 
* Valley Road Primary School, Valley Road 

===Secondary===
* Gillotts School, Gillott&#x27;s Lane

===Independent===
* Rupert House School, Bell Street
* St. Mary&#x27;s Preparatory School, St. Andrews Road
* Shiplake College, is located near Henley in Shiplake

===Further education===
* The Henley College
* Henley Business School, which is part of University of Reading is located near Henley

==Rowing==
Henley is a world-renowned centre for rowing. Each summer the Henley Royal Regatta is held on Henley Reach, a naturally straight stretch of the river just north of the town. It was extended artificially. The event became &quot;Royal&quot; in 1851, when Prince Albert became patron of the regatta. Other regattas and rowing races are held on the same reach, including Henley Women&#x27;s Regatta, Henley Town and Visitors Regatta, Henley Veteran Regatta, Upper Thames Small Boats Head, Henley Fours and Eights Head, and Henley Sculls. These &quot;Heads&quot; often attract strong crews that have won medals at National Championships. Local rowing clubs include:

* Henley Rowing Club (located upstream of Henley Bridge)
* Leander Club (world-famous, home to Olympic and World Champions, most notably Steve Redgrave and Matthew Pinsent, near Henley Bridge)
* Phyllis Court Rowing Club (part of the Phyllis Court Club and set up for recreational rowing)
* Upper Thames Rowing Club (located just upstream from the mark/Fawley/Old Blades)
* Henley Whalers (associated with UTRC) focus on fixed-seat rowing and sailing.

The regatta depicted throughout &quot;Dead in the Water&quot;, an episode of the British detective television series Midsomer Murders, was filmed at Henley.

===River and Rowing Museum===
The River and Rowing Museum, located in Mill Meadows, is the town&#x27;s one museum. It was established in 1998, and officially opened by Queen Elizabeth II. The museum, designed by the architect David Chipperfield, features information on the River Thames, the sport of rowing, and the town of Henley itself. 
==Other sports==
Henley has the oldest football team Henley Town F.C. recognised by the Oxfordshire Football Association, they play at The Triangle ground. Henley also has a rugby union club Henley Hawks which play at the Dry Leas ground, a hockey club Henley Hockey Club which play at Jubilee Park, and Henley Cricket Club which has played at Brakspear Ground since 1886. a new club in Henley was started in September 2016 called Henley Lions FC.

==Notable people==


* Gerry Anderson (1929–2012), creator of Sixties television series &quot;Thunderbirds&quot; lived in Henley-on-Thames.
* Sir Martyn Arbib led the Perpetual fund management company during the late 20th century, unusually based in Henley-on-Thames, rather than London. Arbib was a major benefactor in the establishment of the River and Rowing Museum at Henley, which opened in 1998.
* Mary Berry, food writer and television presenter, lives in Henley.
* Mary Blandy (1720–1752) lived at Blandy House her family&#x27;s home in Henley, now a dental surgery. In 1752, she was hanged for the murder, by poisoning, of her father, Francis Blandy who had opposed her engagement to a Scottish man who was already married. She proclaimed on the day of the hanging in Oxford: &quot;Gentlemen, don&#x27;t hang me high for the sake of decency&quot;. Mary is buried with her parents at St Mary The Virgin&#x27;s Church, despite that being forbidden at the time for a murderer. She is said to haunt the Kenton Theatre, the family house and St Mary&#x27;s churchyard.
* James Blish (1921–1975), American science fiction writer, lived in Henley from 1968 until his death.
* Jonathan Bowden (1962–2012) lived in Rotherfield Peppard (post town Henley-on-Thames) throughout the 1970s.
* Russell Brand, English comedian, actor and activist, lives in Henley-on-Thames.
* Ross Brawn, British engineer best known for his role as the technical director of the Scuderia Ferrari f1 team and former team principal of Mercedes Grand Prix.
* Winston Churchill led the Queen&#x27;s Own Oxfordshire Hussars, (C Squadron) who were based at &quot;The White House&quot; on Market Place in 1908 and some years after that.
* Dame Gladys Cooper (1888–1971), actress, spent her last years in Henley. In an acting career spanning seven decades she appeared on stage (the West End and Broadway), in film, and on television, and was twice nominated for an Academy Award. 
* Sir Frank Crisp (1843–1919), first baronet, lawyer and microscopist, the ideator of Friar Park. The &quot;Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp (Let It Roll)&quot; composed by the former Beatle George Harrison, who purchased Friar Park from Sir Frank, is dedicated to him.
* Esther Deuzeville (1786–1851), as Esther Copley later a writer of children&#x27;s books and works on domestic economy addressed to the working people, lived here with her parents until her marriage in 1809. There is a plaque to her and her family in the United Reformed Church.
* Charles-François Dumouriez (1739–1823), French general, is buried at St Mary the Virgin parish church.
* John Greville Fennell (1807–1885), painter and angler, lived in Henley and is buried there.
* Humphrey Gainsborough (1718–1776), brother of the artist Thomas Gainsborough, was a pastor and inventor who lived in Henley. A blue plaque marks his house, &quot;The Manse&quot;.
* George Harrison (1943–2001), musician and former Beatle, purchased Friar Park in 1970, and lived there until his death. During his years there, he restored the buildings and gardens. His widow, Olivia Harrison, continues to live on the estate. George and Olivia&#x27;s only child, Dhani Harrison was raised at Friar Park. 
* Michael Heseltine, Baron Heseltine of Thenford, preceded Boris Johnson as Conservative MP for Henley-on-Thames.
* Tony Hall, Baron Hall of Birkenhead lives in Henley-on-Thames.
* Sir William Hamilton (1730–1803), British diplomat, antiquarian, archaeologist and vulcanologist was born in Henley-on-Thames.
* John Hunt, Baron Hunt of Fawley (1905–1987) had a house in Henley, where he lived from his retirement until his death.
* Boris Johnson, politician, was the Member of Parliament and the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, as well as the Mayor of London.
* Simon Kernick, author, was raised in Henley-on-Thames.
* William Lenthall (1591–1662), politician, was born in Henley-on-Thames. He was Speaker of the House of Commons between 1640 and 1660.
* Sophie Lloyd, virtuoso guitarist and YouTuber, grew up in Henley-on-Thames.
* Hugo Nicolson, music producer. 
* Jack Ogden, jewellery historian, lives in Henley-on-Thames.
* George Orwell (1903–1950), author, spent some of his formative years in Henley-on-Thames.
* Andrew Peach, broadcaster, lives in Henley with his wife and two children.
* Lee Ryan, singer, lives in Henley.
* Marcus du Sautoy, mathematician, lives in Henley.
* Phillip Schofield, TV presenter, lived in Henley with his wife and two daughters.
* Urs Schwarzenbach, financier, lives at Culham Court, Aston, east of Henley.
* Dame Stephanie Shirley, entrepreneur, philanthropist and workplace revolutionary, lives in Henley with her husband.
* Dusty Springfield (1939–1999), singer, is buried in the grounds of St Mary the Virgin parish church. Her ashes were scattered in Henley and at the Cliffs of Moher in Ireland. Each year her fans gather in Henley to celebrate &quot;Dusty Day&quot; on the closest Sunday to her birthday (16 April).
* Sir Ninian Stephen, Australian judge and Governor-General of Australia (1982–1989), was born in Henley
* Harry Stott, joint winner of &quot;I&#x27;d Do Anything&quot; and star of TV show &quot;Roman Mysteries&quot;.
* David Tomlinson (1917–2000), actor, was born and raised in Henley.
* Andrew Tristem, author and journalist, lives in Henley-on-Thames. 
* Jonathan Lloyd Walker, actor, was born and raised here. He now lives in West Vancouver, Canada.

==Media==
===Newspaper===
Henley has one local newspaper, the &quot;Henley Standard&quot; which is also available online.

===News website===

In addition to the Henley Standard website, there is another source of news online: the Henley Herald 

===Radio===
Local radio stations are BBC Radio Berkshire on 94.6 FM, Heart South on 103.4 FM, Greatest Hits Radio Berkshire and North Hampshire on 107.0 FM and London&#x27;s radio stations such as Capital and Magic along with a few others can also be received. Regatta Radio was broadcast during Henley Royal Regatta for a number of years up to 2014.

===Television===
As Henley is on an overlap of TV regions, it is possible to receive signals from the Crystal Palace (BBC London/ITV London) and Hannington (BBC South/ITV Meridian) transmitters. However, the local relay transmitter for Henley only broadcasts programmes from ITV London and BBC London, making Henley the only part of Oxfordshire included within the London television region.

=== In popular culture ===
Henley-on-Thames was represented in the 2010 American drama film &quot;The Social Network&quot; as the site of a rowing competition between the US and the Netherlands.

==Twin towns, sister cities and related localities==
Henley is twinned with:
* Bled, Slovenia
* Falaise, Calvados, France since 1974
* Leichlingen, Germany

And has a &#x27;friendship link&#x27; with:
* Borama, Somaliland

In addition, several localities around the world are named after Henley, including:
* Henley, a suburb of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
* Henley Beach, a suburb of Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
* Henley, a township on the Taieri Plain in New Zealand.

==See also==
*Brakspear Brewery, founded in 1779 but now moved to Witney
*Henley Festival, held each July
*Henley shirt, a garment named after the town because it was the traditional uniform of the rowing clubs
*Stuart Turner Ltd, Henley-based engineering company founded in 1906

==References==
==Bibliography==
*
*


==External links==
* Henley-on-Thames online</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q990253" start="0" end="16" title="Henley-on-Thames" label="Henley-on-Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q15151170" start="26" end="30" title="town status in the United Kingdom" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="35" end="47" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="55" end="67" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776967" start="76" end="93" title="South Oxfordshire" label="South Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23169" start="107" end="118" title="Oxfordshire" label="Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q161491" start="142" end="149" title="Reading, Berkshire" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q238803" start="159" end="169" title="Maidenhead, England" label="Maidenhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="184" end="190" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="203" end="209" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q316655" start="230" end="238" title="tripoint" label="tripoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q23220" start="255" end="264" title="Berkshire" label="Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="269" end="284" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970190" start="308" end="319" title="United Kingdom Census 2021" label="2021 Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="390" end="403" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142976" start="611" end="625" title="Romano-British" label="Romano-British"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="728" end="741" title="Henry II of England" label="King Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="804" end="808" title="John of England" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351343" start="830" end="836" title="Benson, Oxfordshire" label="Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q108325" start="1096" end="1102" title="chapel" label="chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q155231" start="1182" end="1189" title="demesne" label="demesne"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="1367" end="1371" title="John of England" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258000" start="1445" end="1451" title="assize" label="assize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277252" start="1508" end="1524" title="Earl of Cornwall" label="Earl of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q152395" start="1584" end="1598" title="Corpus Christi (feast)" label="Corpus Christi"/>
<link wikidata="Q160337" start="1632" end="1640" title="Henry VI of England" label="Henry VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="1653" end="1664" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="1920" end="1926" title="Thames" label="Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q879050" start="1966" end="1971" title="Manor house" label="Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188540" start="1977" end="1990" title="Phyllis Court" label="Phyllis Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="2157" end="2166" title="English Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="2175" end="2186" title="William III of England" label="William III"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2215" end="2221" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438768" start="2262" end="2274" title="Fawley Court" label="Fawley Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="2311" end="2316" title="House of Lords" label="Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q628155" start="2515" end="2524" title="workhouse" label="workhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397866" start="2649" end="2663" title="Poor Law Union" label="Poor Law Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="2754" end="2766" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187580" start="2775" end="2783" title="non-metropolitan district" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q769603" start="2789" end="2795" title="non-metropolitan county" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776967" start="2834" end="2868" title="South Oxfordshire District Council" label="South Oxfordshire District Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386253" start="2874" end="2900" title="Oxfordshire County Council" label="Oxfordshire County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q17548970" start="2931" end="2947" title="Henley Town Hall" label="Henley Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="3023" end="3037" title="ancient parish" label="ancient parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752944" start="3060" end="3075" title="ancient borough" label="ancient borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933923" start="3169" end="3188" title="seigneurial borough" label="seigneurial borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815782" start="3214" end="3231" title="lord of the manor" label="lord of the manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q939871" start="3261" end="3275" title="merchant guild" label="merchant guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940451" start="3327" end="3344" title="municipal charter" label="municipal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="3368" end="3379" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897357" start="3398" end="3413" title="Unreformed boroughs in England and Wales 1835–1886" label="left unreformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4256081" start="3480" end="3511" title="Municipal Corporations Act 1835" label="Municipal Corporations Act 1835"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3892" end="3917" title="Local board of health#Local Government Act 1858" label="local government district"/>
<link wikidata="Q518343" start="4112" end="4129" title="municipal borough" label="municipal borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510461" start="4314" end="4339" title="Local Government Act 1972" label="Local Government Act 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632657" start="4422" end="4438" title="successor parish" label="successor parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12059877" start="4621" end="4634" title="Henley Bridge" label="Henley Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="4699" end="4713" title="Grade I listed" label="Grade I listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773332" start="4894" end="4904" title="Marsh Lock" label="Marsh Lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q13494097" start="4997" end="5007" title="Henry Hare (architect)" label="Henry Hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116872" start="5168" end="5199" title="Church of England parish church" label="Church of England parish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="5203" end="5221" title="Mary (mother of Jesus)" label="St Mary the Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754805" start="5262" end="5274" title="The Old Bell (Henley on Thames)" label="The Old Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="5280" end="5283" title="public house" label="pub"/>
<link wikidata="Q107395117" start="5415" end="5452" title="Queen Victoria&amp;#x27;s Diamond Jubilee" label="Queen Victoria&amp;#x27;s Diamond Jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="5498" end="5512" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="5627" end="5642" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438768" start="5651" end="5663" title="Fawley Court" label="Fawley Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q170373" start="5698" end="5714" title="Christopher Wren" label="Christopher Wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350728" start="5782" end="5793" title="James Wyatt" label="James Wyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q454635" start="5813" end="5850" title="Lancelot &amp;quot;Capability&amp;quot; Brown" label="Lancelot &amp;quot;Capability&amp;quot; Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604247" start="5853" end="5863" title="Greenlands, Buckinghamshire" label="Greenlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548712" start="5907" end="5918" title="W. H. Smith" label="W. H. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q125328" start="5938" end="5960" title="Henley Business School" label="Henley Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5714576" start="5992" end="6007" title="Henley-on-Thames railway station" label="railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5714599" start="6031" end="6049" title="Henley Branch Line" label="Henley Branch Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q512845" start="6055" end="6062" title="Twyford railway station" label="Twyford"/>
<link wikidata="Q214788" start="6111" end="6128" title="Paddington station" label="London Paddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q801355" start="6176" end="6183" title="Reading railway station" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851135" start="6214" end="6226" title="High Wycombe railway station" label="High Wycombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q649419" start="6236" end="6253" title="Marylebone station" label="London Marylebone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638174" start="6259" end="6270" title="M4 motorway" label="M4 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541030" start="6294" end="6306" title="M40 motorway" label="M40 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045560" start="6375" end="6389" title="Carousel Buses" label="Carousel Buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q64116" start="6423" end="6435" title="High Wycombe" label="High Wycombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q508998" start="6437" end="6443" title="Marlow, Buckinghamshire" label="Marlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q161491" start="6486" end="6493" title="Reading, Berkshire" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q598948" start="6498" end="6506" title="Wargrave" label="Wargrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774391" start="6511" end="6518" title="Twyford, Berkshire" label="Twyford"/>
<link wikidata="Q380778" start="6543" end="6550" title="Organic food" label="Organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q797971" start="6551" end="6560" title="baby food" label="baby food"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364457" start="6574" end="6593" title="Ella&amp;#x27;s Kitchen" label="Ella&amp;#x27;s Kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16891635" start="6844" end="6859" title="Gillotts School" label="Gillotts School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380308" start="6902" end="6921" title="Rupert House School" label="Rupert House School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498004" start="6992" end="7008" title="Shiplake College" label="Shiplake College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303243" start="7036" end="7044" title="Shiplake" label="Shiplake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739369" start="7072" end="7090" title="The Henley College (Henley-on-Thames)" label="The Henley College"/>
<link wikidata="Q125328" start="7093" end="7115" title="Henley Business School" label="Henley Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432632" start="7134" end="7155" title="University of Reading" label="University of Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q159354" start="7229" end="7235" title="Sport rowing" label="rowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543109" start="7253" end="7273" title="Henley Royal Regatta" label="Henley Royal Regatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q152245" start="7444" end="7457" title="Albert, Prince Consort" label="Prince Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5714677" start="7558" end="7585" title="Henley Women&amp;#x27;s Regatta" label="Henley Women&amp;#x27;s Regatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="7651" end="7657" title="Thames" label="Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q98805088" start="7855" end="7873" title="Henley Rowing Club" label="Henley Rowing Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q12059877" start="7895" end="7908" title="Henley Bridge" label="Henley Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351629" start="7912" end="7924" title="Leander Club" label="Leander Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="7948" end="7955" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q52679" start="7990" end="8004" title="Steve Redgrave" label="Steve Redgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q52680" start="8009" end="8024" title="Matthew Pinsent" label="Matthew Pinsent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188540" start="8087" end="8105" title="Phyllis Court Club" label="Phyllis Court Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898957" start="8144" end="8168" title="Upper Thames Rowing Club" label="Upper Thames Rowing Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016030" start="8227" end="8241" title="Henley Whalers" label="Henley Whalers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245485" start="8338" end="8367" title="Dead in the Water (Midsomer Murders)" label="&amp;quot;Dead in the Water&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q751917" start="8423" end="8439" title="Midsomer Murders" label="Midsomer Murders"/>
<link wikidata="Q15272725" start="8498" end="8521" title="River and Rowing Museum" label="River and Rowing Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6858358" start="8534" end="8546" title="Mill Meadows, Henley-on-Thames" label="Mill Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="8632" end="8650" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q707020" start="8690" end="8708" title="David Chipperfield" label="David Chipperfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="8738" end="8750" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q159354" start="8765" end="8771" title="rowing (sport)" label="rowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="8844" end="8852" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5714674" start="8858" end="8874" title="Henley Town F.C." label="Henley Town F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7115587" start="8893" end="8925" title="Oxfordshire Football Association" label="Oxfordshire Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="8979" end="8990" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5714642" start="8996" end="9008" title="Henley Hawks" label="Henley Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455" start="9065" end="9071" title="Field hockey" label="Hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="9116" end="9123" title="Cricket" label="Cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956054" start="9149" end="9158" title="Brakspear" label="Brakspear"/>
<link wikidata="Q596137" start="9277" end="9291" title="Gerry Anderson" label="Gerry Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q288085" start="9348" end="9360" title="Thunderbirds (TV series)" label="Thunderbirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777593" start="9396" end="9412" title="Sir Martyn Arbib" label="Sir Martyn Arbib"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060594" start="9421" end="9430" title="Invesco Perpetual" label="Perpetual"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="9534" end="9540" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q15272725" start="9599" end="9622" title="River and Rowing Museum" label="River and Rowing Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12035946" start="9658" end="9668" title="Mary Berry" label="Mary Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779079" start="9727" end="9738" title="Mary Blandy" label="Mary Blandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="10031" end="10037" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="10146" end="10153" title="St Mary" label="St Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392100" start="10262" end="10276" title="Kenton Theatre" label="Kenton Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q248867" start="10328" end="10339" title="James Blish" label="James Blish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6272633" start="10431" end="10446" title="Jonathan Bowden" label="Jonathan Bowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304852" start="10468" end="10487" title="Rotherfield Peppard" label="Rotherfield Peppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q296609" start="10541" end="10554" title="Russell Brand" label="Russell Brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q173140" start="10623" end="10633" title="Ross Brawn" label="Ross Brawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="10709" end="10733" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Scuderia Ferrari f1 team"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954812" start="10763" end="10782" title="Mercedes Grand Prix" label="Mercedes Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="10786" end="10803" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3413989" start="10812" end="10848" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Own Oxfordshire Hussars" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Own Oxfordshire Hussars"/>
<link wikidata="Q235299" start="10962" end="10980" title="Dame Gladys Cooper" label="Dame Gladys Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="11105" end="11113" title="West End Theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="11118" end="11126" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="11188" end="11201" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q15515422" start="11206" end="11221" title="Sir Frank Crisp" label="Sir Frank Crisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087616" start="11290" end="11300" title="Friar Park" label="Friar Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q11225739" start="11312" end="11353" title="Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp (Let It Roll)" label="Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp (Let It Roll)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="11383" end="11389" title="Beatle" label="Beatle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="11390" end="11405" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401174" start="11471" end="11488" title="Esther Copley" label="Esther Deuzeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458238" start="11725" end="11747" title="United Reformed Church" label="United Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q378572" start="11751" end="11777" title="Charles-François Dumouriez" label="Charles-François Dumouriez"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="11820" end="11827" title="St Mary" label="St Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6236301" start="11856" end="11877" title="John Greville Fennell" label="John Greville Fennell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5941413" start="11950" end="11971" title="Humphrey Gainsborough" label="Humphrey Gainsborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q192720" start="12007" end="12026" title="Thomas Gainsborough" label="Thomas Gainsborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115583" start="12077" end="12088" title="Oxfordshire Blue Plaques Board" label="blue plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051104" start="12116" end="12121" title="Manse" label="Manse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="12131" end="12146" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="12180" end="12186" title="Beatle" label="Beatle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087616" start="12198" end="12208" title="Friar Park" label="Friar Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q442991" start="12325" end="12340" title="Olivia Harrison" label="Olivia Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q611349" start="12412" end="12426" title="Dhani Harrison" label="Dhani Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q332314" start="12456" end="12473" title="Michael Heseltine" label="Michael Heseltine"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="12513" end="12526" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="12530" end="12542" title="Conservative Party UK" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q80390" start="12570" end="12605" title="Tony Hall, Baron Hall of Birkenhead" label="Tony Hall, Baron Hall of Birkenhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q15462" start="12635" end="12655" title="William Hamilton (diplomat)" label="Sir William Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q14512072" start="12764" end="12795" title="John Hunt, Baron Hunt of Fawley" label="John Hunt, Baron Hunt of Fawley"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="12885" end="12898" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="12920" end="12940" title="Member of Parliament" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="12949" end="12985" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q38931" start="13002" end="13017" title="Mayor of London" label="Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q382450" start="13021" end="13034" title="Simon Kernick" label="Simon Kernick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568790" start="13078" end="13094" title="William Lenthall" label="William Lenthall"/>
<link wikidata="Q464103" start="13157" end="13188" title="Speaker of the House of Commons (United Kingdom)" label="Speaker of the House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q123785271" start="13214" end="13226" title="Sophie Lloyd" label="Sophie Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="13251" end="13258" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q5934273" start="13292" end="13305" title="Hugo Nicolson" label="Hugo Nicolson"/>
<link wikidata="Q42543696" start="13326" end="13336" title="Jack Ogden (jewellery historian)" label="Jack Ogden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335" start="13388" end="13401" title="George Orwell" label="George Orwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758228" start="13480" end="13492" title="Andrew Peach" label="Andrew Peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q252469" start="13557" end="13565" title="Lee Ryan" label="Lee Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q536457" start="13594" end="13610" title="Marcus du Sautoy" label="Marcus du Sautoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185804" start="13646" end="13663" title="Phillip Schofield" label="Phillip Schofield"/>
<link wikidata="Q121033" start="13730" end="13747" title="Urs Schwarzenbach" label="Urs Schwarzenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q38250920" start="13769" end="13781" title="Culham Court, Berkshire" label="Culham Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830827" start="13783" end="13788" title="Aston, Berkshire" label="Aston"/>
<link wikidata="Q214661" start="13808" end="13830" title="Dame Stephanie Shirley" label="Dame Stephanie Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q219782" start="13926" end="13943" title="Dusty Springfield" label="Dusty Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="13993" end="14000" title="St Mary" label="St Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q239477" start="14073" end="14088" title="Cliffs of Moher" label="Cliffs of Moher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356927" start="14224" end="14242" title="Sir Ninian Stephen" label="Sir Ninian Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q382844" start="14265" end="14281" title="Governor-General" label="Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q16226591" start="14329" end="14340" title="Harry Stott" label="Harry Stott"/>
<link wikidata="Q16846251" start="14364" end="14384" title="I&amp;#x27;d Do Anything (BBC TV series)" label="I&amp;#x27;d Do Anything"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234095" start="14417" end="14432" title="Roman Mysteries (TV series)" label="Roman Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q933980" start="14442" end="14457" title="David Tomlinson" label="David Tomlinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q64929796" start="14511" end="14525" title="Andrew Tristem" label="Andrew Tristem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273718" start="14580" end="14601" title="Jonathan Lloyd Walker" label="Jonathan Lloyd Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q991329" start="14652" end="14666" title="West Vancouver" label="West Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5714666" start="14745" end="14760" title="Henley Standard" label="Henley Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834910" start="14961" end="14980" title="BBC Radio Berkshire" label="BBC Radio Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q65066884" start="14993" end="15004" title="Heart South" label="Heart South"/>
<link wikidata="Q104853293" start="15018" end="15067" title="Greatest Hits Radio South" label="Greatest Hits Radio Berkshire and North Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="15084" end="15090" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035441" start="15121" end="15128" title="Capital (radio network)" label="Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q12496071" start="15133" end="15138" title="Magic 105.4" label="Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543109" start="15220" end="15240" title="Henley Royal Regatta" label="Henley Royal Regatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270193" start="15378" end="15392" title="Crystal Palace transmitting station" label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q902373" start="15394" end="15404" title="BBC London" label="BBC London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146976" start="15405" end="15415" title="ITV London" label="ITV London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5649200" start="15421" end="15431" title="Hannington transmitting station" label="Hannington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834969" start="15433" end="15442" title="BBC South" label="BBC South"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975073" start="15443" end="15455" title="ITV Meridian" label="ITV Meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146976" start="15551" end="15561" title="ITV London" label="ITV London"/>
<link wikidata="Q902373" start="15566" end="15576" title="BBC London" label="BBC London"/>
<link wikidata="Q23169" start="15609" end="15620" title="Oxfordshire" label="Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q185888" start="15766" end="15784" title="The Social Network" label="The Social Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="15927" end="15934" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q202852" start="15943" end="15947" title="Bled" label="Bled"/>
<link wikidata="Q193306" start="15960" end="15977" title="Falaise, Calvados" label="Falaise, Calvados"/>
<link wikidata="Q245495" start="15999" end="16010" title="Leichlingen" label="Leichlingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q893092" start="16067" end="16073" title="Borama" label="Borama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5714570" start="16173" end="16179" title="Henley, New South Wales" label="Henley"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="16183" end="16189" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="16193" end="16199" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q12059873" start="16231" end="16243" title="Henley Beach, South Australia" label="Henley Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="16257" end="16265" title="Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910459" start="16297" end="16303" title="Henley, New Zealand" label="Henley"/>
<link wikidata="Q19610511" start="16307" end="16315" title="township" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388459" start="16323" end="16335" title="Taieri Plain" label="Taieri Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956054" start="16367" end="16376" title="Brakspear" label="Brakspear"/>
<link wikidata="Q990166" start="16419" end="16425" title="Witney" label="Witney"/>
<link wikidata="Q16249878" start="16427" end="16442" title="Henley Festival" label="Henley Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5714710" start="16460" end="16472" title="Henley shirt" label="Henley shirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q48700021" start="16565" end="16582" title="Stuart Turner (company)" label="Stuart Turner Ltd"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64055" wikidata="Q1088286" url="?curid=64055" title="Timeline of the Israeli–Palestinian conflict">
<text>This timeline of the Israeli–Palestinian conflict lists events from 1948 to the present. The Israeli–Palestinian conflict emerged from intercommunal conflict in Mandatory Palestine between Palestinian Jews and Arabs, often described as the background to the Israeli–Palestinian conflict. The conflict in its modern phase evolved since the declaration of the State of Israel on May 14, 1948 and consequent intervention of Arab armies on behalf of the Palestinian Arabs.

== Background ==
Israel gained independence on May 14, 1948, while a Palestinian attempt to establish a state in the Gaza Strip in September 1948 under an Egyptian protectorate failed, being de facto managed by Egyptian military and announced dissolved in 1959.

== 1948–1949: Arab–Israeli War ==

== 1948–1966 ==
Between 1949 and 1953, there were 99 complaints made by Israel about the infiltration of armed groups or individuals and 30 complaints of armed Jordanian units crossing into Israeli territory. Several hundred Israeli civilians were killed by infiltrators, and some were raped and mutilated. Israel launched numerous reprisal raids in response. Between 1949 and 1956, 286 Israeli civilians were killed. During the same period, excluding the Suez War, 258 Israeli soldiers were killed. Between 2,700 and 5,000 Arab infiltrators were killed. It is unclear whether these Arabs were really infiltrators or were simply unauthorized crossers, as many Palestinians were crossing into Israel for economic reasons. The Israeli forces necessarily treated anyone attempting unauthorized entry as a potential infiltrator, given the level of bloodshed.


== 1967–1973 ==

== 1974–1980s: Palestinian insurgency in South Lebanon ==

== 1980s ==

== 1987–1991: First Intifada ==
The First Intifada began with violence, riots, general strikes, and civil disobedience campaigns by Palestinians spread across the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Israeli forces responded with tear gas, plastic bullets, and live ammunition against the demonstrators.

After the outbreak of the First Intifada, Shaikh Ahmed Yassin created Hamas from the Gaza wing of the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood. Until that point the Muslim Brotherhood in Gaza had enjoyed the support of the Israeli authorities and had refrained from violent attacks. However, Hamas quickly began attacks on Israeli military targets, and subsequently, Israeli civilians.

The Israeli army killed more than 1,000 Palestinians in the First Intifada whilst 164 Israelis were killed. Allegedly almost half (1,000) of the total Palestinian casualties were caused by internal fighting among Palestinian factions.


== 1991–present: Peace process ==

== 2000–2005: Al-Aqsa Intifada ==

== 2005–present: Post-Intifada, Gaza conflict ==
After Israel completely withdrew from Gaza in 2005, Hamas and other militants unleashed a barrage of daily rocket attacks into Israel. The city of Sderot, for example, one mile away from Gaza, was hit by over 360 Qassam rockets within a six-month period after Israel&#x27;s withdrawal. In June 2006, militants from Gaza tunneled into Israel, killing two soldiers and capturing one. Two weeks later, Hezbollah, supported by Iran and Syria, attacked Israel across the internationally recognized Israeli–Lebanese border, killing eight soldiers and kidnapping two, simultaneously launching a barrage of rockets against civilian towns in northern Israel. Israel responded with a military operation that lasted 34 days. After Hamas fired thousands of rockets at Israeli communities and refused to renew a six-month truce, Israel responded with a military operation against Hamas to protect Israeli citizens. The 22-day operation ended on January 18, 2009. In May 2010, Turkish activists with the Free Gaza flotilla tried to break Israel&#x27;s naval blockade of Hamas-controlled Gaza. In August 2010, Lebanese soldiers shot and killed an Israeli soldier during routine IDF maintenance on the border. Three Lebanese soldiers and one Lebanese journalist were killed in the exchange of gunfire.

=== 2023–present ===

In 2023, heavy warfare between Palestinians (dominated by Hamas) and Israel again erupted, more deadly and destructive than ever since the 1973 Yom Kippur War.

===Death timelines===

Data is from the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.


== See also ==

* History of the Israeli–Palestinian conflict
* Military operations of the Israeli–Palestinian conflict
* Timeline of the Arab–Israeli conflict
* Outline of the Gaza war

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1088286" start="5" end="49" title="Timeline of the Israeli–Palestinian conflict" label="timeline of the Israeli–Palestinian conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q151622" start="93" end="121" title="Israeli–Palestinian conflict" label="Israeli–Palestinian conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992527" start="135" end="180" title="intercommunal conflict in Mandatory Palestine" label="intercommunal conflict in Mandatory Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="367" end="373" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051582" start="574" end="579" title="All-Palestine Government" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="1224" end="1232" title="Suez War" label="Suez War"/>
<link wikidata="Q49105" start="1750" end="1764" title="First Intifada" label="First Intifada"/>
<link wikidata="Q188653" start="2057" end="2069" title="Ahmed Yassin" label="Ahmed Yassin"/>
<link wikidata="Q38799" start="2078" end="2083" title="Hamas" label="Hamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="2110" end="2115" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q133207" start="2119" end="2137" title="Muslim Brotherhood" label="Muslim Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q38799" start="4105" end="4110" title="Hamas" label="Hamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="4116" end="4122" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100" start="4191" end="4205" title="Yom Kippur War" label="Yom Kippur War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065854" start="4248" end="4314" title="United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs" label="United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q106247012" start="4336" end="4379" title="History of the Israeli–Palestinian conflict" label="History of the Israeli–Palestinian conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574645" start="4382" end="4437" title="Military operations of the Israeli–Palestinian conflict" label="Military operations of the Israeli–Palestinian conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967235" start="4440" end="4477" title="Timeline of the Arab–Israeli conflict" label="Timeline of the Arab–Israeli conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q123019490" start="4480" end="4503" title="Outline of the Gaza war" label="Outline of the Gaza war"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64061" wikidata="Q1174585" url="?curid=64061" title="Nain">
<text>Nain may refer to:
==Places==
* Nain, Iran, a city in Iran
* Nain County, an administrative subdivision of Iran
* Nain, Israel, a village in Galilee, mentioned in the New Testament (miraculous raising of the son of the widow of Nain)
* Nain, Jamaica, a village in the parish of Saint Elizabeth
* Nain, Newfoundland and Labrador, a village on the central coast of Labrador, Canada
* Nain Province, a geologic province in Labrador, Canada, part of the North Atlantic Craton
* Nain, Punjab, a village and Union Council of Pakistan
* Nain, South Australia, in the northern Barossa Valley
* Nain, Virginia, an unincorporated community in Frederick County, Virginia, United States
* Nain, Principality of Hutt River, capital and only town in the self-proclaimed state
* Nain, Raebareli, a village in Uttar Pradesh, India

==Other uses==
* Nain rug, name of a traditional pattern and design of Persian carpet
* North American Interfaith Network
* Nain, assistant court ladies of Korea, see gungnyeo
*Nain, a character in Tolkien&#x27;s middle earth fantasy novel The Hobbit

== See also ==
* Nain Jaune, a traditional, still popular French family card game</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1174585" start="0" end="4" title="Nain" label="Nain"/>
<link wikidata="Q720388" start="32" end="42" title="Nain, Iran" label="Nain, Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286366" start="61" end="72" title="Nain County" label="Nain County"/>
<link wikidata="Q934904" start="114" end="126" title="Nain, Israel" label="Nain, Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6959686" start="236" end="249" title="Nain, Jamaica" label="Nain, Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335210" start="296" end="327" title="Nain, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Nain, Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q6959693" start="382" end="395" title="Nain Province" label="Nain Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q6959688" start="474" end="486" title="Nain, Punjab" label="Nain, Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q19876007" start="530" end="551" title="Nain, South Australia" label="Nain, South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6959689" start="586" end="600" title="Nain, Virginia" label="Nain, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q591309" start="683" end="709" title="Principality of Hutt River" label="Principality of Hutt River"/>
<link wikidata="Q108542374" start="764" end="779" title="Nain, Raebareli" label="Nain, Raebareli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515500" start="833" end="841" title="Nain rug" label="Nain rug"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053789" start="904" end="937" title="North American Interfaith Network" label="North American Interfaith Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q852034" start="983" end="991" title="gungnyeo" label="gungnyeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q64889336" start="1085" end="1095" title="Nain Jaune" label="Nain Jaune"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64065" wikidata="Q3719" url="?curid=64065" title="National Register of Historic Places">
<text>The National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) is the United States federal government&#x27;s official list of sites, buildings, structures, districts, and objects deemed worthy of preservation for their historical significance or &quot;great artistic value&quot;.

The enactment of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) in 1966 established the National Register and the process for adding properties to it. Of the more than one and a half million properties on the National Register, 95,000 are listed individually. The remainder are contributing resources within historic districts.

For most of its history, the National Register has been administered by the National Park Service (NPS), an agency within the United States Department of the Interior. Its goals are to help property owners and interest groups, such as the National Trust for Historic Preservation, and coordinate, identify and protect historic sites in the United States. While National Register listings are mostly symbolic, their recognition of significance provides some financial incentive to owners of listed properties. Protection of the property is not guaranteed. During the nomination process, the property is evaluated in terms of the four criteria for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places. The application of those criteria has been the subject of criticism by academics of history and preservation, as well as the public and politicians. A property listed in the National Register, or located within a National Register Historic District, may qualify for tax incentives derived from the total value of expenses incurred in preserving the property.

Properties can be nominated in a variety of forms, including individual properties, historic districts and multiple property submissions (MPS). The Register categorizes general listings into one of five types of properties: district, site, structure, building or object.

National Register Historic Districts are defined geographical areas consisting of contributing and non-contributing properties. Some properties are added automatically to the National Register when they become administered by the National Park Service. These include National Historic Landmarks (NHL), National Historic Landmark Districts (NHLD), National Historic Sites (NHS), National Historical Parks, National Military Parks, National Memorials, and some National Monuments.

==History==


On October 15, 1966, the Historic Preservation Act created the National Register of Historic Places and the corresponding State Historic Preservation Offices (SHPO). The National Register initially consisted of the National Historic Landmarks designated before the Register&#x27;s creation, as well as any other historic sites in the National Park System. Approval of the act, which was amended in 1980 and 1992, represented the first time the United States had a broad-based historic preservation policy. The 1966 act required those agencies to work in conjunction with the SHPO and an independent federal agency, the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (ACHP), to confront adverse effects of federal activities on historic preservation.

To administer the newly created National Register of Historic Places, the National Park Service of the U.S. Department of the Interior, with director George B. Hartzog Jr., established an administrative division named the Federal Office of Archaeology and Historic Preservation (OAHP). Hartzog charged OAHP with creating the National Register program mandated by the 1966 law. Ernest Connally was the Office&#x27;s first director. Within OAHP new divisions were created to deal with the National Register. The division administered several existing programs, including the Historic Sites Survey and the Historic American Buildings Survey, as well as the new National Register and Historic Preservation Fund.

The first official Keeper of the Register was William J. Murtagh, an architectural historian. During the Register&#x27;s earliest years in the late 1960s and early 1970s, organization was lax and SHPOs were small, understaffed and underfunded. However, funds were still being supplied for the Historic Preservation Fund to provide matching grants-in-aid to listed property owners, first for house museums and institutional buildings, but later for commercial structures as well.

In 1979, the NPS history programs affiliated with both the U.S. National Park system and the National Register were categorized formally into two &quot;Assistant Directorates&quot;. Established were the Assistant Directorate for Archeology and Historic Preservation and the Assistant Directorate for Park Historic Preservation. From 1978 until 1981, the main agency for the National Register was the Heritage Conservation and Recreation Service (HCRS) of the United States Department of the Interior.

In February 1983, the two assistant directorates were merged to promote efficiency and recognize the interdependency of their programs. Jerry L. Rogers was selected to direct this newly merged associate directorate. He was described as a skilled administrator, who was sensitive to the need for the NPS to work with SHPOs, academia and local governments.

Although not described in detail in the 1966 act, SHPOs eventually became integral to the process of listing properties on the National Register. The 1980 amendments of the 1966 law further defined the responsibilities of SHPOs concerning the National Register. Several 1992 amendments of the NHPA added a category to the National Register, known as Traditional Cultural Properties: those properties associated with Native American or Hawaiian groups.

The National Register of Historic Places has grown considerably from its legislative origins in 1966. In 1986, citizens and groups nominated 3,623 separate properties, sites and districts for inclusion on the National Register, a total of 75,000 separate properties. Of the more than one and a half million properties on the National Register, 95,000 are listed individually. Others are listed as contributing members within historic districts.

==Nomination process==
 Any individual can prepare a National Register nomination, although historians and historic preservation consultants often are employed for this work. The nomination consists of a standard registration form (NPS 10-900) and contains basic information about a property&#x27;s physical appearance and the type of significance embodied in the building, structure, object, site, or district.

The State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) receives National Register nominations and provides feedback to the nominating individual or group. After preliminary review, the SHPO sends each nomination to the state&#x27;s historic review commission, which then recommends whether the State Historic Preservation Officer should send the nomination to the Keeper of the National Register. For any non-Federally owned property, only the State Historic Preservation Officer may officially nominate a property for inclusion in the National Register. After the nomination is recommended for listing in the National Register by the SHPO, the nomination is sent to the National Park Service, which approves or denies the nomination.

If approved, the property is entered officially by the Keeper of the National Register into the National Register of Historic Places. Property owners are notified of the nomination during the review by the SHPO and state&#x27;s historic review commission. If an owner objects to a nomination of private property, or in the case of a historic district, a majority of owners, then the property cannot be listed in the National Register of Historic Places.

===Criteria===

For a property to be eligible for the National Register of Historic Places, it must meet at least one of its four main criteria. Information about architectural styles, association with various aspects of social history and commerce and ownership are all integral parts of the nomination. Each nomination contains a narrative section that provides a detailed physical description of the property and justifies why it is significant historically with regard either to local, state, or national history. The four National Register of Historic Places criteria are the following:
* Criterion A, &quot;Event&quot;, the property must make a contribution to the major pattern of American history.
* Criterion B, &quot;Person&quot;, is associated with significant people of the American past.
* Criterion C, &quot;Design/Construction&quot;, concerns the distinctive characteristics of the building by its architecture and construction, including having great artistic value or being the work of a master.
* Criterion D, &quot;Information potential&quot;, is satisfied if the property has yielded or may be likely to yield information important to prehistory or history.

The criteria are applied differently for different types of properties; for instance, maritime properties have application guidelines different from those of buildings.

===Exclusions===
The National Park Service names seven categories of properties that &quot;are not usually considered for&quot; and &quot;ordinarily ... shall not be considered eligible for&quot; the National Register: religious properties (e.g., churches); buildings that have been moved; birthplaces or graves of important persons; cemeteries; reconstructed properties; commemorative properties (e.g., statues); and &quot;properties that have achieved significance within the last fifty years&quot;. However, if they meet particular &quot;Criteria Considerations&quot; for their category in addition to the overall criteria, they are, in fact, eligible. Hence, despite the forbidding language, these kinds of places are not actually excluded as a rule. For example, the Register lists thousands of churches.

There is a misconception that there is a strict rule that a property must be at least 50 years old to be listed in the National Register of Historic Places. In reality, there is no hard rule. John H. Sprinkle Jr., deputy director of the Federal Preservation Institute, stated:

The National Register evaluation procedures do not use the term &quot;exclusions&quot;. The stricter National Historic Landmarks Criteria, upon which the National Register criteria are based, do specify exclusions, along with corresponding &quot;exceptions to the exclusions&quot;, which are supposed to apply more narrowly.

===Multiple property submission===

A multiple property submission (MPS) is a thematic group listing of the National Register of Historic Places that consists of related properties that share a common theme and can be submitted as a group. Multiple property submissions must satisfy certain basic criteria for the group of properties to be included in the National Register.

The process begins with the multiple property documentation form which acts as a cover document rather than the nomination to the National Register of Historic Places. The purpose of the documentation form is to establish the basis of eligibility for related properties. The information of the multiple property documentation form can be used to nominate and register related historic properties simultaneously, or to establish criteria for properties that may be nominated in the future. Thus, additions to an MPS can occur over time.

The nomination of individual properties in an MPS is accomplished in the same manner as other nominations. The name of the &quot;thematic group&quot; denotes the historical theme of the properties. It is considered the &quot;multiple property listing&quot;. Once an individual property or a group of properties is nominated and listed in the National Register, the multiple property documentation form, combined with the individual National Register of Historic Places nomination forms, constitute a multiple property submission.

Examples of MPS include the Lee County Multiple Property Submission, the Warehouses in Omaha, the Boundary Markers of the Original District of Columbia and the Illinois Carnegie Libraries. Before the term &quot;Multiple Property Submission&quot; was introduced in 1984, such listings were known as &quot;Thematic Resources&quot;, such as the Operating Passenger Railroad Stations Thematic Resource, or &quot;Multiple Resource Areas&quot;.

== Properties listed ==

A listing on the National Register of Historic Places is governmental acknowledgment of a historic district, site, building, or property. However, the Register is mostly &quot;an honorary status with some federal financial incentives&quot;. The National Register of Historic Places automatically includes all National Historic Landmarks as well as all historic areas administered by the National Park Service, including National Historic Sites (NHS), National Historical Parks, National Military Parks/Battlefields, National Memorials and some National Monuments. 

There are also 35 listed sites in the three island countries with a Compact of Free Association with the United States, as well as one site in Morocco, the American Legation in Tangier.

Listing in the National Register does not restrict private property owners from the use of their property.

Some states and municipalities, however, may have laws that become effective when a property is listed in the National Register. If federal money or a federal permitting process is involved, Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 is invoked. Section 106 requires the federal agency involved to assess the effect of its actions on historic resources. Statutorily, the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (ACHP) has the most significant role by Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act. The section requires that the director of any federal agency with direct or indirect jurisdiction of a project that may affect a property listed or determined eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places must first report to the Advisory Council. The director of said agency is required to &quot;take into account the effect of the undertaking&quot; on the National Register property, as well as to afford the ACHP a reasonable opportunity to comment.

While Section 106 does not mandate explicitly that any federal agency director accept the advice of the ACHP, their advice has a practical influence, especially given the statutory obligations of the NHPA that require federal agencies to &quot;take into account the effect of the undertaking&quot;.

In cases where the ACHP determines federal action will have an &quot;adverse effect&quot; on historic properties, mitigation is sought. Typically, a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) is created by which the involved parties agree to a particular plan. Many states have laws similar to Section 106. In contrast to conditions relating to a federally designated historic district, municipal ordinances governing local historic districts often restrict certain kinds of changes to properties. Thus, they may protect the property more than a National Register listing does.

The Department of Transportation Act, passed on October 15, 1966, the same day as the National Historic Preservation Act, included provisions that addressed historic preservation. The DOT Act is much more general than Section 106 NHPA in that it refers to properties other than those listed in the Register.

The more general language has allowed more properties and parklands to enjoy status as protected areas by this legislation, a policy developed early in its history. The United States Supreme Court ruled in the 1971 case &quot;Citizens to Preserve Overton Park v. Volpe&quot; that parklands could have the same protected status as &quot;historic sites&quot;.

=== Types of properties ===
Listed properties are generally in one of five broad categories, although there are special considerations for other types of properties that in anyone, or into more specialized subcategories. The five general categories for National Register properties are: building, structure, site, district and object. In addition, historic districts consist of contributing and non-contributing properties.

Buildings, as defined by the National Register, are distinguished in the traditional sense. Examples include a house, barn, hotel, church, or similar construction. They are created primarily to shelter human activity. The term building, as in outbuilding, can be used to refer to historically and functionally related units, such as a courthouse and a jail or a barn and a house.

Structures differ from buildings in that they are functional constructions meant to be used for purposes other than sheltering human activity. Examples include an aircraft, a grain elevator, a gazebo and a bridge.

Objects are usually artistic in nature, or small in scale compared to structures and buildings. Although objects may be movable, they are generally associated with a specific setting or environment. Examples of objects include monuments, sculptures and fountains.

Sites are the locations of significant events, which can be prehistoric or historic in nature and represent activities or buildings (standing, ruined, or vanished). When sites are listed, it is the locations themselves that are of historical interest. They possess cultural or archaeological value regardless of the value of any structures that currently exist at the locations. Examples of types of sites include shipwrecks, battlefields, campsites, natural features and rock shelters.

Historic districts possess a concentration, association, or continuity of the other four types of properties. Objects, structures, buildings and sites in a historic district are united historically or aesthetically, either by choice or by the nature of their development.

There are several other different types of historic preservation associated with the properties of the National Register of Historic Places that cannot be classified as either simple buildings or historic districts. Through the National Park Service, the National Register of Historic Places publishes a series of bulletins designed to aid in evaluating and applying the criteria for evaluation of different types of properties. Although the criteria are always the same, the manner they are applied may differ slightly, depending upon the type of property involved. The National Register bulletins describe the application of the criteria for aids to navigation, historic battlefields, archaeological sites, aviation properties, cemeteries and burial places, historic designed landscapes, mining sites, post offices, properties associated with significant persons, properties achieving significance within the last fifty years, rural historic landscapes, traditional cultural properties and vessels and shipwrecks.

==Property owner incentives==

Properties are not protected in any strict sense by the Federal listing. States and local zoning bodies may or may not choose to protect listed historic places. Indirect protection is possible, by state and local regulations on the development of National Register properties and by tax incentives. By contrast, the state of Colorado, for example, does not set any limits on owners of National Register properties.

Until 1976, federal tax incentives were virtually non-existent for buildings on the National Register. Before 1976 the federal tax code favored new construction rather than the reuse of existing, sometimes historical, structures. In 1976, the tax code was altered to provide tax incentives that promote the preservation of income-producing historic properties. The National Park Service was given the responsibility to ensure that only rehabilitations that preserved the historic character of a building would qualify for federal tax incentives. A qualifying rehabilitation is one that the NPS deems consistent with the Secretary of the Interior&#x27;s Standards for Rehabilitation. Properties and sites listed in the Register, as well as those located in and contributing to the period of significance of National Register Historic Districts, became eligible for the federal tax benefits.

Owners of income-producing properties listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or of properties that are contributing resources within a National Register Historic District may be eligible for a 20% investment tax credit for the rehabilitation of the historic structure. The rehabilitation may be of a commercial, industrial, or residential property, for rentals. The tax incentives program is operated by the Federal Historic Preservation Tax Incentives program, which is managed jointly by the National Park Service, individual State Historic Preservation Offices and the Internal Revenue Service.

Some property owners may also qualify for grants, like the now-defunct Save America&#x27;s Treasures grants, which apply specifically to properties entered in the Register with national significance or designated as National Historic Landmarks.

The NHPA did not distinguish between properties listed in the National Register of Historic Places and those designated as National Historic Landmarks concerning qualification for tax incentives or grants. This was deliberate, as the authors of the act had learned from experience that distinguishing between categories of significance for such incentives caused the lowest category to become expendable. Essentially, this made the Landmarks a kind of &quot;honor roll&quot; of the most significant properties of the National Register of Historic Places.

==Limitations==

 982 properties have been removed from the Register, most often due to being destroyed. Among the properties that were demolished or otherwise destroyed after their listing are the Jobbers Canyon Historic District in Omaha, Nebraska (listed in 1979, demolished in 1989), Pan-Pacific Auditorium in Los Angeles, California (listed in 1978, destroyed in a fire in 1989), Palace Amusements in Asbury Park, New Jersey (listed in 2000, demolished in 2004), The Balinese Room in Galveston, Texas (listed in 1997, destroyed by Hurricane Ike in 2008), seven of the nine buildings included in the University of Connecticut Historic District in Storrs, Connecticut (listed in 1989, demolished in 2017), and the Terrell Jacobs Circus Winter Quarters in Peru, Indiana (listed in 2012, demolished in 2021).

==Comparisons to historic registers of other nations==
In France, designation of is similar to NRHP listing. In the French program, however, permanent restrictions are imposed upon designated monuments, for example requiring advance approval for any renovation of a designated building. France had about 43,600 monuments in 2015.

Listed buildings of the United Kingdom may not be demolished, extended, or altered without special permission; the program covers about 374,000 listings in 2010, involving more than 500,000 buildings.

NRHP listing, in contrast, imposes no such restrictions, but rather is &quot;primarily an honor&quot;, although tax subsidies may be available for renovations.

In 2022, the U.S. has about 94,000 NRHP-listed properties, including historic districts; the total number of buildings covered is much larger.

==See also==

* Listed building, the UK equivalent
* National Heritage Area
* Register of Culturally Significant Property
* United States National Register of Historic Places listings
* List of National Historic Landmarks by state
* List of national memorials of the United States
* List of African-American historic places
* List of university and college buildings on the National Register of Historic Places
* List of jails and prisons on the National Register of Historic Places
* List of heritage registers worldwide
== References ==
==Further reading==
* 
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="4" end="40" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="42" end="46" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="NRHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="55" end="87" title="Federal government of the United States" label="United States federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890783" start="104" end="108" title="United States National Register of Historic Places listings" label="list"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620797" start="142" end="150" title="Historic districts in the United States" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q914856" start="182" end="194" title="Historic preservation" label="preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973378" start="288" end="322" title="National Historic Preservation Act" label="National Historic Preservation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q76321820" start="544" end="566" title="contributing property" label="contributing resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620797" start="574" end="592" title="historic district (United States)" label="historic districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="671" end="692" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q608427" start="721" end="761" title="United States Department of the Interior" label="United States Department of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967792" start="834" end="874" title="National Trust for Historic Preservation" label="National Trust for Historic Preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243209" start="1527" end="1544" title="Historic district" label="Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912966" start="1562" end="1575" title="tax incentive" label="tax incentive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620797" start="1740" end="1758" title="Historic districts in the United States" label="historic districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="1928" end="1964" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register Historic Districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="2195" end="2222" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q39616793" start="2230" end="2266" title="National Historic Landmark District" label="National Historic Landmark Districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258086" start="2275" end="2297" title="National Historic Site (United States)" label="National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258086" start="2306" end="2331" title="National Historic Site (United States)" label="National Historical Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q100154387" start="2333" end="2356" title="National Military Park" label="National Military Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245432" start="2358" end="2376" title="List of National Memorials of the United States" label="National Memorials"/>
<link wikidata="Q893775" start="2387" end="2405" title="National monument (United States)" label="National Monuments"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603363" start="2544" end="2578" title="State Historic Preservation Office" label="State Historic Preservation Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="2637" end="2664" title="National Historic Landmarks" label="National Historic Landmarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066612" start="3021" end="3035" title="List of United States federal agencies" label="federal agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686857" start="3041" end="3082" title="Advisory Council on Historic Preservation" label="Advisory Council on Historic Preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536552" start="3318" end="3339" title="George B. Hartzog Jr." label="George B. Hartzog Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q913956" start="3771" end="3805" title="Historic American Buildings Survey" label="Historic American Buildings Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5773622" start="3848" end="3874" title="Historic Preservation Fund" label="Historic Preservation Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888877" start="3896" end="3918" title="Keeper of the Register" label="Keeper of the Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q107542278" start="3923" end="3941" title="William J. Murtagh" label="William J. Murtagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11486702" start="3946" end="3969" title="architectural historian" label="architectural historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5773622" start="4170" end="4196" title="Historic Preservation Fund" label="Historic Preservation Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136450" start="4217" end="4230" title="grants-in-aid" label="grants-in-aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087181" start="4268" end="4281" title="Historic house museum" label="house museums"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408678" start="4416" end="4434" title="United States National Park" label="U.S. National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q16842700" start="4757" end="4801" title="Heritage Conservation and Recreation Service" label="Heritage Conservation and Recreation Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q608427" start="4816" end="4856" title="United States Department of the Interior" label="United States Department of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q76321820" start="6065" end="6085" title="contributing property" label="contributing members"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620797" start="6093" end="6111" title="Historic districts in the United States" label="historic districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q914856" start="6221" end="6242" title="historic preservation" label="historic preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603363" start="6531" end="6565" title="State Historic Preservation Office" label="State Historic Preservation Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888877" start="6882" end="6913" title="Keeper of the Register" label="Keeper of the National Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q32880" start="7872" end="7891" title="architectural style" label="architectural style"/>
<link wikidata="Q908604" start="7930" end="7944" title="social history" label="social history"/>
<link wikidata="Q131110" start="8397" end="8413" title="History of the United States" label="American history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265179" start="8974" end="8982" title="Maritime archaeology" label="maritime"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="9079" end="9100" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016625" start="11945" end="11984" title="List of Registered Historic Buildings in Lee County, Florida" label="Lee County Multiple Property Submission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969303" start="11990" end="12009" title="Warehouses in Omaha Multiple Properties Submission" label="Warehouses in Omaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949943" start="12015" end="12068" title="Boundary Markers of the Original District of Columbia" label="Boundary Markers of the Original District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996643" start="12077" end="12104" title="Illinois Carnegie Libraries Multiple Property Submission" label="Illinois Carnegie Libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q56724928" start="12259" end="12314" title="Operating Passenger Railroad Stations Thematic Resource (New Jersey)" label="Operating Passenger Railroad Stations Thematic Resource"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="12691" end="12718" title="National Historic Landmarks" label="National Historic Landmarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258086" start="12802" end="12824" title="National Historic Site (United States)" label="National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258086" start="12833" end="12857" title="National Historic Site (United States)" label="National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q100154387" start="12860" end="12882" title="National Military Park" label="National Military Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245432" start="12898" end="12915" title="List of National Memorials of the United States" label="National Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q893775" start="12926" end="12943" title="National monument (United States)" label="National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478583" start="13016" end="13043" title="Compact of Free Association" label="Compact of Free Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q468574" start="13104" end="13132" title="American Legation, Tangier" label="American Legation in Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973378" start="13453" end="13495" title="National Historic Preservation Act of 1966" label="National Historic Preservation Act of 1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686857" start="13633" end="13674" title="Advisory Council on Historic Preservation" label="Advisory Council on Historic Preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686857" start="14019" end="14035" title="Advisory Council on Historic Preservation" label="Advisory Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053964" start="14692" end="14715" title="Memorandum of Agreement" label="Memorandum of Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q843713" start="14917" end="14937" title="Local ordinance" label="municipal ordinances"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810098" start="15113" end="15145" title="Title 49 of the United States Code" label="Department of Transportation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q473972" start="15505" end="15519" title="protected area" label="protected area"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="15587" end="15614" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122774" start="15644" end="15686" title="Citizens to Preserve Overton Park v. Volpe" label="Citizens to Preserve Overton Park v. Volpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081138" start="15754" end="15767" title="historic site" label="historic site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520009" start="16758" end="16772" title="grain elevator" label="grain elevator"/>
<link wikidata="Q961082" start="16776" end="16782" title="gazebo" label="gazebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q852190" start="17477" end="17486" title="shipwreck" label="shipwreck"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895508" start="17489" end="17500" title="battlefield" label="battlefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q832778" start="17503" end="17511" title="campsite" label="campsite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149405" start="17535" end="17547" title="rock shelter" label="rock shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620797" start="17551" end="17569" title="Historic districts in the United States" label="Historic districts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18584" end="18611" title="Property type (National Register of Historic Places)#Cultural landscapes" label="historic designed landscape"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18780" end="18811" title="Property type (National Register of Historic Places)#Traditional cultural properties" label="traditional cultural properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912966" start="19308" end="19321" title="tax incentive" label="tax incentive"/>
<link wikidata="Q856251" start="19415" end="19423" title="tax code" label="tax code"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="20776" end="20800" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="Internal Revenue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427983" start="20874" end="20903" title="Save America&amp;#x27;s Treasures" label="Save America&amp;#x27;s Treasures"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="21019" end="21045" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q14704887" start="21803" end="21835" title="Jobbers Canyon Historic District" label="Jobbers Canyon Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q43199" start="21839" end="21854" title="Omaha, Nebraska" label="Omaha, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870804" start="21893" end="21915" title="Pan-Pacific Auditorium" label="Pan-Pacific Auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="21919" end="21942" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126150" start="21990" end="22007" title="Palace Amusements" label="Palace Amusements"/>
<link wikidata="Q201127" start="22011" end="22034" title="Asbury Park, New Jersey" label="Asbury Park, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850937" start="22077" end="22090" title="Balinese Room" label="Balinese Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q135744" start="22094" end="22110" title="Galveston, Texas" label="Galveston, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q392603" start="22141" end="22154" title="Hurricane Ike" label="Hurricane Ike"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895296" start="22209" end="22252" title="University of Connecticut Historic District" label="University of Connecticut Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q166302" start="22256" end="22275" title="Storrs, Connecticut" label="Storrs, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q24966144" start="22322" end="22359" title="Terrell Jacobs Circus Winter Quarters" label="Terrell Jacobs Circus Winter Quarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q386657" start="22363" end="22376" title="Peru, Indiana" label="Peru, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="22474" end="22480" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="22747" end="22763" title="Listed buildings" label="Listed buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="22771" end="22785" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="23270" end="23285" title="Listed building" label="Listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973044" start="23307" end="23329" title="National Heritage Area" label="National Heritage Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309360" start="23332" end="23375" title="Register of Culturally Significant Property" label="Register of Culturally Significant Property"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890783" start="23378" end="23437" title="United States National Register of Historic Places listings" label="United States National Register of Historic Places listings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600862" start="23440" end="23484" title="List of National Historic Landmarks by state" label="List of National Historic Landmarks by state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245432" start="23487" end="23534" title="List of national memorials of the United States" label="List of national memorials of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689679" start="23537" end="23577" title="List of African-American historic places" label="List of African-American historic places"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975258" start="23580" end="23664" title="University and college buildings listed on the National Register of Historic Places" label="List of university and college buildings on the National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123624" start="23667" end="23736" title="List of jails and prisons on the National Register of Historic Places" label="List of jails and prisons on the National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471925" start="23739" end="23775" title="List of heritage registers" label="List of heritage registers worldwide"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64067" wikidata="Q13019738" url="?curid=64067" title="Lists of writers">
<text>The following are lists of writers:

==Alphabetical indices==
A – B – C – D –
E – F –
G – H –
I – J –
K – L –
M – N –
O – P –
Q – R –
S – T –
U – V –
W – X –
Y – Z

==Lists by genre==

==Lists by language (non-English)==

==Lists by ethnicity or nationality==


== Lists of women writers and works ==
Main list
* Women writers: (A-L), (M-Z)
By country

Other lists of women writers

==Lists by publisher==
* List of Alfred A. Knopf authors
* List of Minerva Press authors

==See also==
* Lists of books
* List of literary awards

==External links==
* 
* &quot;Poets &amp; Writers Directory.&quot; &quot;Poets &amp; Writers&quot;
* &quot;Authors A-Z.&quot; &quot;The Guardian&quot;
* &quot;Browse By Author.&quot; &quot;Project Gutenberg&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13019738" start="18" end="34" title="Lists of writers" label="lists of writers"/>
<link wikidata="" start="62" end="63" title="List of authors by name: A" label="A"/>
<link wikidata="" start="66" end="67" title="List of authors by name: B" label="B"/>
<link wikidata="" start="70" end="71" title="List of authors by name: C" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="" start="74" end="75" title="List of authors by name: D" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="" start="78" end="79" title="List of authors by name: E" label="E"/>
<link wikidata="" start="82" end="83" title="List of authors by name: F" label="F"/>
<link wikidata="" start="86" end="87" title="List of authors by name: G" label="G"/>
<link wikidata="" start="90" end="91" title="List of authors by name: H" label="H"/>
<link wikidata="" start="94" end="95" title="List of authors by name: I" label="I"/>
<link wikidata="" start="98" end="99" title="List of authors by name: J" label="J"/>
<link wikidata="" start="102" end="103" title="List of authors by name: K" label="K"/>
<link wikidata="" start="106" end="107" title="List of authors by name: L" label="L"/>
<link wikidata="" start="110" end="111" title="List of authors by name: M" label="M"/>
<link wikidata="" start="114" end="115" title="List of authors by name: N" label="N"/>
<link wikidata="" start="118" end="119" title="List of authors by name: O" label="O"/>
<link wikidata="" start="122" end="123" title="List of authors by name: P" label="P"/>
<link wikidata="" start="126" end="127" title="List of authors by name: Q" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="" start="130" end="131" title="List of authors by name: R" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="" start="134" end="135" title="List of authors by name: S" label="S"/>
<link wikidata="" start="138" end="139" title="List of authors by name: T" label="T"/>
<link wikidata="" start="142" end="143" title="List of authors by name: U" label="U"/>
<link wikidata="" start="146" end="147" title="List of authors by name: V" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="" start="150" end="151" title="List of authors by name: W" label="W"/>
<link wikidata="" start="154" end="155" title="List of authors by name: X" label="X"/>
<link wikidata="" start="158" end="159" title="List of authors by name: Y" label="Y"/>
<link wikidata="" start="162" end="163" title="List of authors by name: Z" label="Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q952242" start="313" end="326" title="List of women writers" label="Women writers"/>
<link wikidata="Q105081491" start="328" end="333" title="List of women writers (A–L)" label="(A-L)"/>
<link wikidata="Q105081493" start="335" end="340" title="List of women writers (M–Z)" label="(M-Z)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55616972" start="408" end="439" title="List of Alfred A. Knopf authors" label="List of Alfred A. Knopf authors"/>
<link wikidata="Q112742154" start="442" end="471" title="List of Minerva Press authors" label="List of Minerva Press authors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251635" start="488" end="502" title="Lists of books" label="Lists of books"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414336" start="505" end="528" title="List of literary awards" label="List of literary awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207541" start="603" end="622" title="Poets &amp;amp; Writers" label="Poets &amp;amp; Writers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="662" end="674" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q22673" start="719" end="736" title="Project Gutenberg" label="Project Gutenberg"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64069" wikidata="Q182031" url="?curid=64069" title="Jack Kilby">
<text>Jack St. Clair Kilby (8 November 1923 - 20 June 2005) was an American electrical engineer who took part, along with Robert Noyce of Fairchild Semiconductor, in the realization of the first integrated circuit while working at Texas Instruments (TI) in 1958. He was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics on 10 December 2000. 

Kilby was also the co-inventor of the handheld calculator and the thermal printer, for which he had the patents. He also had patents for seven other inventions.

== Early life ==
Jack Kilby was born in 1923 in Jefferson City, Missouri, to Hubert and Vina Freitag Kilby. Both parents had Bachelor of Science degrees from the University of Illinois. His father was a manager at a local utility company. Kilby grew up and attended school in Great Bend, Kansas, graduating from the Great Bend High School. Today road signs at the entrances to the town commemorate his time there, and the Commons Area at Great Bend High School has been named &quot;The Jack Kilby Commons Area&quot;.

Kilby received his Bachelor of Science degree from the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, where he was an honorary member of Acacia Fraternity. In 1947, he received a degree in electrical engineering. He earned his Master of Science in electrical engineering from the University of Wisconsin-Extension in Milwaukee.

==Career==
Kilby was vital to the invention of the integrated circuit. In mid-1958, as a newly employed engineer at Texas Instruments (TI), he did not yet have the right to a summer vacation. Kilby spent the summer working on the problem in circuit design that was commonly called the &quot;tyranny of numbers&quot;, and he finally came to the conclusion that the manufacturing of circuit components &quot;en masse&quot; in a single piece of semiconductor material could provide a solution. On September 12, he presented his findings to company&#x27;s management, which included Mark Shepherd. He showed them a piece of germanium with an oscilloscope attached, pressed a switch, and the oscilloscope showed a continuous sine wave, proving that his integrated circuit worked, and thus that he had solved the problem. U.S. Patent 3,138,743 for &quot;Miniaturized Electronic Circuits&quot;, the first integrated circuit, was filed on February 6, 1959. It was notable for having different components (transistors, diodes, resistors, capacitors, etc.) on one single substrate. Along with Robert Noyce (who independently made a similar circuit a few months later), Kilby is generally credited as co-inventor of the integrated circuit.

Jack Kilby went on to pioneer military, industrial, and commercial applications of microchip technology. He headed teams that created the first military system and the first computer incorporating integrated circuits. He invented the handheld calculator (along with Jerry Merryman and James Van Tassel).

In 1970, he took a leave of absence from TI to work as an independent inventor. He explored, among other subjects, the use of silicon technology for generating electrical power from sunlight. From 1978 to 1984, he held the position of Distinguished Professor of Electrical Engineering at Texas A&amp;M University.

In 1983, Kilby retired from Texas Instruments.

== Legacy ==
He died of cancer June 20, 2005, at the age of 81, in Dallas, Texas.

On December 14, 2005, Texas Instruments created the Historic TI Archives. The Jack Kilby family donated his personal manuscripts and his personal photograph collection to Southern Methodist University (SMU). The collection will be cataloged and stored at DeGolyer Library, SMU.

In 2008, the SMU School of Engineering, with the DeGolyer Library and the Library of Congress, hosted a year-long celebration of the 50th anniversary of the birth of the digital age with Kilby&#x27;s Nobel Prize-winning invention of the integrated circuit. Symposia and exhibits examined the many ways in which technology and engineers shaped the modern world. Kilby held an honorary doctorate of science from SMU and was a longtime associate of SMU through the Kilby Foundation.

== Awards and honors ==
A statue of Jack Kilby stands in Texas Instruments Plaza on the campus of The University of Texas at Dallas.

Recognition of Kilby&#x27;s outstanding achievements have been made by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), including the election to IEEE Fellow in 1966, the IEEE David Sarnoff Award in 1966, co-recipient of the first IEEE Cledo Brunetti Award in 1978, the IEEE Centennial Medal in 1984 and the IEEE Medal of Honor in 1986. He was co-recipient of the Franklin Institute’s Stuart Ballantine Medal in 1966. In 1982 and 1989, he received the Holley Medal from the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME). He was elected to member of the National Academy of Engineering (NAE) in 1967 and received the Academy&#x27;s Vladimir K. Zworykin Award in 1975. Kilby received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement in 1970 and was co-recipient of the first NAE&#x27;s Charles Stark Draper Prize in 1989. The Kilby Award Foundation was founded in 1980 in his honor, and the IEEE Jack S. Kilby Signal Processing Medal was created in 1995. He was elected to the American Philosophical Society in 2001.

Kilby was awarded the Stibitz-Wilson Award from the American Computer &amp; Robotics Museum in 1997.

Kilby is also the recipient of the America&#x27;s most prestigious honors in science and engineering: the National Medal of Science in 1969, and the National Medal of Technology in 1990. In 1982, he was inducted into the National Inventors Hall of Fame.

In 1993, he was awarded the Kyoto Prize by the Inamori Foundation. He was awarded both the Washington Award, administered by the Western Society of Engineers and the Eta Kappa Nu Vladimir Karapetoff Award in 1999. In 2000, Kilby was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for his breakthrough discovery, and delivered his personal view of the industry and its history in his acceptance speech.

Kilby was awarded nine honorary doctorate degrees from universities including Southern Methodist University, the University of Miami, University of Illinois, University of Wisconsin–Madison, Texas A&amp;M University, Yale and Rochester Institute of Technology. The National Chiao Tung University (NCTU) in Taiwan awarded Kilby with a certificate of Honorary Professorship in 1998.

The Kilby Labs, TI&#x27;s research laboratory for silicon manufacturing and integrated circuit design, is named after him.

The Jack Kilby Computer Centre at the Merchiston Campus of Edinburgh Napier University in Edinburgh is also named in his honor.

== See also ==
* Geoffrey Dummer

== References ==
== References bibliography ==
*Berlin, Leslie &quot;The man behind the microchip: Robert Noyce and the invention of Silicon Valley &quot; Publisher Oxford University Press US, 2005 
*Lécuyer, Christophe. &quot;Making Silicon Valley: Innovation and the Growth of High Tech, 1930-1970&quot; Published by MIT Press, 2006.
*&quot;Nobel lectures&quot;, World Scientific Publishing Co., Singapore, 2000.

==External links==

* &quot;Jack St. Clair Kilby: A Man of Few Words&quot;, biography by Ed Millis.
* &quot;From concept to cosmos: How Jack Kilby&#x27;s integrated circuit transformed the electronics industry&quot;, biography by Texas Instruments.
* &quot;Jack Kilby, Touching Lives on Micro and Macro Scales&quot; by T.R. Reid, &quot;The Washington Post&quot; (June 2005).
* Jack S. Kilby Patents
* &quot;Tribute to Jack Kilby&quot;, Dream 2047, November 2005</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q182031" start="0" end="20" title="Jack Kilby" label="Jack St. Clair Kilby"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="70" end="89" title="Electrical engineering" label="electrical engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q241735" start="116" end="128" title="Robert Noyce" label="Robert Noyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096013" start="132" end="155" title="Fairchild Semiconductor" label="Fairchild Semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="189" end="207" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q193412" start="225" end="242" title="Texas Instruments" label="Texas Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q852317" start="276" end="298" title="List of Nobel laureates in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q31087" start="360" end="379" title="calculator" label="handheld calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166429" start="388" end="403" title="thermal printing" label="thermal printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065459" start="760" end="778" title="Great Bend, Kansas" label="Great Bend, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598756" start="800" end="822" title="Great Bend High School" label="Great Bend High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="1021" end="1040" title="Bachelor of Science" label="Bachelor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="1057" end="1096" title="University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign" label="University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="1185" end="1207" title="electrical engineering" label="electrical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q950900" start="1223" end="1240" title="Master of Science" label="Master of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198739" start="1359" end="1394" title="invention of the integrated circuit" label="invention of the integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q193412" start="1441" end="1458" title="Texas Instruments" label="Texas Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546271" start="1616" end="1634" title="tyranny of numbers" label="tyranny of numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="1767" end="1780" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676030" start="1904" end="1917" title="Mark Shepherd (businessman)" label="Mark Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q867" start="1945" end="1954" title="germanium" label="germanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q174320" start="1963" end="1975" title="oscilloscope" label="oscilloscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q174320" start="2012" end="2024" title="oscilloscope" label="oscilloscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q207527" start="2045" end="2054" title="sine wave" label="sine wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="2073" end="2091" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q241735" start="2408" end="2420" title="Robert Noyce" label="Robert Noyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q30525657" start="2821" end="2835" title="Jerry Merryman" label="Jerry Merryman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2840" end="2856" title="James Van Tassel" label="James Van Tassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q49212" start="3148" end="3172" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="3290" end="3303" title="Dallas, Texas" label="Dallas, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q193412" start="3328" end="3345" title="Texas Instruments" label="Texas Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536258" start="3477" end="3512" title="Southern Methodist University" label="Southern Methodist University (SMU)"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="4275" end="4324" title="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers" label="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q65052092" start="4359" end="4370" title="IEEE Fellow" label="IEEE Fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970344" start="4384" end="4408" title="IEEE David Sarnoff Award" label="IEEE David Sarnoff Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970325" start="4444" end="4469" title="IEEE Cledo Brunetti Award" label="IEEE Cledo Brunetti Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970301" start="4483" end="4504" title="IEEE Centennial Medal" label="IEEE Centennial Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q678414" start="4521" end="4540" title="IEEE Medal of Honor" label="IEEE Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q339484" start="4577" end="4595" title="Franklin Institute" label="Franklin Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626301" start="4598" end="4621" title="Stuart Ballantine Medal" label="Stuart Ballantine Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q466950" start="4687" end="4727" title="American Society of Mechanical Engineers" label="American Society of Mechanical Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493021" start="4768" end="4799" title="National Academy of Engineering" label="National Academy of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842834" start="4927" end="4958" title="Academy of Achievement" label="American Academy of Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063447" start="5012" end="5038" title="Charles Stark Draper Prize" label="Charles Stark Draper Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970391" start="5117" end="5159" title="IEEE Jack S. Kilby Signal Processing Medal" label="IEEE Jack S. Kilby Signal Processing Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="5203" end="5233" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743510" start="5296" end="5335" title="American Computer &amp;amp; Robotics Museum" label="American Computer &amp;amp; Robotics Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q737051" start="5452" end="5477" title="National Medal of Science" label="National Medal of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q937629" start="5495" end="5523" title="National Medal of Technology" label="National Medal of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366018" start="5567" end="5598" title="National Inventors Hall of Fame" label="National Inventors Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q658444" start="5629" end="5640" title="Kyoto Prize" label="Kyoto Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5402362" start="5767" end="5779" title="Eta Kappa Nu" label="Eta Kappa Nu"/>
<link wikidata="Q852317" start="5846" end="5868" title="List of Nobel laureates in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536258" start="6070" end="6099" title="Southern Methodist University" label="Southern Methodist University"/>
<link wikidata="Q738258" start="6105" end="6124" title="University of Miami" label="University of Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="6126" end="6148" title="University of Illinois" label="University of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q838330" start="6150" end="6181" title="University of Wisconsin–Madison" label="University of Wisconsin–Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q49212" start="6183" end="6207" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="6209" end="6213" title="Yale" label="Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140778" start="6218" end="6251" title="Rochester Institute of Technology" label="Rochester Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q43401" start="6257" end="6287" title="National Chiao Tung University" label="National Chiao Tung University"/>
<link wikidata="Q43401" start="6289" end="6293" title="NCTU" label="NCTU"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="6298" end="6304" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="6424" end="6431" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="6450" end="6468" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921454" start="6536" end="6546" title="Merchiston" label="Merchiston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277357" start="6557" end="6584" title="Edinburgh Napier University" label="Edinburgh Napier University"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="6588" end="6597" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502981" start="6644" end="6659" title="Geoffrey Dummer" label="Geoffrey Dummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740962" start="6709" end="6723" title="Leslie Berlin" label="Berlin, Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7668065" start="7396" end="7405" title="T.R. Reid" label="T.R. Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="7413" end="7432" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64072" wikidata="Q7810" url="?curid=64072" title="Homer Simpson">
<text>Homer Jay Simpson is the main protagonist of the American animated television series &quot;The Simpsons&quot; who is part of the Simpson family. Homer made his television debut in the short &quot;Good Night&quot; on &quot;The Tracey Ullman Show&quot; on April 19, 1987. Cartoonist Matt Groening created and designed Homer while waiting in the lobby of James L. Brooks&#x27;s office. Initially called to pitch a series of shorts based on his comic strip &quot;Life in Hell&quot;, Groening instead developed a new set of characters. After two years on &quot;The Tracey Ullman Show&quot;, the Simpson family received their own series, which premiered on Fox on December 17, 1989.

At the age of thirty-six, Homer is the patriarch of the family; he is married to Marge, with whom he has three children, Bart, Lisa, and Maggie. As the family&#x27;s primary provider, Homer works as a safety inspector at the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant. He embodies numerous American working-class stereotypes: he is overweight, balding, immature, outspoken, aggressive, lazy, ignorant, unprofessional, and deeply fond of beer, junk food, and television. Despite these flaws, Homer is fundamentally a good-hearted man and fiercely protective of his family, especially during critical moments. 

In the shorts and early episodes of &quot;The Simpsons&quot;, Dan Castellaneta voiced Homer with a loose impression of Walter Matthau. However, during the second and third seasons of the full-length series, Homer&#x27;s voice evolved into a more robust tone to better convey a broader range of emotions. Homer has also appeared in various Simpsons-related media, including video games, &quot;The Simpsons Movie&quot; (2007), &quot;The Simpsons&quot; Ride, commercials, and comic books, and has inspired a wide range of merchandise. His iconic catchphrase, the annoyed grunt &quot;D&#x27;oh!&quot;, has been recognized in linguistics, appearing in &quot;The New Oxford Dictionary of English&quot; since 1998 and the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; since 2001.

Homer is regarded as one of the most iconic and influential television characters of all time and is widely recognized as an American cultural icon. In 2007, &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; ranked Homer ninth on their list of the 50 Greatest TV Icons, and in 2010, placed him first on their list of the Top 100 Characters of the Past Twenty Years. &quot;The Sunday Times&quot; referred to him as &quot;the greatest comic creation of [modern] time&quot;, while TV Guide, in 2010, called him second-greatest cartoon character. Castellaneta has received four Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Voice-Over Performance, along with a special-achievement Annie Award. In 2000, Homer and the family were honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.

== Role in &quot;The Simpsons&quot; ==
Homer Jay Simpson is the bumbling husband of Marge and the father of Bart, Lisa, and Maggie Simpson. He is the son of Mona and Abraham &quot;Grampa&quot; Simpson. Over the first 400 episodes of &quot;The Simpsons&quot;, Homer held over 188 different jobs. His primary role is as a nuclear safety inspector at the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant in Sector 7-G. This position, which he is unqualified for, often sees him neglecting his duties or falling asleep on the job. His boss, Mr. Burns, frequently ignores or forgets his existence. Creator Matt Groening chose the nuclear plant as Homer’s workplace to provide opportunities for comedic chaos. Although Homer&#x27;s numerous other jobs each last only one episode, earlier seasons often explained how he was fired from the plant and rehired. In later episodes, these transitions became more impulsive, with his side ventures occurring without reference to his regular employment.

&quot;The Simpsons&quot; employs a floating timeline, where characters either do not age or age minimally. As such, the show is always presumed to take place in the present year. Despite the show&#x27;s flexible timeline, several episodes link events in Homer&#x27;s life to specific time periods. In &quot;Mother Simpson&quot; (season seven, 1995), Homer&#x27;s mother, Mona, is portrayed as a radical who went into hiding in 1969 after a run-in with the law. &quot;The Way We Was&quot; (season two, 1991) depicts Homer falling in love with Marge as a senior at Springfield High School in 1974. Similarly, &quot;I Married Marge&quot; (season three, 1991) implies that Marge became pregnant with Bart in 1980. However, &quot;That &#x27;90s Show&quot; (season 19, 2008) contradicts these events, depicting Homer and Marge as a twentysomething, childless couple in the early 1990s. This inconsistency deepens in &quot;Do Pizza Bots Dream of Electric Guitars&quot; (season 32, 2021), which reimagines Homer&#x27;s adolescence as occurring in the 1990s. Showrunner Matt Selman has addressed these contradictions, stating that no version is &quot;official continuity&quot; and that &quot;they all kind of happened in their imaginary world&quot;, allowing viewers to choose the version they prefer.

Homer&#x27;s age has fluctuated throughout &quot;The Simpsons&quot; due to its floating timeline. In the early episodes, he was thirty-four, increasing to thirty-six in season four, thirty-eight and thirty-nine in season eight, and forty by season eighteen, though these ages are inconsistent even within those seasons. In the episode &quot;Duffless&quot; (season four, 1993), Homer&#x27;s driver’s license lists his birthdate as May 12, 1956, making him 36 at the time. During Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein&#x27;s tenure as showrunners, they aged Homer to thirty-eight, reflecting their own aging and perception of the character. According to the episode guides &quot;The Simpsons: A Complete Guide to Our Favorite Family&quot; (1997) and &quot;Simpsons World: The Ultimate Episode Guide: Seasons 1–20&quot; (2010), both authored by Groening, Homer&#x27;s official age is 36. Homer stands tall and weighs between 239 and 260 lbs (108120 kg).

==Character==
=== Creation ===

Matt Groening first conceived Homer and the rest of the Simpson family in 1987 while waiting in the lobby of producer James L. Brooks&#x27;s office. Groening was invited to pitch a series of animated shorts for &quot;The Tracey Ullman Show&quot; and initially planned to adapt his comic strip, &quot;Life in Hell&quot;. Upon realizing that adapting the strip would require him to relinquish publication rights, he quickly decided to create something new. Groening hastily sketched a concept for a dysfunctional family, naming the characters after members of his own family. Groening named Homer after his father, who himself had been named after the ancient Greek poet. Very little of Homer&#x27;s character was inspired by Groening&#x27;s father, and to emphasize that the significance of the name was minimal, Groening later named his own son Homer. Groening explained, &quot;Homer originated with my goal to both amuse my real father, and just annoy him a little bit. My father was an athletic, creative, intelligent filmmaker and writer, and the only thing he had in common with Homer was a love of donuts&quot;.

While Groening has often mentioned that Homer was named after his father, he has also stated in some interviews that the character Homer Simpson from Nathanael West&#x27;s 1939 novel &quot;The Day of the Locust&quot; and its 1975 film adaptation was an inspiration. In a 2012 interview with the Smithsonian Magazine, Groening clarified, &quot;I took that name from a minor character in the novel &quot;The Day of the Locust&quot;[...] Since Homer was my father&#x27;s name, and I thought Simpson was a funny name in that it had the word &quot;simp&quot; in it, which is short for &quot;simpleton&quot;—I just went with it&quot;. Homer&#x27;s middle initial &quot;J&quot;, which stands for &quot;Jay&quot;, is a nod to animated characters like Bullwinkle J. Moose and Rocket J. Squirrel from &quot;The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show&quot;, whose middle initial was a tribute to series creator Jay Ward. Homer first appeared alongside the Simpson family on April 19, 1987, in &quot;The Tracey Ullman Show&quot; short &quot;Good Night&quot;. On December 17, 1989, these shorts were developed into &quot;The Simpsons&quot;, a half-hour series on the Fox Broadcasting Company, where Homer and the Simpson family became the central characters.

=== Design ===

Homer&#x27;s typical attire includes a short-sleeved white shirt with an open collar, blue pants, and gray shoes. He is overweight and bald, with a fringe of hair around the sides and back of his head and two curly strands on top.

The Simpson family was designed to be easily recognizable in silhouette. The characters were initially crudely drawn because Groening submitted rough sketches to the animators, expecting them to refine the designs; instead, the animators simply traced over his original drawings. Homer&#x27;s appearance has been noted for its resemblance—intentional or not—to the cartoon character Adamsson, created by Swedish cartoonist Oscar Jacobsson in 1920. When Groening originally designed Homer, he incorporated his initials into the character&#x27;s features: the hairline resembled an &quot;M&quot;, and the right ear resembled a &quot;G&quot;. While this design was eventually modified to make the ear appear more natural, Groening continues to draw it as a &quot;G&quot; in sketches for fans. Director Mark Kirkland has described Homer&#x27;s head shape as resembling a tube-shaped coffee can topped with a salad bowl. 

During &quot;The Simpsons&quot; shorts, animators experimented with Homer&#x27;s mouth movements, at one point allowing his mouth to stretch beyond his beard line. However, this approach was abandoned when it became overly exaggerated. In early episodes, Homer&#x27;s hair was more rounded to suggest a disheveled look, but it evolved into the consistently pointed style seen today. During the first three seasons, close-up shots of Homer occasionally included small lines meant to represent eyebrows. Groening disliked this detail, and the lines were eventually removed. During the first three seasons, Homer&#x27;s design for some close-up shots included small lines which were meant to be eyebrows. Groening strongly disliked them and they were eventually dropped.

In the season seven (1995) episode &quot;Treehouse of Horror VI&quot;, Bart, alongside Homer, was rendered as a three-dimensional character for the first time in the &quot;Homer3&quot; segment of the episode. The computer animation was provided by Pacific Data Images. In the final minute of the segment, the three-dimensional Homer transitions into a live-action setting, finding himself in real-world Los Angeles. Directed by David Mirkin, this marked the first instance of a Simpsons character appearing in the real world within the series. In &quot;Lisa&#x27;s Wedding&quot; (season six, 1995), which is set fifteen years in the future, Homer&#x27;s design was modified to reflect his older age. Changes included increased weight, the removal of one hair from the top of his head, and the addition of an extra line under his eye. This older design has since been used in subsequent flashforward episodes.
=== Voice ===

Homer&#x27;s voice is provided by Dan Castellaneta, who also voices several other characters on &quot;The Simpsons&quot;, including Grampa Simpson, Krusty the Clown, Barney Gumble, Groundskeeper Willie, Mayor Quimby, and Hans Moleman. Castellaneta, a regular cast member on &quot;The Tracey Ullman Show&quot;, had prior experience in voice-over work, which he had done in Chicago alongside his wife, Deb Lacusta. When voices were needed for &quot;The Simpsons&quot; shorts, the producers chose Castellaneta and fellow cast member Julie Kavner to voice Homer and Marge, respectively, opting not to hire additional actors. In the shorts and the first season of the half-hour series, Homer&#x27;s voice differed noticeably from its later incarnation. Initially, it was modeled as a loose impression of Walter Matthau but Castellaneta found it challenging to maintain the Matthau-inspired tone during the nine- to ten-hour recording sessions and sought a more sustainable approach. By the second and third seasons, Castellaneta had &quot;dropped the voice down&quot; and developed it into a more versatile and humorous style, enabling Homer to express a broader range of emotions.

Castellaneta&#x27;s natural speaking voice bears no resemblance to Homer&#x27;s. To create Homer&#x27;s voice, Castellaneta lowers his chin to his chest and adopts what he describes as a state of &quot;letting his I.Q. go&quot;. This method has even led to ad-libs, including the famous &quot;S-M-R-T; I mean, S-M-A-R-T!&quot; line from &quot;Homer Goes to College&quot; (season five, 1993), which stemmed from a genuine recording mistake. Castellaneta prefers to stay in character during recording sessions and visualizes scenes to deliver the appropriate vocal performance. Despite Homer&#x27;s widespread fame, Castellaneta says he is rarely recognized in public—unless by an especially dedicated fan. In &quot;Homer&#x27;s Barbershop Quartet&quot; (season five, 1993), Homer&#x27;s voice was partially performed by someone other than Castellaneta. The episode follows Homer forming a barbershop quartet called the Be Sharps, with his singing voice provided at times by a member of the Dapper Dans. The Dapper Dans recorded the singing parts for all four members of the group, blending their vocals with the regular voice actors. Often, a primary voice actor sang the melody while the Dapper Dans provided harmonic backup.

Castellaneta was initially paid US$30,000 per episode for his work on &quot;The Simpsons&quot; until 1998. That year, a pay dispute arose, during which Fox threatened to replace the six main voice actors and even began preparing for new casting. The conflict was ultimately resolved, and Castellaneta salary increased to $125,000 per episode. In 2004, the voice cast pushed for higher wages, seeking $360,000 per episode. After a brief argument, the dispute was settled, and Castellaneta pay was raised to $250,000 per episode. In 2008, further negotiations increased the cast&#x27;s salaries to approximately $400,000 per episode. However, in 2011, Fox demanded production cost reductions, threatening to cancel the series if costs were not cut. In response, Castellaneta and the other main cast members agreed to a 30percent pay reduction, lowering their per-episode earnings to just over $300,000. According to &quot;Backstage&quot;, he was the sixth highest-paid voice actor by late 2024.
=== Character development ===
Executive producer Al Jean observes that in &quot;The Simpsons&quot; writers&#x27; room, &quot;everyone loves writing for Homer&quot;, with many of his antics inspired by the writers&#x27; own experiences. In the show&#x27;s early seasons, Bart was the main character, but by the fourth season, Homer took on a more prominent role. Groening explained this shift: &quot;With Homer, there&#x27;s just a wider range of jokes you can do. And there are far more drastic consequences to Homer&#x27;s stupidity. There&#x27;s only so far you can go with a juvenile delinquent. We wanted Bart to do anything up to the point of him being tried in court as a dad. But Homer is a dad, and his boneheaded-ness is funnier. [...] Homer is launching himself headfirst into every single impulsive thought that occurs to him&quot;.

Homer&#x27;s character has evolved significantly over the course of &quot;The Simpsons&quot;. Initially, he was portrayed as &quot;very angry&quot; and domineering toward Bart, but these traits were softened as his personality was developed further. In the early seasons, Homer often worried that his family might embarrass him, but in later episodes, he became less concerned with others&#x27; opinions. During the show&#x27;s first years, Homer was depicted as dim-witted yet well-meaning. However, under Mike Scully&#x27;s tenure as executive producer (seasons nine through twelve, 1997–2001), his behavior shifted toward being a &quot;boorish, self-aggrandizing oaf&quot;. Chris Suellentrop of &quot;Slate&quot; observed, &quot;Under Scully&#x27;s tenure, &quot;The Simpsons&quot; became, well, a cartoon.[...] Episodes that once would have ended with Homer and Marge bicycling into the sunset now end with Homer blowing a tranquilizer dart into Marge&#x27;s neck&quot;. Fans have labeled this version of the character as &quot;Jerkass Homer&quot;. At recording sessions, Castellaneta has occasionally rejected lines from the script that he felt made Homer too cruel. He believes Homer is &quot;boorish and unthinking, but he&#x27;d never be mean on purpose&quot;. When &quot;The Simpsons Movie&quot; (2007) was being edited, several scenes were adjusted to make Homer more sympathetic.

Over the years, the writers have portrayed Homer with increasingly declining intelligence. They explain this was not done intentionally but became necessary to surpass earlier jokes. For instance, in &quot;When You Dish Upon a Star&quot; (season 10, 1998), Homer admits he cannot read. Although this contradicts earlier scenes where Homer is shown reading, the writers decided to keep the gag because they found it funny. The team often debates how far to take Homer’s stupidity, with one suggested guideline being that &quot;he can never forget his own name&quot;.

=== Personality ===
The comedic appeal of Homer&#x27;s character stems from his frequent displays of bumbling stupidity, laziness, and explosive temper. With a low intelligence level, director David Silverman has described him as &quot;creatively brilliant in his stupidity&quot;. Homer is characterized by his immense apathy towards work, overweight weight, love for food, and short attention span. He frequently spends his evenings drinking Duff Beer at Moe&#x27;s Tavern and, as depicted in the episode &quot;Duffless&quot; (season four, 1993), has exhibited signs of full-blown alcoholism. A recurring gag throughout the series involves Homer impulsively strangling Bart whenever he aggravates him, often accompanied by his catchphrase, &quot;Why you little—!&quot;. According to series creator Groening, Homer&#x27;s strangling of Bart was never meant to be premeditated, as that would make it seem sadistic. Instead, it was made that Homer acts purely on impulse, easily switching from anger to indifference. Groening initially considered making Homer always receive a punishment or having Bart retaliate, but this was discarded. In the episode &quot;McMansion &amp; Wife&quot; (season 35, 2023), Homer states that he no longer strangles Bart, citing changing times. However, the show&#x27;s executive producers later clarified that Homer still strangles Bart, humorously noting, &quot;Homer Simpson was unavailable for comment as he was busy strangling Bart&quot;.

Homer has nuanced relationships with his family. His relationship with Bart is the most contentious; Bart frequently calls Homer by his first name rather than &quot;Dad&quot;, and Homer often refers to him dismissively as &quot;the boy&quot;. Homer frequently overlooks Lisa&#x27;s talents but, when confronted with his neglect, goes out of his way to support her. The show occasionally hints that Homer forgets he has a third child, Maggie. Despite this, the episode &quot;And Maggie Makes Three&quot; (season six, 1995) reveals she is the main reason Homer took and continues to work at his regular job. While Homer&#x27;s thoughtless antics often frustrate his family, he consistently proves himself to be a loving husband; in &quot;A Milhouse Divided&quot; (season eight, 1996), Homer arranged a surprise second wedding with Marge to make up for their unsatisfactory first ceremony. Despite his strained relationship with his father, Abraham &quot;Grampa&quot; Simpson—whom Homer quickly placed in a nursing home and whom the Simpson family often tries to avoid—Homer has occasionally shown genuine love and affection for him.

Homer was described by the &quot;The Times&quot; as &quot;a (happy) slave to his various appetites&quot;. He known for his consistent ignorance, forgetfulness, and general stupidity. Homer&#x27;s low intelligence quotient (IQ) of 55 has been attributed to several factors: the hereditary &quot;Simpson gene&quot; (which causes male family members to become increasingly stupid over time), frequent cranial trauma, and a crayon lodged in his brain&#x27;s frontal lobe. In the episode &quot;HOMR&quot; (season 12, 2001), Homer has the crayon removed, temporarily raising his IQ to 105. This improvement allows him to bond with Lisa, but his newfound intelligence ultimately makes him unhappy, leading him to have the crayon reinserted. Homer frequently engages in debates with his own mind, expressed through internal voiceovers. His mind often provides questionable advice that occasionally steers him in the right direction but more often results in catastrophic failures. In some instances, his mind even becomes so exasperated with Homer that it &quot;walks out&quot; on him, symbolized through sound effects. These internal dialogues were initially introduced as time-fillers and were relatively simple for the animators to create. However, they were eventually phased out after the producers exhausted all possible scenarios for them. In 2015, it was revealed that Homer has narcolepsy, a sleep disorder.

Producer Mike Reiss said Homer was his favorite &quot;Simpsons&quot; character to write: &quot;Homer&#x27;s just a comedy writer&#x27;s dream. He has everything wrong with him, every comedy trope. He&#x27;s fat and bald and stupid and lazy and angry and an alcoholic. I&#x27;m pretty sure he embodies all seven deadly sins&quot;. John Swartzwelder, who wrote 60 episodes, said he wrote Homer as if he were &quot;a big talking dog ... One moment he&#x27;s the saddest man in the world, because he&#x27;s just lost his job, or dropped his sandwich, or accidentally killed his family. Then, the next moment, he&#x27;s the happiest man in the world, because he&#x27;s just found a penny — maybe under one of his dead family members ... If you write him as a dog you&#x27;ll never go wrong&quot;. Reiss felt this was insightful, saying: &quot;Homer is just pure emotion, no long-term memory, everything is instant gratification. And, you know, has good dog qualities, too. I think, loyalty, friendliness, and just kind of continuous optimism&quot;.

== Reception ==
=== Cultural influence, reception, and commendations ===

Homer is widely regarded as one of the most popular and iconic characters in television history. In 2007, &quot;USA Today&quot; recognized Homer Simpson as one of the &quot;top 25 most influential people of the past 25 years&quot;, stating that he &quot;epitomized the irony and irreverence at the core of American humor&quot;. In 1982, Robert Thompson, director of Syracuse University&#x27;s Center for the Study of Popular Television, predicts that &quot;three centuries from now, English professors are going to be regarding Homer Simpson as one of the greatest creations in human storytelling&quot;. Animation historian Jerry Beck described Homer as one of the best animated characters, saying, &quot;you know someone like it, or you identify with (it)&quot;, which he believed is key to a classic character. &quot;The Sunday Times&quot; has hailed Homer as &quot;the greatest comic creation of [modern] time,&quot; emphasizing his universal appeal. The article noted, &quot;Every age needs its great, consoling failure, its lovable, pretension-free mediocrity. And we have ours in Homer Simpson&quot;.

Homer&#x27;s impact on comedy and culture has been significant. In 2010, &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; named him &quot;the greatest character of the last 20 years&quot;. In TV Guide&#x27;s 2002 list of the &quot;Top 50 Greatest Cartoon Characters&quot;, he was ranked second, behind Bugs Bunny. He also placed fifth on Bravo&#x27;s &quot;100 Greatest TV Characters&quot;, one of only four animated characters included. Homer topped a Channel 4 poll ranking the greatest television characters of all time. In 2007, &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; ranked Homer ninth on its list of the &quot;50 Greatest TV Icons&quot; and later placed him first on its 2010 list of the &quot;Top 100 Characters of the Past Twenty Years&quot;. British polls conducted by the BBC also named Homer the &quot;greatest American&quot; and the fictional character voters would most like to see as President of the United States. His relationship with Marge was further recognized in TV Guide&#x27;s list of &quot;The Best TV Couples of All Time&quot;. In 2022, &quot;Paste&quot; writers ranked Homer as the second-greatest cartoon character of all time.

Although Homer is often regarded as a reflection of American culture, his influence extends worldwide. In 2003, Groening revealed that his father, Homer Groening—after whom the character was named—was Canadian, suggesting that Homer could also be considered Canadian. As a result, the character was granted honorary citizenship in Winnipeg, Manitoba, based on the belief that Homer Groening was from there, though records indicate he was actually born in Saskatchewan. In 2007, as part of a promotion for &quot;The Simpsons Movie&quot;, an image of Homer was painted next to the Cerne Abbas Giant in Dorset, England. This sparked controversy among local neopagan groups, who performed &quot;rain magic&quot; in an attempt to wash the image away.

Dan Castellaneta has received multiple awards for his portrayal of Homer, including four Primetime Emmy Awards for &quot;Outstanding Voice-Over Performance&quot;. He won in 1992 for &quot;Lisa&#x27;s Pony&quot;, in 1993 for &quot;Mr. Plow&quot;, in 2004 for &quot;Today I Am a Clown&quot;, and in 2009 for &quot;Father Knows Worst&quot;. However, his 2004 Emmy win was for voicing various characters, not solely Homer. In 2010, Castellaneta received a fifth Emmy nomination for his performances as both Homer and Grampa Simpson in &quot;Thursdays with Abie&quot;. Castellaneta was honored with a Annie Award in 1993 for &quot;Outstanding Individual Achievement in the Field of Animation&quot; for his work on &quot;The Simpsons&quot;. In 2004, he and Julie Kavner (the voice of Marge) won a Young Artist Award for &quot;Most Popular Mom &amp; Dad in a TV Series&quot;. In 2000, Homer and the rest of the Simpson family were awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 7021 Hollywood Boulevard. In 2017, he was recognized by the National Baseball Hall of Fame in celebration of the 25th anniversary of the episode &quot;Homer at the Bat&quot;.

On February 28, 1999, Homer was made an honorary member of the Junior Common Room at Worcester College, Oxford. The college&#x27;s undergraduate body granted him this membership, believing that &quot;he would benefit greatly from an Oxford education&quot;. Homer has also been referenced in scientific literature, particularly in discussions of cognitive function. A 2010 study conducted at Emory University found that the RGS14 gene appeared to impair cognitive development in mice—while disabling the gene led to improved cognitive abilities. This led researchers to nickname it the &quot;Homer Simpson gene&quot;.

===Analysis===
Homer is an &quot;everyman&quot; and embodies several American stereotypes of working class blue-collar men: he is crude, overweight, incompetent, dim-witted, childish, clumsy and a borderline alcoholic. Groening describes him as &quot;completely ruled by his impulses&quot;. Castellaneta calls him &quot;a dog trapped in a man&#x27;s body&quot;, adding, &quot;He&#x27;s incredibly loyal—not entirely clean—but you gotta love him.&quot; 

In his book &quot;Planet Simpson&quot;, author Chris Turner describes Homer as &quot;the most American of the Simpsons&quot; and believes that while the other Simpson family members could be changed to other nationalities, Homer is &quot;pure American&quot;. In the book &quot;God in the Details: American Religion in Popular Culture&quot;, the authors comment that &quot;Homer&#x27;s progress (or lack thereof) reveals a character who can do the right thing, if accidentally or begrudgingly.&quot; The book &quot;The Simpsons and Philosophy: The D&#x27;oh! of Homer&quot; includes a chapter analyzing Homer&#x27;s character from the perspective of Aristotelian virtue ethics. Raja Halwani writes that Homer&#x27;s &quot;love of life&quot; is an admirable character trait, &quot;for many people are tempted to see in Homer nothing but buffoonery and immorality. ... He is not politically correct, he is more than happy to judge others, and he certainly does not seem to be obsessed with his health. These qualities might not make Homer an admirable &quot;person&quot;, but they do make him admirable in some ways, and, more importantly, makes us crave him and the Homer Simpsons of this world.&quot; In 2008, &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; justified designating &quot;The Simpsons&quot; as a television classic by stating, &quot;we all hail Simpson patriarch Homer because his joy is as palpable as his stupidity is stunning&quot;.

In the season eight episode &quot;Homer&#x27;s Enemy&quot; the writers decided to examine &quot;what it would be like to actually work alongside Homer Simpson&quot;. The episode explores the possibilities of a realistic character with a strong work ethic named Frank Grimes placed alongside Homer in a work environment. In the episode, Homer is portrayed as an everyman and the embodiment of the American spirit; however, in some scenes his negative characteristics and silliness are prominently highlighted. By the end of the episode, Grimes, a hard working and persevering &quot;real American hero&quot;, has become the villain; the viewer is intended to be pleased that Homer has emerged victorious.

In &quot;Gilligan Unbound&quot;, author Paul Arthur Cantor states that he believes Homer&#x27;s devotion to his family has added to the popularity of the character. He writes, &quot;Homer is the distillation of pure fatherhood. ... This is why, for all his stupidity, bigotry and self-centered quality, we cannot hate Homer. He continually fails at being a good father, but he never gives up trying, and in some basic and important sense that makes him a good father.&quot; &quot;The Sunday Times&quot; remarked &quot;Homer is good because, above all, he is capable of great love. When the chips are down, he always does the right thing by his children—he is never unfaithful in spite of several opportunities.&quot;

===D&#x27;oh!===

Homer&#x27;s main and most famous catchphrase, the annoyed grunt &quot;D&#x27;oh!&quot;, is typically uttered when he injures himself, realizes that he has done something stupid, or when something bad has happened or is about to happen to him. During the voice recording session for a &quot;Tracey Ullman Show&quot; short, Homer was required to utter what was written in the script as an &quot;annoyed grunt&quot;. Dan Castellaneta rendered it as a drawn out &quot;d&#x27;ooooooh&quot;. This was inspired by Jimmy Finlayson, the mustachioed Scottish actor who appeared in 33 Laurel and Hardy films. Finlayson had used the term as a minced oath to stand in for the word &quot;Damn!&quot; Matt Groening felt that it would better suit the timing of animation if it were spoken faster. Castellaneta then shortened it to a quickly uttered &quot;D&#x27;oh!&quot;. The first intentional use of &quot;D&#x27;oh!&quot; occurred in the Ullman short &quot;The Krusty the Clown Show&quot; (1989), and its first usage in the series was in the series premiere, &quot;Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire&quot;.

&quot;D&#x27;oh!&quot; was first added to &quot;The New Oxford Dictionary of English&quot; in 1998. It is defined as an interjection &quot;used to comment on an action perceived as foolish or stupid&quot;. In 2001, &quot;D&#x27;oh!&quot; was added to the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot;, without the apostrophe (&quot;Doh!&quot;). The definition of the word is &quot;expressing frustration at the realization that things have turned out badly or not as planned, or that one has just said or done something foolish&quot;. In 2006, &quot;D&#x27;oh!&quot; was placed in sixth position on TV Land&#x27;s list of the 100 greatest television catchphrases. &quot;D&#x27;oh!&quot; is also included in &quot;The Oxford Dictionary of Quotations&quot;. The book includes several other quotations from Homer, including &quot;Kids, you tried your best and you failed miserably. The lesson is never try&quot;, from &quot;Burns&#x27; Heir&quot; (season five, 1994) as well as &quot;Kids are the best, Apu. You can teach them to hate the things you hate. And they practically raise themselves, what with the Internet and all&quot;, from &quot;Eight Misbehavin&#x27; (season 11, 1999). Both quotes entered the dictionary in August 2007.

===Merchandising===
Homer&#x27;s inclusion in many Simpsons publications, toys, and other merchandise is evidence of his enduring popularity. &quot;The Homer Book&quot;, about Homer&#x27;s personality and attributes, was released in 2004 and is commercially available. It has been described as &quot;an entertaining little book for occasional reading&quot; and was listed as one of &quot;the most interesting books of 2004&quot; by &quot;The Chattanoogan&quot;. Other merchandise includes dolls, posters, figurines, bobblehead dolls, mugs, alarm clocks, jigsaw puzzles, Chia Pets, and clothing such as slippers, T-shirts, baseball caps, and boxer shorts. Homer has appeared in commercials for Coke, 1-800-COLLECT, Burger King, Butterfinger, C.C. Lemon, Church&#x27;s Chicken, Domino&#x27;s Pizza, Intel, Kentucky Fried Chicken, Ramada Inn, Subway and T.G.I. Friday&#x27;s. In 2004, Homer starred in a MasterCard &quot;Priceless&quot; commercial that aired during Super Bowl XXXVIII. In 2001, Kelloggs launched a brand of cereal called &quot;Homer&#x27;s Cinnamon Donut Cereal&quot;, which was available for a limited time. In June 2009, Dutch automotive navigation systems manufacturer TomTom announced that Homer would be added to its downloadable GPS voice lineup. Homer&#x27;s voice, recorded by Dan Castellaneta, features several in-character comments such as &quot;Take the third right. We might find an ice cream truck! Mmm... ice cream.&quot;

On April 9, 2009, the United States Postal Service unveiled a series of five 44-cent stamps featuring Homer and the four other members of the Simpson family. They are the first characters from a television series to receive this recognition while the show is still in production. The stamps, designed by Matt Groening, were made available for purchase on May 7, 2009.

===Other media===
Homer has appeared in other media relating to &quot;The Simpsons&quot;. He has appeared in every one of &quot;The Simpsons&quot; video games, including the most recent, &quot;The Simpsons Game&quot;. Homer appears as a playable character in the toys-to-life video game &quot;Lego Dimensions&quot; voiced by again by Dan Castellaneta via archival audio recordings, and released via a &quot;Level Pack&quot; packaged with Homer&#x27;s Car and &quot;Taunt-o-Vision&quot; accessories in September 2015; the pack also adds an additional level based on the episode &quot;The Mysterious Voyage of Homer&quot;. Alongside the television series, Homer regularly appeared in issues of &quot;Simpsons Comics&quot;, which were published from November 29, 1993, until October 17, 2018. Homer also plays a role in The Simpsons Ride, launched in 2008 at Universal Studios Florida and Hollywood.

== References ==
=== Notes ===
=== Bibliography ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
*
*Fink, Moritz (2019). &quot;The Simpsons: A Cultural History&quot;. Rowman &amp; Littlefield. .
*

==External links==
* Homer Simpson on IMDb</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7810" start="0" end="17" title="Homer Simpson" label="Homer Jay Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q215972" start="30" end="41" title="protagonist" label="protagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="91" end="103" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q9762" start="129" end="143" title="Simpson family" label="Simpson family"/>
<link wikidata="Q605111" start="184" end="189" title="The Simpsons shorts" label="short"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732306" start="196" end="206" title="Good Night (The Simpsons)" label="Good Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216882" start="222" end="244" title="The Tracey Ullman Show" label="The Tracey Ullman Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q43994" start="281" end="294" title="Matt Groening" label="Matt Groening"/>
<link wikidata="Q95125" start="352" end="367" title="James L. Brooks" label="James L. Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503598" start="459" end="471" title="Life in Hell" label="Life in Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="651" end="654" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q171692" start="717" end="726" title="patriarch" label="patriarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828" start="759" end="764" title="Marge Simpson" label="Marge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480" start="799" end="803" title="Bart Simpson" label="Bart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5846" start="805" end="809" title="Lisa Simpson" label="Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834" start="815" end="821" title="Maggie Simpson" label="Maggie"/>
<link wikidata="Q151076" start="903" end="934" title="Springfield Nuclear Power Plant" label="Springfield Nuclear Power Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034963" start="957" end="979" title="Working class in the United States" label="American working-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q44442" start="1339" end="1355" title="Dan Castellaneta" label="Dan Castellaneta"/>
<link wikidata="Q202172" start="1396" end="1410" title="Walter Matthau" label="Walter Matthau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274105" start="1432" end="1438" title="The Simpsons season 2" label="second"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341352" start="1443" end="1456" title="The Simpsons season 3" label="third seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458013" start="1650" end="1661" title="List of The Simpsons video games" label="video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q182254" start="1669" end="1687" title="The Simpsons Movie" label="The Simpsons Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462327" start="1702" end="1731" title="The Simpsons Ride" label="&amp;quot;The Simpsons&amp;quot; Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2217478" start="1750" end="1761" title="List of The Simpsons comics" label="comic books"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409224" start="1857" end="1867" title="D&amp;#x27;oh!" label="D&amp;#x27;oh!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115311" start="1930" end="1966" title="The New Oxford Dictionary of English" label="The New Oxford Dictionary of English"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="1998" end="2023" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139104" start="2177" end="2190" title="cultural icon" label="cultural icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="2207" end="2227" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q221986" start="2398" end="2414" title="The Sunday Times" label="The Sunday Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672340" start="2504" end="2512" title="TV Guide" label="TV Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="2600" end="2621" title="Primetime Emmy Awards" label="Primetime Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131545" start="2626" end="2660" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Voice-Over Performance" label="Outstanding Voice-Over Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q566905" start="2695" end="2706" title="Annie Award" label="Annie Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="2770" end="2792" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828" start="2879" end="2884" title="Marge Simpson" label="Marge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480" start="2903" end="2907" title="Bart Simpson" label="Bart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5846" start="2909" end="2913" title="Lisa Simpson" label="Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834" start="2919" end="2933" title="Maggie Simpson" label="Maggie Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237599" start="2952" end="2956" title="Mona Simpson (The Simpsons)" label="Mona"/>
<link wikidata="Q842104" start="2961" end="2995" title="Grampa Simpson" label="Abraham &amp;quot;Grampa&amp;quot; Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="3034" end="3046" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q151076" start="3147" end="3178" title="Springfield Nuclear Power Plant" label="Springfield Nuclear Power Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q716636" start="3315" end="3324" title="Mr. Burns" label="Mr. Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q43994" start="3379" end="3392" title="Matt Groening" label="Matt Groening"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181904" start="3803" end="3820" title="floating timeline" label="floating timeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578602" start="4075" end="4089" title="Mother Simpson" label="Mother Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670724" start="4097" end="4109" title="The Simpsons season 7" label="season seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996280" start="4235" end="4249" title="The Way We Was" label="The Way We Was"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274105" start="4257" end="4267" title="The Simpsons season 2" label="season two"/>
<link wikidata="Q111808" start="4381" end="4396" title="I Married Marge" label="I Married Marge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341352" start="4404" end="4416" title="The Simpsons season 3" label="season three"/>
<link wikidata="Q599463" start="4493" end="4512" title="That &amp;#x27;90s Show (The Simpsons)" label="That &amp;#x27;90s Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508392" start="4520" end="4529" title="The Simpsons season 19" label="season 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q105234753" start="4684" end="4723" title="Do Pizza Bots Dream of Electric Guitars" label="Do Pizza Bots Dream of Electric Guitars"/>
<link wikidata="Q61816313" start="4731" end="4740" title="The Simpsons season 32" label="season 32"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747983" start="5403" end="5411" title="Duffless" label="Duffless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670665" start="5419" end="5430" title="The Simpsons season 4" label="season four"/>
<link wikidata="Q862352" start="5540" end="5551" title="Bill Oakley" label="Bill Oakley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604225" start="5556" end="5570" title="Josh Weinstein" label="Josh Weinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151484" start="5711" end="5725" title="The Simpsons episode guides" label="episode guides"/>
<link wikidata="Q43994" start="6039" end="6052" title="Matt Groening" label="Matt Groening"/>
<link wikidata="Q9762" start="6095" end="6109" title="Simpson family" label="Simpson family"/>
<link wikidata="Q95125" start="6157" end="6172" title="James L. Brooks" label="James L. Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216882" start="6256" end="6278" title="The Tracey Ullman Show" label="The Tracey Ullman Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503598" start="6339" end="6351" title="Life in Hell" label="Life in Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285253" start="6430" end="6447" title="publication right" label="publication right"/>
<link wikidata="Q906343" start="6536" end="6556" title="dysfunctional family" label="dysfunctional family"/>
<link wikidata="Q5901299" start="6640" end="6650" title="Homer Groening" label="his father"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="6685" end="6707" title="Homer" label="the ancient Greek poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q370521" start="7307" end="7321" title="Nathanael West" label="Nathanael West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150908" start="7346" end="7367" title="The Day of the Locust" label="The Day of the Locust"/>
<link wikidata="Q281296" start="7378" end="7402" title="The Day of the Locust (film)" label="its 1975 film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487014" start="7452" end="7472" title="Smithsonian Magazine" label="Smithsonian Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646886" start="7900" end="7919" title="Bullwinkle J. Moose" label="Bullwinkle J. Moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q3939827" start="7924" end="7942" title="Rocket J. Squirrel" label="Rocket J. Squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318552" start="7954" end="7983" title="The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show" label="The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3163276" start="8044" end="8052" title="Jay Ward" label="Jay Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q605111" start="8161" end="8166" title="The Simpsons shorts" label="short"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732306" start="8173" end="8183" title="Good Night (The Simpsons short)" label="Good Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="8298" end="8322" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox Broadcasting Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383654" start="9022" end="9030" title="Silent Sam (comics)" label="Adamsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q357738" start="9062" end="9077" title="Oscar Jacobsson" label="Oscar Jacobsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q41055" start="9197" end="9205" title="hairline" label="hairline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748620" start="9438" end="9451" title="Mark Kirkland" label="Mark Kirkland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670724" start="10333" end="10345" title="The Simpsons season 7" label="season seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361433" start="10367" end="10389" title="Treehouse of Horror VI" label="Treehouse of Horror VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q533547" start="10574" end="10593" title="Pacific Data Images" label="Pacific Data Images"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665938" start="10754" end="10766" title="David Mirkin" label="David Mirkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q221028" start="10879" end="10898" title="Lisa&amp;#x27;s Wedding" label="Lisa&amp;#x27;s Wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670715" start="10906" end="10916" title="The Simpsons season 6" label="season six"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533706" start="11212" end="11224" title="flashforward" label="flashforward"/>
<link wikidata="Q44442" start="11284" end="11300" title="Dan Castellaneta" label="Dan Castellaneta"/>
<link wikidata="Q842104" start="11382" end="11396" title="Grampa Simpson" label="Grampa Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q727156" start="11398" end="11414" title="Krusty the Clown" label="Krusty the Clown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470014" start="11416" end="11429" title="Barney Gumble" label="Barney Gumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q324430" start="11431" end="11451" title="Groundskeeper Willie" label="Groundskeeper Willie"/>
<link wikidata="Q745472" start="11453" end="11465" title="Mayor Quimby" label="Mayor Quimby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237599" start="11471" end="11483" title="Hans Moleman" label="Hans Moleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018704" start="11650" end="11661" title="Deb Lacusta" label="Deb Lacusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q228893" start="11780" end="11792" title="Julie Kavner" label="Julie Kavner"/>
<link wikidata="Q202172" start="12049" end="12063" title="Walter Matthau" label="Walter Matthau"/>
<link wikidata="Q94318" start="12771" end="12792" title="Homer Goes to College" label="Homer Goes to College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458629" start="12800" end="12811" title="The Simpsons season 5" label="season five"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660469" start="13142" end="13173" title="Homer&amp;#x27;s Barbershop Quartet" label="Homer&amp;#x27;s Barbershop Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728889" start="13413" end="13428" title="the Dapper Dans" label="the Dapper Dans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="13687" end="13690" title="US$" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q14874192" start="14575" end="14584" title="Backstage (magazine)" label="Backstage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829373" start="14697" end="14704" title="Al Jean" label="Al Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670665" start="14958" end="14971" title="The Simpsons season 4" label="fourth season"/>
<link wikidata="Q655207" start="16000" end="16011" title="Mike Scully" label="Mike Scully"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670746" start="16049" end="16061" title="The Simpsons season 9" label="seasons nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575630" start="16070" end="16076" title="The Simpsons season 12" label="twelve"/>
<link wikidata="Q60497" start="16197" end="16202" title="Slate (magazine)" label="Slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747983" start="16349" end="16390" title="Duffless" label="Homer and Marge bicycling into the sunset"/>
<link wikidata="Q866551" start="16404" end="16460" title="It&amp;#x27;s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad Marge" label="Homer blowing a tranquilizer dart into Marge&amp;#x27;s neck"/>
<link wikidata="Q182254" start="16773" end="16791" title="The Simpsons Movie" label="The Simpsons Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348977" start="17091" end="17116" title="When You Dish Upon a Star" label="When You Dish Upon a Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670754" start="17124" end="17133" title="The Simpsons season 10" label="season 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q919608" start="17645" end="17660" title="David Silverman (animator)" label="David Silverman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115119" start="17836" end="17850" title="attention span" label="attention span"/>
<link wikidata="Q151076" start="17908" end="17925" title="Moe&amp;#x27;s Tavern" label="Moe&amp;#x27;s Tavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747983" start="17964" end="17972" title="Duffless" label="Duffless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670665" start="17980" end="17991" title="The Simpsons season 4" label="season four"/>
<link wikidata="Q123174107" start="18609" end="18629" title="McMansion &amp;amp; Wife" label="McMansion &amp;amp; Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q117288045" start="18637" end="18646" title="The Simpsons season 35" label="season 35"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598367" start="19399" end="19421" title="And Maggie Makes Three" label="And Maggie Makes Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670715" start="19429" end="19439" title="The Simpsons season 6" label="season six"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614353" start="19661" end="19679" title="A Milhouse Divided" label="A Milhouse Divided"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670733" start="19687" end="19699" title="The Simpsons season 8" label="season eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q842104" start="19863" end="19897" title="Grampa Simpson" label="Abraham &amp;quot;Grampa&amp;quot; Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="20090" end="20099" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q170277" start="20257" end="20278" title="intelligence quotient" label="intelligence quotient"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984662" start="20351" end="20363" title="Simpson gene" label="Simpson gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920572" start="20455" end="20469" title="cranial trauma" label="cranial trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q749520" start="20511" end="20523" title="frontal lobe" label="frontal lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198344" start="20546" end="20550" title="HOMR" label="HOMR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575630" start="20558" end="20567" title="The Simpsons season 12" label="season 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q189561" start="21436" end="21446" title="narcolepsy" label="narcolepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446929" start="21476" end="21486" title="Mike Reiss" label="Mike Reiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q166502" start="21772" end="21789" title="seven deadly sins" label="seven deadly sins"/>
<link wikidata="Q657901" start="21797" end="21814" title="John Swartzwelder" label="John Swartzwelder"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="22698" end="22707" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q450024" start="22923" end="22938" title="Robert Thompson (media scholar)" label="Robert Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q617433" start="22952" end="22971" title="Syracuse University" label="Syracuse University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6183232" start="23210" end="23220" title="Jerry Beck" label="Jerry Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q221986" start="23405" end="23421" title="The Sunday Times" label="The Sunday Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="23773" end="23793" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672340" start="23870" end="23878" title="TV Guide" label="TV Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q183102" start="23980" end="23990" title="Bugs Bunny" label="Bugs Bunny"/>
<link wikidata="Q902771" start="24016" end="24021" title="Bravo (American TV network)" label="Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="24131" end="24140" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="24454" end="24457" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="24570" end="24600" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q12811336" start="24734" end="24751" title="Paste (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Paste&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044835" start="24880" end="24896" title="American culture" label="American culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5901299" start="24975" end="24989" title="Homer Groening" label="Homer Groening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="25029" end="25037" title="Canadian" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q987080" start="25135" end="25155" title="honorary citizenship" label="honorary citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135" start="25159" end="25177" title="Winnipeg, Manitoba" label="Winnipeg, Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="25283" end="25295" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q182254" start="25339" end="25357" title="The Simpsons Movie" label="The Simpsons Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055469" start="25407" end="25424" title="Cerne Abbas Giant" label="Cerne Abbas Giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="25428" end="25434" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q189753" start="25482" end="25490" title="Modern paganism" label="neopagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q477738" start="25519" end="25529" title="Rainmaking (ritual)" label="rain magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44442" start="25575" end="25591" title="Dan Castellaneta" label="Dan Castellaneta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="25664" end="25684" title="Primetime Emmy Award" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131545" start="25696" end="25730" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Voice-Over Performance" label="Outstanding Voice-Over Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827874" start="25763" end="25779" title="Lisa&amp;#x27;s Pony" label="Lisa&amp;#x27;s Pony"/>
<link wikidata="Q277882" start="25805" end="25813" title="Mr. Plow" label="Mr. Plow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558200" start="25839" end="25857" title="Today I Am a Clown" label="Today I Am a Clown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196131" start="25887" end="25905" title="Father Knows Worst" label="Father Knows Worst"/>
<link wikidata="Q842104" start="26088" end="26102" title="Grampa Simpson" label="Grampa Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068586" start="26112" end="26131" title="Thursdays with Abie" label="Thursdays with Abie"/>
<link wikidata="Q566905" start="26171" end="26182" title="Annie Award" label="Annie Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q228893" start="26326" end="26338" title="Julie Kavner" label="Julie Kavner"/>
<link wikidata="Q494588" start="26366" end="26384" title="Young Artist Award" label="Young Artist Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="26521" end="26543" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="26607" end="26637" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame" label="National Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662792" start="26698" end="26714" title="Homer at the Bat" label="Homer at the Bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q780745" start="26808" end="26833" title="Worcester College, Oxford" label="Worcester College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141241" start="27068" end="27086" title="cognitive function" label="cognitive function"/>
<link wikidata="Q621043" start="27114" end="27130" title="Emory University" label="Emory University"/>
<link wikidata="Q18035550" start="27146" end="27151" title="RGS14" label="RGS14"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751034" start="27201" end="27205" title="mice" label="mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q13407143" start="27374" end="27382" title="everyman" label="everyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191714" start="27448" end="27459" title="blue-collar worker" label="blue-collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219914" start="27813" end="27827" title="Planet Simpson" label="Planet Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108329" start="27842" end="27854" title="Chris Turner (author)" label="Chris Turner"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28309" end="28361" title="The Simpsons and Philosophy: The D&amp;#x27;oh! of Homer" label="The Simpsons and Philosophy: The D&amp;#x27;oh! of Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q263307" start="28444" end="28456" title="Aristotelianism" label="Aristotelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086395" start="28457" end="28470" title="virtue ethics" label="virtue ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q25507258" start="28472" end="28484" title="Raja Halwani" label="Raja Halwani"/>
<link wikidata="Q131160" start="28671" end="28690" title="political correctness" label="politically correct"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="29010" end="29030" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670733" start="29237" end="29249" title="The Simpsons season 8" label="season eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979779" start="29264" end="29282" title="Homer&amp;#x27;s Enemy" label="Homer&amp;#x27;s Enemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15455690" start="29974" end="29992" title="Paul Cantor" label="Paul Arthur Cantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q221986" start="30414" end="30430" title="The Sunday Times" label="The Sunday Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409224" start="30741" end="30751" title="D&amp;#x27;oh!" label="D&amp;#x27;oh!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216882" start="30961" end="30979" title="The Tracey Ullman Show" label="Tracey Ullman Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q963194" start="31178" end="31193" title="James Finlayson (actor)" label="Jimmy Finlayson"/>
<link wikidata="Q33497" start="31245" end="31261" title="Laurel and Hardy" label="Laurel and Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305924" start="31302" end="31313" title="minced oath" label="minced oath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513117" start="31345" end="31349" title="Damnation" label="Damn"/>
<link wikidata="Q43994" start="31357" end="31370" title="Matt Groening" label="Matt Groening"/>
<link wikidata="Q727156" start="31615" end="31640" title="The Krusty the Clown Show" label="The Krusty the Clown Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q753507" start="31723" end="31756" title="Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire" label="Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115311" start="31813" end="31849" title="Oxford Dictionary of English" label="The New Oxford Dictionary of English"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="32026" end="32051" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109582" start="32356" end="32363" title="TV Land" label="TV Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755795" start="32470" end="32505" title="The Oxford Dictionary of Quotations" label="The Oxford Dictionary of Quotations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203942" start="32678" end="32694" title="Burns&amp;#x27; Heir" label="Burns&amp;#x27; Heir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458629" start="32702" end="32713" title="The Simpsons season 5" label="season five"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356837" start="32898" end="32920" title="Eight Misbehavin&amp;#x27;" label="Eight Misbehavin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670788" start="32922" end="32931" title="The Simpsons season 11" label="season 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722252" start="33430" end="33446" title="The Chattanoogan" label="The Chattanoogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q359678" start="33508" end="33524" title="bobblehead" label="bobblehead dolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q519930" start="33562" end="33570" title="Chia Pet" label="Chia Pet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="33685" end="33689" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q28208702" start="33691" end="33704" title="1-800-COLLECT" label="1-800-COLLECT"/>
<link wikidata="Q177054" start="33706" end="33717" title="Burger King" label="Burger King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018081" start="33719" end="33731" title="Butterfinger" label="Butterfinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022438" start="33733" end="33743" title="C.C. Lemon" label="C.C. Lemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089932" start="33745" end="33766" title="Church&amp;#x27;s Chicken" label="Church&amp;#x27;s Chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q839466" start="33768" end="33787" title="Domino&amp;#x27;s Pizza" label="Domino&amp;#x27;s Pizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="33789" end="33794" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q524757" start="33796" end="33818" title="KFC" label="Kentucky Fried Chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502859" start="33820" end="33830" title="Ramada" label="Ramada Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q244457" start="33832" end="33838" title="Subway (restaurant)" label="Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524184" start="33843" end="33863" title="T.G.I. Friday&amp;#x27;s" label="T.G.I. Friday&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q489921" start="33893" end="33903" title="MasterCard" label="MasterCard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33910" end="33919" title="MasterCard#Advertising" label="Priceless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049630" start="33955" end="33973" title="Super Bowl XXXVIII" label="Super Bowl XXXVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q856897" start="33984" end="33992" title="Kellogg Company" label="Kelloggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q27731" start="34135" end="34163" title="automotive navigation system" label="automotive navigation system"/>
<link wikidata="Q682144" start="34178" end="34184" title="TomTom" label="TomTom"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="34241" end="34244" title="Global Positioning System" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="34465" end="34493" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458013" start="34934" end="34970" title="List of The Simpsons video games" label="&amp;quot;The Simpsons&amp;quot; video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139044" start="35005" end="35022" title="The Simpsons Game" label="The Simpsons Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909460" start="35075" end="35087" title="toys-to-life" label="toys-to-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q19789277" start="35105" end="35120" title="Lego Dimensions" label="Lego Dimensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986112" start="35395" end="35425" title="El Viaje Misterioso de Nuestro Jomer (The Mysterious Voyage of Homer)" label="The Mysterious Voyage of Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2217478" start="35504" end="35531" title="List of The Simpsons comics" label="&amp;quot;Simpsons Comics&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462327" start="35629" end="35646" title="The Simpsons Ride" label="The Simpsons Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880820" start="35668" end="35693" title="Universal Studios Florida" label="Universal Studios Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337576" start="35698" end="35707" title="Universal Studios Hollywood" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q37312" start="35965" end="35969" title="IMDb" label="IMDb"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64073" wikidata="Q7012596" url="?curid=64073" title="New World syndrome">
<text>New World syndrome is a set of non-communicable diseases brought on by consumption of junk food and a sedentary lifestyle, especially common to indigenous peoples of the Americas, Oceania, and circumpolar peoples. It is characterized by obesity, heart disease, diabetes, hypertension, and shortened life span.

==Causes==
New World syndrome is linked to a change from a traditional diet and exercise to a Western diet and a sedentary lifestyle. Traditional occupations of indigenous people—such as fishing, farming, and hunting—tended to involve constant activity, whereas modern office jobs do not. The introduction of modern transportation such as automobiles also decreased physical exertion. Meanwhile, Western foods which are rich in fat, salt, sugar, and refined starches are also imported into countries. The amount of carbohydrates in diets increases.

==Diagnosis==
The diagnosis does not require specific criteria. Obesity is often followed by its complications like hyperlipidemia, hypertension, and cardiac diseases.

==See also==
* Alcohol and Native Americans
* Diabetes in Indigenous Australians
* Genetics of obesity
* Human genetic variation
* Indigenous health in Australia
* Metabolic syndrome
* Native American health
* Obesity in the Pacific
* Thrifty gene hypothesis

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7012596" start="0" end="18" title="New World syndrome" label="New World syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137154" start="31" end="55" title="non-communicable disease" label="non-communicable disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q851384" start="86" end="95" title="junk food" label="junk food"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349358" start="102" end="121" title="sedentary lifestyle" label="sedentary lifestyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="144" end="178" title="indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="indigenous peoples of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q142425" start="180" end="187" title="Indigenous peoples of Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987120" start="193" end="212" title="circumpolar peoples" label="circumpolar peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="237" end="244" title="obesity" label="obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="246" end="259" title="heart disease" label="heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="261" end="269" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="271" end="283" title="hypertension" label="hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="299" end="308" title="life expectancy" label="life span"/>
<link wikidata="Q474191" start="370" end="386" title="traditional diet" label="traditional diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q219067" start="391" end="399" title="physical exercise" label="exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988517" start="405" end="417" title="Western diet" label="Western diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346149" start="958" end="971" title="Complication (medicine)" label="complications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079120" start="977" end="991" title="hyperlipidemia" label="hyperlipidemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744115" start="1045" end="1073" title="Alcohol and Native Americans" label="Alcohol and Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q22090617" start="1076" end="1110" title="Diabetes in Indigenous Australians" label="Diabetes in Indigenous Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532952" start="1113" end="1132" title="Genetics of obesity" label="Genetics of obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502105" start="1135" end="1158" title="Human genetic variation" label="Human genetic variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150995" start="1161" end="1191" title="Indigenous health in Australia" label="Indigenous health in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q657193" start="1194" end="1212" title="Metabolic syndrome" label="Metabolic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q109570620" start="1215" end="1237" title="Native American health" label="Native American health"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074868" start="1240" end="1262" title="Obesity in the Pacific" label="Obesity in the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q3759725" start="1265" end="1288" title="Thrifty gene hypothesis" label="Thrifty gene hypothesis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64081" wikidata="Q2075244" url="?curid=64081" title="Mergenthaler Linotype Company">
<text>The Mergenthaler Linotype Company was a company founded in the United States in 1886 to market the Linotype machine (), a system to cast metal type in lines (linecaster) invented by Ottmar Mergenthaler. It became the world&#x27;s leading manufacturer of book and newspaper typesetting equipment; outside North America, its only serious challenger for book typesetting was the Anglo-American Monotype Corporation. 

Starting in 1960, the Mergenthaler Linotype Company became a major supplier of phototypesetting equipment which included laser typesetters, typefonts, scanners, typesetting computers. 

In 1987, the US-based Mergenthaler Linotype Company became part of the German Linotype-Hell AG; in the US the company name changed to Linotype Co. In 1996, the German Linotype-Hell AG was taken over by the German printing machine company Heidelberger Druckmaschinen AG. A separate business, Linotype Library GmbH was established to manage the digital assets. 

In 2005, Linotype Library GmbH shortened its name to Linotype GmbH, and in 2007, Linotype GmbH was acquired by Monotype Imaging Holdings, Inc., the parent of Monotype Imaging, Inc. and others.

Monotype announced in August 2023 that it was discontinuing Linotype.com, effectively closing the business. 

==Founding==

The invention of a machine to replace the labor-intensive task of setting type by hand had been tackled by many inventors during the 19th century. The most time consumed was not in creating the text, but in returning the characters to their proper position for future use. Mergenthaler solved this problem by placing a type mold for a letter on the side of a specially keyed matrix (with multiple matrix/molds available for any given letter). The linotype operator would type in a line of text. The machine would drop each matrix with its mold into place, assembling the matrices into a line of text that was needed. Hot lead alloy was then forced into the molds of matrices, creating the fresh line of type. 

The linotype operator would then go on to type in the next line. Multiple lines would be stacked into blocks, sometimes paragraphs, to be set in place in the proper column of the page layout. Meanwhile, back inside the linotype machine, the matrices used for a line 
would progress through the machine, where the special keying system on one end of the matrix, unique for each character, would allow the matrix to drop back only into the correct storage slot, ready for the next use. Another benefit of this overall process was that each edition of the paper was created from a fresh casting of metal, thus avoiding problems of type wear. 

Another problem Mergenthaler solved was in justifying the type, or ensuring that in a column of print, there were flush margins on the left and right. Hand compositors had previously done this by using spaces of different widths in a line, to ensure that the lines all ended at the same point. Mergenthaler adapted the &quot;space band&quot; (patented by J. W. Schuckers), a device consisting of two wedges of metal connected loosely. When a line of type was being justified, all the space band wedges would be pushed up in two passes to spread the line out to the full measure being cast. The space bands were stored for reuse in a different location from the matrices.

==History==
The invention of the first working Linotype was a long, arduous and intricate process that involved many players and the creation of a long succession of companies.

In 1877, the National Printing Company was organized under the laws of the District of Columbia and Lewis Clephane, the brother of James O. Clephane, was elected president. After the first successful trial of the Linotype in October, 1885, the Mergenthaler Printing Company was established to raise fresh capital from the shareholders of the National Printing Company. Finally, The Mergenthaler Linotype Company was formed in New York in 1895. Philip Tell Dodge served as its first president until 1928 when his son Norman Dodge replaced him. The Mergenthaler Linotype Company of New York, the organization&#x27;s newest iteration, was launched with $5,000,000 capital (in 1895 dollars), and $10,000,000 (in 1895 dollars) in stock holdings across 333 investors. 

In 1889 The Linotype Company, a British offshoot of the firm, was formed by Joseph Lawrence, publisher of &quot;The Railway Magazine&quot;. In 1899, a new factory in Broadheath, Altrincham was opened. In 1903, the British company merged with Machinery Trust to form Linotype &amp; Machinery Ltd.

Mergenthaler Linotype dominated the printing industry through the twentieth century. The machines were so well designed, major parts remained virtually unchanged for nearly 100 years. A particularly notable success was Linotype&#x27;s Legibility Group of typefaces, used by most of the world&#x27;s (Latin-alphabet) newspapers for much of the twentieth century. The ruggedness of the Linotype system, which cast lines as solid bars of type, aided this dominance.

Linotype Company was merged with Mergenthaler acquisition K. S. Paul to form Linotype-Paul Ltd which developed a range of Linotron phototypesetters using K. S. Paul&#x27;s cathode ray tube technology.
The company, as so many in the printing industry, endured a complex post-war history, during which printing technology went through two revolutions — first moving to phototypesetting, then to digital.

During the 1950s, the Davidson Corporation, which manufactured a series of small offset presses, was a subsidiary of Linotype. This was later sold to American Type Founders and operated under the name ATF-Davidson.

Through a series of mergers and reorganizations, the business of Mergenthaler Linotype Company ultimately vested in Linotype-Hell AG, a German company. In April 1997, Linotype-Hell AG was acquired by Heidelberger Druckmaschinen AG. The following month certain divisions of Linotype-Hell AG were spun off into new companies, one of which was &quot;Linotype Library GmbH&quot; with headquarters at Bad Homburg vor der Höhe. This new company was responsible solely for the acquisition, creation and distribution of digital fonts and related software. This spin-off effectively divorced the company&#x27;s font software business from the older typesetting business which was retained by Heidelberg. 

In 2005, Linotype Library GmbH shortened its name to Linotype GmbH, and in 2007, Linotype GmbH was acquired by Monotype Imaging Holdings, Inc., the parent of Monotype Imaging, Inc. and others.

In August 2023, Monotype announced that it would be closing the Linotype e-commerce platform, together with FontShop and Fonts.com. Monotype stated that it could no longer maintain its desired level of quality across the platforms and would instead be focussing its efforts on developing its MyFonts site. The company pledged to preserve Linotype’s history and legacy online with stories and content.

==Typefaces==
The typefaces in the Linotype type library are the artwork of some of the most famous typeface designers of the 20th century. The library contains such famous trademarked typefaces as Palatino and Optima by Hermann Zapf; Frutiger, Avenir and Univers by Adrian Frutiger; and Helvetica by Max Miedinger and Eduard Hoffman. Linotype GmbH frequently brings out new designs from both established and new type designers. Linotype had also introduced FontExplorer X for Mac OS X. It was a well-reviewed font manager that allows users to browse and purchase new fonts within the program — a business model similar to that used by iTunes and the iTunes Store.

The Arabic typeface Simplified Arabic, later called Yakout for the 13th-century Islamic calligrapher Yaqut al-Musta&#x27;simi, was released by Linotype in 1956, and remains one of the most common Arabic typefaces for books and newspapers.

==See also==
*Hot-metal typesetting
*Chauncey Hawley Griffith

==References==
==Sources==
* 

==Further reading==
*Manfred Raether: „Linotype – Chronik eines Firmennamens“; E-Book, self-published, Schöneck 2009
*Basil Kahan: Ottmar Mergenthaler – The Man and his Machine; Oak Knoll Press, New Castle (DE), 2000 – 
*1919 new model machine, acquired by the Abbeville Herald (Alabama) for .

==External links==
*&quot;Linotype – Chronik eines Firmennamens&quot; (&quot;Linotype – Chronologie of a Company Name&quot;): e-book covering the history of Linotype, starting in 1886
*Typophile: Linotype Article
*Metal Type — For Those who Remember Hot Metal Typesetting
*Linotypesetting - Hot Metal Typesetting for Hobbyists and the Trade
*The Linotype &amp; Machinery Co. Ltd - information sheet on the UK company from the Museum of Science and Industry (Manchester)
*Chauncey Hawley Griffith papers at the University of Kentucky (Mergenthaler&#x27;s Vice President for Typographic Development)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2075244" start="4" end="33" title="Mergenthaler Linotype Company" label="Mergenthaler Linotype Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q694899" start="99" end="115" title="Linotype machine" label="Linotype machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q213701" start="182" end="201" title="Ottmar Mergenthaler" label="Ottmar Mergenthaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="304" end="317" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583606" start="391" end="411" title="Monotype Corporation" label="Monotype Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q697106" start="839" end="869" title="Heidelberger Druckmaschinen" label="Heidelberger Druckmaschinen AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583606" start="1073" end="1104" title="Monotype Imaging" label="Monotype Imaging Holdings, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q184894" start="2675" end="2685" title="justification (typesetting)" label="justifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q116688359" start="3582" end="3596" title="Lewis Clephane" label="Lewis Clephane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6140546" start="3613" end="3630" title="James O. Clephane" label="James O. Clephane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075244" start="4029" end="4058" title="Mergenthaler Linotype Company" label="Mergenthaler Linotype Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q13529965" start="4322" end="4337" title="Joseph Lawrence (British politician)" label="Joseph Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071668" start="4358" end="4378" title="The Railway Magazine" label="The Railway Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972196" start="4412" end="4422" title="Broadheath, Greater Manchester" label="Broadheath"/>
<link wikidata="Q445058" start="4424" end="4434" title="Altrincham" label="Altrincham"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387602" start="4778" end="4794" title="Legibility Group" label="Legibility Group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5065" end="5075" title="K. S. Paul" label="K. S. Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5276" end="5284" title="World War II" label="post-war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149547" start="5374" end="5390" title="phototypesetting" label="phototypesetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q17451" start="5400" end="5407" title="typeface" label="digital"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5432" end="5452" title="Davidson Corporation" label="Davidson Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843050" start="5560" end="5582" title="American Type Founders" label="American Type Founders"/>
<link wikidata="Q697106" start="5826" end="5856" title="Heidelberger Druckmaschinen" label="Heidelberger Druckmaschinen AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165" start="6022" end="6046" title="Bad Homburg vor der Höhe" label="Bad Homburg vor der Höhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583606" start="6434" end="6465" title="Monotype Imaging" label="Monotype Imaging Holdings, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1389575" start="6625" end="6633" title="FontShop International" label="FontShop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331123" start="6809" end="6816" title="MyFonts" label="MyFonts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093499" start="7117" end="7125" title="Palatino" label="Palatino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091875" start="7130" end="7136" title="Optima" label="Optima"/>
<link wikidata="Q60302" start="7140" end="7152" title="Hermann Zapf" label="Hermann Zapf"/>
<link wikidata="Q915886" start="7154" end="7162" title="Frutiger (typeface)" label="Frutiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q505337" start="7164" end="7170" title="Avenir (typeface)" label="Avenir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065215" start="7175" end="7182" title="Univers" label="Univers"/>
<link wikidata="Q123621" start="7186" end="7201" title="Adrian Frutiger" label="Adrian Frutiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q504745" start="7207" end="7216" title="Helvetica" label="Helvetica"/>
<link wikidata="Q118270" start="7220" end="7233" title="Max Miedinger" label="Max Miedinger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7377" end="7391" title="FontExplorer X" label="FontExplorer X"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="7396" end="7404" title="Mac OS X" label="Mac OS X"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465090" start="7429" end="7441" title="Font-management program" label="font manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q9589" start="7555" end="7561" title="iTunes" label="iTunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9593" start="7570" end="7582" title="iTunes Store" label="iTunes Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047147" start="7605" end="7622" title="Simplified Arabic" label="Simplified Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q656831" start="7665" end="7685" title="Islamic calligraphy" label="Islamic calligrapher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915617" start="7686" end="7710" title="Yaqut al-Musta&amp;#x27;simi" label="Yaqut al-Musta&amp;#x27;simi"/>
<link wikidata="Q883672" start="7839" end="7860" title="Hot-metal typesetting" label="Hot-metal typesetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q361826" start="7862" end="7886" title="Chauncey H. Griffith" label="Chauncey Hawley Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638616" start="8640" end="8683" title="Museum of Science and Industry (Manchester)" label="Museum of Science and Industry (Manchester)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64083" wikidata="Q851384" url="?curid=64083" title="Junk food">
<text>&quot;Junk food&quot; is a term used to describe food that is high in calories from macronutrients such as sugar and fat, and often also high in sodium, making it hyperpalatable, and low in dietary fiber, protein, or micronutrients such as vitamins and minerals. It is also known as &quot;high in fat, salt and sugar food&quot; (HFSS food). The term &quot;junk food&quot; is a pejorative dating back to the 1950s.

Precise definitions vary by purpose and over time. Some high-protein foods, like meat prepared with saturated fat, may be considered junk food. Fast food and fast-food restaurants are often equated with junk food, although fast foods cannot be categorically described as junk food. Candy, soft drinks, and highly processed foods such as certain breakfast cereals, are generally included in the junk food category; much of it is ultra-processed food.

Concerns about the negative health effects resulting from a junk food-heavy diet, especially obesity, have resulted in public health awareness campaigns, and restrictions on advertising and sale in several countries. Current studies indicate that a diet high in junk food can increase the risk of depression, digestive issues, heart disease and stroke, type 2 diabetes, cancer, and early death.

==Etymology==
The term &quot;junk food&quot; dates back at least to the early 1950s, although its coinage has been credited to Michael F. Jacobson of the Center for Science in the Public Interest, in 1972. In 1952, the phrase appeared in a headline in the Lima, Ohio, &quot;News&quot;, Junk Foods&#x27; Cause Serious Malnutrition&quot;, over a reprint of a 1948 article from the Ogden, Utah, &quot;Standard-Examiner&quot;, originally titled, &quot;Dr. Brady&#x27;s Health Column: More Junk Than Food&quot;. In the article, Dr. Brady writes, &quot;What Mrs. H calls &#x27;junk&#x27; I call cheat food. That is anything made principally of (1) white flour and or (2) refined white sugar or syrup. For example, white bread, crackers, cake, candy, ice cream soda, chocolate malted, sundaes, sweetened carbonated beverages.&quot; The term &quot;cheat food&quot; can be traced back in newspaper mentions to at least 1916.

==Definitions==
In Andrew F. Smith&#x27;s &quot;Encyclopedia of Junk Food and Fast Food&quot;, junk food is defined as &quot;those commercial products, including candy, bakery goods, ice cream, salty snacks and soft drinks, which have little or no nutritional value but do have plenty of calories, salt, and fats. While not all fast foods are junk foods, many of them are. Fast foods are ready-to-eat foods served promptly after ordering. Some fast foods are high in calories and low in nutritional value, while other fast foods, such as salads, may be low in calories and high in nutritional value.&quot;

Junk food provides empty calories, supplying little or none of the protein, vitamins, or minerals required for a nutritious diet. Some foods, such as hamburgers, and tacos, can be considered either healthy or junk food, depending on their ingredients and preparation methods. The more highly processed items usually fall under the junk food category, including breakfast cereals that are mostly sugar or high fructose corn syrup and white flour or milled corn.

Junk food can be defined through nutrient profiling. The United Kingdom&#x27;s Advertising Standards Authority, the self-regulatory agency for the UK ad industry, takes this approach. Foods are scored for &quot;A&quot; nutrients (energy, saturated fat, total sugar, and sodium) and &quot;C&quot; nutrients (fruit, vegetable, and nut content, fiber, and protein). The difference between A and C scores determines whether a food or beverage is categorized as HFSS (high in fat, salt and sugar; a term synonymous with &quot;junk food&quot;). Defining junk food as highly processed or ultra-processed food mainly considers the level of processing rather than nutrient profiles.

In &quot;Panic Nation: Unpicking the Myths We&#x27;re Told About Food and Health&quot;, the junk food label is described as nutritionally meaningless: food is food, and if there is zero nutritional value, then it is not a food. Co-editor Vincent Marks explains, &quot;To label a food as &#x27;junk&#x27; is just another way of saying, &#x27;I disapprove of it.&#x27; There are bad diets – that is, bad mixtures and quantities of food – but there are no &#x27;bad foods&#x27; except those that have become bad through contamination or deterioration.&quot;

==History==
According to an article in the &quot;New York Times&quot;, &quot;Let Us Now Praise the Great Men of Junk Food&quot;, &quot;The history of junk food is a largely American tale: It has been around for hundreds of years, in many parts of the world, but no one has done a better job inventing so many varieties of it, branding it, mass-producing it, making people rich off it and, of course, eating it.&quot; Cracker Jack, the candy-coated popcorn-and-peanuts confection, is credited as the first popular name-brand junk food; it was created in Chicago, registered in 1896, and became the best-selling candy in the world 20 years later.

==Popularity and appeal==
Junk food in its various forms is an integral part of modern popular culture. In the US, annual fast food sales are in the area of $160 billion, compared to supermarket sales of $620 billion (a figure which also includes junk food in the form of convenience foods, snack foods, and candy). In 1976, &quot;Junk Food Junkie&quot;, a US top 10 pop song, described a junk food addict who pretends to follow a healthy diet by day, while at night gorging on Hostess Twinkies and Fritos corn chips, McDonald&#x27;s and KFC. Thirty-six years later, &quot;Time&quot; placed the Twinkie at #1 in an article titled, &quot;Top 10 Iconic Junk Foods&quot;: &quot;Not only...a mainstay on our supermarket shelves and in our bellies, they&#x27;ve been a staple in our popular culture and, above all, in our hearts. Often criticized for its lack of any nutritional value whatsoever, the Twinkie has managed to persevere as a cultural and gastronomical icon.&quot;

America also celebrates an annual National Junk Food Day on July 21. Origins are unclear; it is one of around 175 US food and drink days, most created by &quot;people who want to sell more food&quot;, at times aided by elected officials at the request of a trade association or commodity group. &quot;In honor of the day,&quot; &quot;Time&quot; in 2014 published, &quot;5 Crazy Junk Food Combinations&quot;. Headlines from other national and local media coverage include: &quot;Celebrate National Junk Food Day With... Beer-Flavored Oreos?&quot; (MTV); &quot;National Junk Food Day: Pick your favorite unhealthy treats in this poll&quot; (Baltimore); &quot;Celebrities&#x27; favorite junk food&quot; (Los Angeles); &quot;A Nutritionist&#x27;s Guide to National Junk Food Day&quot; with &quot;Rules for Splurging&quot; (&quot;Huffington Post&quot;); and &quot;It&#x27;s National Junk Food Day: Got snacks?&quot; (Kansas City).

As for the source of junk food&#x27;s appeal, there is no definitive scientific answer; both physiological and psychological factors are cited. Food manufacturers spend billions of dollars on research and development to create flavor profiles that trigger the human affinity for sugar, salt, and fat. Consumption results in pleasurable, likely addictive, effects on the brain. At the same time, massive marketing efforts are deployed, creating powerful brand loyalties that studies have shown can trump taste.

It is well-established that the poor eat more junk food overall than the more affluent, but the reasons for this are unclear. Few studies have focused on variations in food perception according to socio-economic status (SES); some studies that have differentiated based on SES suggest that the economically challenged do not perceive healthy food much differently than any other population segment. Recent research into scarcity, combining behavioral science and economics, suggests that, faced with extreme economic uncertainty, where even the next meal may not be a sure thing, judgment is impaired and the drive is to the instant gratification of junk food, rather than to make the necessary investment in the longer-term benefits of a healthier diet.

== Health effects ==
When junk food is consumed very often, the excess fat, simple carbohydrates, and processed sugar found in junk food contribute to an increased risk of obesity, cardiovascular disease, and many other chronic health conditions. A case study on the consumption of fast foods in Ghana suggested a direct correlation between consumption of junk food and obesity rates. The report asserts that obesity resulted in related complex health concerns such as an upsurge in the rate of heart attacks. Studies reveal that as early as the age of 30, arteries could begin clogging and lay the groundwork for future heart attacks. Consumers also tend to eat too much in one sitting, and those who have satisfied their appetite with junk food are less likely to eat healthy foods like fruit or vegetables.

Testing on rats has indicated negative effects of junk food that may manifest likewise in people. A Scripps Research Institute study in 2008 suggested that junk food consumption alters brain activity in a manner similar to addictive drugs like cocaine and heroin. After many weeks with unlimited access to junk food, the pleasure centers of rat brains became desensitized, requiring more food for pleasure; after the junk food was taken away and replaced with a healthy diet, the rats starved for two weeks instead of eating nutritious fare. A 2007 study in the &quot;British Journal of Nutrition&quot; found that female rats who eat junk food during pregnancy increased the likelihood of unhealthy eating habits in their offspring.

Other research has been done on the impact of sugary foods on human emotional health and has suggested that consuming junk food can negatively impact energy levels and emotional well-being.

In a study published in the &quot;European Journal of Clinical Nutrition&quot;, the frequency of consumption of 57 foods/drinks of 4,000 children at the age of four and a half were collected by maternal report. At age seven, the 4,000 children were given the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ), with five scales: hyperactivity, conduct problems, peer problems, emotional symptoms, and pro-social behavior. A one standard deviation increase in junk food was then linked to excessive hyperactivity in 33% of the subjects, leading to the conclusion that children consuming excess junk food at the age of seven are more likely to be in the top third of the hyperactivity scale. There was no significant correlation between junk food and the other scales.

==Anti-junk food measures==
Several countries have taken, or are considering, various forms of legislative action to curb junk food consumption. Eating habits can be influenced by the food environment around us. In 2014, United Nations Special Rapporteur on the right to health, Anand Grover, released his report, &quot;Unhealthy foods, non-communicable diseases and the right to health&quot;, and called for governments to &quot;take measures, such as developing food and nutrition guidelines for healthy diets, regulating marketing and advertising of junk food, adopting consumer-friendly labeling of food products, and establishing accountability mechanisms for violations of the right to health.&quot;

An early, high-profile, and controversial attempt to identify and curb junk food in the American diet was undertaken by the McGovern Committee (United States Senate Select Committee on Nutrition and Human Needs, chaired by Senator George McGovern) between 1968 and 1977. Initially formed to investigate malnutrition and hunger in the US, the committee&#x27;s scope progressively expanded to include environmental conditions that affected eating habits, such as urban decay, then focused on the diet and nutritional habits of the American public. The committee took issue with the use of salt, sugar, and fat in processed foods, noted problems with overeating and the high percentage of ads for junk food on TV, and stated that bad eating habits could be as deadly as smoking. The findings were heavily criticized and rebutted from many directions, including the food industry, the American Medical Association, and the committee itself. In 1977, the committee issued public guidelines under the title, &quot;Dietary Goals for the United States&quot;, which became the predecessor to &quot;Dietary Guidelines for Americans&quot;, published every five years beginning in 1980 by the US Department of Health and Human Services.

=== Comprehensive measures ===
In 2016, Chile became the first country to implement comprehensive nutritional quality measures aimed at consumers, with the Law of Food Labeling and Advertising. The statute mandated front-of-package warning labels, restricted marketing to children, and banned in-school sales of food and drink containing excessive sugar, salt, or saturated fat. 

===Taxation===
To reduce junk food consumption through price control, sin taxes have been implemented. Targeting saturated fat consumption, Denmark introduced the world&#x27;s first fat-food tax in October 2011 by imposing a surcharge on all foods, including those made from natural ingredients, that contain more than 2.3 percent saturated fat, an unpopular measure that lasted a little over a year. Hungary has imposed taxes on foods and beverages high in added sugar, fat, and salt. Norway taxes refined sugar, and Mexico has various excises on unhealthy food. On April 1, 2015, the first fat tax in the US, the Navajo Nation&#x27;s Healthy Diné Nation Act of 2014, mandating a 2% junk food tax, came into effect, covering the Navajo reservation; the Act targeted problems with obesity and diabetes among the Navajo population.

===Banning junk food advertisements===
In mid-2021, the government of the United Kingdom proposed policies that would call for a ban on online advertisements of foods high in fat, salt, and sugar, in addition to an additional ban on advertising such foods on television before 9:00 pm local time. The bans would not affect advertisements that do not directly promote a junk food product, and promoting these products on company webpages and social media accounts would remain permitted. The bans were intended to come into force in 2023, but they will become effective from 1 October, 2025.

In October 2021, the Ministry of Consumer Affairs of Spain, under the leadership of minister Alberto Garzón, announced a ban on the advertising of several categories of junk food to children under 16. Such advertising would be forbidden on television, radio, online, in movie theaters, and in newspapers. Affected foods include candy, energy bars, cookies, cake, juice, energy drinks, and ice cream. The ban is to take effect in 2022.

===Restricting advertising to children===

Junk food that is targeted at children is a contentious issue. In &quot;The Impact of Advertising on Childhood obesity&quot;, the American Psychological Association reports: &quot;Research has found strong associations between increases in advertising for non-nutritious foods and rates of childhood obesity.&quot; Advertising of unhealthy foods to children increases their consumption of the product and positive attitudes (liking or wanting to buy) about the advertised product. Children&#x27;s critical reasoning (the ability to understand what an advertisement is and the aim of advertising to buy the product) is not protective against the impact of advertising, and does not appear to be fully developed during adolescence.

The World Health Organization recommends that governments take action to limit children&#x27;s exposure to food marketing, stating, &quot;Many advertisements promote foods high in fats, sugar, and salt, consumption of which should be limited as part of a healthy diet. ... Food advertising and other forms of marketing have been shown to influence children&#x27;s food preferences, purchasing behaviour and overall dietary behaviour. Marketing has also been associated with an increased risk of overweight and obesity in children. The habits children develop early in life may encourage them to adopt unhealthy dietary practices which persist into adulthood, increasing the likelihood of overweight, obesity and associated health problems such as diabetes and cardiovascular diseases.&quot;

In the United Kingdom, efforts to increasingly limit or eliminate advertising of foods high in sugar, salt, or fat at any time children may be viewing are ongoing. The UK government has been criticized for failing to do enough to stop advertising and promotion of junk food aimed at children. A UK parliamentary select committee recommended that cartoon characters advertising unhealthy food to children should be banned, supermarkets should have to remove unhealthy sweets and snacks from ends of aisles and checkout areas, local authorities should be able to limit the number of fast food outlets in their area, brands associated with unhealthy foods should be banned from sponsoring sports clubs, youth leagues and tournaments, and social media like Facebook should cut down junk food advertising to childrenall are currently just recommendations.

In Australia, a Wollongong University study in 2015 found that junk food sponsors were mentioned over 1,000 times in a single Australian cricket match broadcast, which included ads and branding worn on players&#x27; uniforms and on the scoreboard and pitch. A coalition of Australian obesity, cancer, and diabetes organizations called on Cricket Australia, the sport&#x27;s governing body, to &quot;phase out sponsorships with unhealthy brands&quot;, emphasizing that cricket is a &quot;healthy, family-oriented sport&quot; with children in the audience.

===Restricting sales to minors===
Several states in Mexico banned sales of junk food to minors, starting in August 2020.

==See also==

* Obesity
* Ultra-processed food
* Hyperpalatable food
* Bliss point
* Comfort food
* Nutrient profiling

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q851384" start="6" end="15" title="Junk food" label="Junk food"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70" end="78" title="calorie#Nutrition" label="calories"/>
<link wikidata="Q181394" start="84" end="97" title="macronutrient" label="macronutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="107" end="112" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q127980" start="117" end="120" title="fat" label="fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="145" end="151" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q123051125" start="163" end="177" title="hyperpalatable" label="hyperpalatable"/>
<link wikidata="Q215210" start="190" end="203" title="dietary fiber" label="dietary fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q21296145" start="205" end="212" title="Protein (nutrient)" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q531507" start="217" end="230" title="micronutrient" label="micronutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q34956" start="240" end="247" title="vitamin" label="vitamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189598" start="253" end="261" title="dietary element" label="minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q851384" start="329" end="338" title="Junk food" label="HFSS food"/>
<link wikidata="Q545779" start="377" end="387" title="pejorative" label="pejorative"/>
<link wikidata="Q970537" start="515" end="528" title="saturated fat" label="saturated fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q81799" start="559" end="568" title="Fast food" label="Fast food"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751429" start="573" end="593" title="fast-food restaurant" label="fast-food restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q185583" start="697" end="702" title="Candy" label="Candy"/>
<link wikidata="Q147538" start="704" end="715" title="Soft drink" label="soft drinks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="721" end="743" title="Food processing#Processing levels" label="highly processed foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q768267" start="760" end="777" title="Breakfast cereal" label="breakfast cereals"/>
<link wikidata="Q48931140" start="843" end="863" title="ultra-processed food" label="ultra-processed food"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="959" end="966" title="obesity" label="obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="985" end="998" title="public health" label="public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q21086751" start="999" end="1018" title="awareness campaigns" label="awareness campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="1040" end="1051" title="advertising" label="advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="1193" end="1206" title="heart disease" label="heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="1211" end="1217" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025883" start="1219" end="1234" title="type 2 diabetes" label="type 2 diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927391" start="1389" end="1408" title="Michael F. Jacobson" label="Michael F. Jacobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053605" start="1416" end="1457" title="Center for Science in the Public Interest" label="Center for Science in the Public Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q983974" start="1518" end="1528" title="Lima, Ohio" label="Lima, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q52471" start="1641" end="1652" title="Ogden, Utah" label="Ogden, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q12147" start="1727" end="1733" title="Health" label="Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q36465" start="1904" end="1915" title="white flour" label="white flour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4409456" start="1927" end="1946" title="refined sugar" label="refined white sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501889" start="1970" end="1981" title="white bread" label="white bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q387405" start="2006" end="2020" title="ice cream soda" label="ice cream soda"/>
<link wikidata="Q37159" start="2022" end="2038" title="milkshake" label="chocolate malted"/>
<link wikidata="Q859553" start="2040" end="2046" title="sundae" label="sundae"/>
<link wikidata="Q147538" start="2049" end="2079" title="soft drink" label="sweetened carbonated beverages"/>
<link wikidata="Q185583" start="2341" end="2346" title="candy" label="candy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13233" start="2362" end="2371" title="ice cream" label="ice cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q749316" start="2373" end="2385" title="snack food" label="salty snacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q147538" start="2390" end="2401" title="soft drinks" label="soft drinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075931" start="2427" end="2444" title="nutritional value" label="nutritional value"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775564" start="2805" end="2819" title="empty calories" label="empty calories"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663" start="2936" end="2946" title="hamburgers" label="hamburgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q191655" start="2952" end="2956" title="taco" label="taco"/>
<link wikidata="Q627371" start="3078" end="3087" title="food processing" label="processed"/>
<link wikidata="Q11422173" start="3190" end="3214" title="high fructose corn syrup" label="high fructose corn syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324284" start="3281" end="3299" title="nutrient profiling" label="nutrient profiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686747" start="3327" end="3358" title="Advertising Standards Authority (United Kingdom)" label="Advertising Standards Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q536390" start="3364" end="3386" title="self-regulatory organisation" label="self-regulatory agency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3809" end="3825" title="Food processing#Processing levels" label="highly processed"/>
<link wikidata="Q48931140" start="3829" end="3844" title="Ultra-processed food" label="ultra-processed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131075" start="3932" end="4003" title="Panic Nation" label="Panic Nation: Unpicking the Myths We&amp;#x27;re Told About Food and Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q455721" start="4896" end="4908" title="Cracker Jack" label="Cracker Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q13030962" start="5397" end="5413" title="convenience food" label="convenience food"/>
<link wikidata="Q6313802" start="5456" end="5472" title="Junk Food Junkie" label="Junk Food Junkie"/>
<link wikidata="Q525586" start="5603" end="5619" title="Hostess Twinkies" label="Hostess Twinkies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504809" start="5624" end="5630" title="Fritos" label="Fritos"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="5643" end="5658" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q524757" start="5663" end="5666" title="Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC)" label="KFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="5698" end="5702" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="6646" end="6649" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q18049522" start="6924" end="6939" title="Huffington Post" label="Huffington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="7218" end="7242" title="research and development" label="research and development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515895" start="7757" end="7760" title="Socioeconomic status" label="SES"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="8376" end="8389" title="Carbohydrate" label="carbohydrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="8465" end="8472" title="obesity" label="obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="8474" end="8496" title="cardiovascular disease" label="cardiovascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="9082" end="9087" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="9091" end="9101" title="vegetables" label="vegetables"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764992" start="9104" end="9119" title="Animal testing on rodents" label="Testing on rats"/>
<link wikidata="Q793867" start="9204" end="9230" title="Scripps Research Institute" label="Scripps Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="9348" end="9355" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="9360" end="9366" title="heroin" label="heroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5906358" start="9566" end="9578" title="healthy diet" label="healthy diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970206" start="9672" end="9700" title="British Journal of Nutrition" label="British Journal of Nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q15756702" start="10063" end="10101" title="European Journal of Clinical Nutrition" label="European Journal of Clinical Nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623268" start="10288" end="10328" title="Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire" label="Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="10354" end="10367" title="Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder" label="hyperactivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q159375" start="10453" end="10471" title="standard deviation" label="standard deviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15143900" start="11014" end="11047" title="United Nations Special Rapporteur" label="United Nations Special Rapporteur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919435" start="11055" end="11070" title="right to health" label="right to health"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751251" start="11072" end="11084" title="Anand Grover" label="Anand Grover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798912" start="11428" end="11442" title="accountability" label="accountability"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919435" start="11476" end="11491" title="right to health" label="right to health"/>
<link wikidata="Q6100428" start="11644" end="11710" title="United States Senate Select Committee on Nutrition and Human Needs" label="United States Senate Select Committee on Nutrition and Human Needs"/>
<link wikidata="Q331742" start="11731" end="11746" title="George McGovern" label="George McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039238" start="11961" end="11972" title="urban decay" label="urban decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q465697" start="12381" end="12409" title="American Medical Association" label="American Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6100428" start="12508" end="12543" title="Dietary Goals for the United States" label="Dietary Goals for the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q55609558" start="12589" end="12621" title="Dietary Guidelines for Americans" label="Dietary Guidelines for Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q942326" start="12681" end="12723" title="US Department of Health and Human Services" label="US Department of Health and Human Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="12766" end="12771" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043055" start="13177" end="13184" title="sin tax" label="sin tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q970537" start="13220" end="13233" title="saturated fat" label="saturated fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="13247" end="13254" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="13508" end="13515" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011065" start="13565" end="13576" title="added sugar" label="added sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326227" start="13699" end="13706" title="fat tax" label="fat tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783171" start="13722" end="13735" title="Navajo Nation" label="Navajo Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="14013" end="14027" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q127980" start="14114" end="14117" title="fat" label="fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11254" start="14119" end="14123" title="salt" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="14129" end="14134" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q81811743" start="14552" end="14580" title="Ministry of Consumer Affairs (Spain)" label="Ministry of Consumer Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="14584" end="14589" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327963" start="14624" end="14638" title="Alberto Garzón" label="Alberto Garzón"/>
<link wikidata="Q41253" start="14801" end="14814" title="movie theater" label="movie theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q185583" start="14859" end="14864" title="candy" label="candy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699821" start="14866" end="14876" title="energy bar" label="energy bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13266" start="14879" end="14885" title="cookie" label="cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q13276" start="14888" end="14892" title="cake" label="cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q8492" start="14894" end="14899" title="juice" label="juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q215754" start="14901" end="14913" title="energy drink" label="energy drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q13233" start="14920" end="14929" title="ice cream" label="ice cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686773" start="15028" end="15048" title="Advertising to children" label="targeted at children"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241451" start="15111" end="15128" title="Childhood obesity" label="Childhood obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q843894" start="15507" end="15525" title="Critical thinking" label="critical reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="15745" end="15770" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447672" start="16828" end="16861" title="Select committee (United Kingdom)" label="UK parliamentary select committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="17286" end="17294" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686773" start="17321" end="17344" title="advertising to children" label="advertising to children"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350021" start="17401" end="17422" title="Wollongong University" label="Wollongong University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="17522" end="17529" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002584" start="17723" end="17740" title="Cricket Australia" label="Cricket Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="18079" end="18086" title="Obesity" label="Obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q48931140" start="18089" end="18109" title="Ultra-processed food" label="Ultra-processed food"/>
<link wikidata="Q123051125" start="18112" end="18131" title="Hyperpalatable food" label="Hyperpalatable food"/>
<link wikidata="Q25203169" start="18134" end="18145" title="Bliss point (food)" label="Bliss point"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887327" start="18148" end="18160" title="Comfort food" label="Comfort food"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324284" start="18163" end="18181" title="Nutrient profiling" label="Nutrient profiling"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64085" wikidata="Q183440" url="?curid=64085" title="Caramel">
<text>Caramel ( or ) is a confectionery product made by heating a range of sugars. It is used as a flavoring in puddings and desserts, as a filling in bonbons or candy bars, or as a topping for ice cream and custard.

The process of caramelization consists of heating sugar slowly to around . As the sugar heats, the molecules break down and re-form into compounds with a characteristic colour and flavour.

A variety of candies, desserts, toppings, and confections are made with caramel: brittles, nougats, pralines, flan, crème brûlée, crème caramel, and caramel apples. Ice creams sometimes are flavored with or contain swirls of caramel.

==Etymology==

The English word comes from French &#x27;, borrowed from Spanish (18th century), itself possibly from Portuguese &#x27;. Most likely that comes from Late Latin &#x27; &#x27;sugar cane&#x27;, a diminutive of &#x27;reed, cane&#x27;, itself from Greek . Less likely, it comes from Medieval Latin &#x27;, from &#x27;cane&#x27; + &#x27;honey&#x27;. Finally, some dictionaries connect it to Arabic &#x27;ball of sweet&#x27;.

==Sauce==
Caramel sauce is made by mixing caramelized sugar with cream. Depending on the intended application, additional ingredients such as butter, fruit purees, liquors, or vanilla can be used. Caramel sauce is used in a range of desserts, especially as a topping for ice cream. When it is used for crème caramel or flan, it is known as clear caramel and only contains caramelized sugar and water. Butterscotch sauce is made with brown sugar, butter, and cream. Traditionally, butterscotch is a hard candy more in line with a toffee.

==Candy==

Caramel candy, or &quot;caramels&quot;, and sometimes called &quot;toffee&quot; (though this also refers to other types of candy), is a soft, dense, chewy candy made by boiling a mixture of milk or cream, sugar(s), glucose, butter, and vanilla (or vanilla flavoring). The sugar and glucose are combined and heated to reach ; the cream and butter are then added which cools the mixture. The mixture is then stirred and reheated until it reaches . Upon completion of cooking, vanilla or any additional flavorings and salt are added. Adding the vanilla or flavorings earlier would result in them burning off at the high temperatures. Adding salt earlier in the process would result in inverting the sugars as they cooked.

Alternatively, all ingredients may be cooked together. In this procedure, the mixture is not heated above the firm ball stage (), so that caramelization of the milk occurs. This temperature is not high enough to caramelize sugar and this type of candy is often called milk caramel or cream caramel. Even though caramel candy is sometimes called &quot;toffee&quot; and is also compared with butterscotch, there is a difference. While toffee and butterscotch are more closely related than caramel, they do have most of the same ingredients. However, toffee and butterscotch use molasses or brown sugar while caramel uses white sugar. They are also cooked at different temperatures and they each have their own cooking techniques that make them unique in taste and shape.

==Salting==
Salted caramel was created in 1977 by French pastry chef Henri Le Roux in Quiberon, Brittany, in the form of a salted butter caramel with crushed nuts (&quot;caramel au beurre salé&quot;), using Breton &quot;demi-sel&quot; butter. It was named the &quot;Best confectionery in France&quot; (&#x27;) at the Paris &#x27; in 1980. Le Roux registered the trademark &quot;CBS&quot; (caramel au beurre salé) the year after.

It became a huge hit throughout France and other French-speaking European countries (notably Belgium and Switzerland which already had a tradition for fine chocolate and confectionery) and for years French, Belgian and Swiss children added it to their , a meal eaten around 4 pm in order to restore their energy after school. usually consists of bread with jam or caramel spread, croissants or pain au chocolat, fruit and hot chocolate.

In the late 1990s, Parisian pastry chef Pierre Hermé introduced his salted butter and caramel macarons and, by 2000, high-end chefs started adding a bit of salt to caramel and chocolate dishes. In 2008 it entered the mass market, when Häagen-Dazs and Starbucks started selling it.

Originally used in desserts, the confection has seen wide use elsewhere, including in hot chocolate and spirits such as vodka. Its popularity may come from its effects on the reward systems of the human brain, resulting in &quot;hedonic escalation&quot;.

==Colouring==

Caramel colouring, a dark, bitter liquid, is the highly concentrated product of near total caramelization, used commercially as food and beverage colouring, e.g., in cola.

==Chemistry==

Caramelization is the removal of water from a sugar, proceeding to isomerization and polymerization of the sugars into various high-molecular-weight compounds. Compounds such as difructose anhydride may be created from the monosaccharides after water loss. Fragmentation reactions result in low-molecular-weight compounds that may be volatile and may contribute to flavor. Polymerization reactions lead to larger-molecular-weight compounds that contribute to the dark-brown color.
Caramel can be produced in many forms such as sauce, chewy candy, or hard candy depending on how much of an ingredient is added and the temperature it is being prepared at.
In modern recipes and in commercial production, glucose (from corn syrup or wheat) or invert sugar is added to prevent crystallization, making up 10–50% of the sugars by mass. &quot;Wet caramels&quot; made by heating sucrose and water instead of sucrose alone produce their own invert sugar due to thermal reaction, but not necessarily enough to prevent crystallization in traditional recipes.

==See also==
* Caramel color
* Crème caramel
* Caramel apple, whole apples covered in a layer of caramel and/or chocolate
* Caramel corn, popcorn coated in caramel
* Dodol, a caramelized confection made with coconut milk
* Dulce de leche, caramelized, sweetened milk
* Maillard reaction
* Nougat, using egg white rather than milk products
* Tablet, Scottish candy made with condensed milk
* Toffee, a type of confection
* Fudge
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q183440" start="0" end="7" title="Caramel" label="Caramel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159627" start="20" end="33" title="confectionery" label="confectionery"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="69" end="74" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9053" start="106" end="113" title="pudding" label="pudding"/>
<link wikidata="Q182940" start="119" end="126" title="dessert" label="dessert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272827" start="145" end="151" title="bonbon" label="bonbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11312555" start="156" end="166" title="candy bars" label="candy bars"/>
<link wikidata="Q13233" start="188" end="197" title="ice cream" label="ice cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q625825" start="202" end="209" title="custard" label="custard"/>
<link wikidata="Q73185" start="227" end="241" title="caramelization" label="caramelization"/>
<link wikidata="Q185583" start="415" end="422" title="Candy" label="candies"/>
<link wikidata="Q182940" start="424" end="431" title="dessert" label="dessert"/>
<link wikidata="Q708823" start="483" end="491" title="Brittle (food)" label="brittles"/>
<link wikidata="Q208729" start="493" end="499" title="nougat" label="nougat"/>
<link wikidata="Q116150719" start="502" end="509" title="praline (nut confection)" label="praline"/>
<link wikidata="Q14747193" start="512" end="516" title="Flan (pie)" label="flan"/>
<link wikidata="Q312839" start="518" end="530" title="crème brûlée" label="crème brûlée"/>
<link wikidata="Q374381" start="532" end="545" title="crème caramel" label="crème caramel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105083" start="551" end="564" title="caramel apple" label="caramel apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q13228" start="1137" end="1142" title="cream" label="cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q56139" start="1236" end="1242" title="liquor" label="liquor"/>
<link wikidata="Q13241" start="1248" end="1255" title="vanilla" label="vanilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q374381" start="1374" end="1387" title="crème caramel" label="crème caramel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009326" start="1552" end="1564" title="butterscotch" label="butterscotch"/>
<link wikidata="Q927904" start="1688" end="1694" title="toffee" label="toffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q618739" start="1836" end="1843" title="corn syrup" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q124953110" start="2303" end="2323" title="Inverted sugar syrup" label="inverting the sugars"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082653" start="2451" end="2460" title="firm ball" label="firm ball"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3180" end="3193" title=":fr:Henri Le Roux" label="Henri Le Roux"/>
<link wikidata="Q128783" start="3197" end="3205" title="Quiberon" label="Quiberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12478" start="4073" end="4080" title="macaron" label="macaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143333" start="4214" end="4225" title="Häagen-Dazs" label="Häagen-Dazs"/>
<link wikidata="Q37158" start="4230" end="4239" title="Starbucks" label="Starbucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q13261" start="4347" end="4360" title="hot chocolate" label="hot chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q374" start="4381" end="4386" title="vodka" label="vodka"/>
<link wikidata="Q670713" start="4436" end="4449" title="reward system" label="reward system"/>
<link wikidata="Q753009" start="4660" end="4687" title="food colouring" label="food and beverage colouring"/>
<link wikidata="Q134041" start="4698" end="4702" title="cola" label="cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q903420" start="4787" end="4800" title="isomerization" label="isomerization"/>
<link wikidata="Q181898" start="4805" end="4819" title="polymerization" label="polymerization"/>
<link wikidata="Q122043" start="4898" end="4908" title="fructose" label="difructose"/>
<link wikidata="Q17992308" start="4909" end="4918" title="Acid anhydride" label="anhydride"/>
<link wikidata="Q133516" start="4943" end="4957" title="monosaccharide" label="monosaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="5422" end="5429" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q618739" start="5436" end="5446" title="corn syrup" label="corn syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="5450" end="5455" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q124953110" start="5460" end="5472" title="Inverted sugar syrup" label="invert sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q227816" start="5784" end="5797" title="Caramel color" label="Caramel color"/>
<link wikidata="Q374381" start="5800" end="5813" title="Crème caramel" label="Crème caramel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105083" start="5816" end="5829" title="Caramel apple" label="Caramel apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037669" start="5893" end="5905" title="Caramel corn" label="Caramel corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924455" start="5935" end="5940" title="Dodol" label="Dodol"/>
<link wikidata="Q917761" start="5992" end="6006" title="Dulce de leche" label="Dulce de leche"/>
<link wikidata="Q647574" start="6038" end="6055" title="Maillard reaction" label="Maillard reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q208729" start="6058" end="6064" title="Nougat" label="Nougat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502845" start="6110" end="6116" title="Tablet (confectionery)" label="Tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q927904" start="6160" end="6166" title="Toffee" label="Toffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q379138" start="6191" end="6196" title="Fudge" label="Fudge"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64087" wikidata="Q2892133" url="?curid=64087" title="Type design">
<text>Type design is the art and process of designing typefaces. This involves drawing each letterform using a consistent style. The basic concepts and design variables are described below.

A typeface differs from other modes of graphic production such as handwriting and drawing in that it is a fixed set of alphanumeric characters with specific characteristics to be used repetitively. Historically, these were physical elements, called sorts, placed in a wooden frame; modern typefaces are stored and used electronically. It is the art of a type designer to develop a pleasing and functional typeface. In contrast, it is the task of the typographer (or typesetter) to lay out a page using a typeface that is appropriate to the work to be printed or displayed.

Type designers use the basic concepts of strokes, counter, body, and structural groups when designing typefaces. There are also variables that type designers take into account when creating typefaces. These design variables are style, weight, contrast, width, posture, and case. 

== History ==
The technology of printing text using movable type was invented in China, but the vast number of Chinese characters, and the esteem with which calligraphy was held, meant that few distinctive, complete typefaces were created in China in the early centuries of printing.

Gutenberg&#x27;s most important innovation in the mid 15th century development of his press was not the printing itself, but the casting of Latinate types. Unlike Chinese characters, which are based on a uniform square area, European Latin characters vary in width, from the very wide &quot;M&quot; to the slender &quot;l&quot;. Gutenberg developed an adjustable mold which could accommodate an infinite variety of widths. From then until at least 400 years later, type started with cutting punches, which would be struck into a brass &quot;matrix&quot;. The matrix was inserted into the bottom of the adjustable meld and the negative space formed by the mold cavity plus the matrix acted as the master for each letter that was cast. The casting material was an alloy usually containing lead, which had a low melting point, cooled readily, and could be easily filed and finished. In those early days, type design had to not only imitate the familiar handwritten forms common to readers, but also account for the limitations of the printing process, such as the rough papers of uneven thicknesses, the squeezing or splashing properties of the ink, and the eventual wear on the type itself.

Beginning in the 1890s, each character was drawn in a very large size for the American Type Founders Corporation and a few others using their technology—over a foot (30 cm) high. The outline was then traced by a Benton pantograph-based engraving machine with a pointer at the hand-held vertex and a cutting tool at the opposite vertex down to a size usually less than a quarter-inch (6 mm). The pantographic engraver was first used to cut punches, and later to directly create matrices.

In the late 1960s through the 1980s, typesetting moved from metal to photo composition. During this time, type design made a similar transition from physical matrixes to hand drawn letters on vellum or mylar and then the precise cutting of &quot;rubyliths&quot;. Rubylith was a common material in the printing trade, in which a red transparent film, very soft and pliable, was bonded to a supporting clear acetate. Placing the ruby over the master drawing of the letter, the craftsman would gently and precisely cut through the upper film and peel the non-image portions away. The resulting letterform, now existing as the remaining red material still adhering to the clear substrate, would then be ready to be photographed using a reproduction camera.

With the coming of computers, type design became a form of computer graphics. Initially, this transition occurred with a program called Ikarus around 1980, but widespread transition began with programs such as Aldus Freehand and Adobe Illustrator, and finally to dedicated type design programs called font editors, such as Fontographer and FontLab. This process occurred rapidly: by the mid-1990s, virtually all commercial type design had transitioned to digital vector drawing programs.

Each glyph design can be drawn or traced by a stylus on a digitizing board, or modified from a scanned drawing, or composed entirely within the program itself. Each glyph is then in a digital form, either in a bitmap (pixel-based) or vector (scalable outline) format. A given digitization of a typeface can easily be modified by another type designer; such a modified font is usually considered a derivative work, and is covered by the copyright of the original font software.

Type design could be copyrighted typeface by typeface in many countries, though not the United States. The United States offered and continues to offer design patents as an option for typeface design protection.

== Basic concepts ==

=== Stroke ===
The shape of designed letterforms and other characters are defined by strokes arranged in specific combinations. This shaping and construction has a basis in the gestural movements of handwriting. The visual qualities of a given stroke are derived from factors surrounding its formation: the kind of tool used, the angle at which the tool is dragged across a surface, and the degree of pressure applied from beginning to end. The stroke is the positive form that establishes a character&#x27;s archetypal shape.

=== Counter ===
The spaces created between and around strokes are called counters (also known as counterforms). These negative forms help to define the proportion, density, and rhythm of letterforms. The counter is an integral element in Western typography, however this concept may not apply universally to non-Western typographic traditions. More complex scripts, such as Chinese, which make use of compounding elements (radicals) within a single character may additionally require consideration of spacing not only between characters but also within characters.

=== Body ===
The overall proportion of characters, or their body, considers proportions of width and height for all cases involved (which in Latin are uppercase and lowercase), and individually for each character. In the former case, a grid system is used to delineate vertical proportions and gridlines (such as the baseline, mean line/x-height, cap line, descent line, and ascent line). In the latter case, letterforms of a typeface may be designed with variable bodies, making the typeface proportional, or they may be designed to fit within a single body measure, making the typeface fixed width or monospaced.

=== Structural groups ===
When designing letterforms, characters with analogous structures can be grouped in consideration of their shared visual qualities. In Latin, for example, archetypal groups can be made on the basis of the dominant strokes of each letter: verticals and horizontals (), diagonals (), verticals and diagonals (), horizontals and diagonals (), circular strokes (), circular strokes and verticals (), and verticals ().

== Design variables ==
Type design takes into consideration a number of design variables which are delineated based on writing system and vary in consideration of functionality, aesthetic quality, cultural expectations, and historical context.

=== Style ===

Style describes several different aspects of typeface variability historically related to character and function. This includes variations in:

* Structural class (such as serif, sans serif, and script typefaces)
* Historical class (such as oldstyle, transitional, neoclassical, grotesque, humanist, etc.)
* Relative neutrality (ranging from neutral typefaces to stylized typefaces)
* Functional use (such as text, display, and caption typefaces)

=== Weight ===
Weight refers to the thickness or thinness of a typeface&#x27;s strokes in a global sense. Typefaces usually have a default medium, or regular, weight which will produce the appearance of a uniform grey value when set in text. Categories of weight include hairline, thin, extra light, light, book, regular/medium, semibold, bold, black/heavy, and extra black/ultra.

Variable fonts are computer fonts that are able to store and make use of a continuous range of weight (and size) variants of a single typeface.

=== Contrast ===
Contrast refers to the variation in weight that may exist internally within each character, between thin strokes and thick strokes. More extreme contrasts will produce texts with more uneven typographic color. At a smaller scale, strokes within a character may individually also exhibit contrasts in weight, which is called modulation.

=== Width ===

Each character within a typeface has its own overall width relative to its height. These proportions may be changed globally so that characters are narrowed or widened. Typefaces that are narrowed are called condensed typefaces, while those that are widened are called extended typefaces.

=== Posture ===

Letterform structures may be structured in a way that changes the angle between upright stem structures and the typeface&#x27;s baseline, changing the overall posture of the typeface. In Latin script typefaces, a typeface is categorized as a Roman when this angle is perpendicular. A forward-leaning angle produces either an Italic, if the letterforms are designed with reanalyzed cursive forms, or an oblique, if the letterforms are slanted mechanically. A back-leaning angle produces a reverse oblique, or backslanted, posture.

=== Case ===
A proportion of writing systems are bicameral, distinguishing between two parallel sets of letters that vary in use based on prescribed grammar or convention. These sets of letters are known as cases. The larger case is called uppercase or capitals (also known as majuscule) and the smaller case is called lowercase (also known as minuscule). Typefaces may also include a set of small capitals, which are uppercase forms designed in the same height and weight as lowercase forms. Other writing systems are unicameral, meaning only one case exists for letterforms. Bicameral writing systems may have typefaces with unicase designs, which mix uppercase and lowercase letterforms within a single case.

==Principles==
The design of a legible text-based typeface remains one of the most challenging assignments in graphic design. The even visual quality of the reading material being of paramount importance, each drawn character (called a glyph) must be even in appearance with every other glyph regardless of order or sequence. Also, if the typeface is to be versatile, it must appear the same whether it is small or large. Because of optical illusions that occur when we apprehend small or large objects, this entails that in the best fonts, a version is designed for small use and another version is drawn for large, display, applications. Also, large letterforms reveal their shape, whereas small letterforms in text settings reveal only their textures: this requires that any typeface that aspires to versatility in both text and display, needs to be evaluated in both of these visual domains. A beautifully shaped typeface may not have a particularly attractive or legible texture when seen in text settings.

Spacing is also an important part of type design. Each glyph consists not only of the shape of the character, but also the white space around it. The type designer must consider the relationship of the space within a letter form (the counter) and the letter spacing between them.

Designing type requires many accommodations for the quirks of human perception, &quot;optical corrections&quot; required to make shapes look right, in ways that diverge from what might seem mathematically right. For example, round shapes need to be slightly bigger than square ones to appear &quot;the same&quot; size (&quot;overshoot&quot;), and vertical lines need to be thicker than horizontal ones to appear the same thickness. For a character to be perceived as geometrically round, it must usually be slightly &quot;squared&quot; off (made slightly wider at the shoulders). As a result of all these subtleties, excellence in type design is highly respected in the design professions.

==Profession == 

Type design is performed by a type designer. It is a craft, blending elements of art and science. In the pre-digital era it was primarily learned through apprenticeship and professional training within the industry. Since the mid-1990s it has become the subject of dedicated degree programs at a handful of universities, including the MA Typeface Design at the University of Reading (UK) and the Type Media program at the KABK (Royal Academy of Art in the Hague). At the same time, the transition to digital type and font editors which can be inexpensive (or even open source and free) has led to a great democratization of type design; the craft is accessible to anyone with the interest to pursue it, nevertheless, it may take a very long time for the serious artist to master.
==References==
==Further reading==
*Stiebner, Erhardt D. &amp; Dieter Urban. &quot;Initials and Decorative Alphabets&quot;. Poole, England: Blandford Press, 1985. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2892133" start="0" end="11" title="Type design" label="Type design"/>
<link wikidata="Q17451" start="48" end="56" title="typeface" label="typeface"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533641" start="86" end="96" title="letterform" label="letterform"/>
<link wikidata="Q8250483" start="434" end="439" title="sort (typesetting)" label="sorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q159964" start="635" end="646" title="typographer" label="typographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q837721" start="651" end="661" title="typesetter" label="typesetter"/>
<link wikidata="Q12681" start="1197" end="1208" title="calligraphy" label="calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q722757" start="2734" end="2744" title="pantograph" label="pantograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376429" start="3266" end="3274" title="Rubylith" label="Rubylith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194708" start="4456" end="4462" title="bitmap" label="bitmap"/>
<link wikidata="Q170130" start="4480" end="4486" title="Vector graphics" label="vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q836950" start="4643" end="4658" title="derivative work" label="derivative work"/>
<link wikidata="Q849778" start="5910" end="5918" title="Radical (Chinese characters)" label="radicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188561" start="6169" end="6174" title="Letter case" label="cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570349" start="6656" end="6666" title="Monospaced font" label="monospaced"/>
<link wikidata="Q243449" start="7541" end="7546" title="serif" label="serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q864011" start="7548" end="7558" title="Sans-serif" label="sans serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q30593402" start="8199" end="8212" title="Variable font" label="Variable font"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147633" start="8218" end="8232" title="computer fonts" label="computer fonts"/>
<link wikidata="Q344098" start="9345" end="9351" title="Italic type" label="Italic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188561" start="9758" end="9763" title="Letter case" label="cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q185925" start="10374" end="10388" title="graphic design" label="graphic design"/>
<link wikidata="Q2207288" start="12320" end="12325" title="craft" label="craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432632" start="12628" end="12649" title="University of Reading" label="University of Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q511291" start="12695" end="12715" title="Royal Academy of Art, The Hague" label="Royal Academy of Art"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64088" wikidata="Q618739" url="?curid=64088" title="Corn syrup">
<text>Corn syrup is a food syrup which is made from the starch of corn/maize and contains varying amounts of sugars: glucose, maltose and higher oligosaccharides, depending on the grade. Corn syrup is used in foods to soften texture, add volume, prevent crystallization of sugar, and enhance flavor. Most table syrups are typically based with corn syrup. It can be processed into high-fructose corn syrup (HFCS) by using the enzyme D-xylose isomerase to convert a large proportion of its glucose into sweeter fructose.

The more general term glucose syrup is often used synonymously with corn syrup, since glucose syrup in the United States is most commonly made from corn starch. Technically, glucose syrup is any liquid starch hydrolysate of mono-, di-, and higher-saccharides and can be made from any source of starch: wheat, tapioca and potatoes are the most common other sources.

== Commercial preparation ==
Historically, corn syrup was produced by combining corn starch with dilute hydrochloric acid, and then heating the mixture under pressure. The process was invented by the German chemist Gottlieb Kirchhoff in 1811. Currently, corn syrup is obtained through a multi-step bioprocess. First, the enzyme α-amylase is added to a mixture of corn starch and water. α-amylase is secreted by various species of the bacterium genus &quot;Bacillus&quot; and the enzyme is isolated from the liquid in which the bacteria were grown. The enzyme breaks down the starch into oligosaccharides, which are then broken into glucose molecules by adding the enzyme glucoamylase, known also as &quot;γ-amylase&quot;. Glucoamylase is secreted by various species of the fungus &quot;Aspergillus&quot;; the enzyme is isolated from the liquid in which the fungus is grown. The glucose can then be transformed into fructose by passing the glucose through a column that is loaded with the enzyme D-xylose isomerase, an enzyme that is isolated from the growth medium of any of several bacteria.

Corn syrup is produced from number 2 yellow dent corn. When wet milled, about 2.3 litres of corn are required to yield an average of 947g of starch, to produce 1 kg of glucose syrup. A bushel (25 kg) of corn will yield an average of 31.5 pounds (14.3 kg) of starch, which in turn will yield about 33.3 pounds (15.1 kg) of syrup. Thus, it takes about 2,300 litres of corn to produce a tonne of glucose syrup, or 60 bushels (1524 kg) of corn to produce one short ton.

The viscosity and sweetness of the syrup depends on the extent to which the hydrolysis reaction has been carried out. To distinguish different grades of syrup, they are rated according to their dextrose equivalent (DE). Most commercially available corn syrups are approximately 1/3 glucose by weight.

Two common commercial corn syrup products are light and dark corn syrup.
*&quot;Light corn syrup&quot; is corn syrup seasoned with vanilla flavor and salt. It is a nearly clear color.
*&quot;Dark corn syrup&quot; is a combination of corn syrup and refiner&#x27;s syrup, caramel color and flavor, salt, and the preservative sodium benzoate. Its color is dark brown.

== Uses ==

Major uses of corn syrup in commercially prepared foods are as a thickener, a sweetener, and a humectant (an ingredient that retains moisture and thus maintains a food&#x27;s freshness). The primary ingredient in most brands of commercial &quot;table syrup&quot; is either regular corn syrup or high-fructose corn syrup, both of which are less expensive than maple syrup.

In the United States, tariff-rate quotas for cane sugar imports raise sugar prices; hence, domestically produced corn syrup and high-fructose corn syrup are less costly alternatives that are often used in American-made processed and mass-produced foods, candies, soft drinks, and fruit drinks.

Glucose syrup was the primary corn sweetener in the United States prior to the expanded use of high fructose corn syrup production in 1964. HFCS is a variant in which other enzymes are used to convert some of the glucose into fructose. The resulting syrup is sweeter and more soluble.

If mixed with sugar, water, and cream of tartar, corn syrup can be used to make sugar glass.

== History ==
Corn syrup was available at grocery stores in the 19th century, as a generic product sold from a barrel. In 1902, the Corn Products Refining Company introduced clear, bottled corn syrup under the brand name of Karo Syrup. In 1910, the company launched one of the largest advertising campaigns ever seen. This included full-page advertisements in women&#x27;s magazines and free cookbooks full of recipes that called for Karo brand corn syrup. In the 1930s, they promoted a new pecan pie recipe that featured corn syrup, followed by a similar, nut-free chess pie recipe, in a bid to drive sales. Later, they promoted it as an alternative to maple syrup for waffles. As cooking in the home declined in the 21st century, so that fewer people made candies or pies at home, commercial sales of Karo tended to dominate over the retail sales.

==See also==

* Candy corn
* High-fructose corn syrup
* High-maltose corn syrup
* List of syrups
* Maple syrup
* Mizuame
* Molasses

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q618739" start="0" end="10" title="Corn syrup" label="Corn syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6584340" start="21" end="26" title="syrup" label="syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q41534" start="50" end="56" title="starch" label="starch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="65" end="70" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="111" end="118" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q170002" start="120" end="127" title="maltose" label="maltose"/>
<link wikidata="Q320607" start="139" end="154" title="oligosaccharide" label="oligosaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952715" start="219" end="226" title="Mouthfeel" label="texture"/>
<link wikidata="Q284256" start="248" end="263" title="crystallization" label="crystallization"/>
<link wikidata="Q117467386" start="299" end="310" title="table syrup" label="table syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q11422173" start="374" end="398" title="high-fructose corn syrup" label="high-fructose corn syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045529" start="426" end="444" title="xylose isomerase" label="D-xylose isomerase"/>
<link wikidata="Q122043" start="503" end="511" title="fructose" label="fructose"/>
<link wikidata="Q14770547" start="536" end="549" title="glucose syrup" label="glucose syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393961" start="662" end="673" title="corn starch" label="corn starch"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="723" end="734" title="hydrolysis" label="hydrolysate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="761" end="771" title="saccharide" label="saccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q873761" start="823" end="830" title="tapioca" label="tapioca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="984" end="1001" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127869" start="1095" end="1113" title="Gottlieb Kirchhoff" label="Gottlieb Kirchhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119055" start="1178" end="1188" title="bioprocess" label="bioprocess"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="1201" end="1207" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q17153" start="1210" end="1217" title="amylase" label="amylase"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="1314" end="1323" title="bacteria" label="bacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q212032" start="1336" end="1344" title="Bacillus" label="Bacillus"/>
<link wikidata="Q320607" start="1467" end="1482" title="oligosaccharide" label="oligosaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859004" start="1551" end="1563" title="glucoamylase" label="glucoamylase"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="1653" end="1659" title="fungus" label="fungus"/>
<link wikidata="Q335130" start="1666" end="1677" title="Aspergillus" label="Aspergillus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045529" start="1875" end="1893" title="Xylose isomerase" label="D-xylose isomerase"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989950" start="2034" end="2044" title="wet-milling" label="wet milled"/>
<link wikidata="Q216658" start="2159" end="2165" title="bushel" label="bushel"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="2358" end="2363" title="tonne" label="tonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q469356" start="2429" end="2438" title="short ton" label="short ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207253" start="2635" end="2654" title="dextrose equivalent" label="dextrose equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q13241" start="2874" end="2881" title="vanilla" label="vanilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2688129" start="2991" end="3011" title="refiner&amp;#x27;s syrup" label="refiner&amp;#x27;s syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q911854" start="3216" end="3225" title="humectant" label="humectant"/>
<link wikidata="Q117467386" start="3366" end="3377" title="table syrup" label="table syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q402563" start="3480" end="3491" title="maple syrup" label="maple syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686027" start="3516" end="3533" title="tariff-rate quota" label="tariff-rate quota"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027534" start="3539" end="3549" title="cane sugar" label="cane sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q14770547" start="3789" end="3802" title="Glucose syrup" label="Glucose syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q11422173" start="3884" end="3908" title="high fructose corn syrup" label="high fructose corn syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="4089" end="4094" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="4096" end="4101" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q18745" start="4107" end="4122" title="cream of tartar" label="cream of tartar"/>
<link wikidata="Q28243" start="4155" end="4166" title="sugar glass" label="sugar glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295201" start="4211" end="4225" title="grocery stores" label="grocery stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378329" start="4252" end="4267" title="generic product" label="generic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q8273105" start="4301" end="4331" title="Corn Products Refining Company" label="Corn Products Refining Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q80228" start="4350" end="4357" title="Bottle" label="bottled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761818" start="4454" end="4475" title="Advertising campaign" label="advertising campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="4511" end="4525" title="advertisements" label="advertisements"/>
<link wikidata="Q21114779" start="4529" end="4551" title="women&amp;#x27;s magazines" label="women&amp;#x27;s magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q605076" start="4561" end="4570" title="cookbooks" label="cookbooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q219239" start="4579" end="4586" title="recipes" label="recipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284379" start="4660" end="4669" title="pecan pie" label="pecan pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093340" start="4735" end="4744" title="chess pie" label="chess pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q402563" start="4823" end="4834" title="maple syrup" label="maple syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q375" start="4839" end="4846" title="waffles" label="waffles"/>
<link wikidata="Q17119302" start="4927" end="4934" title="Sugar candy" label="candies"/>
<link wikidata="Q104862279" start="4938" end="4942" title="Pie in American cuisine" label="pies"/>
<link wikidata="Q12054162" start="5036" end="5046" title="Candy corn" label="Candy corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q11422173" start="5049" end="5073" title="High-fructose corn syrup" label="High-fructose corn syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757588" start="5076" end="5099" title="High-maltose corn syrup" label="High-maltose corn syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q65119347" start="5102" end="5116" title="List of syrups" label="List of syrups"/>
<link wikidata="Q402563" start="5119" end="5130" title="Maple syrup" label="Maple syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044475" start="5133" end="5140" title="Mizuame" label="Mizuame"/>
<link wikidata="Q154389" start="5143" end="5151" title="Molasses" label="Molasses"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64093" wikidata="Q610791" url="?curid=64093" title="Verdana">
<text>Verdana is a humanist sans-serif typeface designed by Matthew Carter for Microsoft Corporation, with hand-hinting done by Thomas Rickner, then at Monotype. Demand for such a typeface was recognized by Virginia Howlett of Microsoft&#x27;s typography group and commissioned by Steve Ballmer. The name &quot;Verdana&quot; is derived from &quot;&quot; (green) and &quot;Ana&quot; (the name of Howlett&#x27;s eldest daughter).

Bearing similarities to humanist sans-serif typefaces such as Frutiger, Verdana was designed to be readable at small sizes on the low-resolution computer screens of the period. Like many designs of this type, Verdana has a large x-height (tall lower-case characters), with wider proportions and looser letter-spacing than on print-orientated designs like Helvetica. The counters and apertures are wide, to keep strokes clearly separate from one another, and similarly shaped letters are designed to appear clearly different to increase legibility for body text. The bold weight is thicker than would be normal with fonts for print use, suiting the limitations of onscreen display. Carter has described spacing as an area he particularly worked on during the design process.

==Distinctive visual identifiable characteristics==

Some characteristics of the typeface are as follows:
As an example of the approach of making similar characters easily distinguishable, the digit 1 (one) in Verdana was given a horizontal base and a hook in the upper left to distinguish it from lowercase l (L) and uppercase I (i). This is similar to the digit &quot;1&quot; found in Morris Fuller Benton&#x27;s sans-serif typefaces News Gothic and Franklin Gothic.

==Prevalence==

Released in 1996, Verdana was bundled with subsequent versions of the Windows operating system, as well as their Office and Internet Explorer software on Windows, classic Mac OS, and Mac OS X. Since at least Mac OS X 10.4 it is also bundled with Mac OS itself. In addition, up until 2002 it was available for download from Microsoft&#x27;s web site as freeware (&quot;.exe&quot; files for Microsoft Windows and in &quot;.sit.hqx&quot; archives for Mac OS) under a proprietary license imposing some restrictions on usage and distribution, allowing it to be used by end users in any system supporting installation of &quot;exe&quot; or &quot;.sit.hqx&quot; files and supporting TrueType fonts. The downloadable files are still available legally from third-party web sites; see the External links section. However, these files include only old versions of Verdana, and updated versions are not available as freeware.

According to a 2013 survey, the availability of Verdana was 99.90% on Windows, 99.26% on Mac OS, and 70.02% on free operating systems like Linux.

According to a study of online fonts by the Software Usability and Research Laboratory at Wichita State University, participants preferred Verdana as the best overall font choice, and it was also perceived as being among the most legible fonts. However, Microsoft&#x27;s font manager Bill Hill wrote that &quot;with its large x-height and very generous spacing, it never felt comfortable as an eBook font&quot;. He noted that Microsoft had commissioned an alternative version of the pre-existing typefaces Berling and Frutiger for its Microsoft Reader e-book product. Despite this, Verdana was initially used as one of the bundled book-reading fonts on the iPad before an update in 2011.

==Microsoft variants==
Verdana Ref is a custom version of Verdana for use with Microsoft Reference. It is used in Microsoft Bookshelf 2000, Encarta Encyclopedia Deluxe 99, Encarta Virtual Globe 99, Office 2000 Premium, Publisher 2000. MS Reference Sans Serif is a derivative of Verdana Ref with bold and italic fonts. This font family is included with Microsoft Encarta.

Tahoma is similar to Verdana but with tighter letter spacing. The Windows Mobile core font Nina is a more condensed version of Tahoma and Verdana.

==Verdana Pro==
Microsoft licensed rights to Verdana to Font Bureau for a new Verdana Pro release, published in 2011. Verdana Pro adds correct German closing quotation marks, light, semi-bold and black styles with italics, as well as condensed styles with italics across all weights. The expanded family was designed for organisations which had made extensive use of Verdana due to its availability but desired additional versions for greater flexibility. It is sold separately through print and web licenses, being sold by Font Bureau and Ascender, although Windows 10 users can acquire it free of charge from Microsoft Store or by activating the Pan-European Supplemental Fonts optional resource on the Settings app. A similar Georgia Pro release was announced at the same time.

==Combining characters bug==
In the past, Verdana (v. 2.43) had an incorrect position for combining diacritical marks, causing them to display on the following character instead of the preceding. This made it unsuitable for Unicode-encoded text such as Cyrillic or Greek. This bug did not usually reveal itself with Latin letters. This is because some font display engines substitute sequences of base character + combining character with a precomposed character glyph. This bug was subsequently fixed in the version issued with Windows Vista. It is also fixed in Verdana version 5.01 font on Windows XP by installing the European Union Expansion Font Update from Microsoft.

==Awards==

In 2006, the Verdana typeface was named in the list of British design icons in the Great British Design Quest organised by the BBC and the Design Museum. Carter&#x27;s typeface appeared on a list which included Concorde, Mini, Jaguar E-Type, Aston Martin DB5, Supermarine Spitfire, World Wide Web, London tube map, AEC Routemaster bus and the K2 telephone box.

==Usage==

In 2007, the font was used for the questions in &quot;Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?&quot;, replacing the ITC Conduit font.

In 2009, IKEA changed the typeface used in its catalog from Futura to Verdana, expressing a desire to unify its branding between print and web media. The controversy has been attributed to the perception of Verdana as a symbol of homogeneity in popular typography. &quot;Time&quot; magazine and the Associated Press ran articles on the controversy including a brief interview with an IKEA representative, focusing on the opinions of typographers and designers. Design and advertising industry-focused publications such as &quot;Business Week&quot; joined the fray of online posts. The branding critic blog Brand New was one of those using the Verdanagate name. The Australian online daily news site &quot;Crikey&quot; also published an article on the controversy. &quot;The Guardian&quot; ran an article asking &quot;Ikea is changing its font to Verdana—causing outrage among typomaniacs. Should the rest of us care? Absolutely.&quot; &quot;The New York Times&quot; said the change to Verdana &quot;is so offensive to many because it seems like a slap at the principles of design by a company that has been hailed for its adherence to them.&quot;

Carter addressed this controversy during an interview in 2013:
Ever since there was that big ruckus about the IKEA catalog changing from Futura to Verdana, which I had nothing to do with and didn’t even know about, people ask me about that everywhere I go. I give a talk about something historical and then at the end someone will get up and say: &quot;I started a petition to go back to Futura. You’re a villain!&quot; You get blamed for something you had nothing to do with.&lt;BR&gt;&lt;BR&gt;
There&#x27;s a strange misunderstanding. A friendly guy came up to me at a conference recently and said: I signed that petition to go back to Futura. So I asked: what caused you to do that? And he said, well, Verdana is a screen font. You mustn’t use it in print. So I said: OK, well, so you open the IKEA catalog, it’s set in Verdana, with the big prices and everything… how do you tell it’s a screen font? What is it about Verdana that says: this is a screen font? He had no idea. He just knew it because he’d been told. There are many people who make judgments without really understanding what the typographic issues are. Students are interesting—they’ll say things to me like: my professor told me I cannot use Verdana and Georgia in print because they’re screen fonts, but I tried it and it looks perfectly all right. And I can only say: Thank you! Go ahead!

In 2019, with its logo refresh, IKEA again changed their corporate typeface, from Verdana to a customized version of Noto Sans under the name &quot;Noto IKEA&quot;.

== See also ==

* Core fonts for the Web
* Georgia
* Segoe
* Tahoma

==Notes==
==References==
*&quot;Interview with Matthew Carter, designer of Verdana and Georgia&quot;
*&quot;Interview with Virginia Howlett, mother of Verdana&quot; Retrieved September 9, 2005
*Friedl, Friedrich, Nicolaus Ott and Bernard Stein. &quot;Typography: An Encyclopedic Survey of Type Design and Techniques through History.&quot; Black Dog &amp; Leventhal: 1998. .
*Macmillan, Neil. &quot;An A–Z of Type Designers.&quot; Yale University Press: 2006. .

==External links==

*Verdana font family (Microsoft typography)
*Verdana Pro font family (Microsoft typography)
*Verdana Ref font family (Microsoft typography)
*Downloadable version of Verdana (Core fonts for the Web)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q610791" start="0" end="7" title="Verdana" label="Verdana"/>
<link wikidata="Q864011" start="13" end="32" title="humanist sans-serif" label="humanist sans-serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q17451" start="33" end="41" title="typeface" label="typeface"/>
<link wikidata="Q383244" start="54" end="68" title="Matthew Carter" label="Matthew Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="73" end="94" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493777" start="106" end="113" title="font hinting" label="hinting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793538" start="122" end="136" title="Thomas Rickner" label="Thomas Rickner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583606" start="146" end="154" title="Monotype Corporation" label="Monotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934324" start="201" end="217" title="Virginia Howlett" label="Virginia Howlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q159964" start="238" end="248" title="typography" label="typography"/>
<link wikidata="Q181162" start="275" end="288" title="Steve Ballmer" label="Steve Ballmer"/>
<link wikidata="" start="447" end="455" title=":Category:Humanist sans-serif typefaces" label="humanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17451" start="467" end="475" title="typeface" label="typeface"/>
<link wikidata="Q915886" start="485" end="493" title="Frutiger (typeface)" label="Frutiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290" start="568" end="583" title="computer screen" label="computer screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916348" start="652" end="660" title="x-height" label="x-height"/>
<link wikidata="Q504745" start="778" end="787" title="Helvetica" label="Helvetica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452931" start="793" end="815" title="counter (typography)" label="counters and apertures"/>
<link wikidata="Q979053" start="1585" end="1605" title="Morris Fuller Benton" label="Morris Fuller Benton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7019371" start="1634" end="1645" title="News Gothic" label="News Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424804" start="1650" end="1665" title="Franklin Gothic" label="Franklin Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="1754" end="1761" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="1762" end="1778" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11255" start="1797" end="1803" title="Microsoft Office" label="Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575" start="1808" end="1825" title="Internet Explorer" label="Internet Explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522376" start="1847" end="1861" title="classic Mac OS" label="classic Mac OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="1867" end="1875" title="Mac OS X" label="Mac OS X"/>
<link wikidata="Q178285" start="2036" end="2044" title="freeware" label="freeware"/>
<link wikidata="Q751800" start="2360" end="2368" title="TrueType" label="TrueType"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2463" end="2477" title="#External links" label="External links"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="2710" end="2714" title="Free and open source software" label="free"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="2738" end="2743" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q429561" start="2836" end="2860" title="Wichita State University" label="Wichita State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q128093" start="3140" end="3145" title="eBook" label="eBook"/>
<link wikidata="Q915886" start="3264" end="3272" title="Frutiger (typeface)" label="Frutiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584816" start="3281" end="3297" title="Microsoft Reader" label="Microsoft Reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796" start="3403" end="3407" title="iPad" label="iPad"/>
<link wikidata="Q231136" start="3787" end="3804" title="Microsoft Encarta" label="Microsoft Encarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q910757" start="3807" end="3813" title="Tahoma (typeface)" label="Tahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q21207" start="3873" end="3887" title="Windows Mobile" label="Windows Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q996725" start="4011" end="4022" title="Font Bureau" label="Font Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q996725" start="4479" end="4490" title="Font Bureau" label="Font Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q18168774" start="4514" end="4524" title="Windows 10" label="Windows 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q135288" start="4566" end="4581" title="Microsoft Store (digital)" label="Microsoft Store"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4684" end="4695" title="Georgia (typeface)#Georgia Pro" label="Georgia Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q685216" start="4827" end="4853" title="combining diacritical mark" label="combining diacritical mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="4961" end="4968" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="4990" end="4998" title="Cyrillic script" label="Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216" start="5002" end="5007" title="Greek alphabet" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="5053" end="5066" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422376" start="5178" end="5199" title="precomposed character" label="precomposed character"/>
<link wikidata="Q36975" start="5200" end="5205" title="glyph" label="glyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q11230" start="5266" end="5279" title="Windows Vista" label="Windows Vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248" start="5330" end="5340" title="Windows XP" label="Windows XP"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="5552" end="5555" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q571249" start="5564" end="5577" title="Design Museum" label="Design Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505" start="5636" end="5644" title="Concorde" label="Concorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q36024" start="5646" end="5650" title="Mini" label="Mini"/>
<link wikidata="Q249303" start="5652" end="5665" title="Jaguar E-Type" label="Jaguar E-Type"/>
<link wikidata="Q749871" start="5667" end="5683" title="Aston Martin DB5" label="Aston Martin DB5"/>
<link wikidata="Q29190" start="5685" end="5705" title="Supermarine Spitfire" label="Supermarine Spitfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="5707" end="5721" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014543" start="5723" end="5738" title="Tube map" label="London tube map"/>
<link wikidata="Q938552" start="5740" end="5755" title="AEC Routemaster" label="AEC Routemaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q712868" start="5768" end="5784" title="Red telephone box" label="K2 telephone box"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997397" start="5852" end="5882" title="Who Wants to Be a Millionaire? (British game show)" label="Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?"/>
<link wikidata="Q54078" start="5932" end="5936" title="IKEA" label="IKEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q17451" start="5949" end="5957" title="typeface" label="typeface"/>
<link wikidata="Q247686" start="5983" end="5989" title="Futura (typeface)" label="Futura"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="6222" end="6238" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q833195" start="6451" end="6464" title="Business Week" label="Business Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="6693" end="6705" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="6864" end="6882" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948181" start="8551" end="8560" title="Noto Sans" label="Noto Sans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132493" start="8618" end="8640" title="Core fonts for the Web" label="Core fonts for the Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q246141" start="8643" end="8650" title="Georgia (typeface)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q97189" start="8653" end="8658" title="Segoe" label="Segoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q910757" start="8661" end="8667" title="Tahoma (typeface)" label="Tahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132493" start="9325" end="9347" title="Core fonts for the Web" label="Core fonts for the Web"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64097" wikidata="Q864011" url="?curid=64097" title="Sans-serif">
<text>In typography and lettering, a sans-serif, sans serif (), gothic, or simply sans letterform is one that does not have extending features called &quot;serifs&quot; at the end of strokes. Sans-serif typefaces tend to have less stroke width variation than serif typefaces. They are often used to convey simplicity and modernity or minimalism. For the purposes of type classification, sans-serif designs are usually divided into these major groups: , , , , and .

Sans-serif typefaces have become the most prevalent for display of text on computer screens. On lower-resolution digital displays, fine details like serifs may disappear or appear too large. The term comes from the French word , meaning &quot;without&quot; and &quot;serif&quot; of uncertain origin, possibly from the Dutch word meaning &quot;line&quot; or pen-stroke. In printed media, they are more commonly used for display use and less for body text.

Before the term &quot;sans-serif&quot; became standard in English typography, a number of other terms had been used. One of these terms for sans-serif was &quot;grotesque&quot;, often used in Europe, and &quot;gothic&quot;, which is still used in East Asian typography and sometimes seen in typeface names like News Gothic, Highway Gothic, Franklin Gothic or Trade Gothic.

Sans-serif typefaces are sometimes, especially in older documents, used as a device for emphasis, due to their typically blacker type color.

==Classification==
For the purposes of type classification, sans-serif designs are usually divided into three or four major groups, the fourth being the result of splitting the &quot;grotesque&quot; category into grotesque and neo-grotesque.

===Grotesque===
This group features most of the early (19th century to early 20th) sans-serif designs. Influenced by Didone serif typefaces of the period and sign painting traditions, these were often quite solid, bold designs suitable for headlines and advertisements. The early sans-serif typefaces often did not feature a lower case or italics, since they were not needed for such uses. They were sometimes released by width, with a range of widths from extended to normal to condensed, with each style different, meaning to modern eyes they can look quite irregular and eccentric.

Grotesque typefaces have limited variation of stroke width (often none perceptible in capitals). The terminals of curves are usually horizontal, and many have a spurred &quot;G&quot; and an &quot;R&quot; with a curled leg. Capitals tend to be of relatively uniform width. Cap height and ascender height are generally the same to produce a more regular effect in texts such as titles with many capital letters, and descenders are often short for tighter line spacing. They often avoid having a true italic in favor of a more restrained oblique or sloped design, although at least some sans-serif true italics were offered.

Examples of grotesque typefaces include Akzidenz-Grotesk, Venus, News Gothic, Franklin Gothic, IBM Plex and Monotype Grotesque. Akzidenz Grotesk Old Face, Knockout, Grotesque No. 9 and Monotype Grotesque are examples of digital fonts that retain more of the eccentricities of some of the early sans-serif types.

According to Monotype, the term &quot;grotesque&quot; originates from , meaning &quot;belonging to the cave&quot; due to their simple geometric appearance. The term arose because of adverse comparisons that were drawn with the more ornate Modern Serif and Roman typefaces that were the norm at the time.

===Neo-grotesque===
Neo-grotesque designs appeared in the mid-twentieth century as an evolution of grotesque types. They are relatively straightforward in appearance with limited stroke width variation. Similar to grotesque typefaces, neo-grotesques often feature capitals of uniform width and a quite &#x27;folded-up&#x27; design, in which strokes (for example on the &#x27;c&#x27;) are curved all the way round to end on a perfect horizontal or vertical. Helvetica is an example of this. Unlike earlier grotesque designs, many were issued in large families from the time of release.

Neo-grotesque type began in the 1950s with the emergence of the International Typographic Style, or Swiss style. Its members looked at the clear lines of Akzidenz-Grotesk (1898) as an inspiration for designs with a neutral appearance and an even colour on the page. In 1957 the release of Helvetica, Univers, and Folio, the first typefaces categorized as neo-grotesque, had a strong impact internationally: Helvetica came to be the most used typeface for the following decades.
===Geometric===
Geometric sans-serif typefaces are based on geometric shapes, like near-perfect circles and squares. Common features are a nearly-circular capital &#x27;O&#x27;, sharp and pointed uppercase &#x27;N&#x27; vertices, and a &quot;single-storey&quot; lowercase letter &#x27;a&#x27;. The &#x27;M&#x27; is often splayed and the capitals of varying width, following the classical model.

The geometric sans originated in Germany in the 1920s. Two early efforts in designing geometric types were made by Herbert Bayer and Jakob Erbar, who worked respectively on Universal Typeface (unreleased at the time but revived digitally as Architype Bayer) and Erbar (). In 1927 Futura, by Paul Renner, was released to great acclaim and popularity.

Geometric sans-serif typefaces were popular from the 1920s and 1930s due to their clean, modern design, and many new geometric designs and revivals have been developed since. Notable geometric types of the period include Kabel, Semplicità, Bernhard Gothic, Nobel and Metro; more recent designs in the style include ITC Avant Garde, Brandon Grotesque, Gotham, Avenir, Product Sans, HarmonyOS Sans and Century Gothic. Many geometric sans-serif alphabets of the period, such as those authored by the Bauhaus art school (1919–1933) and modernist poster artists, were hand-lettered and not cut into metal type at the time.

A separate inspiration for many types described &quot;geometric&quot; in design has been the simplified shapes of letters engraved or stenciled on metal and plastic in industrial use, which often follow a simplified structure and are sometimes known as &quot;rectilinear&quot; for their use of straight vertical and horizontal lines. Designs which have been called geometric in principles but not descended from the Futura, Erbar and Kabel tradition include Bank Gothic, DIN 1451, Eurostile and Handel Gothic, along with many of the typefaces designed by Ray Larabie.
===Humanist===
Humanist sans-serif typefaces take inspiration from traditional letterforms, such as Roman square capitals, traditional serif typefaces and calligraphy. Many have true italics rather than an oblique, ligatures and even swashes in italic. One of the earliest humanist designs was Edward Johnston&#x27;s Johnston typeface from 1916, and, a decade later, Gill Sans (Eric Gill, 1928). Edward Johnston, a calligrapher by profession, was inspired by classic letter forms, especially the capital letters on the Column of Trajan.

Humanist designs vary more than gothic or geometric designs. Some humanist designs have stroke modulation (strokes that clearly vary in width along their line) or alternating thick and thin strokes. These include most popularly Hermann Zapf&#x27;s Optima (1958), a typeface expressly designed to be suitable for both display and body text. Some humanist designs may be more geometric, as in Gill Sans and Johnston (especially their capitals), which like Roman capitals are often based on perfect squares, half-squares and circles, with considerable variation in width. These somewhat architectural designs may feel too stiff for body text. Others such as Syntax, Goudy Sans and Sassoon Sans more resemble handwriting, serif typefaces or calligraphy.

Frutiger, from 1976, has been particularly influential in the development of the modern humanist sans genre, especially designs intended to be particularly legible above all other design considerations. The category expanded greatly during the 1980s and 1990s, partly as a reaction against the overwhelming popularity of Helvetica and Univers and also due to the need for legible computer fonts on low-resolution computer displays. Designs from this period intended for print use include FF Meta, Myriad, Thesis, Charlotte Sans, Bliss, Skia and Scala Sans, while designs developed for computer use include Microsoft&#x27;s Tahoma, Trebuchet, Verdana, Calibri and Corbel, as well as Lucida Grande, Fira Sans and Droid Sans. Humanist sans-serif designs can (if appropriately proportioned and spaced) be particularly suitable for use on screen or at distance, since their designs can be given wide apertures or separation between strokes, which is not a conventional feature on grotesque and neo-grotesque designs.
===Other or mixed===
Due to the diversity of sans-serif typefaces, many do not exactly fit into the above categories. For example, Neuzeit S has both neo-grotesque and geometric influences, as does Hermann Zapf&#x27;s URW Grotesk. Whitney blends humanist and grotesque influences, while Klavika is a geometric design not based on the circle. Sans-serif typefaces intended for signage, such as Transport and Tern (both used on road signs), may have unusual features to enhance legibility and differentiate characters, such as a lower-case &#x27;L&#x27; with a curl or &#x27;i&#x27; with serif under the dot.

====Modulated sans-serifs====
A particular subgenre of sans-serifs is those such as Rothbury, Britannic, Radiant, and National Trust with obvious variation in stroke width. These have been called &#x27;modulated&#x27;, &#x27;stressed&#x27; or &#x27;high-contrast&#x27; sans-serifs. They are nowadays often placed within the humanist genre, although they predate Johnston which started the modern humanist genre. These may take inspiration from sources outside printing such as brush lettering or calligraphy.
==History==

Letters without serifs have been common in writing across history, for example in casual, non-monumental epigraphy of the classical period. However, Roman square capitals, the inspiration for much Latin-alphabet lettering throughout history, had prominent serifs. While simple sans-serif letters have always been common in &quot;uncultured&quot; writing and sometimes even in epigraphy, such as basic handwriting, most artistically authored letters in the Latin alphabet, both sculpted and printed, since the Middle Ages have been inspired by fine calligraphy, blackletter writing and Roman square capitals. As a result, printing done in the Latin alphabet for the first three hundred and fifty years of printing was &quot;serif&quot; in style, whether in blackletter, roman type, italic or occasionally script.

The earliest printing typefaces which omitted serifs were not intended to render contemporary texts, but to represent inscriptions in Ancient Greek and Etruscan. Thus, Thomas Dempster&#x27;s &quot;De Etruria regali libri VII&quot; (1723), used special types intended for the representation of Etruscan epigraphy, and in , the Caslon foundry made Etruscan types for pamphlets written by Etruscan scholar John Swinton. Another niche used of a printed sans-serif letterform from 1786 onwards was a rounded sans-serif script typeface developed by Valentin Haüy for the use of the blind to read with their fingers.

===Developing popularity===

Towards the end of the eighteenth century neoclassicism led to architects increasingly incorporating ancient Greek and Roman designs in contemporary structures. Historian James Mosley, the leading expert on early revival of sans-serif letters, has found that architect John Soane commonly used sans-serif letters on his drawings and architectural designs. Soane&#x27;s inspiration was apparently the inscriptions dedicating the Temple of Vesta in Tivoli, Italy, with minimal serifs.

These were then copied by other artists, and in London sans-serif capitals became popular for advertising, apparently because of the &quot;astonishing&quot; effect the unusual style had on the public. The lettering style apparently became referred to as &quot;old Roman&quot; or &quot;Egyptian&quot; characters, referencing the classical past and a contemporary interest in Ancient Egypt and its blocky, geometric architecture.

Mosley writes that &quot;in 1805 Egyptian letters were happening in the streets of London, being plastered over shops and on walls by signwriters, and they were astonishing the public, who had never seen letters like them and were not sure they wanted to&quot;. A depiction of the style, as an engraving, rather than printed from type, was shown in the &quot;European Magazine&quot; of 1805, described as &quot;old Roman&quot; characters. However, the style did not become used in printing for some more years. (Early sans-serif signage was not printed from type but hand-painted or carved, since at the time it was not possible to print in large sizes. This makes tracing the descent of sans-serif styles hard, since a trend can arrive in the dated, printed record from a signpainting tradition which has left less of a record or at least no dates.)

The inappropriateness of the name was not lost on the poet Robert Southey, in his satirical &quot;Letters from England&quot; written in the character of a Spanish aristocrat. It commented: &quot;The very shopboards must be... painted in Egyptian letters, which, as the Egyptians had no letters, you will doubtless conceive must be curious. They are simply the common characters, deprived of all beauty and all proportion by having all the strokes of equal thickness, so that those which should be thin look as if they had the elephantiasis.&quot; Similarly, the painter Joseph Farington wrote in his diary on 13 September 1805 of seeing a memorial engraved &quot;in what is called &quot;Egyptian Characters&quot;&quot;.

Around 1816, the Ordnance Survey began to use &#x27;Egyptian&#x27; lettering, monoline sans-serif capitals, to mark ancient Roman sites. This lettering was printed from copper plate engraving.

===Entry into printing===
Around 1816, William Caslon IV produced the first sans-serif printing type in England for the Latin alphabet, a capitals-only face under the title &#x27;Two Lines English Egyptian&#x27;, where &#x27;Two Lines English&#x27; referred to the typeface&#x27;s body size, which equals to about 28 points. Although it is known from its appearances in the firm&#x27;s specimen books, no uses of it from the period have been found; Mosley speculates that it may have been commissioned by a specific client.

A second hiatus in interest in sans-serif appears to have lasted for about twelve years, until Vincent Figgins&#x27; foundry of London issued a new sans-serif in 1828. David Ryan felt that the design was &quot;cruder but much larger&quot; than its predecessor, making it a success. Thereafter sans-serif capitals rapidly began to be issued from London typefounders.

Much imitated was the Thorowgood &quot;grotesque&quot; face of the early 1830s. This was arrestingly bold and highly condensed, quite unlike the classical proportions of Caslon&#x27;s design, but very suitable for poster typography and similar in aesthetic effect to the (generally wider) slab serif and &quot;fat faces&quot; of the period. It also added a lower-case. The term &quot;grotesque&quot; comes from the Italian word for &quot;cave&quot;, and was often used to describe Roman decorative styles found by excavation, but had long become applied in the modern sense for objects that appeared &quot;malformed or monstrous&quot;. The term &quot;grotesque&quot; became commonly used to describe sans-serifs.

Similar condensed sans-serif display typefaces, often capitals-only, became very successful. Sans-serif printing types began to appear thereafter in France and Germany.

A few theories about early sans-serifs now known to be incorrect may be mentioned here. One is that sans-serifs are based on either &quot;fat face typefaces&quot; or slab-serifs with the serifs removed. It is now known that the inspiration was more classical antiquity, and sans-serifs appeared before the first dated appearance of slab-serif letterforms in 1810. The Schelter &amp; Giesecke foundry also claimed during the 1920s to have been offering a sans-serif with lower-case by 1825. Wolfgang Homola dated it in 2004 to 1882 based on a study of Schelter &amp; Giesecke specimens; Mosley describes this as &quot;thoroughly discredited&quot;; even in 1986 Walter Tracy described the claimed dates as &quot;on stylistic grounds... about forty years too early&quot;.

Sans-serif lettering and typefaces were popular due to their clarity and legibility at distance in advertising and display use, when printed very large or small. Because sans-serif type was often used for headings and commercial printing, many early sans-serif designs did not feature lower-case letters. Simple sans-serif capitals, without use of lower-case, became very common in uses such as tombstones of the Victorian period in Britain.

The first use of sans-serif as a running text has been proposed to be the short booklet &quot;Feste des Lebens und der Kunst: eine Betrachtung des Theaters als höchsten Kultursymbols&quot; (Celebration of Life and Art: A Consideration of the Theater as the Highest Symbol of a Culture), by Peter Behrens, in 1900.


===Twentieth-century sans-serifs===
Throughout the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries sans-serif types were viewed with suspicion by many printers, especially those of fine book printing, as being fit only for advertisements (if that), and to this day most books remain printed in serif typefaces as body text. This impression would not have been helped by the standard of common sans-serif types of the period, many of which now seem somewhat lumpy and eccentrically shaped. In 1922, master printer Daniel Berkeley Updike described sans-serif typefaces as having &quot;no place in any artistically respectable composing-room.&quot; In 1937 he stated that he saw no need to change this opinion in general, though he felt that Gill Sans and Futura were the best choices if sans-serifs had to be used.

Through the early twentieth century, an increase in popularity of sans-serif typefaces took place as more artistic sans-serif designs were released. While he disliked sans-serif typefaces in general, the American printer J. L. Frazier wrote of Copperplate Gothic in 1925 that &quot;a certain dignity of effect accompanies... due to the absence of anything in the way of frills&quot;, making it a popular choice for the stationery of professionals such as lawyers and doctors. As Updike&#x27;s comments suggest, the new, more constructed humanist and geometric sans-serif designs were viewed as increasingly respectable, and were shrewdly marketed in Europe and America as embodying classic proportions (with influences of Roman capitals) while presenting a spare, modern image.

Futura in particular was extensively marketed by Bauer and its American distribution arm by brochure as capturing the spirit of modernity, using the German slogan &quot;die Schrift unserer Zeit&quot; (&quot;the typeface of our time&quot;) and in English &quot;the typeface of today and tomorrow&quot;; many typefaces were released under its influence as direct clones, or at least offered with alternate characters allowing them to imitate it if desired.

===Grotesque sans-serif revival and the International Typographic Style===

In the post-war period, an increase of interest took place in &quot;grotesque&quot; sans-serifs. Writing in &quot;The Typography of Press Advertisement&quot; (1956), printer Kenneth Day commented that Stephenson Blake&#x27;s eccentric Grotesque series had returned to popularity for having &quot;a personality sometimes lacking in the condensed forms of the contemporary sans cuttings of the last thirty years.&quot; Leading type designer Adrian Frutiger wrote in 1961 on designing a new face, Univers, on the nineteenth-century model: &quot;Some of these old sans-serifs have had a real renaissance within the last twenty years, once the reaction of the &#x27;New Objectivity&#x27; had been overcome. A purely geometrical form of type is unsustainable.&quot;

Of this period in Britain, Mosley has commented that in 1960 &quot;orders unexpectedly revived&quot; for Monotype&#x27;s eccentric Monotype Grotesque design: &quot;[it] represents, even more evocatively than Univers, the fresh revolutionary breeze that began to blow through typography in the early sixties&quot; and &quot;its rather clumsy design seems to have been one of the chief attractions to iconoclastic designers tired of the... prettiness of Gill Sans&quot;.

By the 1960s, neo-grotesque typefaces such as Univers and Helvetica had become popular through reviving the nineteenth-century grotesques while offering a more unified range of styles than on previous designs, allowing a wider range of text to be set artistically through setting headings and body text in a single family. The style of design using asymmetric layouts, Helvetica and a grid layout extensively has been called the Swiss or International Typographic Style.

==Other names==
===Early===
*&quot;Egyptian&quot;: The name of Caslon&#x27;s first general-purpose sans-serif printing type; also documented as being used by Joseph Farington to describe seeing the sans-serif inscription on John Flaxman&#x27;s memorial to Isaac Hawkins Brown in 1805, though today the term is commonly used to refer to slab serif, not sans-serif.
*&quot;Antique&quot;: Particularly popular in France; some families such as Antique Olive, still carry the name.
*&quot;Grotesque&quot;: Popularised by William Thorowgood of Fann Street Foundry from around 1830. The name came from the Italian word &#x27;grottesco&#x27;, meaning &#x27;belonging to the cave&#x27;. In Germany, the name became &quot;Grotesk&quot;.
*&quot;Doric&quot;: Used by the Caslon foundry in London
*&quot;Gothic&quot;: Popular with American type founders. Perhaps the first use of the term was due to the Boston Type and Stereotype Foundry, which in 1837 published a set of sans-serif typefaces under that name. It is believed that those were the first sans-serif designs to be introduced in America. The term may have derived from the architectural definition, which is neither Greek nor Roman, and from the extended adjective term of &quot;Germany&quot;, which was the place where sans-serif typefaces became popular in the 19th to 20th centuries. Early adopters for the term includes Miller &amp; Richard (1863), and (1865). In China, Japan and Korea, East Asian gothic typefaces are a type style characterized by strokes of even thickness and lack of decorations, thus akin to sans-serif styles in Western type design.

===Recents===
*&quot;Lineale&quot;, or &quot;linear&quot;: The term was defined by Maximilien Vox in the VOX-ATypI classification to describe sans-serif types. Later, in British Standards Classification of Typefaces (BS 2961:1967), lineale replaced sans-serif as classification name.
*&quot;Simplices&quot;: In Jean Alessandrini&#x27;s (preliminary designations), the term (plain typefaces) is used to describe sans-serif on the basis that the name &#x27;lineal&#x27; refers to lines, whereas, in reality, all typefaces are made of lines, including those that are not lineals.
*&quot;Swiss&quot;: It is used as a synonym to sans-serif, as opposed to &quot;roman&quot; (serif). The OpenDocument format (ISO/IEC 26300:2006) and Rich Text Format can use it to specify the sans-serif generic typeface (&quot;font family&quot;) name for the font files used in a document. Presumably refers to the popularity of sans-serif grotesque and neo-grotesque types in Switzerland.
*&quot;Industrial&quot;: Used to refer to grotesque and neo-grotesque sans-serifs that are not based on &quot;artistic&quot; principles, as humanist, geometric and decorative designs normally are.

==Gallery==

== See also ==
* East Asian sans-serif typeface
* Emphasis (typography)
* List of sans serif typefaces
* San Serriffe, an April Fools&#x27; joke by the newspaper &quot;The Guardian&quot;

== Explanatory notes ==
== References ==
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
*The sanserif: the search for examples (lecture by James Mosley)
*The true source of the sans (lecture to ATypI by Jon Melton)
*The Sans Serif in France: The Early Years (1834–44) (lecture by )
*Panorama: A of 19th century poster type (presentation by Pierre Pané-Farré to Ésad Amiens)
*Grotesque: The Birth of The Modern Sans Serif in The Types of The Nineteenth Century (Lecture at Cooper Union by Sara Soskolne)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q159964" start="3" end="13" title="typography" label="typography"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538738" start="18" end="27" title="lettering" label="lettering"/>
<link wikidata="Q864011" start="31" end="41" title="Sans-serif" label="sans-serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q864011" start="43" end="53" title="Sans-serif" label="sans serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q864011" start="58" end="64" title="Sans-serif" label="gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q864011" start="76" end="80" title="Sans-serif" label="sans"/>
<link wikidata="Q243449" start="150" end="155" title="serif" label="serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q243449" start="253" end="258" title="serif" label="serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889081" start="315" end="324" title="Modern typography" label="modernity"/>
<link wikidata="Q173436" start="328" end="338" title="minimalism" label="minimalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q424598" start="879" end="890" title="Display typeface" label="display use"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378314" start="904" end="913" title="body text" label="body text"/>
<link wikidata="Q908121" start="1126" end="1132" title="East Asian gothic typeface" label="gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7019371" start="1227" end="1238" title="News Gothic" label="News Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671285" start="1240" end="1254" title="Highway Gothic" label="Highway Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424804" start="1256" end="1271" title="Franklin Gothic" label="Franklin Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831947" start="1275" end="1287" title="Trade Gothic" label="Trade Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q920915" start="1378" end="1386" title="emphasis (typography)" label="emphasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543909" start="1419" end="1429" title="type color" label="type color"/>
<link wikidata="Q693749" start="1792" end="1798" title="Didone (typography)" label="Didone"/>
<link wikidata="Q344098" start="2014" end="2021" title="Italic type" label="italics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045635" start="2675" end="2685" title="Descender (typography)" label="descenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232321" start="2796" end="2803" title="oblique type" label="oblique"/>
<link wikidata="Q424600" start="2924" end="2940" title="Akzidenz-Grotesk" label="Akzidenz-Grotesk"/>
<link wikidata="Q28230583" start="2942" end="2947" title="Venus (typeface)" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7019371" start="2949" end="2960" title="News Gothic" label="News Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424804" start="2962" end="2977" title="Franklin Gothic" label="Franklin Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43305211" start="2979" end="2987" title="IBM Plex" label="IBM Plex"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902058" start="2992" end="3010" title="Monotype Grotesque" label="Monotype Grotesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q28452292" start="3049" end="3064" title="Grotesque (Stephenson Blake typefaces)" label="Grotesque No. 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147633" start="3104" end="3117" title="computer font" label="digital fonts"/>
<link wikidata="Q504745" start="3959" end="3968" title="Helvetica" label="Helvetica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140911" start="4152" end="4183" title="International Typographic Style" label="International Typographic Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q424600" start="4242" end="4258" title="Akzidenz-Grotesk" label="Akzidenz-Grotesk"/>
<link wikidata="Q504745" start="4377" end="4386" title="Helvetica" label="Helvetica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065215" start="4388" end="4395" title="Univers" label="Univers"/>
<link wikidata="Q456289" start="4401" end="4406" title="Folio (typeface)" label="Folio"/>
<link wikidata="Q533425" start="4944" end="4959" title="Roman square capitals" label="classical model"/>
<link wikidata="Q213637" start="5077" end="5090" title="Herbert Bayer" label="Herbert Bayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q90974" start="5095" end="5106" title="Jakob Erbar" label="Jakob Erbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400243" start="5203" end="5218" title="Architype Bayer" label="Architype Bayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q942044" start="5224" end="5229" title="Erbar (typeface)" label="Erbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q247686" start="5242" end="5248" title="Futura (typeface)" label="Futura"/>
<link wikidata="Q552409" start="5253" end="5264" title="Paul Renner" label="Paul Renner"/>
<link wikidata="Q657153" start="5534" end="5539" title="Kabel (typeface)" label="Kabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q30580539" start="5541" end="5551" title="Semplicità (typeface)" label="Semplicità"/>
<link wikidata="Q825106" start="5553" end="5568" title="Bernhard Gothic" label="Bernhard Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859717" start="5570" end="5575" title="Nobel (typeface)" label="Nobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345842" start="5580" end="5585" title="Metro (typeface)" label="Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q790168" start="5628" end="5643" title="ITC Avant Garde" label="ITC Avant Garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956878" start="5645" end="5662" title="Brandon Grotesque" label="Brandon Grotesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q4147080" start="5664" end="5670" title="Gotham (typeface)" label="Gotham"/>
<link wikidata="Q505337" start="5672" end="5678" title="Avenir (typeface)" label="Avenir"/>
<link wikidata="Q25022191" start="5680" end="5692" title="Product Sans" label="Product Sans"/>
<link wikidata="Q63986220" start="5694" end="5708" title="HarmonyOS Sans (sans-serif typeface)" label="HarmonyOS Sans"/>
<link wikidata="Q472836" start="5713" end="5727" title="Century Gothic" label="Century Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q124354" start="5810" end="5817" title="Bauhaus" label="Bauhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4333890" start="6390" end="6401" title="Bank Gothic" label="Bank Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q591913" start="6403" end="6411" title="DIN 1451" label="DIN 1451"/>
<link wikidata="Q448605" start="6413" end="6422" title="Eurostile" label="Eurostile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126707" start="6427" end="6440" title="Handel Gothic" label="Handel Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104700" start="6487" end="6498" title="Ray Larabie" label="Ray Larabie"/>
<link wikidata="Q533425" start="6600" end="6621" title="Roman square capitals" label="Roman square capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q344098" start="6678" end="6690" title="Italic type" label="true italics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232321" start="6706" end="6713" title="Oblique type" label="oblique"/>
<link wikidata="Q188725" start="6715" end="6723" title="typographic ligature" label="ligature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237024" start="6734" end="6739" title="swash (typography)" label="swash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292717" start="6794" end="6809" title="Edward Johnston" label="Edward Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q383685" start="6817" end="6825" title="Johnston (typeface)" label="Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q255886" start="6867" end="6876" title="Gill Sans" label="Gill Sans"/>
<link wikidata="Q551426" start="6878" end="6887" title="Eric Gill" label="Eric Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q12681" start="6915" end="6927" title="Calligraphy" label="calligrapher"/>
<link wikidata="Q192784" start="7019" end="7035" title="Column of Trajan" label="Column of Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60302" start="7266" end="7278" title="Hermann Zapf" label="Hermann Zapf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091875" start="7286" end="7292" title="Optima" label="Optima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766362" start="7693" end="7699" title="Syntax (typeface)" label="Syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q24963401" start="7701" end="7711" title="Goudy Sans" label="Goudy Sans"/>
<link wikidata="Q15496832" start="7716" end="7728" title="Rosemary Sassoon" label="Sassoon Sans"/>
<link wikidata="Q915886" start="7789" end="7797" title="Frutiger (typeface)" label="Frutiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q504745" start="8110" end="8119" title="Helvetica" label="Helvetica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065215" start="8124" end="8131" title="Univers" label="Univers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147633" start="8169" end="8182" title="computer font" label="computer font"/>
<link wikidata="Q368188" start="8277" end="8284" title="FF Meta" label="FF Meta"/>
<link wikidata="Q246119" start="8286" end="8292" title="Myriad (typeface)" label="Myriad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420274" start="8294" end="8300" title="Thesis (typeface)" label="Thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625487" start="8302" end="8316" title="Charlotte Sans" label="Charlotte Sans"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457461" start="8318" end="8323" title="Bliss (typeface)" label="Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7534970" start="8325" end="8329" title="Skia (typeface)" label="Skia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5425447" start="8334" end="8344" title="FF Scala Sans" label="Scala Sans"/>
<link wikidata="Q910757" start="8412" end="8418" title="Tahoma (typeface)" label="Tahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631297" start="8420" end="8429" title="Trebuchet MS" label="Trebuchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q610791" start="8431" end="8438" title="Verdana" label="Verdana"/>
<link wikidata="Q246937" start="8440" end="8447" title="Calibri" label="Calibri"/>
<link wikidata="Q246157" start="8452" end="8458" title="Corbel (typeface)" label="Corbel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560024" start="8471" end="8484" title="Lucida Grande" label="Lucida Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q93213277" start="8486" end="8495" title="Fira Sans" label="Fira Sans"/>
<link wikidata="Q605923" start="8500" end="8510" title="Droid fonts" label="Droid Sans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452931" start="8684" end="8693" title="Counter (typography)" label="apertures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338537" start="8932" end="8941" title="Neuzeit S" label="Neuzeit S"/>
<link wikidata="Q60302" start="8999" end="9011" title="Hermann Zapf" label="Hermann Zapf"/>
<link wikidata="Q24886195" start="9019" end="9030" title="URW Grotesk" label="URW Grotesk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996667" start="9032" end="9039" title="Whitney (typeface)" label="Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6419999" start="9088" end="9095" title="Klavika" label="Klavika"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834844" start="9194" end="9203" title="Transport (typeface)" label="Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425381" start="9208" end="9212" title="Tern (typeface)" label="Tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345839" start="9503" end="9512" title="Britannic (typeface)" label="Britannic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457380" start="9514" end="9521" title="Radiant (typeface)" label="Radiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457591" start="9527" end="9541" title="National Trust (typeface)" label="National Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q181260" start="10036" end="10045" title="epigraphy" label="epigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q533425" start="10080" end="10101" title="Roman square capitals" label="Roman square capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q213686" start="10492" end="10503" title="blackletter" label="blackletter"/>
<link wikidata="Q533425" start="10516" end="10537" title="Roman square capitals" label="Roman square capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q213686" start="10687" end="10698" title="blackletter" label="blackletter"/>
<link wikidata="Q484023" start="10700" end="10710" title="roman type" label="roman type"/>
<link wikidata="Q344098" start="10712" end="10718" title="italic type" label="italic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249794" start="10735" end="10741" title="Script typeface" label="script"/>
<link wikidata="Q35726" start="10896" end="10904" title="Etruscan language" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q672898" start="10912" end="10927" title="Thomas Dempster" label="Thomas Dempster"/>
<link wikidata="Q271565" start="11037" end="11055" title="Etruscan alphabet" label="Etruscan epigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259828" start="11147" end="11159" title="John Swinton (1703–1777)" label="John Swinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q704417" start="11287" end="11300" title="Valentin Haüy" label="Valentin Haüy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="11426" end="11439" title="neoclassicism" label="neoclassicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q22004551" start="11555" end="11567" title="James Mosley" label="James Mosley"/>
<link wikidata="Q549786" start="11653" end="11663" title="John Soane" label="John Soane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219688" start="11812" end="11827" title="Temple of Vesta, Tivoli" label="Temple of Vesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q159605" start="11831" end="11844" title="Tivoli, Lazio" label="Tivoli, Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752827" start="12217" end="12238" title="Ancient Egypt in the Western imagination" label="contemporary interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412795" start="12656" end="12673" title="European Magazine" label="European Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q216838" start="13208" end="13222" title="Robert Southey" label="Robert Southey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6283034" start="13719" end="13735" title="Joseph Farington" label="Joseph Farington"/>
<link wikidata="Q548721" start="13887" end="13902" title="Ordnance Survey" label="Ordnance Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404074" start="14237" end="14275" title="Caslon Egyptian" label="&amp;#x27;Two Lines English Egyptian&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7931791" start="14684" end="14699" title="Vincent Figgins" label="Vincent Figgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892715" start="15245" end="15255" title="slab serif" label="slab serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q94979689" start="15260" end="15281" title="Fat face typefaces" label="&amp;quot;fat faces&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q94979689" start="15978" end="15996" title="fat face typefaces" label="fat face typefaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892715" start="16006" end="16016" title="slab-serif" label="slab-serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q7431114" start="16208" end="16239" title="Schelter &amp;amp; Giesecke Type Foundry" label="Schelter &amp;amp; Giesecke foundry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966295" start="16500" end="16512" title="Walter Tracy" label="Walter Tracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q76726" start="17343" end="17356" title="Peter Behrens" label="Peter Behrens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450120" start="17543" end="17561" title="Fine press" label="fine book printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4067973" start="17875" end="17897" title="Daniel Berkeley Updike" label="Daniel Berkeley Updike"/>
<link wikidata="Q255886" start="18101" end="18110" title="Gill Sans" label="Gill Sans"/>
<link wikidata="Q247686" start="18115" end="18121" title="Futura (typeface)" label="Futura"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168849" start="18420" end="18438" title="Copperplate Gothic" label="Copperplate Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28452292" start="19722" end="19738" title="Grotesque (Stephenson Blake typefaces)" label="Grotesque series"/>
<link wikidata="Q123621" start="19926" end="19941" title="Adrian Frutiger" label="Adrian Frutiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065215" start="19981" end="19988" title="Univers" label="Univers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583606" start="20353" end="20368" title="Monotype Imaging" label="Monotype&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902058" start="20379" end="20397" title="Monotype Grotesque" label="Monotype Grotesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065215" start="20764" end="20771" title="Univers" label="Univers"/>
<link wikidata="Q504745" start="20776" end="20785" title="Helvetica" label="Helvetica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140911" start="21156" end="21187" title="International Typographic Style" label="International Typographic Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q6283034" start="21348" end="21364" title="Joseph Farington" label="Joseph Farington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6076466" start="21446" end="21465" title="Isaac Hawkins Browne (poet)" label="Isaac Hawkins Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892715" start="21526" end="21536" title="slab serif" label="slab serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q582888" start="21630" end="21643" title="Antique Olive" label="Antique Olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q17388833" start="21706" end="21724" title="William Thorowgood" label="William Thorowgood"/>
<link wikidata="Q18159886" start="21728" end="21739" title="Fann Street" label="Fann Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303526" start="22563" end="22583" title="Miller &amp;amp; Richard" label="Miller &amp;amp; Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q908121" start="22631" end="22657" title="East Asian gothic typeface" label="East Asian gothic typeface"/>
<link wikidata="Q322131" start="22883" end="22897" title="Maximilien Vox" label="Maximilien Vox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437688" start="22905" end="22929" title="VOX-ATypI classification" label="VOX-ATypI classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q920219" start="22970" end="22987" title="British Standards" label="British Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437688" start="23017" end="23024" title="BS 2961" label="BS 2961"/>
<link wikidata="Q184473" start="23481" end="23493" title="OpenDocument" label="OpenDocument"/>
<link wikidata="Q467454" start="23526" end="23542" title="Rich Text Format" label="Rich Text Format"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147633" start="23636" end="23645" title="font file" label="font file"/>
<link wikidata="Q908121" start="23995" end="24025" title="East Asian sans-serif typeface" label="East Asian sans-serif typeface"/>
<link wikidata="Q920915" start="24028" end="24049" title="Emphasis (typography)" label="Emphasis (typography)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410152" start="24052" end="24080" title="List of sans serif typefaces" label="List of sans serif typefaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415312" start="24083" end="24095" title="San Serriffe" label="San Serriffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="24146" end="24158" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q743360" start="24345" end="24350" title="ATypI" label="ATypI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7421776" start="24639" end="24652" title="Sara Soskolne" label="Sara Soskolne"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64100" wikidata="Q243449" url="?curid=64100" title="Serif">
<text>In typography, a serif () is a small line or stroke regularly attached to the end of a larger stroke in a letter or symbol within a particular font or family of fonts. A typeface or &quot;font family&quot; making use of serifs is called a serif typeface (or serifed typeface), and a typeface that does not include them is sans-serif. Some typography sources refer to sans-serif typefaces as &quot;grotesque&quot; (in German, ) or &quot;Gothic&quot; (although this often refers to blackletter type as well) and serif typefaces as &quot;roman&quot; (or in German, ).

Serif typefaces can be broadly classified into one of four subgroups: Old-style, Transitional, Didone, and Slab serif, in order of first emergence.

==Origins and etymology==
Serifs originated from the first official Greek writings on stone and in Latin alphabet with inscriptional lettering—words carved into stone in Roman antiquity. The explanation proposed by Father Edward Catich in his 1968 book &quot;The Origin of the Serif&quot; is now broadly but not universally accepted: the Roman letter outlines were first painted onto stone, and the stone carvers followed the brush marks, which flared at stroke ends and corners, creating serifs. Another theory is that serifs were devised to neaten the ends of lines as they were chiselled into stone.

The origin of the word &#x27;serif&#x27; is obscure, but apparently is almost as recent as the type style. The book &quot;The British Standard of the Capital Letters contained in the Roman Alphabet, forming a complete code of systematic rules for a mathematical construction and accurate formation of the same&quot; (1813) by William Hollins, defined &#x27;surripses&#x27;, usually pronounced &quot;surriphs&quot;, as &quot;projections which appear at the tops and bottoms of some letters, the O and Q excepted, at the beginning or end, and sometimes at each, of all&quot;. The standard also proposed that &#x27;surripsis&#x27; may be a Greek word derived from (, &quot;together&quot;) and (, &quot;projection&quot;).

In 1827, Greek scholar Julian Hibbert printed with his own experimental uncial Greek types, remarking that the types of Giambattista Bodoni&#x27;s &quot;Callimachus&quot; were &quot;ornamented (or rather disfigured) by additions of what [he] believe[s] type-founders call syrifs or cerefs&quot;. The printer Thomas Curson Hansard referred to them as &quot;ceriphs&quot; in 1825. The oldest citations in the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; (&quot;OED&quot;) are 1830 for &#x27;serif&#x27; and 1841 for &#x27;sans serif&#x27;. The &quot;OED&quot; speculates that &#x27;serif&#x27; was a back-formation from &#x27;sanserif&#x27;.

&quot;Webster&#x27;s Third New International Dictionary&quot; traces &#x27;serif&#x27; to the Dutch noun , meaning &quot;line, stroke of the pen&quot;, related to the verb , &quot;to delete, strike through&quot; ( now also means &quot;serif&quot; in Dutch). Yet, is the past tense of (to write). The relation between and is documented by Van Veen and Van der Sijs. In her book , Van der Sijs lists words by first known publication in the language area that is the Netherlands today:
* , 1100;
* , 1350;
* , 1406 (i.e. is from (to write), not from (to scratch, eliminate by strike-through)).

The &quot;OED&quot;″s earliest citation for &quot;grotesque&quot; in this sense is 1875, giving &#x27;stone-letter&#x27; as a synonym. It would seem to mean &quot;out of the ordinary&quot; in this usage, as in art &#x27;grotesque&#x27; usually means &quot;elaborately decorated&quot;. Other synonyms include &quot;Doric&quot; and &quot;Gothic&quot;, commonly used for Japanese Gothic typefaces.

==Classification==

===Old-style===
Old-style typefaces date back to 1465, shortly after Johannes Gutenberg&#x27;s adoption of the movable type printing press. Early printers in Italy created types that broke with Gutenberg&#x27;s blackletter printing, creating upright (&quot;roman&quot;) and then oblique (&quot;italic&quot;) styles that were inspired by Renaissance calligraphy. Old-style serif fonts have remained popular for setting body text because of their organic appearance and excellent readability on rough book paper. The increasing interest in early printing during the late 19th and early 20th centuries saw a return to the designs of Renaissance printers and type-founders, many of whose names and designs are still used today.

Old-style type is characterized by a lack of large differences between thick and thin lines (low line contrast) and generally, but less often, by a diagonal stress (the thinnest parts of letters are at an angle rather than at the top and bottom). An old-style font normally has a left-inclining curve axis with weight stress at about 8 and 2 o&#x27;clock; serifs are almost always bracketed (they have curves connecting the serif to the stroke); head serifs are often angled.

Old-style faces evolved over time, showing increasing abstraction from what would now be considered handwriting and blackletter characteristics, and often increased delicacy or contrast as printing technique improved. Old-style faces have often sub-divided into &#x27;Venetian&#x27; (or &#x27;humanist&#x27;) and &#x27;Garalde&#x27; (or &#x27;Aldine&#x27;), a division made on the Vox-ATypI classification system. Nonetheless, some have argued that the difference is excessively abstract, hard to spot except to specialists and implies a clearer separation between styles than originally appeared. Modern typefaces such as Arno and Trinité may fuse both styles.

Early &quot;humanist&quot; roman types were introduced in Italy. Modelled on the script of the period, they tend to feature an &quot;e&quot; in which the cross stroke is angled, not horizontal; an &quot;M&quot; with two-way serifs; and often a relatively dark colour on the page. In modern times, that of Nicolas Jenson has been the most admired, with many revivals. Garaldes, which tend to feature a level cross-stroke on the &quot;e&quot;, descend from an influential 1495 font cut by engraver Francesco Griffo for printer Aldus Manutius, which became the inspiration for many typefaces cut in France from the 1530s onwards. Often lighter on the page and made in larger sizes than had been used for roman type before, French Garalde faces rapidly spread throughout Europe from the 1530s to become an international standard.

Also during this period, italic type evolved from a quite separate genre of type, intended for informal uses such as poetry, into taking a secondary role for emphasis. Italics moved from being conceived as separate designs and proportions to being able to be fitted into the same line as roman type with a design complementary to it.

Examples of contemporary Garalde old-style typefaces are Bembo, Garamond, Galliard, Granjon, Goudy Old Style, Minion, Palatino, Renard, Sabon, and Scala. Contemporary typefaces with Venetian old style characteristics include Cloister, Adobe Jenson, the Golden Type, Hightower Text, Centaur, Goudy&#x27;s Italian Old Style and Berkeley Old Style and ITC Legacy. Several of these blend in Garalde influences to fit modern expectations, especially placing single-sided serifs on the &quot;M&quot;; Cloister is an exception. 

==== Dutch taste ====
A new genre of serif type developed around the 17th century in the Netherlands and Germany that came to be called the &quot;Dutch taste&quot; ( in French). It was a tendency towards denser, more solid typefaces, often with a high x-height (tall lower-case letters) and a sharp contrast between thick and thin strokes, perhaps influenced by blackletter faces.

Artists in the &quot;Dutch taste&quot; style include Hendrik van den Keere, Nicolaas Briot, Christoffel van Dijck, Miklós Tótfalusi Kis and the Janson and Ehrhardt types based on his work and Caslon, especially the larger sizes.

===Transitional===

Transitional, or baroque, serif typefaces first became common around the mid-18th century until the start of the 19th. They are in between &quot;old style&quot; and &quot;modern&quot; fonts, thus the name &quot;transitional&quot;. Differences between thick and thin lines are more pronounced than they are in old style, but less dramatic than they are in the Didone fonts that followed. Stress is more likely to be vertical, and often the &quot;R&quot; has a curled tail. The ends of many strokes are marked not by blunt or angled serifs but by ball terminals. Transitional faces often have an italic &#x27;h&#x27; that opens outwards at bottom right. Because the genre bridges styles, it is difficult to define where the genre starts and ends. Many of the most popular transitional designs are later creations in the same style.

Fonts from the original period of transitional typefaces include early on the in France, then the work of Pierre Simon Fournier in France, Fleischman and Rosart in the Low Countries, Pradell in Spain and John Baskerville and Bulmer in England. Among more recent designs, Times New Roman (1932), Perpetua, Plantin, Mrs. Eaves, Freight Text, and the earlier &quot;modernised old styles&quot; have been described as transitional in design.

Later 18th-century transitional typefaces in Britain begin to show influences of Didone typefaces from Europe, described below, and the two genres blur, especially in type intended for body text; Bell is an example of this.

===Didone===
Didone, or modern, serif typefaces, which first emerged in the late 18th century, are characterized by extreme contrast between thick and thin lines. These typefaces have a vertical stress and thin serifs with a constant width, with minimal bracketing (constant width). Serifs tend to be very thin, and vertical lines very heavy. Didone fonts are often considered to be less readable than transitional or old-style serif typefaces. Period examples include Bodoni, Didot, and Walbaum. Computer Modern is a popular contemporary example. The very popular Century is a softened version of the same basic design, with reduced contrast. Didone typefaces achieved dominance of printing in the early 19th-century printing before declining in popularity in the second half of the century and especially in the 20th as new designs and revivals of old-style faces emerged.

In print, Didone fonts are often used on high-gloss magazine paper for magazines such as &quot;Harper&#x27;s Bazaar&quot;, where the paper retains the detail of their high contrast well, and for whose image a crisp, &quot;European&quot; design of type may be considered appropriate. They are used more often for general-purpose body text, such as book printing, in Europe. They remain popular in the printing of Greek, as the Didot family were among the first to establish a printing press in newly independent Greece. The period of Didone types&#x27; greatest popularity coincided with the rapid spread of printed posters and commercial ephemera and the arrival of bold type. As a result, many Didone typefaces are among the earliest designed for &quot;display&quot; use, with an ultra-bold &quot;fat face&quot; style becoming a common sub-genre.

===Slab serif===

Slab serif typefaces date to about 1817.&lt;ref name=&quot;Three chapters in the development of clarendon/ionic typefaces&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Originally intended as attention-grabbing designs for posters, they have very thick serifs, which tend to be as thick as the vertical lines themselves. Slab serif fonts vary considerably: some such as Rockwell have a geometric design with minimal variation in stroke width—they are sometimes described as sans-serif fonts with added serifs. Others such as those of the &quot;Clarendon&quot; model have a structure more like most other serif fonts, though with larger and more obvious serifs. These designs may have bracketed serifs that increase width along their length.

Because of the clear, bold nature of the large serifs, slab serif designs are often used for posters and in small print. Many monospace fonts, on which all characters occupy the same amount of horizontal space as in a typewriter, are slab-serif designs. While not always purely slab-serif designs, many fonts intended for newspaper use have large slab-like serifs for clearer reading on poor-quality paper. Many early slab-serif types, being intended for posters, only come in bold styles with the key differentiation being width, and often have no lower-case letters at all.

Examples of slab-serif typefaces include Clarendon, Rockwell, Archer, Courier, Excelsior, TheSerif, and Zilla Slab. FF Meta Serif and Guardian Egyptian are examples of newspaper and small print-oriented typefaces with some slab-serif characteristics, often most visible in the bold weights. In the late 20th century, the term &quot;humanist slab-serif&quot; has been applied to typefaces such as Chaparral, Caecilia and Tisa, with strong serifs but an outline structure with some influence of old-style serif typefaces.
===Other styles===
During the 19th century, genres of serif type besides conventional body text faces proliferated. These included &quot;Tuscan&quot; faces, with ornamental, decorative ends to the strokes rather than serifs, and &quot;Latin&quot; or &quot;wedge-serif&quot; faces, with pointed serifs, which were particularly popular in France and other parts of Europe including for signage applications such as business cards or shop fronts.

Well-known typefaces in the &quot;Latin&quot; style include Wide Latin, Copperplate Gothic, Johnston Delf Smith and the more restrained Méridien.

==Readability and legibility==

Serifed fonts are widely used for body text because they are considered easier to read than sans-serif fonts in print. Colin Wheildon, who conducted scientific studies from 1982 to 1990, found that sans serif fonts created various difficulties for readers that impaired their comprehension. According to Kathleen Tinkel, studies suggest that &quot;most sans serif typefaces may be slightly less legible than most serif faces, but ... the difference can be offset by careful setting&quot;.

Sans-serif are considered to be more legible on computer screens. According to Alex Poole, &quot;we should accept that most reasonably designed typefaces in mainstream use will be equally legible&quot;. A study suggested that serif fonts are more legible on a screen but are not generally preferred to sans serif fonts. Another study indicated that comprehension times for individual words are slightly faster when written in a sans serif font versus a serif font.

When size of an individual glyph is 9–20 pixels, proportional serifs and some lines of most glyphs of common vector fonts are smaller than individual pixels. Hinting, spatial anti-aliasing, and subpixel rendering allow to render distinguishable serifs even in this case, but their proportions and appearance are off and thickness is close to many lines of the main glyph, strongly altering appearance of the glyph. Consequently, it is sometimes advised to use sans-serif fonts for content meant to be displayed on screens, as they scale better for low resolutions. Indeed, most web pages employ sans-serif type. Recent introduction of desktop displays with 300+ dpi resolution might eventually make this recommendation obsolete.

As serifs originated in inscription, they are generally not used in handwriting. A common exception is the printed capital I, where the addition of serifs distinguishes the character from lowercase L (l). The printed capital J and the numeral 1 are also often handwritten with serifs.

==Gallery==
Below are some images of serif letterforms across history:
== Analogues in other writing systems ==
=== East Asia ===

In the Chinese and Japanese writing systems, there are common type styles based on the regular script for Chinese characters akin to serif and sans serif fonts in the West. In Mainland China, the most popular category of serifed-like typefaces for body text is called Song (, ); in Japan, the most popular serif style is called ; and in Taiwan and Hong Kong, it is called (, ). The names of these lettering styles come from the Song and Ming dynasties, when block printing flourished in China. Because the wood grain on printing blocks ran horizontally, it was fairly easy to carve horizontal lines with the grain. However, carving vertical or slanted patterns was difficult because those patterns intersect with the grain and break easily. This resulted in a typeface that has thin horizontal strokes and thick vertical strokes. In accordance with Chinese calligraphy (kaiti style in particular), where each horizontal stroke is ended with a dipping motion of the brush, the ending of horizontal strokes are also thickened. These design forces resulted in the current Song typeface characterized by thick vertical strokes contrasted with thin horizontal strokes, triangular ornaments at the end of single horizontal strokes, and overall geometrical regularity.

In Japanese typography, the equivalent of serifs on kanji and kana characters are called —&quot;fish scales&quot;. In Chinese, the serifs are called either (, lit. &quot;forms with legs&quot;) or (, lit. &quot;forms with ornamental lines&quot;).

The other common East Asian style of type is called black (, ) in Chinese and in Japanese. This group is characterized by lines of even thickness for each stroke, the equivalent of &quot;sans serif&quot;. This style, first introduced on newspaper headlines, is commonly used on headings, websites, signs and billboards. A Japanese-language font designed in imitation of western serifs also exists.

=== Thai ===

Farang Ses, designed in 1913, was the first Thai typeface to employ thick and thin strokes reflecting old-style serif Latin typefaces, and became extremely popular, with its derivatives widely used into the digital age. (Examples: Angsana UPC, Kinnari)

===Compared to blackletter===
In Germany and other Central European countries, blackletter remained the norm in body text for longer than in Western Europe; see the Antiqua–Fraktur dispute, often dividing along ideological or political lines. After the mid-20th century, Fraktur fell out of favor and Antiqua-based typefaces became the official standard in Germany. (In German, the term &quot;Antiqua&quot; refers to serif typefaces.)

==See also==
* Homoglyph
* Ming (typeface), a similar style in Asian typefaces
** The analogs of serifs, known in Japanese as &quot;uroko&quot;, literally &quot;fish scales&quot;
* San Serriffe, an elaborate typographic joke

===Lists of serif typefaces===
* List of serif typefaces
* List of typefaces#Serif
* Old-style
* Transitional
* Didone

==Notes==
==Citations==
==Bibliography==
* Robert Bringhurst, &quot;The Elements of Typographic Style,&quot; version 4.0 (Vancouver, BC, Canada: Hartley &amp; Marks Publishers, 2012), .
* Harry Carter, &quot;A View of Early Typography: Up to about 1600&quot; (London: Hyphen Press, 2002).
* Father Edward Catich, &quot;The Origin of the Serif: Brush Writing and Roman Letters&quot;, 2nd ed., edited by Mary W. Gilroy (Davenport, Iowa: Catich Gallery, St. Ambrose University, 1991), .
* Nicolete Gray, &quot;Nineteenth Century Ornamented Typefaces&quot;, 2nd ed. (Faber, 1976), .
* Alfred F. Johnson, &quot;Type Designs: Their History and Development&quot; (Grafton, 1959).
* Stan Knight, &quot;Historical Types: From Gutenberg to Ashendene&quot; (Oak Knoll Press, 2012), .
* Ellen Lupton, &quot;Thinking with Type: A Critical Guide for Designers, Writers, Editors, &amp; Students&quot;, 2nd ed. (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2010), , &lt;www.thinkingwithtype.com&gt;.
* Indra Kupferschmid, &quot;Some Type Genres Explained,&quot; Type, kupferschrift.de (2016-01-15).
* Stanley Morison, &quot;A Tally of Types&quot;, edited by Brooke Crutchley et al., 2nd ed. (London: Cambridge University Press, 1973), . (on revivals of historical typefaces created by the British company Monotype)
* ———, “Type Designs of the Past and Present,” was serialized in 4 parts in 1937 in &quot;PM Magazine&quot; (the last 2 are available online):
** “Part 1,” &quot;PM Magazine&quot;, 4, 1 (1937-09);
** “Part 2,” &quot;PM Magazine&quot;, 4, 2 (1937-12);
** “Part 3 ,” &quot;PM Magazine&quot;, 4, 3 (1937-11): 17–32;
** “Part 4 ,” &quot;PM Magazine&quot;, 4, 4 (1937-12): 61–81.
*Sébastien Morlighem, &quot;The &#x27;modern face&#x27; in France and Great Britain, 1781-1825: typography as an ideal of progress&quot; (thesis, University of Reading, 2014), download link
* Sébastien Morlighem, &quot;Robert Thorne and the Introduction of the &#x27;modern&#x27; fat face&quot;, 2020, Poem, and presentation
* James Mosley, &quot;Ornamented types: twenty-three alphabets from the foundry of Louis John Poucheé&quot;, I.M. Imprimit, 1993
* Paul Shaw, &quot;Revival Type: Digital Typefaces Inspired by the Past&quot; (Brighton: Quid Publishing, 2017), .
* Walter Tracy, &quot;Letters of Credit: A View of Type Design&quot;, 2nd ed. (David R. Godine, 2003), .
* Daniel Berkeley Updike, &quot;Printing Types, their History, Forms, and Use: A Study in Survivals&quot;, 2 vols. (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1922), and —now outdated and known for a strong, not always accurate dislike of Dutch and modern-face printing, but extremely comprehensive in scope.
* H. D. L. Vervliet, &quot;The Palaeotypography of the French Renaissance: Selected Papers on Sixteenth-Century Typefaces&quot;, 2 vols., Library of the Written Word series, No. 6, The Handpress World subseries, No. 4 (Leiden: Koninklijke Brill NV, 2008-11-27), .
* ———, &quot;Sixteenth Century Printing Types of the Low Countries&quot;, Annotated catalogue (Leiden: Koninklijke Brill NV, 1968-01-01), .
* ———, &quot;French Renaissance Printing Types: A Conspectus&quot; (Oak Knoll Press, 2010).
* ———, &quot;Liber librorum: 5000 ans d&#x27;art du livre&quot; (Arcade, 1972).
** Translation: Fernand Baudin, &quot;The Book Through Five Thousand Years: A Survey&quot;, edited by Hendrik D. L. Vervliet (London: Phaidon, 1972).
* James Mosley&#x27;s reading lists: &quot;Type and its Uses, 1455–1830&quot;, 1830-2000</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q159964" start="3" end="13" title="typography" label="typography"/>
<link wikidata="Q243449" start="17" end="22" title="Serif" label="serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868296" start="143" end="147" title="font" label="font"/>
<link wikidata="Q17451" start="170" end="178" title="typeface" label="typeface"/>
<link wikidata="Q243449" start="239" end="253" title="Serif" label="serif typeface"/>
<link wikidata="Q243449" start="258" end="274" title="Serif" label="serifed typeface"/>
<link wikidata="Q864011" start="322" end="332" title="sans-serif" label="sans-serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="417" end="423" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q213686" start="480" end="491" title="blackletter" label="blackletter"/>
<link wikidata="Q484023" start="535" end="540" title="Roman type" label="roman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="636" end="645" title="Serif#Old-style" label="Old-style"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="647" end="659" title="Serif#Transitional" label="Transitional"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="661" end="667" title="Serif#Didone" label="Didone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="673" end="683" title="Serif#Slab serif" label="Slab serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="814" end="828" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q533425" start="834" end="857" title="Roman square capitals" label="inscriptional lettering"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="891" end="900" title="Classical antiquity" label="antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342231" start="937" end="950" title="Edward Catich" label="Edward Catich"/>
<link wikidata="Q18672827" start="1645" end="1660" title="William Hollins" label="William Hollins"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2061" end="2075" title="Julian Hibbert" label="Julian Hibbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q784235" start="2110" end="2116" title="uncial" label="uncial"/>
<link wikidata="Q220768" start="2158" end="2177" title="Giambattista Bodoni" label="Giambattista Bodoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423282" start="2346" end="2367" title="Thomas Curson Hansard" label="Thomas Curson Hansard"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="2451" end="2476" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q989162" start="2629" end="2643" title="back-formation" label="back-formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q33105447" start="2678" end="2727" title="Webster&amp;#x27;s Third New International Dictionary" label="Webster&amp;#x27;s Third New International Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="2766" end="2771" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q42106" start="3390" end="3397" title="synonym" label="synonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q908121" start="3632" end="3656" title="Japanese Gothic typeface" label="Japanese Gothic typeface"/>
<link wikidata="Q8958" start="3749" end="3767" title="Johannes Gutenberg" label="Johannes Gutenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q426853" start="3791" end="3803" title="movable type" label="movable type"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="3804" end="3818" title="printing press" label="printing press"/>
<link wikidata="Q213686" start="3891" end="3902" title="blackletter" label="blackletter"/>
<link wikidata="Q484023" start="3937" end="3942" title="Roman type" label="roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q344098" start="3974" end="3980" title="italic type" label="italic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="4017" end="4028" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5175" end="5183" title="Vox-ATypI classification#Humanist" label="humanist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5201" end="5208" title="Vox-ATypI classification#Garalde" label="Garalde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437688" start="5263" end="5287" title="Vox-ATypI classification" label="Vox-ATypI classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917159" start="5505" end="5509" title="Arno (typeface)" label="Arno"/>
<link wikidata="Q4002363" start="5514" end="5521" title="Trinité (typeface)" label="Trinité"/>
<link wikidata="Q965340" start="5850" end="5864" title="Nicolas Jenson" label="Nicolas Jenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229114" start="6041" end="6057" title="Francesco Griffo" label="Francesco Griffo"/>
<link wikidata="Q213220" start="6070" end="6084" title="Aldus Manutius" label="Aldus Manutius"/>
<link wikidata="Q344098" start="6397" end="6408" title="italic type" label="italic type"/>
<link wikidata="Q816361" start="6764" end="6769" title="Bembo" label="Bembo"/>
<link wikidata="Q246110" start="6771" end="6779" title="Garamond" label="Garamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519041" start="6781" end="6789" title="Galliard (typeface)" label="Galliard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471329" start="6791" end="6798" title="Granjon" label="Granjon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588178" start="6800" end="6815" title="Goudy Old Style" label="Goudy Old Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q742456" start="6817" end="6823" title="Minion (typeface)" label="Minion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093499" start="6825" end="6833" title="Palatino" label="Palatino"/>
<link wikidata="Q505169" start="6843" end="6848" title="Sabon" label="Sabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q478407" start="6854" end="6859" title="FF Scala" label="Scala"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345843" start="6932" end="6940" title="Cloister (typeface)" label="Cloister"/>
<link wikidata="Q865653" start="6942" end="6954" title="Adobe Jenson" label="Adobe Jenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q25407502" start="6960" end="6971" title="Golden Type" label="Golden Type"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345841" start="6973" end="6987" title="Hightower Text" label="Hightower Text"/>
<link wikidata="Q927717" start="6989" end="6996" title="Centaur (typeface)" label="Centaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q24765334" start="7033" end="7051" title="Berkeley Old Style" label="Berkeley Old Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="7399" end="7405" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916348" start="7482" end="7490" title="x-height" label="x-height"/>
<link wikidata="Q94758021" start="7665" end="7686" title="Hendrik van den Keere" label="Hendrik van den Keere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084376" start="7704" end="7725" title="Christoffel van Dijck" label="Christoffel van Dijck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177974" start="7727" end="7747" title="Miklós Tótfalusi Kis" label="Miklós Tótfalusi Kis"/>
<link wikidata="Q716102" start="7756" end="7762" title="Janson" label="Janson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418301" start="7767" end="7775" title="Ehrhardt (typeface)" label="Ehrhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047752" start="7804" end="7810" title="Caslon" label="Caslon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851280" start="8407" end="8420" title="ball terminal" label="ball terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340818" start="8799" end="8820" title="Pierre Simon Fournier" label="Pierre Simon Fournier"/>
<link wikidata="Q13554037" start="8832" end="8842" title="Joan Michaël Fleischman" label="Fleischman"/>
<link wikidata="Q59534315" start="8847" end="8853" title="Jacques François Rosart" label="Rosart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406456" start="8876" end="8883" title="Eudald Pradell" label="Pradell"/>
<link wikidata="Q455265" start="8897" end="8913" title="John Baskerville" label="John Baskerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798814" start="8918" end="8924" title="Bulmer (typeface)" label="Bulmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q213048" start="8964" end="8979" title="Times New Roman" label="Times New Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200696" start="8988" end="8996" title="Perpetua (typeface)" label="Perpetua"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201647" start="8998" end="9005" title="Plantin (typeface)" label="Plantin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080878" start="9007" end="9017" title="Mrs. Eaves" label="Mrs. Eaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q28802742" start="9019" end="9031" title="Freight (typeface)" label="Freight Text"/>
<link wikidata="Q28843643" start="9049" end="9082" title="Modernised Old Style (typeface)" label="&amp;quot;modernised old styles&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642009" start="9327" end="9331" title="Bell MT" label="Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q833029" start="9825" end="9831" title="Bodoni" label="Bodoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q933861" start="9833" end="9838" title="Didot (typeface)" label="Didot"/>
<link wikidata="Q25394223" start="9844" end="9851" title="Walbaum (typeface)" label="Walbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122282" start="9853" end="9868" title="Computer Modern" label="Computer Modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2753355" start="9921" end="9928" title="Century type family" label="Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197545" start="10284" end="10298" title="Coated paper" label="magazine paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q654606" start="10327" end="10347" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q609781" start="10433" end="10438" title="Corporate identity" label="image"/>
<link wikidata="Q429785" start="10847" end="10853" title="poster" label="poster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523267" start="10870" end="10878" title="ephemera" label="ephemera"/>
<link wikidata="Q920915" start="10898" end="10907" title="bold type" label="bold type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10980" end="10999" title="Typeface#Display type" label="&amp;quot;display&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q94979689" start="11030" end="11038" title="fat face" label="fat face"/>
<link wikidata="Q830067" start="11444" end="11452" title="Rockwell (typeface)" label="Rockwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q644810" start="11612" end="11633" title="Clarendon (typeface)" label="&amp;quot;Clarendon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11942" end="11957" title="Monospace font#Monospaced typefaces" label="monospace fonts"/>
<link wikidata="Q46335" start="12034" end="12044" title="typewriter" label="typewriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q920915" start="12293" end="12297" title="boldface" label="bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q644810" start="12434" end="12443" title="Clarendon (typeface)" label="Clarendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q830067" start="12445" end="12453" title="Rockwell (typeface)" label="Rockwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785938" start="12455" end="12461" title="Archer (typeface)" label="Archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q515301" start="12463" end="12470" title="Courier (typeface)" label="Courier"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387602" start="12472" end="12481" title="Excelsior (typeface)" label="Excelsior"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420274" start="12483" end="12491" title="Thesis (typeface)" label="TheSerif"/>
<link wikidata="Q66372709" start="12497" end="12507" title="Zilla Slab" label="Zilla Slab"/>
<link wikidata="Q368188" start="12509" end="12522" title="FF Meta" label="FF Meta Serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993448" start="12527" end="12544" title="Guardian Egyptian" label="Guardian Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q441360" start="12789" end="12798" title="Chaparral (typeface)" label="Chaparral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152637" start="13418" end="13428" title="Wide Latin" label="Wide Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168849" start="13430" end="13448" title="Copperplate Gothic" label="Copperplate Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13450" end="13469" title="Johnston (typeface)#Johnston Delf Smith" label="Johnston Delf Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q21296414" start="13494" end="13502" title="Meridien (typeface)" label="Méridien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378314" start="13571" end="13580" title="body text" label="body text"/>
<link wikidata="Q864011" start="13629" end="13639" title="sans-serif" label="sans-serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q864011" start="14027" end="14037" title="Sans-serif" label="Sans-serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820694" start="14064" end="14071" title="Legibility" label="legible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493777" start="14651" end="14658" title="Font hinting" label="Hinting"/>
<link wikidata="Q127386817" start="14660" end="14681" title="spatial anti-aliasing" label="spatial anti-aliasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q452912" start="14687" end="14705" title="subpixel rendering" label="subpixel rendering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261015" start="15330" end="15337" title="block letters" label="printed"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188561" start="15338" end="15345" title="capital letters" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q9893" start="15346" end="15347" title="I" label="I"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188561" start="15411" end="15420" title="lowercase" label="lowercase"/>
<link wikidata="Q9927" start="15421" end="15422" title="L" label="L"/>
<link wikidata="Q9773" start="15448" end="15449" title="J" label="J"/>
<link wikidata="Q122653" start="15458" end="15465" title="numeral system" label="numeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q199" start="15466" end="15467" title="1 (number)" label="1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="15647" end="15654" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="15659" end="15667" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196029" start="15727" end="15741" title="regular script" label="regular script"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="15746" end="15764" title="Chinese characters" label="Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071487" start="15908" end="15912" title="Songti" label="Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="16068" end="16072" title="Song dynasty" label="Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="16077" end="16081" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261053" start="16098" end="16112" title="block printing" label="block printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423948" start="16146" end="16156" title="wood grain" label="wood grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196029" start="16510" end="16515" title="kaiti" label="kaiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q82772" start="16955" end="16960" title="kanji" label="kanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q187659" start="16965" end="16969" title="kana" label="kana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583237" start="17807" end="17814" title="Kinnari (typeface)" label="Kinnari"/>
<link wikidata="Q314127" start="17982" end="18005" title="Antiqua–Fraktur dispute" label="Antiqua–Fraktur dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q239178" start="18268" end="18277" title="Homoglyph" label="Homoglyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071487" start="18280" end="18295" title="Ming (typeface)" label="Ming (typeface)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415312" start="18434" end="18446" title="San Serriffe" label="San Serriffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410153" start="18512" end="18535" title="List of serif typefaces" label="List of serif typefaces"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18538" end="18561" title="List of typefaces#Serif" label="List of typefaces#Serif"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18564" end="18573" title=":Category:Old style serif typefaces" label="Old-style"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18576" end="18588" title=":Category:Transitional serif typefaces" label="Transitional"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18591" end="18597" title=":Category:Didone serif typefaces" label="Didone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662673" start="18642" end="18659" title="Robert Bringhurst" label="Robert Bringhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731753" start="18667" end="18700" title="The Elements of Typographic Style" label="The Elements of Typographic Style"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18744" end="18763" title="Hartley &amp;amp; Marks" label="Hartley &amp;amp; Marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5667823" start="18787" end="18799" title="Harry Carter (typographer)" label="Harry Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342231" start="18897" end="18910" title="Edward Catich" label="Edward Catich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7030254" start="19085" end="19098" title="Nicolete Gray" label="Nicolete Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q17626874" start="19180" end="19197" title="Alfred F. Johnson" label="Alfred F. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q535193" start="19374" end="19386" title="Ellen Lupton" label="Ellen Lupton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403508" start="19505" end="19534" title="Princeton Architectural Press" label="Princeton Architectural Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4067973" start="20945" end="20967" title="Daniel Berkeley Updike" label="Daniel Berkeley Updike"/>
<link wikidata="Q59149248" start="21248" end="21265" title="Hendrik Désiré Louis Vervliet" label="H. D. L. Vervliet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64105" wikidata="Q17451" url="?curid=64105" title="Typeface">
<text>A typeface (or font family) is a design of letters, numbers and other symbols, to be used in printing or for electronic display. Most typefaces include variations in size (e.g., 24 point), weight (e.g., light, bold), slope (e.g., italic), width (e.g., condensed), and so on. Each of these variations of the typeface is a font.

There are thousands of different typefaces in existence, with new ones being developed constantly.

The art and craft of designing typefaces is called type design. Designers of typefaces are called type designers and are often employed by type foundries. In desktop publishing, type designers are sometimes also called &quot;font developers&quot; or &quot;font designers&quot; (a typographer is someone who &quot;uses&quot; typefaces to design a page layout).

Every typeface is a collection of glyphs, each of which represents an individual letter, number, punctuation mark, or other symbol. The same glyph may be used for characters from different writing systems, e.g. Roman uppercase A looks the same as Cyrillic uppercase А and Greek uppercase alpha (Α). There are typefaces tailored for special applications, such as cartography, astrology or mathematics.

==Terminology==

In professional typography, the term &quot;typeface&quot; is not interchangeable with the word &quot;font&quot; (originally &quot;fount&quot; in British English, and pronounced &quot;font&quot;), because the term font has historically been defined as a given alphabet and its associated characters in a single size. For example, 8-point Caslon Italic was one font, and 10-point Caslon Italic was another. Historically, a font came from a type foundry as a set of &quot;sorts&quot;, with number of copies of each character included.

As the range of typeface designs increased and requirements of publishers broadened over the centuries, fonts of specific weight (blackness or lightness) and stylistic variants (most commonly &quot;regular&quot; or &quot;roman&quot; as distinct from &quot;italic&quot;, as well as &quot;condensed&quot;) have led to &quot;font families&quot;, collections of closely related typeface designs that can include hundreds of styles. A typeface family is typically a group of related typefaces which vary only in weight, orientation, width, etc., but not design. For example, Times is a typeface family, whereas Times Roman, Times Italic and Times Bold are individual typefaces making up the Times family. Typeface families typically include several typefaces, though some, such as Helvetica, may consist of dozens of fonts. In traditional typography, a font family is a set of fonts within the same typeface: for example Times Roman 8, Times Roman 10, Times Roman 12 etc. In web typography (using ), a &#x27;font family&#x27; equates to a &#x27;typeface family&#x27; or even to a very broad category such as sans-serif that encompass many typeface families.

Another way to look at the distinction between font and typeface is that a font is the vessel (e.g. the software) that allows you to use a set of characters with a given appearance, whereas a typeface is the actual design of such characters. Therefore, a given typeface, such as Times, may be rendered by different fonts, such as computer font files created by this or that vendor, a set of metal type characters etc. In the metal type era, a font also meant a specific point size, but with digital scalable outline fonts this distinction is no longer valid, as a single font may be scaled to any size.

The first &quot;extended&quot; font families, which included a wide range of widths and weights in the same general style emerged in the early 1900s, starting with ATF&#x27;s Cheltenham (1902–1913), with an initial design by Bertram Grosvenor Goodhue, and many additional faces designed by Morris Fuller Benton. Later examples include Futura, Lucida, ITC Officina. Some became superfamilies as a result of revival, such as Linotype Syntax, Linotype Univers; while others have alternate styling designed as compatible replacements of each other, such as Compatil, Generis.

Font &quot;superfamilies&quot; began to emerge when foundries began to include typefaces with significant structural differences, but some design relationship, under the same general family name. Arguably the first superfamily was created when Morris Fuller Benton created Clearface Gothic for ATF in 1910, a sans serif companion to the existing (serifed) Clearface. The superfamily label does not include quite different designs given the same family name for what would seem to be purely marketing, rather than design, considerations: Caslon Antique, Futura Black and Futura Display are structurally unrelated to the Caslon and Futura families, respectively, and are generally not considered part of those families by typographers, despite their names.

Additional or supplemental glyphs intended to match a main typeface have been in use for centuries. In some formats they have been marketed as separate fonts. In the early 1990s, the Adobe Systems type group introduced the idea of &quot;expert set&quot; fonts, which had a standardized set of additional glyphs, including small caps, old style figures, and additional superior letters, fractions and ligatures not found in the main fonts for the typeface. Supplemental fonts have also included alternate letters such as swashes, dingbats, and alternate character sets, complementing the regular fonts under the same family. However, with introduction of font formats such as OpenType, those supplemental glyphs were merged into the main fonts, relying on specific software capabilities to access the alternate glyphs.

Since Apple&#x27;s and Microsoft&#x27;s operating systems supported different character sets in the platform related fonts, some foundries used expert fonts in a different way. These fonts included the characters which were missing on either Macintosh or Windows computers, e.g. fractions, ligatures or some accented glyphs. The goal was to deliver the whole character set to the customer regardless of which operating system was used.

===Sizing===
The size of typefaces and fonts is traditionally measured in points; &quot;point&quot; has been defined differently at different times, but now the most popular is the Desktop Publishing point of  in (). When specified in typographic sizes (points, kyus), the height of an &quot;em-square&quot;, an invisible box which is typically a bit larger than the distance from the tallest ascender to the lowest descender, is scaled to equal the specified size. For example, when setting Helvetica at 12 point, the em square defined in the Helvetica font is scaled to 12 points or . Yet no particular element of 12-point Helvetica need measure exactly 12 points.

Frequently measurement in non-typographic units (feet, inches, meters) will be of the &quot;cap-height&quot;, the height of the capital letters. Font size is also commonly measured in millimeters (mm) and &quot;q&quot;s (a quarter of a millimeter, &quot;kyu&quot; in romanized Japanese) and inches.

==History==
Type foundries have cast fonts in lead alloys from the 1450s until the present, although wood served as the material for some large fonts called wood type during the 19th century, particularly in the United States. In the 1890s, the mechanization of typesetting allowed automated casting of fonts on the fly as lines of type in the size and length needed. This was known as continuous casting, and remained profitable and widespread until its demise in the 1970s. The first machine of this type was the Linotype machine, invented by Ottmar Mergenthaler.

During a brief transitional period (–1990s), photographic technology, known as &quot;phototypesetting&quot;, utilized tiny high-resolution images of individual glyphs on a film strip (in the form of a film negative, with the letters as clear areas on an opaque black background). A high-intensity light source behind the film strip projected the image of each glyph through an optical system, which focused the desired letter onto the light-sensitive phototypesetting paper at a specific size and position. This photographic typesetting process permitted optical scaling, allowing designers to produce multiple sizes from a single font, although physical constraints on the reproduction system used still required design changes at different sizes; for example, ink traps and spikes to allow for spread of ink encountered in the printing stage. Manually operated photocomposition systems using fonts on filmstrips allowed fine kerning between letters without the physical effort of manual typesetting, and spawned an enlarged type design industry in the 1960s and 1970s.

By the mid-1970s, all of the major typeface technologies and all their fonts were in use: letterpress; continuous casting machines; phototypositors; computer-controlled phototypesetters; and the earliest digital typesetters – bulky machines with primitive processors and CRT outputs. From the mid-1980s, as digital typography has grown, users have almost universally adopted the American spelling &quot;font&quot;, which has come to primarily refer to a computer file containing scalable outline letterforms (&quot;digital font&quot;), in one of several common formats. Some typefaces, such as Verdana, are designed primarily for use on computer screens.

==Digital type==
Digital type became the dominant form of type in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Digital fonts store the image of each character either as a bitmap in a &quot;bitmap font&quot;, or by mathematical description of lines and curves in an &quot;outline font&quot;, also called a &quot;vector font&quot;. Bitmap fonts were more commonly used in the earlier stages of digital type, and are rarely used today. These bitmapped typefaces were first produced by Casady &amp; Greene, Inc. and were also known as Fluent Fonts. Fluent Fonts became mostly obsolete with the creation of downloadable PostScript fonts, and these new fonts are called Fluent Laser Fonts (FLF).

When an outline font is used, a rasterizing routine (in the application software, operating system or printer) renders the character outlines, interpreting the vector instructions to decide which pixels should be black and which ones white. Rasterization is straightforward at high resolutions such as those used by laser printers and in high-end publishing systems. For computer screens, where each individual pixel can mean the difference between legible and illegible characters, some digital fonts use hinting algorithms to make readable bitmaps at small sizes.

Digital fonts may also contain data representing the &quot;metrics&quot; used for composition, including kerning pairs, component creation data for accented characters, glyph substitution rules for Arabic typography and for connecting script faces, and for simple everyday ligatures like &quot;&quot;. Common font formats include TrueType, OpenType and PostScript Type 1, while Metafont is still used by TeX and its variants. Applications using these font formats, including the rasterizers, appear in Microsoft and Apple Computer operating systems, Adobe Systems products and those of several other companies. Digital fonts are created with font editors such as FontForge, RoboFont, Glyphs, Fontlab&#x27;s TypeTool, FontLab Studio, Fontographer, or AsiaFont Studio.

==Typeface anatomy==

Typographers have developed a comprehensive vocabulary for describing the many aspects of typefaces and typography. Some vocabulary applies only to a subset of all scripts. &quot;Serifs&quot;, for example, are a purely decorative characteristic of typefaces used for European scripts, whereas the glyphs used in Arabic or East Asian scripts have characteristics (such as stroke width) that may be similar in some respects but cannot reasonably be called serifs and may not be purely decorative.

===Serifs===
Typefaces can be divided into two main categories: serif and sans serif. Serifs comprise the small features at the end of strokes within letters. The printing industry refers to typeface without serifs as sans serif (from French &quot;sans&quot;, meaning &quot;without&quot;), or as &quot;grotesque&quot; (or, in German, &quot;grotesk&quot;).

Great variety exists among both serif and sans serif typefaces. Both groups contain faces designed for setting large amounts of body text, and others intended primarily as decorative. The presence or absence of serifs represents only one of many factors to consider when choosing a typeface.

Typefaces with serifs are often considered easier to read in long passages than those without. Studies on the matter are ambiguous, suggesting that most of this effect is due to the greater familiarity of serif typefaces. As a general rule, printed works such as newspapers and books almost always use serif typefaces, at least for the text body. Websites do not have to specify a font and can simply respect the browser settings of the user. But of those web sites that do specify a font, most use modern sans serif fonts, because it is commonly believed that, in contrast to the case for printed material, sans serif fonts are easier than serif fonts to read on the low-resolution computer screen.

===Proportion===
A proportional typeface, also called variable-width typeface, contains glyphs of varying widths, while a monospaced (non-proportional or fixed-width) typeface uses a single standard width for all glyphs in the font. Duospaced fonts are similar to monospaced fonts, but characters can also be two character widths instead of a single character width.

Many people generally find proportional typefaces nicer-looking and easier to read, and thus they appear more commonly in professionally published printed material. For the same reason, GUI computer applications (such as word processors and web browsers) typically use proportional fonts. However, many proportional fonts contain fixed-width (tabular) numerals so that columns of numbers stay aligned.

Monospaced typefaces function better for some purposes because their glyphs line up in neat, regular columns. No glyph is given any more weight than another. Most manually operated typewriters use monospaced fonts. So do text-only computer displays and third- and fourth-generation game console graphics processors, which treat the screen as a uniform grid of character cells. Most computer programs which have a text-based interface (terminal emulators, for example) use only monospaced fonts (or add additional spacing to proportional fonts to fit them in monospaced cells) in their configuration. Monospaced fonts are commonly used by computer programmers for displaying and editing source code so that certain characters (for example parentheses used to group arithmetic expressions) are easy to see.

ASCII art usually requires a monospaced font for proper viewing, with the exception of Shift JIS art which takes advantage of the proportional characters in the MS PGothic font. In a web page, the codice_1, codice_2&lt;/code&gt; or codice_3 HTML tags most commonly specify monospaced fonts. In LaTeX, the &quot;verbatim&quot; environment or the Teletype font family (e.g., codice_4 or codice_5) uses monospaced fonts (in TeX, use codice_6).

Any two lines of text with the same number of characters in each line in a monospaced typeface should display as equal in width, while the same two lines in a proportional typeface may have radically different widths. This occurs because in a proportional font, glyph widths vary, such that wider glyphs (typically those for characters such as W, Q, Z, M, D, O, H, and U) use more space, and narrower glyphs (such as those for the characters i, t, l, and 1) use less space than the average.

In the publishing industry, it was once the case that editors read manuscripts in monospaced fonts (typically Courier) for ease of editing and word count estimates, and it was considered discourteous to submit a manuscript in a proportional font. This has become less universal in recent years, such that authors need to check with editors as to their preference, though monospaced fonts are still the norm.

===Font metrics===


Most scripts share the notion of a baseline: an imaginary horizontal line on which characters rest. In some scripts, parts of glyphs lie below the baseline. The &quot;descent&quot; spans the distance between the baseline and the lowest descending glyph in a typeface, and the part of a glyph that descends below the baseline has the name &quot;descender&quot;. Conversely, the &quot;ascent&quot; spans the distance between the baseline and the top of the glyph that reaches farthest from the baseline. The ascent and descent may or may not include distance added by accents or diacritical marks.

In the Latin, Greek and Cyrillic (sometimes collectively referred to as LGC) scripts, one can refer to the distance from the baseline to the top of regular lowercase glyphs (mean line) as the &quot;x-height&quot;, and the part of a glyph rising above the x-height as the &quot;ascender&quot;. The distance from the baseline to the top of the ascent or a regular uppercase glyphs (cap line) is also known as the cap height. The height of the ascender can have a dramatic effect on the readability and appearance of a font. The ratio between the x-height and the ascent or cap height often serves to characterize typefaces.

Typefaces that can be substituted for one another in a document without changing the document&#x27;s text flow are said to be &quot;metrically identical&quot; (or &quot;metrically compatible&quot;). Several typefaces have been created to be metrically compatible with widely used proprietary typefaces to allow the editing of documents set in such typefaces in digital typesetting environments where these typefaces are not available. For instance, the free and open-source Liberation fonts and Croscore fonts have been designed as metrically compatible substitutes for widely used Microsoft fonts.

===Optical sizing===

During the metal type era, all type was cut in metal and could only be printed at a specific size. It was a natural process to vary a design at different sizes, making it chunkier and clearer to read at smaller sizes. Many digital typefaces are offered with a range of fonts (or a variable font axis) for different sizes, especially designs sold for professional design use. The art of designing fonts for a specific size is known as optical sizing. Others will be offered in only one style, but optimised for a specific size. Optical sizes are particularly common for serif fonts, since the fine detail of serif fonts can need to be bulked up for smaller sizes.

Typefaces may also be designed differently considering the type of paper on which they will be printed. Designs to be printed on absorbent newsprint paper will be more slender as the ink will naturally spread out as it absorbs into the paper, and may feature ink traps: areas left blank into which the ink will soak as it dries. These corrections will not be needed for printing on high-gloss cardboard or display on-screen. Fonts designed for low-resolution displays, meanwhile, may avoid pure circles, fine lines and details a screen cannot render.

=== Typesetting numbers ===

Most typefaces, especially modern designs, include a complementary set of numeric digits.

Numbers can be typeset in two main independent sets of ways: &quot;lining&quot; and &quot;non-lining figures&quot;, and &quot;proportional&quot; and &quot;tabular&quot; styles.

Most modern typefaces set numeric digits by default as lining figures, which are the height of upper-case letters. Non-lining figures, styled to match lower-case letters, are often common in fonts intended for body text, as they are thought to be less disruptive to the style of running text. They are also called &quot;lower-case numbers&quot; or &quot;text figures&quot; for the same reason.

==== Tabular figures ====

The horizontal spacing of digits can also be &quot;proportional&quot;, with a character width tightly matching the width of the figure itself, or &quot;tabular&quot;, where all digits have the same width. Proportional spacing places the digits closely together, reducing empty space in a document, and is thought to allow the numbers to blend into the text more effectively. As tabular spacing makes all numbers with the same number of digits the same width, it is used for typesetting documents such as price lists, stock listings and sums in mathematics textbooks, all of which require columns of numeric figures to line up on top of each other for easier comparison. Tabular spacing is also a common feature of simple printing devices such as cash registers and date-stamps.

Characters of uniform width are a standard feature of so-called monospaced fonts, used in programming and on typewriters. However, many fonts that are not monospaced use tabular figures. More complex font designs may include two or more combinations with one as the default and others as alternate characters. Of the four possibilities, non-lining tabular figures are particularly rare since there is no common use for them.

Fonts intended for professional use in documents such as business reports may also make the bold-style tabular figures take up the same width as the regular (non-bold) numbers, so a bold-style total would appear just as wide as the same sum in regular style.

==Style of typefaces ==

Because an abundance of typefaces has been created over the centuries, they are commonly categorized according to their appearance. At the highest level (in the context of Latin-script fonts), one can differentiate Roman, Blackletter, and Gaelic types. Roman types are in the most widespread use today, and are sub-classified as serif, sans serif, ornamental, and script types. Historically, the first European fonts were blackletter, followed by Roman serif, then sans serif and then the other types. The use of Gaelic faces was restricted to the Irish language, though these form a unique if minority class. Typefaces may be monospaced regardless of whether they are Roman, Blackletter, or Gaelic. Symbol typefaces are non-alphabetic. The Cyrillic script comes in two varieties, Roman-appearance type (called гражданский шрифт &quot;graždanskij šrift&quot;) and traditional Slavonic type (called славянский шрифт &quot;slavjanskij šrift&quot;).

===Roman typefaces===

====Serif typefaces====

Serif, or &quot;Roman&quot;, typefaces are named for the features at the ends of their strokes. Times New Roman and Garamond are common examples of serif typefaces. Serif fonts are probably the most used class in printed materials, including most books, newspapers and magazines. Serif fonts are often classified into three subcategories: Old Style, Transitional, and Didone (or Modern), representative examples of which are Garamond, Baskerville, and Bodoni respectively.

Old Style typefaces are influenced by early Italian lettering design. Modern fonts often exhibit a bracketed serif and a substantial difference in weight within the strokes. Though some argument exists as to whether Transitional fonts exist as a discrete category among serif fonts, Transitional fonts lie somewhere between Old Style and Modern style typefaces. Transitional fonts exhibit a marked increase in the variation of stroke weight and a more horizontal serif compared to Old Style. Slab serif designs have particularly large serifs, and date to the early nineteenth century. The earliest known slab serif font was first shown around 1817 by the English typefounder Vincent Figgins.

&quot;Roman&quot;, &quot;italic&quot;, and &quot;oblique&quot; are also terms used to differentiate between upright and two possible slanted forms of a typeface. Italic and oblique fonts are similar (indeed, oblique fonts are often simply called italics) but there is strictly a difference: &quot;italic&quot; applies to fonts where the letter forms are redesigned, not just slanted. Almost all serif faces have italic forms; some sans-serif faces have oblique designs. (Most faces do not offer both as this is an artistic choice by the font designer about how the slanted form should look.)

====Sans-serif typefaces====
Sans serif (lit. without serif) designs appeared relatively recently in the history of type design. The first, similar to slab serif designs, was shown in 1816 by William Caslon IV. Many have minimal variation in stroke width, creating the impression of a minimal, simplified design. When first introduced, the faces were disparaged as &quot;grotesque&quot; (or ) and &quot;gothic&quot;: but by the late nineteenth century were commonly used for san-serif without negative implication.

The major sub-classes of Sans-serif are &quot;Grotesque&quot;, &quot;Neo-grotesque&quot;, &quot;Geometric&quot; and &quot;Humanist&quot;.

===Blackletter typefaces===

&quot;Blackletter&quot; is the name of the class of typefaces used with the earliest printing presses in Europe, which imitated the calligraphy style of that time and place. Various forms exist including textualis, rotunda, schwabacher and fraktur. (Some people refer to Blackletter as &quot;gothic script&quot; or &quot;gothic font&quot;, though the term &quot;Gothic&quot; in typography refers to sans serif typefaces.)

===Gaelic typefaces===

Gaelic fonts were first used for the Irish language in 1571, and were used regularly for Irish until the early 1960s, though they continue to be used in display type and type for signage. Their use was effectively confined to Ireland, though Gaelic typefaces were designed and produced in France, Belgium, and Italy. Gaelic typefaces make use of insular letterforms, and early fonts made use of a variety of abbreviations deriving from the manuscript tradition. Various forms exist, including manuscript, traditional, and modern styles, chiefly distinguished as having angular or uncial features.

===Monospaced typefaces===

Monospaced fonts are typefaces in which every glyph is the same width (as opposed to variable-width fonts, where the &quot;w&quot; and &quot;m&quot; are wider than most letters, and the &quot;i&quot; is narrower). The first monospaced typefaces were designed for typewriters, which could only move the same distance forward with each letter typed. Their use continued with early computers, which could only display a single font. Although modern computers can display any desired typeface, monospaced fonts are still important for computer programming, terminal emulation, and for laying out tabulated data in plain text documents; they may also be particularly legible at small sizes due to all characters being quite wide. Examples of monospaced typefaces are Courier, Prestige Elite, Fixedsys, and Monaco. Most monospaced fonts are sans-serif or slab-serif as these designs are easiest to read printed small or display on low-resolution screens, though many exceptions exist.

===CJK typefaces===

CJK, or Chinese, Japanese and Korean typefaces consist of large sets of glyphs. These typefaces originate in the glyphs found in brush calligraphy during the Tang dynasty. These later evolved into the Song style (宋体字) which used thick vertical strokes and thin horizontal strokes in wood block printing.

The glyphs found in CJK fonts are designed to fit within a square. This allows for regular vertical, horizontal, right-to-left and left-to-right orientations. CJK fonts can also include an extended set of monospaced Latin characters. This commonly results in complex, sometimes contradictory rules and conventions for mixing languages in type.

====Mincho====

With CJK typefaces, Mincho style tends to be something like Serifs for the end of stems, and in fact includes Serifed glyphs for Extended Latin and Cyrillic sets within a typeface.

====Gothic====
With CJK typefaces, Goth style tends to be something like Sans Serifs with squarish, cut off end-caps for the end of stems, and in fact includes Sans Serif glyphs for Extended Latin and Cyrillic sets within a typeface.

====Maru====
With CJK typefaces, Maru style tends to be something like Sans Serifs with rounded end-caps for the end of stems, and in fact includes Rounded Sans Serif glyphs for Extended Latin and Cyrillic sets within a typeface.

==Display type==

Display type refers to the use of type at large sizes, perhaps 30 points or larger. Some typefaces are considered useful solely at display sizes, and are known as display faces. Most effect typefaces are display types. Common features of display type include tighter default letter spacing, finer details and serifs, slightly more condensed letter shapes and larger differences between thick and thin strokes; many of these are most visible in serif designs. Many display typefaces in the past such as those intended for posters and newspaper headlines were also only cut in capitals, since it was assumed lower-case would not be needed, or at least with no italics. This was true of many early sans-serif fonts.

In the days of metal type, when each size was cut individually, types intended for display use were often adjusted accordingly. These modifications continued to be made even after fonts started to be made by scaling using a pantograph, but began to fade away with the advent of phototypesetting and then digital fonts, which can both be printed at any size. Premium digital fonts used for magazines, books and newspapers do often include display variants, but they are often not included with typefaces bundled with operating systems and desktop publishing software. Display typefaces in the letterpress period were often made as wood type, being lighter than metal.

Decades into the desktop publishing revolution, few typographers with metal foundry type experience are still working, and few digital typefaces are optimized specifically for different sizes, so the misuse of the term display typeface as a synonym for ornamental type has become widespread; properly speaking, ornamental typefaces are a subcategory of display typefaces. At the same time, with new printing techniques, typefaces have largely replaced hand-lettering for very large signs and notices that would once have been painted or carved by hand.

===Script typefaces===

Script typefaces imitate handwriting or calligraphy. They do not lend themselves to quantities of body text, as people find them harder to read than many serif and sans-serif typefaces; they are typically used for logos or invitations. Historically, most lettering on logos, displays, shop frontages did not use fonts but was rather custom-designed by signpainters and engravers, so many emulate the styles of hand-drawn signs from different historical periods. The genre has developed rapidly in recent years due to modern font formats allowing more complex simulations of handwriting. Examples include Coronet (a quite simple design from 1937) and Zapfino (a much more complicated digital design).

===Mimicry typefaces ===
Mimicry typefaces are decorative typefaces that have been designed to represent characters of one alphabet but at the same time evoke another writing system. This group includes Roman typefaces designed to appear as Arabic, Chinese characters (Wonton fonts), Cyrillic (Faux Cyrillic), Indic scripts, Greek (an example being Lithos), Hebrew (Faux Hebrew), Kana, or Thai. These are used largely for the purpose of novelty to make something appear foreign, or to make businesses offering foreign products, such as restaurants, clearly stand out. This typographic mimicry is also known as a faux font (named faux x, where x is usually a language script), pseudoscript, ethnic typeface, simulation typeface or a &quot;foreign look&quot; font.

===Reverse-contrast typefaces===

A reverse-contrast type is a typeface in which the stress is reversed from the norm: instead of the vertical lines being the same width or thicker than horizontals, which is normal in Latin-alphabet printing, the horizontal lines are the thickest. Reverse-contrast types are rarely used for body text, and are particularly common in display applications such as headings and posters, in which their unusual structure may be particularly eye-catching. First seen in London in 1821, they were particularly common in the mid- to late nineteenth century in American and British printing and have been revived occasionally since then. They effectively become slab serif designs because of the serifs becoming thick, and are often characterised as part of that genre. In recent times, the reverse-contrast effect has been extended to other kinds of typeface, such as sans-serif designs.

===Effect typefaces===
Some typefaces have a structure that suggests a three-dimensional letter, such as letters carved into stone. An example of this is the genre known as &#x27;inline&#x27;, &#x27;block&#x27; &#x27;outline&#x27; or &#x27;shadowed&#x27; typefaces. This renders the interior of glyphs in the background color, with a thin line around the edges of the glyphs. In some cases, the outline shows the glyph filled in with the foreground color, surrounded a thin outline mirroring the edges separated by a small gap. (This latter style is often used with &quot;college&quot; typefaces.) Colorized block lettering is often seen in carefully rendered graffiti.

A &quot;shadow&quot; effect can also be either designed into a typeface or added to an existing typeface. Designed-in shadows can be stylized or connected to the foreground. An after-market shadow effect can be created by making two copies of each glyph, slightly offset in a diagonal direction and possibly in different colors. Drop shadows can also be dynamically created by rendering software. The shadow effect is often combined with the outline effect, where the top layer is shown in white with black outline and the bottom layer in black, for greater contrast. An example typeface with an &#x27;inline&#x27; effect is Imprint Shadowed, where the shadowed version is more widely distributed than the regular design.

===Small print typefaces===
Some typefaces are specifically designed to be printed at small sizes, for example in telephone directories or on newsprint paper. Bell Gothic and Bell Centennial, commissioned for telephone directories, are notable examples of this. Small-print designs often feature a large x-height, and a chunky design. Some fonts used at such sizes may be members of a larger typeface family joining members for normal sizes. For example, the Times New Roman family contains some designs intended for small print use, as do many families with optical sizes such as Minion.

In the metal type era, typefaces intended to be printed small contained ink traps, small indentations at the junctions of strokes that would be filled up with ink spreading out, maintaining the intended appearance of the type design. Without ink traps, the excess ink would blob and ruin the crisp edge. At larger sizes, these ink traps were not necessary, so display faces did not have them. They have also been removed from most digital fonts, as these will normally be viewed on screen or printed through inkjet printing, laser printing, offset lithography, electrophotographic printing or other processes that do not show the ink spread of letterpress. Ink traps have remained common on designs intended to be printed on low-quality, absorbent paper, especially newsprint and telephone directories.

==Typeface family==
A typeface family (or type family) is a set of typefaces that share a common design concept. The simplest typeface family has just a &#x27;regular&#x27; face and an &#x27;oblique&#x27; face (or &#x27;Roman&#x27; and &#x27;Italic&#x27;); the next step up adds boldface versions of these types. A modern professional typeface family (such as Danish Standard no. 737) might have as many as 54 different styles: condensed, normal and expanded forms of each of &#x27;thin&#x27;, &#x27;extralight&#x27;, &#x27;light&#x27;, &#x27;regular&#x27;, &#x27;medium&#x27;, &#x27;demibold&#x27;, &#x27;bold&#x27;, &#x27;extrabold&#x27; and &#x27;heavy&#x27; types, in regular and italic.

==Texts used to demonstrate typefaces==
A sentence that uses all of the alphabet (a pangram), such as &quot;The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog&quot;, is often used as a design aesthetic tool to demonstrate the personality of a typeface&#x27;s characters in a setting (because it displays all the letters of the alphabet). For extended settings of typefaces graphic designers often use nonsense text (commonly referred to as &quot;greeking&quot;), such as &quot;lorem ipsum&quot; or Latin text such as the beginning of Cicero&#x27;s &quot;In Catilinam&quot;. Greeking is used in typography to determine a typeface&#x27;s &quot;colour&quot;, or weight and style, and to demonstrate an overall typographic aesthetic prior to actual type setting. Another common demonstration word is &quot;Hamburgevons&quot;.

==Non-character typefaces==
The process of printing typefaces has historically been far simpler than commissioning and engraving custom illustrations, especially as many non-text features of printed works like symbols and borders were likely to be reused by a printer in future. Non-character typefaces have therefore been created for elements of documents that are not letters but are likely to be reused regularly. These include:

===Ornamental typefaces===
Ornamental (also known as &quot;novelty&quot; or sometimes &quot;display&quot;) typefaces are used to decorate a page. Historically complex interlocking patterns known as arabesques were common in fine printing, as were floral borders known as fleurons evoking hand-drawn manuscripts.

In the metal type era, type-founding companies often would offer pre-formed illustrations as fonts showing objects and designs likely to be useful for printing and advertisements, the equivalent of modern clip art and stock photographs. As examples, the American Type Founders specimen of 1897 offered designs including baseball players, animals, Christmas wreaths, designs for cheques, and emblems such as state seals for government printing. The practice has declined as printing custom illustrations and colour printing using processes such as lithography has become cheaper, although illustration typefaces are still sold by some companies. See above for the historical definition of &quot;display typeface&quot;.

===Symbol typefaces===

Symbol, or dingbat, typefaces consist of symbols (such as decorative bullets, clock faces, railroad timetable symbols, CD-index, or TV-channel enclosed numbers) rather than normal text characters. Common, widely used symbol typeface releases include Zapf Dingbats and Wingdings, though many may be created internally by a publication for its own use and some typefaces may have a symbol range included. Marlett is an example of a font used by Windows to draw elements of windows and icons.

===Emoji===
Emoji are pictograms that can be used and displayed inline with text. They are similar to previous symbol typefaces, but with a much larger range of characters, such as symbols for common objects, animals, food types, weather and emotions. Originally developed in Japan, they are now commonly installed on many computer and smartphone operating systems. Following standardisation and inclusion in the Unicode standard, allowing them to be used internationally, the number of Emoji characters has rapidly increased to meet the demands of an expanded range of cultures using them; unlike many previous symbol typefaces, they are interchangeable with the ability to display the pictures of the same meaning in a range of fonts on different operating systems. The popularity of emoji has meant that characters have sometimes gained culture-specific meanings not inherent to the design. Both colour and monochrome emoji typefaces exist, as well as at least one animated design.

===Music typefaces===

Typefaces that include musical notes and other needed symbols have been developed to print sheet music.

==Intellectual property==
==See also==
== Explanatory notes ==
== References ==
==Further reading==
* 
* Jaspert, W. P.; Berry, W. Turner; Johnson, A. F. (1953, 1958, 1962, 1970, 1983, 1986, 1990, 1991, 1993, 2001, 2008). &quot;The Encyclopedia of Typefaces&quot;. London: Blandford Press.


==External links==

* Monotype printed borders specimens
* ArchLinux list of Metric-compatible fonts</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17451" start="2" end="10" title="Typeface" label="typeface"/>
<link wikidata="Q17451" start="15" end="26" title="Typeface" label="font family"/>
<link wikidata="Q9788" start="43" end="49" title="Letter (alphabet)" label="letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q82990" start="52" end="58" title="Numerical digit" label="number"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="70" end="76" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868296" start="321" end="325" title="font" label="font"/>
<link wikidata="Q632304" start="338" end="370" title="list of typefaces" label="thousands of different typefaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892133" start="479" end="490" title="type design" label="type design"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892133" start="526" end="539" title="type designer" label="type designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q377688" start="567" end="581" title="type foundry" label="type foundries"/>
<link wikidata="Q188610" start="586" end="604" title="desktop publishing" label="desktop publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q159964" start="708" end="719" title="typographer" label="typographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q36975" start="823" end="828" title="glyph" label="glyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241972" start="952" end="961" title="character (symbol)" label="character"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192" start="978" end="993" title="writing systems" label="writing systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q9659" start="1016" end="1017" title="A" label="A"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="1036" end="1044" title="Cyrillic" label="Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16330" start="1055" end="1056" title="А" label="А"/>
<link wikidata="Q9887" start="1077" end="1082" title="alpha" label="alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q42515" start="1151" end="1162" title="cartography" label="cartography"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="1164" end="1173" title="astrology" label="astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="1177" end="1188" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q159964" start="1224" end="1234" title="typography" label="typography"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868296" start="1309" end="1313" title="font" label="font"/>
<link wikidata="Q377688" start="1646" end="1658" title="type foundry" label="type foundry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8250483" start="1677" end="1681" title="sort (typesetting)" label="sort"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868296" start="1863" end="1869" title="font weight" label="weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868296" start="1899" end="1917" title="font style" label="stylistic variants"/>
<link wikidata="Q484023" start="1962" end="1967" title="Roman type" label="roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q344098" start="1997" end="2003" title="Italic type" label="italic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868296" start="2269" end="2274" title="font width" label="width"/>
<link wikidata="Q213048" start="2311" end="2316" title="Times New Roman" label="Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q504745" start="2517" end="2526" title="Helvetica" label="Helvetica"/>
<link wikidata="Q864011" start="2844" end="2854" title="sans-serif" label="sans-serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147633" start="3225" end="3238" title="computer font" label="computer font"/>
<link wikidata="Q794304" start="3320" end="3330" title="Type metal" label="metal type"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843050" start="3663" end="3666" title="American Type Founders" label="ATF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744729" start="3674" end="3684" title="Cheltenham (typeface)" label="Cheltenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q979053" start="3789" end="3809" title="Morris Fuller Benton" label="Morris Fuller Benton"/>
<link wikidata="Q247686" start="3834" end="3840" title="Futura (typeface)" label="Futura"/>
<link wikidata="Q267249" start="3842" end="3848" title="Lucida" label="Lucida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654978" start="3850" end="3862" title="ITC Officina" label="ITC Officina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766362" start="3922" end="3937" title="Syntax (typeface)" label="Linotype Syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065215" start="3939" end="3955" title="Univers" label="Linotype Univers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826987" start="4052" end="4060" title="Compatil" label="Compatil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290072" start="4062" end="4069" title="Generis (typeface)" label="Generis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250008" start="4072" end="4102" title="Font superfamily" label="Font &amp;quot;superfamilies&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048975" start="4609" end="4623" title="Caslon Antique" label="Caslon Antique"/>
<link wikidata="Q247686" start="4625" end="4631" title="Futura (typeface)" label="Futura"/>
<link wikidata="Q36975" start="4855" end="4860" title="glyph" label="glyph"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5011" end="5035" title="Adobe Type" label="Adobe Systems type group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163271" start="5150" end="5160" title="small caps" label="small caps"/>
<link wikidata="Q956716" start="5162" end="5179" title="old style figures" label="old style figures"/>
<link wikidata="Q66055" start="5214" end="5223" title="Fraction (mathematics)" label="fractions"/>
<link wikidata="Q188725" start="5228" end="5237" title="Typographical ligature" label="ligatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237024" start="5348" end="5355" title="Swash (typography)" label="swashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q199172" start="5357" end="5364" title="dingbat" label="dingbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q260180" start="5503" end="5511" title="OpenType" label="OpenType"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868296" start="6123" end="6127" title="font" label="font"/>
<link wikidata="Q156389" start="6158" end="6164" title="Point (typography)" label="points"/>
<link wikidata="Q518371" start="6477" end="6485" title="Ascender (typography)" label="ascender"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045635" start="6500" end="6509" title="descender" label="descender"/>
<link wikidata="Q504745" start="6576" end="6585" title="Helvetica" label="Helvetica"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="7098" end="7102" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="7264" end="7277" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q694899" start="7567" end="7583" title="Linotype machine" label="Linotype machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q213701" start="7597" end="7616" title="Ottmar Mergenthaler" label="Ottmar Mergenthaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149547" start="7704" end="7720" title="phototypesetting" label="phototypesetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q102441924" start="8182" end="8189" title="scaling (geometry)" label="scaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635931" start="8381" end="8389" title="ink trap" label="ink trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q127418" start="8425" end="8428" title="ink" label="ink"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139211" start="8546" end="8553" title="kerning" label="kerning"/>
<link wikidata="Q82753" start="9145" end="9158" title="computer file" label="computer file"/>
<link wikidata="Q610791" start="9285" end="9292" title="Verdana" label="Verdana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290" start="9328" end="9343" title="computer screen" label="computer screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194708" start="9505" end="9511" title="bitmap" label="bitmap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147633" start="9523" end="9534" title="bitmap font" label="bitmap font"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147633" start="9645" end="9656" title="vector font" label="vector font"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047992" start="9816" end="9841" title="Casady &amp;amp; Greene" label="Casady &amp;amp; Greene, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q182270" start="10057" end="10076" title="Raster graphics" label="rasterizing routine"/>
<link wikidata="Q67972035" start="10341" end="10354" title="laser printer" label="laser printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290" start="10396" end="10411" title="computer display" label="computer screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493777" start="10531" end="10549" title="Font hinting" label="hinting algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139211" start="10697" end="10704" title="kerning" label="kerning"/>
<link wikidata="Q188725" start="10865" end="10873" title="Ligature (typography)" label="ligature"/>
<link wikidata="Q751800" start="10922" end="10930" title="TrueType" label="TrueType"/>
<link wikidata="Q260180" start="10932" end="10940" title="OpenType" label="OpenType"/>
<link wikidata="Q218170" start="10945" end="10955" title="PostScript" label="PostScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q785247" start="10956" end="10962" title="Type 1 font" label="Type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457000" start="10970" end="10978" title="Metafont" label="Metafont"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301" start="10996" end="10999" title="TeX" label="TeX"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="11123" end="11139" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11463" start="11142" end="11155" title="Adobe Systems" label="Adobe Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q687332" start="11255" end="11264" title="FontForge" label="FontForge"/>
<link wikidata="Q453290" start="11284" end="11291" title="Fontlab" label="Fontlab"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192" start="11546" end="11553" title="writing system" label="scripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q243449" start="11942" end="11947" title="serif" label="serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q864011" start="11952" end="11962" title="sans serif" label="sans serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q243449" start="11964" end="11969" title="Serif" label="Serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="12204" end="12210" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13351" end="13361" title="#Monospaced typefaces" label="monospaced"/>
<link wikidata="Q42309974" start="13462" end="13476" title="Duospaced font" label="Duospaced font"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="13783" end="13786" title="GUI" label="GUI"/>
<link wikidata="Q54277" start="13818" end="13832" title="word processor" label="word processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="13838" end="13849" title="web browser" label="web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q46335" start="14181" end="14191" title="typewriter" label="typewriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660658" start="14221" end="14248" title="text mode" label="text-only computer displays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071233" start="14435" end="14452" title="terminal emulator" label="terminal emulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482740" start="14638" end="14657" title="computer programmer" label="computer programmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="14686" end="14697" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q174565" start="14738" end="14749" title="parentheses" label="parentheses"/>
<link wikidata="Q193097" start="14806" end="14815" title="ASCII art" label="ASCII art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242502" start="14893" end="14906" title="Shift JIS art" label="Shift JIS art"/>
<link wikidata="Q994668" start="14967" end="14977" title="MS Mincho" label="MS PGothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36774" start="14989" end="14997" title="web page" label="web page"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="15047" end="15051" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310" start="15100" end="15105" title="LaTeX" label="LaTeX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696897" start="15151" end="15159" title="Teletype Corporation" label="Teletype"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301" start="15227" end="15230" title="TeX" label="TeX"/>
<link wikidata="Q87167" start="15807" end="15817" title="manuscript" label="manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q515301" start="15850" end="15857" title="Courier (typeface)" label="Courier"/>
<link wikidata="Q33260112" start="16175" end="16182" title="script (styles of handwriting)" label="scripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262182" start="16205" end="16213" title="baseline (typography)" label="baseline"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045635" start="16514" end="16523" title="descender" label="descender"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="16774" end="16779" title="Latin script" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216" start="16781" end="16786" title="Greek script" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="16791" end="16799" title="Cyrillic script" label="Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000122" start="16941" end="16950" title="mean line" label="mean line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916348" start="16965" end="16973" title="x-height" label="x-height"/>
<link wikidata="Q518371" start="17044" end="17052" title="Ascender (typography)" label="ascender"/>
<link wikidata="Q245722" start="17864" end="17880" title="Liberation fonts" label="Liberation fonts"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009448" start="17885" end="17899" title="Croscore fonts" label="Croscore fonts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="17972" end="17981" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18446" end="18460" title="Font#Optical size" label="optical sizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q187046" start="18815" end="18824" title="newsprint" label="newsprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635931" start="18935" end="18943" title="ink trap" label="ink trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q956716" start="19438" end="19456" title="non-lining figures" label="non-lining figures"/>
<link wikidata="Q956716" start="19641" end="19659" title="Non-lining figures" label="Non-lining figures"/>
<link wikidata="Q235041" start="20694" end="20707" title="cash register" label="cash register"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570349" start="20791" end="20806" title="monospaced font" label="monospaced font"/>
<link wikidata="Q484023" start="21691" end="21701" title="Roman type" label="Roman type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938758" start="22249" end="22266" title="гражданский шрифт" label="гражданский шрифт"/>
<link wikidata="Q213048" start="22530" end="22545" title="Times New Roman" label="Times New Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q246110" start="22550" end="22558" title="Garamond" label="Garamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q693749" start="22802" end="22808" title="Didone (typography)" label="Didone"/>
<link wikidata="Q246110" start="22859" end="22867" title="Garamond" label="Garamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q768857" start="22869" end="22880" title="Baskerville" label="Baskerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q833029" start="22886" end="22892" title="Bodoni" label="Bodoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q7931791" start="23583" end="23598" title="Vincent Figgins" label="Vincent Figgins"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24720" end="24745" title="Sans-serif#Classification" label="sub-classes of Sans-serif"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24756" end="24765" title="Sans-serif#Grotesque" label="Grotesque"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24779" end="24792" title="Sans-serif#Neo-grotesque" label="Neo-grotesque"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24806" end="24815" title="Sans-serif#Geometric" label="Geometric"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24832" end="24840" title="Sans-serif#Humanist" label="Humanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="24963" end="24977" title="printing press" label="printing press"/>
<link wikidata="Q12681" start="25010" end="25021" title="calligraphy" label="calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q213686" start="25082" end="25091" title="textualis" label="textualis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418954" start="25093" end="25100" title="rotunda (script)" label="rotunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q640799" start="25102" end="25113" title="schwabacher" label="schwabacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q148443" start="25118" end="25125" title="Fraktur (typeface)" label="fraktur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5587887" start="25170" end="25183" title="gothic script (disambiguation)" label="gothic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q864011" start="25277" end="25287" title="sans serif" label="sans serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="25362" end="25376" title="Irish language" label="Irish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518866" start="25671" end="25678" title="insular script" label="insular"/>
<link wikidata="Q80006" start="26482" end="26502" title="computer programming" label="computer programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145976" start="26561" end="26571" title="plain text" label="plain text"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26676" end="26708" title="List of typefaces#Monospaced" label="Examples of monospaced typefaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q515301" start="26713" end="26720" title="Courier (typeface)" label="Courier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654549" start="26722" end="26736" title="Prestige Elite" label="Prestige Elite"/>
<link wikidata="Q920050" start="26738" end="26746" title="Fixedsys" label="Fixedsys"/>
<link wikidata="Q246407" start="26752" end="26758" title="Monaco (typeface)" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625629" start="29628" end="29637" title="wood type" label="wood type"/>
<link wikidata="Q12681" start="30284" end="30295" title="calligraphy" label="calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378314" start="30342" end="30351" title="body text" label="body text"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715818" start="30848" end="30855" title="Coronet (typeface)" label="Coronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q147359" start="30894" end="30901" title="Zapfino" label="Zapfino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192" start="31112" end="31126" title="writing system" label="writing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="31186" end="31192" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="31194" end="31211" title="Chinese character" label="Chinese character"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032111" start="31214" end="31225" title="Wonton font" label="Wonton font"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="31229" end="31237" title="Cyrillic script" label="Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064170" start="31239" end="31252" title="Faux Cyrillic" label="Faux Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q467037" start="31255" end="31268" title="Indic scripts" label="Indic scripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216" start="31270" end="31275" title="Greek alphabet" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6648164" start="31294" end="31300" title="Lithos" label="Lithos"/>
<link wikidata="Q33513" start="31303" end="31309" title="Hebrew alphabet" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q117468361" start="31311" end="31322" title="Faux Hebrew" label="Faux Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q187659" start="31325" end="31329" title="Kana" label="Kana"/>
<link wikidata="Q236376" start="31334" end="31338" title="Thai alphabet" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32076" end="32083" title="Typeface#Display type" label="display"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892715" start="32397" end="32407" title="slab serif" label="slab serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q864011" start="32604" end="32614" title="sans-serif" label="sans-serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514" start="33285" end="33293" title="graffiti" label="graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351947" start="33625" end="33636" title="Drop shadow" label="Drop shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311519" start="33921" end="33937" title="Imprint (typeface)" label="Imprint Shadowed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633344" start="34178" end="34189" title="Bell Gothic" label="Bell Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942450" start="34194" end="34209" title="Bell Centennial" label="Bell Centennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916348" start="34323" end="34331" title="x-height" label="x-height"/>
<link wikidata="Q213048" start="34478" end="34493" title="Times New Roman" label="Times New Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q742456" start="34600" end="34606" title="Minion (typeface)" label="Minion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635931" start="34681" end="34689" title="ink trap" label="ink trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q187046" start="35375" end="35384" title="newsprint" label="newsprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q920915" start="35692" end="35700" title="boldface" label="boldface"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35841" end="35850" title="Font#Width" label="condensed"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35863" end="35871" title="Font#Width" label="expanded"/>
<link wikidata="Q188546" start="36190" end="36197" title="pangram" label="pangram"/>
<link wikidata="Q399981" start="36214" end="36257" title="The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog" label="The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602072" start="36545" end="36553" title="greeking" label="greeking"/>
<link wikidata="Q152036" start="36576" end="36587" title="lorem ipsum" label="lorem ipsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="36597" end="36602" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="36633" end="36639" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055008" start="36653" end="36665" title="In Catilinam" label="In Catilinam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543909" start="36741" end="36747" title="Type color" label="colour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411592" start="36901" end="36913" title="Hamburgevons" label="Hamburgevons"/>
<link wikidata="Q186599" start="37553" end="37563" title="Arabesque (European art)" label="arabesques"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033580" start="37626" end="37634" title="Fleuron (typography)" label="fleurons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101796" start="37873" end="37881" title="clip art" label="clip art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843050" start="37922" end="37944" title="American Type Founders" label="American Type Founders"/>
<link wikidata="Q80042" start="38046" end="38052" title="cheque" label="cheque"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600963" start="38075" end="38086" title="Seals of the U.S. states" label="state seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q133036" start="38215" end="38226" title="lithography" label="lithography"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38313" end="38322" title="#Display type" label="See above"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066397" start="38661" end="38674" title="Zapf Dingbats" label="Zapf Dingbats"/>
<link wikidata="Q958410" start="38679" end="38688" title="Wingdings" label="Wingdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771774" start="38814" end="38821" title="Marlett" label="Marlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="38854" end="38861" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="39315" end="39322" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q187947" start="40002" end="40013" title="sheet music" label="sheet music"/>
<link wikidata="Q17626874" start="40155" end="40169" title="Alfred F. Johnson" label="Johnson, A. F."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64107" wikidata="Q131354" url="?curid=64107" title="Alcatraz Island">
<text>Alcatraz Island () is a small island offshore from San Francisco, California, United States. The island was developed in the mid-19th century with facilities for a lighthouse, a military fortification, and a military prison. In 1934, the island was converted into a federal prison, Alcatraz Federal Penitentiary. The strong currents around the island and cold water temperatures made escape nearly impossible, and the prison became one of the most notorious in American history. The prison closed in 1963, and the island is now a major tourist attraction.

Beginning in November 1969, the island was occupied for more than 19 months by a group of Native Americans, initially primarily from San Francisco, who were later joined by AIM and other urban Native Americans from other parts of the country, who were part of a wave of Native American activists organizing public protests across the US through the 1970s. In 1972, Alcatraz was transferred to the Department of Interior to become part of Golden Gate National Recreation Area. It was designated as a National Historic Landmark in 1986.

Today, the island&#x27;s facilities are managed by the National Park Service as part of Golden Gate National Recreation Area. Visitors can reach the island by ferry ride from Pier 33, located between the San Francisco Ferry Building and Fisherman&#x27;s Wharf. Hornblower Cruises, operating under the name Alcatraz Cruises, is the official ferry provider to and from the island.

Alcatraz Island is the site of the abandoned federal prison, the oldest operating lighthouse on the West Coast of the United States, early military fortifications, and natural features such as rock pools and a seabird colony (mostly western gulls, cormorants, and egrets). According to a 1971 documentary on the history of Alcatraz, the island measures by and is at highest point during mean tide. The total area of the island is reported to be .

Landmarks on the island include the Main Cellhouse, Dining Hall, Lighthouse, the ruins of the Warden&#x27;s House and Social Hall, Parade Grounds, Building 64, Water Tower, New Industries Building, Model Industries Building, and the Recreation Yard.

==History==


The first European to document the islands of San Francisco Bay was Spanish naval officer and explorer Juan Manuel de Ayala during Spanish rule of California; he charted San Francisco Bay in 1775. He named today&#x27;s Yerba Buena Island as &quot;La Isla de los Alcatraces&quot;, which translates as &quot;The Island of the Gannets&quot;, but is commonly believed to translate as &quot;The Island of the Pelicans&quot; (the modern Spanish word for pelican is &quot;pelícano&quot;), from the archaic Spanish &quot;&quot; (&quot;pelican&quot;). No gannets are native to the Pacific Coast, making the older Spanish usage more likely.

Yerba Buena Island was labeled on Ayala&#x27;s 1775 chart of San Francisco Bay as &quot;Isla de Alcatraces&quot;. The name was later applied to the rock now known as Alcatraz Island by Captain Frederick W. Beechey, an English naval officer and explorer.

Over the years, the Spanish version &quot;Alcatraz&quot; became popular and is now widely used. In August 1827, for instance, French Captain Auguste Bernard Duhaut-Cilly wrote &quot;... running past Alcatraze&#x27;s (Pelicans) Island ... covered with a countless number of these birds. A gun fired over the feathered legions caused them to fly up in a great cloud and with a noise like a hurricane.&quot; The California brown pelican (&quot;Pelecanus occidentalis californicus&quot;) is not known to nest on the island today. The Spanish built several small buildings on the island and other minor structures.

===Fort Alcatraz===

The earliest recorded private owner of the island of Alcatraz is Julian Workman, to whom it was given by Mexican Governor Pio Pico in June 1846, with the understanding that Workman would build a lighthouse on it. Julian Workman is the baptismal name of William Workman, co-owner of Rancho La Puente and a personal friend of Pio Pico. Later in 1846, acting in his capacity as military governor of California, John C. Frémont bought the island for $5,000 in the name of the United States government from Francis Temple.

In 1850, President Millard Fillmore ordered that Alcatraz Island be set aside specifically as a United States military reservation, for military purposes based upon the U.S. acquisition of California from Mexico following the Mexican–American War. Frémont had expected a large compensation for his initiative in purchasing and securing Alcatraz Island for the U.S. government, but the U.S. government later invalidated the sale and paid Frémont nothing. Frémont and his heirs sued for compensation during protracted but unsuccessful legal battles that extended into the 1890s.

 Following the acquisition of California by the United States as a result of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (1848), which ended the Mexican–American War, and the onset of the California Gold Rush the following year, the U.S. Army began studying the suitability of Alcatraz Island for the positioning of coastal batteries to protect the approaches to San Francisco Bay. In 1853, under the direction of Zealous B. Tower, the United States Army Corps of Engineers began fortifying the island, work which continued until 1858, when the initial version of Fort Alcatraz was complete. The island&#x27;s first garrison, numbering about 200 soldiers, arrived at the end of that year.

When the American Civil War broke out in 1861, the island mounted 85 cannons (increased to 105 cannons by 1866) in casements around its perimeter, though the small size of the garrison meant only a fraction of the guns could be used at one time. At this time, it also served as the San Francisco Arsenal for storage of firearms to prevent them falling into the hands of Confederate sympathizers. Alcatraz, built as a &quot;heavily fortified military site on the West Coast&quot;, was to form a &quot;triangle of defense&quot; with Fort Point and Lime Point, but the contemplated work on Lime Point was never built. The first operational lighthouse on the West Coast of the United States was also built on Alcatraz. During the war, Fort Alcatraz was used to imprison Confederate sympathizers and privateers on the west coast, but its guns were never fired at an enemy.

Studies of the island and its fortifications have included archeological surveys relying on contemporary technology. In 2019 &quot;Binghamton University archaeologist Timothy de Smet and colleagues located historical remains beneath the former recreation yard of the Alcatraz Federal Penitentiary.&quot; Using ground-penetrating radar (GPR) data and georectifications, Smet and colleagues discovered structures, including &quot;a &#x27;bombproof&#x27; earthwork traverse along with its underlying vaulted brick masonry tunnel and ventilation ducts,&quot; in surprisingly good condition. Archaeologists also found the remains of ammunition magazines, and tunnels below the penitentiary that was built later.

Because of the isolation created by the cold, strong currents of the waters of San Francisco Bay, as early as 1859, Alcatraz was used to house soldiers convicted of crimes. By 1861, the fort was the military prison for the Department of the Pacific. It housed Civil War prisoners of war (POWs) as early as that year.


Starting in 1863, the military also held private citizens accused of treason, after the writ of habeas corpus in the United States was suspended. Hundreds of troops were trained on the island, with more than 350 military personnel in place by April 1861. As enlistees were assigned to units, new green troops reported for training. In early 1865, the number of men reached 433, the peak of the war.

During the Civil War-era, rapid changes in artillery and fortification were generated. Alcatraz&#x27;s defenses were obsolete by the postwar years. Modernization efforts, including an ambitious plan to level the entire island and construct shell-proof underground magazines and tunnels, were undertaken between 1870 and 1876 but never completed (the so-called &quot;parade ground&quot; on the southern tip of the island represents the extent of the flattening effort). Instead, the army switched the focus of its plans for Alcatraz from coastal defense to detention, a task for which it was well suited because of its isolation.

In 1867, a brick jailhouse was built (previously inmates had been kept in the basement of the guardhouse), and in 1868, Alcatraz was officially designated as a long-term detention facility for military prisoners. The facility was later discontinued for Prisoners of War in 1846. Among those incarcerated at Alcatraz were Confederates caught on the West Coast and some Hopi Native American men in the 1870s, who refused orders to send their children away from their families to Indian boarding schools.

In 1898, due to the Spanish–American War, the prison population rose from 26 to over 450. From 1905 to 1907 it was commanded by U.S. Army Major George W. McIver. After the 1906 San Francisco earthquake, civilian prisoners were transferred to Alcatraz for safe confinement. On March 21, 1907, Alcatraz was officially designated as the Western U.S. Military Prison, later Pacific Branch, U.S. Disciplinary Barracks, 1915.

In 1909 construction began on the huge concrete main cell block, designed by Major Reuben Turner, which remains the island&#x27;s dominant feature. It was completed in 1912. To accommodate the new cell block, the Citadel, a three-story barracks, was demolished down to the first floor, which was below ground level. The building had been constructed in an excavated pit, creating a defensive dry moat. The first floor was incorporated as a basement to the new cell block, giving rise to the popular legend of &quot;dungeons&quot; below the main cell block. The US Disciplinary Barracks was deactivated in October 1933 and transferred to the Bureau of Prisons.

During World War I, the prison was used to hold conscientious objectors, including Philip Grosser, who wrote a pamphlet entitled &quot;Uncle Sam&#x27;s Devil&#x27;s Island&quot; about his experiences.

===Alcatraz Federal Penitentiary===

The United States Disciplinary Barracks on Alcatraz were acquired by the United States Department of Justice on October 12, 1933, and the island was designated as a federal prison in August 1934. Alcatraz was designed to hold prisoners who continuously caused trouble at other federal prisons. At 9:40 am on August 11, 1934, the first batch of 137 prisoners arrived at Alcatraz, arriving by railroad from the United States Penitentiary in Leavenworth, Kansas, to Santa Venetia, California. They were escorted to Alcatraz, while handcuffed in high security coaches and guarded by 60 special FBI agents, U.S. Marshals and railway security officials.

Most of the prisoners were notorious bank robbers and murderers. The prison initially had a staff of 155, including the first warden James A. Johnston and associate warden J. E. Shuttleworth, both considered to be &quot;iron men&quot;. The staff were highly trained in security, but not rehabilitation.

During the 29 years it was in use, the prison held some of the most notorious criminals in American history, including gangsters such as Al Capone, Robert Franklin Stroud (the &quot;Birdman of Alcatraz&quot;), George &quot;Machine Gun&quot; Kelly and Bumpy Johnson, and political terrorists such as Rafael Cancel Miranda, a member of the Puerto Rican Nationalist Party who attacked the United States Capitol building in 1954. Others included Mickey Cohen, Arthur R. &quot;Doc&quot; Barker, and Alvin &quot;Creepy&quot; Karpis, who served more time at Alcatraz than any other inmate. It also provided housing for the Bureau of Prisons staff and their families.

Contrary to popular belief, it was possible to escape and swim all of the way to shore. However, during its 29 years of operation, the penitentiary claimed that no prisoner successfully escaped. A total of 36 prisoners made 14 escape attempts, two men trying twice. 23 were caught alive, six were shot and killed during their escape, two drowned, and five are listed as &quot;missing and presumed drowned&quot;. The most violent incident occurred on May 2, 1946, when a failed escape attempt by six prisoners led to the Battle of Alcatraz. Perhaps the most famous is the intricate escape, carried out on June 11, 1962, by Frank Morris, John Anglin, and Clarence Anglin. The three men are believed to have drowned in their attempt. However, no bodies were ever found, sparking speculation that they made it to shore and escaped.

Although most escapees were caught or drowned, in 1962, prisoner John Paul Scott made it to the shore. However, he was so weary that police found him unconscious and in hypothermic shock. The annual Escape from Alcatraz Triathlon includes a required swim from the island to the bay shore.

===Closing of the prison===

There are several reasons that Alcatraz closed as a penitentiary in 1963. The penitentiary cost much more to operate than other prisons (nearly $10 per prisoner per day, as opposed to $3 per prisoner per day at Atlanta). Half a century of salt water saturation had severely eroded the buildings and three people had purportedly escaped in 1962. After its closure, George Moscone received public proposals to repurpose Alcatraz Island.

===Native American occupation===

Alcatraz Island was occupied by Native American activists for the first time on March 8, 1964. The protest, proposed by Lakota Sioux activist Belva Cottier and joined by about 35 others, was reported by, among others, the &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot; and the &quot;San Francisco Examiner&quot;.

Beginning on November 20, 1969, a group of Native Americans called United Indians of All Tribes, mostly college students from San Francisco, occupied the island to protest federal policies related to American Indians. Some of them were children of Native Americans who had relocated in the city as part of the Bureau of Indian Affairs&#x27; (BIA) Indian termination policy, which was a series of laws and policies aimed at the assimilation of Native Americans into mainstream US society. It encouraged Native Americans to move away from the Indian reservations and into cities to take advantage of health, educational and employment opportunities. A number of employees of the Bureau of Indian Affairs also occupied Alcatraz at that time, including Doris Purdy, an amateur photographer, who later produced footage of her stay on the island.

The occupiers, who stayed on the island for nearly two years, demanded that the island&#x27;s facilities be adapted and new structures built for an Indian education center, ecology center, and cultural center. The American Indians claimed the island by provisions of the Treaty of Fort Laramie (1868) between the US and the Sioux; they said the treaty promised to return all retired, abandoned, or out-of-use federal lands to the native peoples from whom they were acquired. Indians of All Tribes claimed Alcatraz Island by the &quot;Right of Discovery&quot;; as historian Troy R. Johnson states in &quot;The Occupation of Alcatraz Island&quot;, generations of indigenous peoples knew about Alcatraz at least 10,000 years before any European knew about any part of North America. Begun by urban Indians of San Francisco, the occupation attracted other Native Americans from across the country, including American Indian Movement (AIM) urban activists from Minneapolis.

During the nineteen months and nine days of occupation by the American Indians, several buildings at Alcatraz were damaged or destroyed by fire, including the lighthouse keeper&#x27;s home, the warden&#x27;s home, the Officers&#x27; Club, the recreation hall, and the Coast Guard quarters. The origin of the fires is disputed. The US government demolished a number of other buildings (mostly apartments) after the occupation had ended. Graffiti from the period of Native American occupation is still visible at many locations on the island.

During the occupation, President Richard Nixon rescinded the Indian termination policy, designed by earlier administrations to end federal recognition of many tribes and their special relationship with the US government. He established a new policy of self-determination, in part as a result of the publicity and awareness created by the occupation. The occupation ended on June 11, 1971.

===Alcatraz under the National Park Service===
In 1972, the National Park Service purchased Alcatraz along with Fort Mason from the U.S. Army to establish the Golden Gate National Recreation Area. Under &quot;An Act to Establish the Golden Gate National Recreation Area&quot; President Richard Nixon allocated $120 million for land acquisition and development of the area. It has since been under the direction of the Golden Gate National Recreation Area and now operates as a tourist site and museum dedicated to its time as a federal penitentiary. Operating costs still remain one of its biggest challenges today.

==Landmarks==
Part of the Golden Gate National Recreation Area since 1972, the entire Alcatraz Island was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1976. In 1986 it was designated as a National Historic Landmark, the highest recognition.

In 1993, the National Park Service published a plan entitled &quot;Alcatraz Development Concept and Environmental Assessment.&quot; This plan, approved in 1980, doubled the area of Alcatraz accessible to the public, in order to enable visitors to enjoy its scenery and bird, marine, and animal life.
Major sites in the cultural landscape include:
* Boat Dock
* Building 64
* Citadel
* Dining Hall
* Former Military Chapel (Bachelor Quarters)
* Helipad 
* Library
* Lighthouse
* Main Cellhouse
* Model Industries Building
* Morgue
* New Industries Building
* Officers&#x27; Club
* Parade Grounds
* Power House
* Recreation Yard
* Wardens House
* Water Tower

==Development==
American Indigenous groups, such as the International Indian Treaty Council, occasionally hold ceremonies on the island, most notably, their &quot;Sunrise Gatherings&quot; every Columbus Day and Thanksgiving Day.

Around 2007, the Global Peace Foundation proposed to raze the prison and build a peace center in its place. Supporters collected 10,350 signatures – sufficient to have it placed as a proposition on the presidential primary ballots in San Francisco for February 5, 2008. The proposed plan was estimated at US$1 billion. For the plan to pass, Congress would have to have taken Alcatraz out of the National Park Service. Critics of the plan said that Alcatraz is too rich in history to be destroyed. On February 6, 2008, the Alcatraz Island Global Peace Center Proposition C failed to pass, with 72% of voters rejecting the proposition.

The coastal environment of the San Francisco Bay Area has caused deterioration and corrosion of building materials throughout Alcatraz. Beginning in 2011, the National Park Service began major renovations on the island, including the installation of solar panels on the cell house roof, slope stabilization near the Warden&#x27;s House, and the stabilization and rehabilitation of the outer cell house walls.
Now one of San Francisco&#x27;s major tourist attractions, Alcatraz drew some 1.7 million visitors annually according to a 2018 report. Visitors arrive by ferry, operated under contract by Alcatraz Cruises LLC at Pier 33. 
The 2018 report indicated that &quot;former prison buildings are being conserved and seismically upgraded and additional areas of the Island are opened to the public as safety hazards are removed&quot;. During the COVID-19 pandemic, the buildings and the island remained closed to the public for more than a year (and ferry services were suspended), reopening in March 2021.

==Art==
Alcatraz has been home to several art installations. In 2014, Chinese artist/dissident Ai Weiwei staged an exhibition which explored &quot;questions about human rights and freedom of expression&quot; called @Large. This exhibition included Lego portraits of famous political prisoners. The creation of the exhibition was featured in a 2019 documentary film, &quot;Ai Weiwei: Yours Truly&quot;. In 2016, Nelson Saiers used math and prison slang as central elements in a six-month installation that called attention to the imposition of long prison sentences.

==Fauna and flora==

===Habitat===

* Cisterns. A bluff that, because of its moist crevices, is believed to be an important site for California slender salamanders.
* Cliff tops at the island&#x27;s north end. Containing a onetime manufacturing building and a plaza, the area is listed as important to nesting and roosting birds.
* The powerhouse area. A steep embankment where native grassland and creeping wild rye support a habitat for deer mice.
* Tide pools. One of the only complexes in the San Francisco Bay, the island&#x27;s tide pools were created by quarrying activities, and contain a variety of typical invertebrate species.
* Western cliffs and cliff tops. Rising to heights of nearly , they provide nesting and roosting sites for seabirds including pigeon guillemots, cormorants, Heermann&#x27;s gulls, and western gulls. Harbor seals can occasionally be seen on a small beach at the base.
* The parade grounds. Carved from the hillside during the late 19th century and covered with rubble since the government demolished guard housing in 1971, the area has become a habitat and breeding ground for black-crowned night herons, western gulls, slender salamanders, and deer mice.
* The Agave Path, a trail named for its dense growth of agave. Located atop a shoreline bulkhead on the south side, it provides a nesting habitat for night herons.

===Flora===

Gardens planted by families of the original Army post, and later by families of the prison guards, fell into neglect after the prison closure in 1963. After 40 years, they are being restored by a paid staff member and many volunteers, thanks to funding by the Garden Conservancy and the Golden Gate National Parks Conservancy. The untended gardens had become severely overgrown and had developed into a nesting habitat and sanctuary for numerous birds. Now, areas of bird habitat are being preserved and protected, while many of the gardens are being restored to their original state.

In clearing out the overgrowth, workers found that many of the original plants were growing where they had been planted – some more than 100 years ago. Numerous heirloom rose hybrids, including a Welsh rose (Bardou Job) that had been believed to be extinct, have been discovered and propagated. Many species of roses, succulents, and geraniums are growing among apple and fig trees, banks of sweet peas, manicured gardens of cutting flowers, and wildly overgrown sections of native grasses with blackberry and honeysuckle.

==In popular culture==
Alcatraz Island appears often in media and popular culture, including films dating from 1962: &quot;Resident Evil: Death Island&quot; (2023), &quot;The Book of Eli&quot; (2010), &quot;X-Men: The Last Stand&quot; (2006), &quot;Catch Me If You Can&quot; (2002), &quot;The Rock&quot; (1996), &quot;Murder in the First&quot; (1995), &quot;Escape from Alcatraz&quot; (1979), &quot;The Enforcer&quot; (1976), &quot;Point Blank&quot; (1967) &quot;, Birdman of Alcatraz&quot; (1962) and J. J. Abrams&#x27; 2012 television series &quot;Alcatraz&quot;.

It also was featured in the anime &quot;Yu-Gi-Oh! Duel Monsters&quot;, the book &quot;Al Capone Does My Shirts&quot; and the video game &quot;Tony Hawk&#x27;s Pro Skater 4&quot; as a playable level. It is also showcased as a playable racetrack in the 1997 arcade racing video game &quot;San Francisco Rush the Rock: Alcatraz Edition&quot;. Alcatraz has also been portrayed often as a safe haven or base of operations in many post-apocalyptic movies, such as &quot;The Book of Eli&quot;.

Alcatraz was featured in the video game &quot;Call of Duty: Black Ops II&quot;; in the downloadable zombie survival map &quot;Mob of the Dead&quot;, players could explore the Main Cellhouse, the Boat Dock and a fictional area called the Catacombs which runs through the island. A segment of Alcatraz&#x27; Cellhouse makes a cameo appearance in &quot;Call of Duty: Black Ops III&quot; in the downloadable zombie survival map &quot;Revelations&quot;. The map was then remastered in &quot;Call of Duty: Black Ops 4&#x27;s&quot; zombie mode as &quot;Blood of the Dead&quot;; the playable area of the map was expanded to include the Model Industries Building, New Industries Building and the Warden&#x27;s House. &quot;Call of Duty: Mobile&quot; has a seasonal game mode in Alcatraz Island and Rebirth Island in &quot;Call of Duty: Warzone&quot; is also based on the island.

Alcatraz even appears in the novels &quot;The Alchemyst&quot; and &quot;The Sorceress&quot; by Michael Scott where it is depicted as a prison for the immortal Perenelle Flamel.

Alcatraz is featured in the &quot;Mummies Alive!&quot; episode &quot;Bird Mummy of Alcatraz&quot; and was also featured in a mission in the video game &quot;Watch Dogs 2&quot; where you can walk around and visit the island. Alcatraz is also featured as a downloadable map in the video game &quot;The Escapists.&quot;

The German rock band Scorpions filmed the music video for &quot;No One Like You&quot; at the Alcatraz prison.

&quot;Escape from Alcatraz&quot; and &quot;The Rock&quot; are two films that show how inescapable the island is. &quot;Escape from Alcatraz&quot; is based on the true story of a few inmates trying to flee the island. &quot;The Rock&quot;, on the other hand, just depicts life in Alcatraz.

In the 2003 video game &quot;Hulk&quot;, Alcatraz is the location of a secret base of operations called &quot;Freehold&quot; for the supervillain Leader.

In the novel &quot;The Battle of the Labyrinth&quot; by Rick Riordan (part of the &quot;Percy Jackson &amp; the Olympians&quot; series), Alcatraz serves as the prison of the Hundred-Handed One Briares, guarded by the monster Kampê.

==Gallery==
==See also==
* Asinara
* Cellular Jail
* Château d&#x27;If
* Devil&#x27;s Island
* Fort Denison
* List of islands of California
* Robben Island
* San Lucas Island
==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
* 
* AlcatrazHistory.com: Alcatraz History website – homepage
* American Devils Island Holds Toughest Prisoners – &quot;Popular Science&quot; (February 1935).
* Federal Bureau of Prisons.gov: &quot;A Brief History of Alcatraz&quot;
* California State Military Museum.org: The Post at Alcatraz Island
* 2012 KDRTradio.org: Interview with former Alcatraz convict Robert Luke
* Report on the 1962 Alcatraz escape incident – &quot;(from the FBI FOIA electronic reading room)&quot;.
* Mapicurious.com: Map of Alcatraz – &quot;with marker pictures&quot;.
* Alcatraz: A Prison as Disneyland. Chris Hedges (December 2014).
* Alcatraz Island, Part of Golden Gate National Recreation Area, National Park Service at Google Cultural Institute</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131354" start="0" end="15" title="Alcatraz Island" label="Alcatraz Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="51" end="64" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712967" start="164" end="174" title="Alcatraz Island Lighthouse" label="lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006048" start="266" end="280" title="federal prison" label="federal prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142661" start="282" end="311" title="Alcatraz Federal Penitentiary" label="Alcatraz Federal Penitentiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044383" start="600" end="608" title="Occupation of Alcatraz" label="occupied"/>
<link wikidata="Q465140" start="730" end="733" title="American Indian Movement" label="AIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q920486" start="827" end="852" title="Indigenous rights" label="Native American activists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456206" start="995" end="1031" title="Golden Gate National Recreation Area" label="Golden Gate National Recreation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="1056" end="1082" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="1148" end="1169" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q25653" start="1252" end="1257" title="ferry" label="ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408117" start="1297" end="1325" title="San Francisco Ferry Building" label="San Francisco Ferry Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324280" start="1330" end="1352" title="Fisherman&amp;#x27;s Wharf, San Francisco" label="Fisherman&amp;#x27;s Wharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5904087" start="1354" end="1372" title="Hornblower Cruises" label="Hornblower Cruises"/>
<link wikidata="Q39715" start="1555" end="1565" title="lighthouse" label="lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="1573" end="1604" title="West Coast of the United States" label="West Coast of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="1621" end="1634" title="fortification" label="fortification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521187" start="1666" end="1675" title="rock pool" label="rock pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808" start="1683" end="1690" title="seabird" label="seabird"/>
<link wikidata="Q630829" start="1706" end="1718" title="western gull" label="western gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901247" start="1721" end="1730" title="cormorant" label="cormorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3060012" start="1737" end="1742" title="egret" label="egret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142661" start="1957" end="1971" title="Alcatraz Cellhouse" label="Main Cellhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142641" start="1973" end="1984" title="Alcatraz Dining Hall" label="Dining Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712967" start="1986" end="1996" title="Alcatraz Lighthouse" label="Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142648" start="2015" end="2034" title="Warden&amp;#x27;s House (Alcatraz Island)" label="Warden&amp;#x27;s House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142634" start="2068" end="2079" title="Building 64" label="Building 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142684" start="2081" end="2092" title="Alcatraz Water Tower" label="Water Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142660" start="2094" end="2117" title="New Industries Building" label="New Industries Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142654" start="2119" end="2144" title="Model Industries Building" label="Model Industries Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142605" start="2154" end="2169" title="Recreation Yard (Alcatraz)" label="Recreation Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="2254" end="2261" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059097" start="2289" end="2309" title="Juan de Ayala" label="Juan Manuel de Ayala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818043" start="2317" end="2343" title="Spanish California" label="Spanish rule of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q768669" start="2405" end="2423" title="Yerba Buena Island" label="Yerba Buena Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651414" start="2510" end="2517" title="Gannets" label="Gannets"/>
<link wikidata="Q19413" start="2590" end="2597" title="Pelican" label="Pelican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059097" start="2852" end="2857" title="Juan de Ayala" label="Ayala"/>
<link wikidata="Q510721" start="3003" end="3031" title="Frederick William Beechey" label="Captain Frederick W. Beechey"/>
<link wikidata="Q208714" start="3482" end="3506" title="Brown pelican" label="California brown pelican"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="3810" end="3817" title="Mexico" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q949282" start="3827" end="3835" title="Pio Pico" label="Pio Pico"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035019" start="3958" end="3973" title="Workman-Temple family" label="William Workman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291032" start="3987" end="4003" title="Rancho La Puente" label="Rancho La Puente"/>
<link wikidata="Q169011" start="4113" end="4128" title="John C. Frémont" label="John C. Frémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="4177" end="4201" title="United States government" label="United States government"/>
<link wikidata="Q12306" start="4243" end="4259" title="Millard Fillmore" label="Millard Fillmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="4450" end="4470" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q616109" start="4883" end="4910" title="Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo" label="Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="4935" end="4955" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="4978" end="4998" title="California Gold Rush" label="California Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="5023" end="5032" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3575052" start="5204" end="5220" title="Zealous B. Tower" label="Zealous B. Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="5226" end="5263" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers" label="United States Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712966" start="5354" end="5367" title="Alcatraz Citadel" label="Fort Alcatraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="5489" end="5507" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q510690" start="5850" end="5874" title="Copperheads (politics)" label="Confederate sympathizers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438659" start="6011" end="6021" title="Fort Point, San Francisco" label="Fort Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="6135" end="6166" title="West Coast of the United States" label="West Coast of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="6246" end="6257" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q201559" start="6275" end="6284" title="privateer" label="privateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q503560" start="6659" end="6683" title="ground-penetrating radar" label="ground-penetrating radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260563" start="7280" end="7305" title="Department of the Pacific" label="Department of the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="7327" end="7343" title="Prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636685" start="7472" end="7506" title="habeas corpus in the United States" label="habeas corpus in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="8754" end="8764" title="West Coast of the United States" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q117255" start="8774" end="8778" title="Hopi" label="Hopi"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="8779" end="8794" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096204" start="8883" end="8906" title="Indian boarding schools" label="Indian boarding schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="8929" end="8949" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q14629452" start="9053" end="9069" title="George W. McIver" label="George W. McIver"/>
<link wikidata="Q211386" start="9081" end="9110" title="1906 San Francisco earthquake" label="1906 San Francisco earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q88480" start="9726" end="9730" title="moat" label="moat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400015" start="9971" end="9988" title="Bureau of Prisons" label="Bureau of Prisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="9998" end="10009" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930613" start="10039" end="10062" title="conscientious objectors" label="conscientious objectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3379019" start="10074" end="10088" title="Philip Grosser" label="Philip Grosser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="10303" end="10338" title="United States Department of Justice" label="United States Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400015" start="10395" end="10409" title="Federal Bureau of Prisons" label="federal prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762867" start="10669" end="10688" title="Leavenworth, Kansas" label="Leavenworth, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665797" start="10693" end="10718" title="Santa Venetia, California" label="Santa Venetia, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="10820" end="10830" title="FBI agents" label="FBI agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q934866" start="10832" end="10845" title="United States Marshals Service" label="U.S. Marshals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142816" start="11012" end="11029" title="James A. Johnston" label="James A. Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056154" start="11051" end="11069" title="J. E. Shuttleworth" label="J. E. Shuttleworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q80048" start="11320" end="11329" title="Al Capone" label="Al Capone"/>
<link wikidata="Q503110" start="11331" end="11353" title="Robert Franklin Stroud" label="Robert Franklin Stroud"/>
<link wikidata="Q72733" start="11393" end="11429" title="Machine Gun Kelly (gangster)" label="George &amp;quot;Machine Gun&amp;quot; Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332591" start="11434" end="11447" title="Bumpy Johnson" label="Bumpy Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282062" start="11482" end="11503" title="Rafael Cancel Miranda" label="Rafael Cancel Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114836" start="11521" end="11551" title="Puerto Rican Nationalist Party" label="Puerto Rican Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q54109" start="11569" end="11590" title="United States Capitol" label="United States Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371363" start="11625" end="11637" title="Mickey Cohen" label="Mickey Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864989" start="11639" end="11671" title="Arthur Barker" label="Arthur R. &amp;quot;Doc&amp;quot; Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q449135" start="11677" end="11708" title="Alvin &amp;quot;Creepy&amp;quot; Karpis" label="Alvin &amp;quot;Creepy&amp;quot; Karpis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17501755" start="12050" end="12086" title="List of Alcatraz escape attempts" label="36 prisoners made 14 escape attempts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081278" start="12364" end="12382" title="Battle of Alcatraz" label="Battle of Alcatraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3592743" start="12415" end="12431" title="June 1962 Alcatraz escape attempt" label="intricate escape"/>
<link wikidata="Q3592743" start="12466" end="12478" title="Frank Morris (prisoner)" label="Frank Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3592743" start="12480" end="12491" title="John Anglin (criminal)" label="John Anglin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3592743" start="12497" end="12512" title="Clarence Anglin" label="Clarence Anglin"/>
<link wikidata="Q672018" start="12738" end="12753" title="John Paul Scott" label="John Paul Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036696" start="12842" end="12853" title="hypothermia" label="hypothermic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366815" start="12872" end="12902" title="Escape from Alcatraz (triathlon)" label="Escape from Alcatraz Triathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q373499" start="13236" end="13252" title="water saturation" label="water saturation"/>
<link wikidata="Q705708" start="13356" end="13370" title="George Moscone" label="George Moscone"/>
<link wikidata="Q98399052" start="13604" end="13617" title="Belva Cottier" label="Belva Cottier"/>
<link wikidata="Q139103" start="13690" end="13713" title="San Francisco Chronicle" label="San Francisco Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164240" start="13734" end="13756" title="San Francisco Examiner" label="San Francisco Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="13808" end="13824" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304751" start="13832" end="13860" title="Alcatraz-Red Power Movement" label="United Indians of All Tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010563" start="14075" end="14099" title="Bureau of Indian Affairs" label="Bureau of Indian Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404841" start="14112" end="14137" title="Indian termination policy" label="Indian termination policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="14306" end="14325" title="Indian reservations" label="Indian reservations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481957" start="14878" end="14907" title="Treaty of Fort Laramie (1868)" label="Treaty of Fort Laramie (1868)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164323" start="15141" end="15159" title="Doctrine of Discovery" label="Right of Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="15268" end="15286" title="indigenous peoples" label="indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q465140" start="15511" end="15535" title="American Indian Movement" label="American Indian Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="15563" end="15574" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514" start="16013" end="16021" title="Graffiti" label="Graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="16152" end="16165" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979971" start="16361" end="16389" title="Native American self-determination" label="policy of self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456206" start="17152" end="17188" title="Golden Gate National Recreation Area" label="Golden Gate National Recreation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="17246" end="17282" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="17323" end="17349" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712975" start="17726" end="17735" title="Boat Dock, Alcatraz" label="Boat Dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142634" start="17738" end="17749" title="Building 64" label="Building 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712966" start="17752" end="17759" title="Alcatraz Citadel" label="Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142641" start="17762" end="17773" title="Alcatraz Dining Hall" label="Dining Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470102" start="17776" end="17818" title="Former Military Chapel (Bachelor Quarters)" label="Former Military Chapel (Bachelor Quarters)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142990" start="17832" end="17839" title="Alcatraz Library" label="Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712967" start="17842" end="17852" title="Alcatraz Lighthouse" label="Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142661" start="17855" end="17869" title="Alcatraz Cellhouse" label="Main Cellhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142654" start="17872" end="17897" title="Model Industries Building" label="Model Industries Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142668" start="17900" end="17906" title="Alcatraz Morgue" label="Morgue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142660" start="17909" end="17932" title="New Industries Building" label="New Industries Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142650" start="17935" end="17954" title="Social Hall (Alcatraz)" label="Officers&amp;#x27; Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142612" start="17974" end="17985" title="Power House (Alcatraz)" label="Power House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142605" start="17988" end="18003" title="Recreation Yard (Alcatraz)" label="Recreation Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142648" start="18006" end="18019" title="Warden&amp;#x27;s House (Alcatraz Island)" label="Wardens House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142684" start="18022" end="18033" title="Alcatraz Water Tower" label="Water Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666638" start="18091" end="18126" title="International Indian Treaty Council" label="International Indian Treaty Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q367523" start="18229" end="18241" title="Columbus Day" label="Columbus Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q13959" start="18246" end="18262" title="Thanksgiving Day" label="Thanksgiving Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q199208" start="18282" end="18305" title="Global Peace Foundation" label="Global Peace Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="18606" end="18614" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="19059" end="19080" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q87455852" start="19746" end="19763" title="COVID-19 pandemic in California" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q160115" start="20003" end="20012" title="Ai Weiwei" label="Ai Weiwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q170484" start="20156" end="20160" title="Lego" label="Lego"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20280" end="20302" title="Ai Weiwei: Yours Truly" label="Ai Weiwei: Yours Truly"/>
<link wikidata="Q17149597" start="20319" end="20332" title="Nelson Saiers" label="Nelson Saiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="20338" end="20342" title="Mathematics" label="math"/>
<link wikidata="Q838858" start="20513" end="20521" title="Cisterns" label="Cisterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698012" start="20608" end="20637" title="California slender salamander" label="California slender salamander"/>
<link wikidata="Q174782" start="20735" end="20740" title="plaza" label="plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q159719" start="20811" end="20821" title="power station" label="powerhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072892" start="20883" end="20891" title="Elymus (plant)" label="wild rye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232962" start="20914" end="20923" title="deer mice" label="deer mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521187" start="20927" end="20937" title="Tide pools" label="Tide pools"/>
<link wikidata="Q926867" start="21239" end="21255" title="pigeon guillemot" label="pigeon guillemot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901247" start="21258" end="21267" title="cormorant" label="cormorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q795982" start="21270" end="21290" title="Heermann&amp;#x27;s gull" label="Heermann&amp;#x27;s gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q630829" start="21297" end="21309" title="western gull" label="western gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q26913" start="21312" end="21323" title="Harbor seal" label="Harbor seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q311396" start="21512" end="21517" title="Corrections officer" label="guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q126216" start="21589" end="21614" title="black-crowned night heron" label="black-crowned night heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q630829" start="21617" end="21629" title="western gull" label="western gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q786876" start="21632" end="21650" title="slender salamander" label="slender salamander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232962" start="21657" end="21666" title="deer mice" label="deer mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q155874" start="21724" end="21729" title="agave" label="agave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902474" start="21818" end="21829" title="night heron" label="night heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q189939" start="22750" end="22760" title="succulents" label="succulents"/>
<link wikidata="Q146118" start="22766" end="22775" title="geraniums" label="geraniums"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23079" end="23106" title="Resident Evil: Death Island" label="Resident Evil: Death Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q274529" start="23127" end="23142" title="The Book of Eli" label="The Book of Eli"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23163" end="23184" title="X-Men: The Last Stand" label="X-Men: The Last Stand"/>
<link wikidata="Q208108" start="23205" end="23224" title="Catch Me If You Can" label="Catch Me If You Can"/>
<link wikidata="Q216720" start="23245" end="23253" title="The Rock (film)" label="The Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154802" start="23274" end="23293" title="Murder in the First (film)" label="Murder in the First"/>
<link wikidata="Q496316" start="23314" end="23334" title="Escape from Alcatraz (film)" label="Escape from Alcatraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q592457" start="23355" end="23367" title="The Enforcer (1976 film)" label="The Enforcer"/>
<link wikidata="Q595047" start="23388" end="23399" title="Point Blank (1967 film)" label="Point Blank"/>
<link wikidata="Q608943" start="23421" end="23440" title="Birdman of Alcatraz (film)" label="Birdman of Alcatraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q188137" start="23458" end="23470" title="J. J. Abrams" label="J. J. Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q834560" start="23506" end="23514" title="Alcatraz (TV series)" label="Alcatraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q192015" start="23563" end="23586" title="Yu-Gi-Oh!" label="Yu-Gi-Oh! Duel Monsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703648" start="23609" end="23633" title="Al Capone Does My Shirts" label="Al Capone Does My Shirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512956" start="23665" end="23694" title="Tony Hawk&amp;#x27;s Pro Skater 4" label="Tony Hawk&amp;#x27;s Pro Skater 4"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23810" end="23855" title="San Francisco Rush: Extreme Racing" label="San Francisco Rush the Rock: Alcatraz Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540126" start="23921" end="23939" title="headquarters" label="base of operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q197949" start="23948" end="23971" title="apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction" label="post-apocalyptic movies"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24057" end="24083" title="Call of Duty: Black Ops II" label="Call of Duty: Black Ops II"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24361" end="24388" title="Call of Duty: Black Ops III" label="Call of Duty: Black Ops III"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24497" end="24529" title="Call of Duty: Black Ops IIII" label="Call of Duty: Black Ops 4&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24725" end="24745" title="Call of Duty: Mobile" label="Call of Duty: Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24824" end="24845" title="Call of Duty: Warzone" label="Call of Duty: Warzone"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24924" end="24937" title="The Alchemyst: The Secrets of the Immortal Nicholas Flamel" label="The Alchemyst"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24954" end="24967" title="The Sorceress: The Secrets of the Immortal Nicholas Flamel" label="The Sorceress"/>
<link wikidata="Q562163" start="24977" end="24990" title="Michael Scott (Irish author)" label="Michael Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323349" start="25041" end="25057" title="Perenelle Flamel" label="Perenelle Flamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q964677" start="25094" end="25108" title="Mummies Alive!" label="Mummies Alive!"/>
<link wikidata="Q24455756" start="25217" end="25229" title="Watch Dogs 2" label="Watch Dogs 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066707" start="25315" end="25327" title="Downloadable content" label="downloadable"/>
<link wikidata="Q19360088" start="25356" end="25369" title="The Escapists" label="The Escapists"/>
<link wikidata="Q124147" start="25399" end="25408" title="Scorpions (band)" label="Scorpions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112540" start="25442" end="25457" title="No One Like You" label="No One Like You"/>
<link wikidata="Q496316" start="25489" end="25521" title="Escape from Alcatraz (film)" label="&amp;quot;Escape from Alcatraz&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q216720" start="25526" end="25546" title="The Rock (film)" label="&amp;quot;The Rock&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q969774" start="25808" end="25812" title="Hulk (video game)" label="Hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328990" start="25925" end="25931" title="Leader (character)" label="Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991641" start="25953" end="25980" title="The Battle of the Labyrinth" label="The Battle of the Labyrinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q212727" start="25990" end="26002" title="Rick Riordan" label="Rick Riordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q213167" start="26022" end="26055" title="Percy Jackson &amp;amp; the Olympians" label="Percy Jackson &amp;amp; the Olympians"/>
<link wikidata="Q175255" start="26127" end="26134" title="Briares" label="Briares"/>
<link wikidata="Q176130" start="26159" end="26164" title="Kampê" label="Kampê"/>
<link wikidata="Q730500" start="26194" end="26201" title="Asinara" label="Asinara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345501" start="26204" end="26217" title="Cellular Jail" label="Cellular Jail"/>
<link wikidata="Q622500" start="26220" end="26237" title="Château d&amp;#x27;If" label="Château d&amp;#x27;If"/>
<link wikidata="Q220385" start="26240" end="26259" title="Devil&amp;#x27;s Island" label="Devil&amp;#x27;s Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748475" start="26262" end="26274" title="Fort Denison" label="Fort Denison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624450" start="26277" end="26306" title="List of islands of California" label="List of islands of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q192493" start="26309" end="26322" title="Robben Island" label="Robben Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q592125" start="26325" end="26341" title="San Lucas Island" label="San Lucas Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="26837" end="26840" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003780" start="26841" end="26845" title="United States FOIA" label="FOIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274616" start="26985" end="26997" title="Chris Hedges" label="Chris Hedges"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64116" wikidata="Q2482838" url="?curid=64116" title="Reading Abbey">
<text>Reading Abbey is a large, ruined abbey in the centre of the town of Reading, in the English county of Berkshire. It was founded by Henry I in 1121 &quot;for the salvation of my soul, and the souls of King William, my father, and of King William, my brother, and Queen Maud, my wife, and all my ancestors and successors.&quot; In its heyday the abbey was one of Europe&#x27;s largest royal monasteries. The traditions of the Abbey are continued today by the neighbouring St James&#x27;s Church, which is partly built using stones of the Abbey ruins.

Reading Abbey was the focus of a major £3 million project called &quot;Reading Abbey Revealed&quot; which conserved the ruins and Abbey Gateway and resulted in them being re-opened to the public on 16 June 2018. Alongside the conservation, new interpretation of the Reading Abbey Quarter was installed, including a new gallery at Reading Museum, and an extensive activity programme.

Abbey Ward of Reading Borough Council takes its name from Reading Abbey, which lies within its boundaries. Now HM Prison Reading is on the site.

==History==

The abbey was founded by Henry I in 1121. As part of his endowments, he gave the abbey his lands within Reading, along with land at Cholsey, then in Berkshire, and Leominster in Herefordshire. He also arranged for further land in Reading, previously given to Battle Abbey by William the Conqueror, to be transferred to Reading Abbey, in return for some of his land at Appledram in Sussex.

Following its royal foundation, the abbey was established by a party of monks from Cluny Abbey in Burgundy, together with monks from the Cluniac priory of St Pancras at Lewes in Sussex. The abbey was dedicated to the Virgin Mary and St John the Evangelist. The first abbot, in 1123, was Hugh of Amiens who became archbishop of Rouen and was buried in Rouen Cathedral.

According to the twelfth-century chronicler William of Malmesbury, the abbey was built on a gravel spur &quot;between the rivers Kennet and Thames, on a spot calculated for the reception of almost all who might have occasion to travel to the more populous cities of England&quot;. The adjacent rivers provided convenient transport, and the abbey established wharves on the River Kennet. The Kennet also provided power for the abbey water mills, most of which were established on the Holy Brook, a channel of the Kennet of uncertain origin.
When Henry I died in Lyons-la-Forêt, Normandy in 1135 his body was returned to Reading, and was buried in the front of the altar of the then incomplete abbey.

Because of its royal patronage, the abbey was one of the pilgrimage centres of medieval England, and one of its richest and most important religious houses, with possessions as far away as Herefordshire and Scotland. The abbey also held over 230 relics including the hand of St James. A shrivelled human hand was found in the ruins during demolition work in 1786 and is now in St Peter&#x27;s Catholic Church, Marlow. The song Sumer is icumen in, which was first written down in the abbey about 1240, is the earliest known six-part harmony from Britain. The original document is held in the British Library.

Reading Abbey was frequently visited by kings and others, most especially by Henry III who often visited three or four times a year staying several weeks on each visit. It also hosted important state events, including the meeting between Henry II and the Patriarch of Jerusalem in 1185, the wedding of John of Gaunt and Blanche of Lancaster in 1359 and a meeting of Parliament in 1453.

The abbey was mostly destroyed in 1538 during Henry VIII&#x27;s Dissolution of the Monasteries. The last abbot, Hugh Faringdon, was subsequently tried and convicted of high treason and hanged, drawn and quartered in front of the Abbey Church. After this, the buildings of the abbey were extensively robbed, with lead, glass and facing stones removed for reuse elsewhere.

Some twenty years after the Dissolution, Reading town council created a new town hall by inserting an upper floor into the former refectory of the hospitium of the abbey. The lower floor of this building continued to be used by Reading School, as it had been since 1486. For the next 200 years, the old monastic building continued to serve as Reading&#x27;s town hall, but by the 18th century it was suffering from structural weakness. Between 1785 and 1786, the old hall was dismantled and replaced on the same site by the first of several phases of building that were to make up today&#x27;s Reading Town Hall. Around 1787, Henry Seymour Conway removed a large amount of stone from the wall and used it to build Conway&#x27;s Bridge near his home at Park Place outside Henley.

St James&#x27;s Church and School was built on a portion of the site of the abbey between 1837 and 1840. Its founder was James Wheble, who owned land in the area at that time. Reading Gaol was built in 1844 on the eastern portion of the abbey site, replacing a small county Gaol on the same site. James Wheble sold the rest of his portion of the abbey site to Reading Corporation to create the Forbury Gardens, which were opened in 1861.

==Abbey ruins==

The inner rubble cores of the walls of many of the major buildings of the abbey still stand. The only parts of the Abbey Church that still exist are fragments of the piers of the central tower, together with parts of transepts, especially the south transept. In a range to the south of this transept are, in order, the remains of the vestry, the chapter house, the passage and the ground floor of the dorter or monks dormitory and reredorter or toilet block. The best preserved of these ruins are those of the chapter house, which is apsidal and has a triple entrance and three great windows above. To the west of this range, the site of the cloister is laid out as a private garden and to the south is a surviving wall of the refectory. The ruins are Grade I listed and a Scheduled monument

===Restoration===

Over the years the ruins have been repaired and maintained in a piecemeal fashion leading to their deterioration. In April 2008, the cloister arch, chapter house and treasury were closed to the public. Repair work began in March 2009 and was expected to take only a few weeks, but the entire site was instead closed in May 2009 due to the risk of falling masonry.

In late 2010, Reading Borough Council was reported as estimating that the ruins could cost £3m to repair, but it was also stated that the extent of the damage was yet to be determined. A survey was carried out in October 2010, using three-dimensional scans to build up a detailed view of each elevation, thus helping to identify the extent of the conservation required. In April 2011 plans for an £8m revamp were unveiled, with the aim to create an Abbey Quarter cultural area in Reading. In June 2014 the Council secured initial funding from the Heritage Lottery Fund (HLF); more detailed plans for the project, Reading Abbey Revealed, were then developed and submitted to the HLF in September 2015.

In October 2014, a temporary scaffold roof, not visible from ground level, was installed on the Gateway to allow the building to dry out until funding for more permanent repairs was secured. The HLF confirmed that the second round application had been successful in December 2015. The HLF supported the project with a grant of £1.77 million, with Reading Borough Council match funding of £1.38 million. Historic England provided additional grant funding for initial work to the Abbey gateway and the conservation of the refectory wall. Work began in September 2016 and the ruins reopened to the public on 16 June 2018.

===Hidden Abbey Project===
In spring 2014, historian-screenwriter Philippa Langley, MBE, best known for her contribution to the exhumation of Richard III in 2012, together with local historians John and Lindsay Mullaney, put together a complementary effort called the Hidden Abbey Project (HAP). The goal of the HAP was to perform a modern comprehensive study, including a non-invasive analysis of the grounds using ground-penetrating radar (GPR). The first phase of the GPR survey, focusing on the Abbey Church, St James’ Church, the Forbury Gardens, and the Reading Gaol car park, began in June 2016. Initial results indicate some potential grave sites behind the high altar in an apse at the east end of the Abbey. There are also some findings probably related to the Abbey&#x27;s construction, as well as some other potential archaeological targets. News reports seized on the fact that the grave sites were found underneath the Ministry of Justice car park at Reading Gaol. Said the Telegraph:

Britain’s kings appear to be making a habit of this. First it was Richard III, whose bones were found under a car park in Leicester. Now it appears that Henry I may have met a similarly undignified fate.
However, the borough council&#x27;s press release stated, &quot;The graves are located behind the High Altar in an apse at the east end of the Abbey. They are located east of the area where King Henry I&#x27;s grave is believed to be. No direct connection between these features and King Henry can be made using these results alone.&quot;

==Other remains==
Besides the ruins of the abbey itself, there are several other remains of the larger abbey complex still extant.

===Abbey Gateway===
The Abbey&#x27;s Inner Gateway, also known as the Abbey Gateway, adjoins Reading Crown Court and Forbury Gardens. It is one of only two abbey buildings that have survived intact, and is a grade I listed building. The Inner Gateway marked the division between the area open to the public and the section accessible only to monks. Hugh Faringdon, the last abbot of Reading was hanged, drawn, and quartered outside the Abbey Gateway in 1539. The gateway survived because it was used as the entrance to the abbots&#x27; lodging, which was turned into a royal palace after the Dissolution. In the late 18th century, the gateway was used as part of the Reading Ladies&#x27; Boarding School, attended amongst others by the novelist Jane Austen.

The gateway was heavily restored by Sir George Gilbert Scott, after a partial collapse during a storm in 1861. It was extensively restored again after some decorative stonework came loose and fell into the street in 2010, reopening in 2018. The room above the gateway is now used by Reading Museum as part of its learning programme for local schools, whilst the arch below is available for use by pedestrian and cycle traffic.

===Hospitium===
The abbey&#x27;s hospitium, or dormitory for pilgrims, also survives. Known as the &quot;Hospitium of St. John&quot; and founded in 1189, the surviving building is the main building of a larger range of buildings that could accommodate 400 people. Much of the remainder of this range of buildings was located where Reading Town Hall now stands. Today the surviving building occupies a rather isolated site, with no direct street access. It abuts the main concert hall of Reading Town Hall to the west, and the south of the building opens directly onto the churchyard of St Laurence&#x27;s Church. The building is surrounded to the north and east by a modern office development, with a small intermediate courtyard.

===Abbey Mill and Holy Brook===
Some remains of the former Abbey Mill are visible alongside the Holy Brook at the south of the abbey site; they consist of a ruined former watermill on the Holy Brook, a channel of the River Kennet. The ruins are grade II listed. It is situated just to the south of the ruins of the Abbey itself. The water mill originally belonged to Reading Abbey, whose monks are believed to have created the Holy Brook as a water supply to this and other mills owned by them and to the abbey&#x27;s fish ponds.

The mill was built straddling the Holy Brook which marked the southern boundary of the monastic enclosure. It continued to grind corn into the 1950s. Today, all that remains is a section of wall, pierced by three arches. The wall is built of flint with caen stone ashlar dressings and brick filling. The two side arches are round headed, whilst the centre arch over the Holy Brook is larger and pointed.

The Holy Brook is a long, largely artificial, watercourse which flows out of the River Kennet near the village of Theale, passes just to the south of the Abbey, and returns to its parent river just downstream of the Abbey Mill.

==Open-air theatre and performance==
The ruins of Reading Abbey have a history of live performance. From early impromptu artist-led events, the site has established a history of open-air theatre.

In the late 1980s, the food art and performance collective La Grande Bouche organised a cabaret under marquee in the ruins. The evening offered music and performance acts combined with food, much of which cooked by contributing performers.

In 1994, a large scale performance event &quot;From the Ruins&quot; was held in the abbey ruins, the finale event for the &quot;Art in Reading&quot; (AIR) festival, funded in part by Reading Borough Council. This was organised by and featured a large number of artists and performers living or working in Reading, and combined specially created music, dance, paintings, poetry and culminated in a spectacular evening performance involving large scale puppetry and pyrotechnics loosely based upon the history of Reading Abbey from the foundation by Henry I through the rise of the merchant classes to the dissolution and eventual sacking of the Abbey under Henry VIII.

In 1995, the ruined South Transept was used as the setting for the first Abbey Ruins Open Air Shakespeare production by MDM Productions and Progress Theatre in partnership with Reading Borough Council. In 1996, the outdoor production moved to the ruined chapter house and since 1999 has been staged by Progress Theatre in partnership with Reading Borough Council. This annual event expanded to the &quot;Reading Abbey Ruins Open Air Festival&quot; in 2007. Because of the access limitations during the restoration project, the 2009 and 2010 festivals could not be held, and the event has since relocated to the gardens of Caversham Court. &quot;Shakespeare in the Ruins&quot; returned to the Chapter House in July 2018 after the ruins reopened to the public after extensive conservation in June 2018.

==Abbots==

As an abbey, Reading was ruled by an abbot. The abbey had 27 abbots between 1123 and 1539.

==Notable burials==
*King Henry I
*Anne de Beauchamp, 15th Countess of Warwick
*Constance of York
*Henry fitzGerold
*Reginald de Dunstanville, 1st Earl of Cornwall
*Warin II fitzGerold
*William of Poitiers

==See also==
*Isle of May Priory, a community of nine Benedictine monks from Reading Abbey that was founded in 1153 on the remote Isle of May in the Firth of Forth under the patronage of David I of Scotland.

==References==
==Further reading==
*
*

==External links==

* Reading Abbey Quarter
* Reading Museum blog posts on Reading Abbey
* Catholic Encyclopedia: Reading Abbey
* Friends of Reading Abbey 
* Royal Berkshire History: Reading Abbey
* RBH for Kids: Reading Abbey</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2482838" start="0" end="13" title="Reading Abbey" label="Reading Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q109607" start="26" end="32" title="ruins" label="ruined"/>
<link wikidata="Q160742" start="33" end="38" title="abbey" label="abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q161491" start="68" end="75" title="Reading, Berkshire" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q23220" start="102" end="111" title="Berkshire" label="Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q101384" start="131" end="138" title="Henry I of England" label="Henry I"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="200" end="223" title="William I of England" label="King William, my father"/>
<link wikidata="Q102005" start="232" end="256" title="William II of England" label="King William, my brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q232761" start="262" end="281" title="Edith of Scotland" label="Queen Maud, my wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="389" end="400" title="monastery" label="monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593468" start="470" end="492" title="St James&amp;#x27;s Church, Reading" label="St James&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941004" start="880" end="894" title="Reading Museum" label="Reading Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4663968" start="934" end="944" title="Abbey (Reading ward)" label="Abbey Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018654" start="948" end="971" title="Reading Borough Council" label="Reading Borough Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930959" start="1045" end="1062" title="HM Prison Reading" label="HM Prison Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q101384" start="1118" end="1125" title="Henry I of England" label="Henry I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049410" start="1225" end="1232" title="Cholsey" label="Cholsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q550424" start="1257" end="1267" title="Leominster" label="Leominster"/>
<link wikidata="Q810981" start="1352" end="1364" title="Battle Abbey" label="Battle Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="1368" end="1389" title="William the Conqueror" label="William the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q615366" start="1461" end="1470" title="Appledram" label="Appledram"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="1555" end="1559" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q220301" start="1566" end="1577" title="Cluny Abbey" label="Cluny Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173" start="1581" end="1589" title="Burgundy" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536133" start="1628" end="1648" title="priory of St Pancras" label="priory of St Pancras"/>
<link wikidata="Q246884" start="1652" end="1657" title="Lewes" label="Lewes"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="1700" end="1711" title="Virgin Mary" label="Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q328804" start="1716" end="1738" title="St John the Evangelist" label="St John the Evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142555" start="1770" end="1784" title="Hugh of Amiens" label="Hugh of Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q569265" start="1796" end="1815" title="archbishop of Rouen" label="archbishop of Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q476516" start="1834" end="1849" title="Rouen Cathedral" label="Rouen Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q345524" start="1896" end="1917" title="William of Malmesbury" label="William of Malmesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q828909" start="2210" end="2217" title="wharf" label="wharves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987365" start="2225" end="2237" title="River Kennet" label="River Kennet"/>
<link wikidata="Q185187" start="2284" end="2294" title="water mill" label="water mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060453" start="2335" end="2345" title="Holy Brook" label="Holy Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q115476" start="2413" end="2427" title="Lyons-la-Forêt" label="Lyons-la-Forêt"/>
<link wikidata="Q101687" start="2515" end="2520" title="altar" label="altar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="2609" end="2619" title="pilgrimage" label="pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2631" end="2639" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q23129" start="2741" end="2754" title="Herefordshire" label="Herefordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q187616" start="2798" end="2803" title="relic" label="relic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43999" start="2827" end="2835" title="James, son of Zebedee" label="St James"/>
<link wikidata="Q508998" start="2962" end="2968" title="Marlow, Buckinghamshire" label="Marlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190737" start="2979" end="2997" title="Sumer is icumen in" label="Sumer is icumen in"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="3143" end="3158" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="3238" end="3247" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="3399" end="3407" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q530906" start="3416" end="3438" title="Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem" label="Patriarch of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q193752" start="3463" end="3476" title="John of Gaunt" label="John of Gaunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q238334" start="3481" end="3501" title="Blanche of Lancaster" label="Blanche of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="3527" end="3537" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="3594" end="3611" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="3612" end="3642" title="Dissolution of the Monasteries" label="Dissolution of the Monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897597" start="3660" end="3674" title="Hugh Faringdon" label="Hugh Faringdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="3716" end="3728" title="high treason" label="high treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q877524" start="3733" end="3760" title="hanged, drawn and quartered" label="hanged, drawn and quartered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630480" start="4067" end="4076" title="hospitium" label="hospitium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300559" start="4148" end="4162" title="Reading School" label="Reading School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300575" start="4514" end="4531" title="Reading Town Hall" label="Reading Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348767" start="4546" end="4566" title="Henry Seymour Conway" label="Henry Seymour Conway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166683" start="4634" end="4654" title="Conway&amp;#x27;s Bridge" label="Conway&amp;#x27;s Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q15265461" start="4672" end="4682" title="Park Place, Berkshire" label="Park Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q990253" start="4691" end="4697" title="Henley-on-Thames" label="Henley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593468" start="4700" end="4722" title="St James&amp;#x27;s Church, Reading" label="St James&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930959" start="4876" end="4888" title="Reading (HM Prison)" label="Reading Gaol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467400" start="5094" end="5109" title="Forbury Gardens" label="Forbury Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923504" start="5490" end="5496" title="vestry" label="vestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416310" start="5502" end="5515" title="chapter house" label="chapter house"/>
<link wikidata="Q847950" start="5557" end="5563" title="dorter" label="dorter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225375" start="5587" end="5597" title="reredorter" label="reredorter"/>
<link wikidata="Q170463" start="5690" end="5697" title="apsidal" label="apsidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430154" start="5798" end="5806" title="cloister" label="cloister"/>
<link wikidata="Q568225" start="5883" end="5892" title="refectory" label="refectory"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="5916" end="5922" title="listed building" label="listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q219538" start="5929" end="5947" title="Scheduled monument" label="Scheduled monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742662" start="6880" end="6901" title="Heritage Lottery Fund" label="Heritage Lottery Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184728" start="7721" end="7737" title="Philippa Langley" label="Philippa Langley"/>
<link wikidata="Q133028" start="7797" end="7808" title="Richard III" label="Richard III"/>
<link wikidata="Q503560" start="8071" end="8095" title="ground-penetrating radar" label="ground-penetrating radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q26407346" start="9424" end="9443" title="Reading Crown Court" label="Reading Crown Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467400" start="9448" end="9463" title="Forbury Gardens" label="Forbury Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="9539" end="9562" title="grade I listed building" label="grade I listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897597" start="9680" end="9694" title="Hugh Faringdon" label="Hugh Faringdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q45319220" start="9998" end="10034" title="Reading Ladies&amp;#x27; Boarding School" label="Reading Ladies&amp;#x27; Boarding School"/>
<link wikidata="Q36322" start="10076" end="10087" title="Jane Austen" label="Jane Austen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927358" start="10106" end="10122" title="Victorian restoration" label="heavily restored"/>
<link wikidata="Q681007" start="10130" end="10150" title="George Gilbert Scott" label="George Gilbert Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941004" start="10373" end="10387" title="Reading Museum" label="Reading Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630480" start="10551" end="10560" title="hospitium" label="hospitium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300575" start="10849" end="10866" title="Reading Town Hall" label="Reading Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300575" start="11005" end="11022" title="Reading Town Hall" label="Reading Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593935" start="11104" end="11129" title="St Laurence&amp;#x27;s Church, Reading" label="St Laurence&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q185187" start="11421" end="11430" title="watermill" label="watermill"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060453" start="11438" end="11448" title="Holy Brook" label="Holy Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987365" start="11467" end="11479" title="River Kennet" label="River Kennet"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="11495" end="11510" title="grade II listed" label="grade II listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q185187" start="11583" end="11593" title="water mill" label="water mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265665" start="11768" end="11777" title="fish pond" label="fish pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q83087" start="12023" end="12028" title="flint" label="flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421807" start="12034" end="12044" title="caen stone" label="caen stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122603" start="12045" end="12051" title="ashlar" label="ashlar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987365" start="12267" end="12279" title="River Kennet" label="River Kennet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519746" start="12300" end="12306" title="Theale" label="Theale"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018654" start="13036" end="13059" title="Reading Borough Council" label="Reading Borough Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248580" start="13662" end="13678" title="Progress Theatre" label="Progress Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055085" start="14144" end="14159" title="Caversham Court" label="Caversham Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q103163" start="14373" end="14378" title="abbot" label="abbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q101384" start="14449" end="14461" title="Henry I of England" label="King Henry I"/>
<link wikidata="Q543665" start="14463" end="14506" title="Anne de Beauchamp, 15th Countess of Warwick" label="Anne de Beauchamp, 15th Countess of Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620487" start="14508" end="14525" title="Constance of York" label="Constance of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5730827" start="14527" end="14543" title="Henry fitzGerold" label="Henry fitzGerold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363727" start="14545" end="14591" title="Reginald de Dunstanville, 1st Earl of Cornwall" label="Reginald de Dunstanville, 1st Earl of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q28037644" start="14593" end="14612" title="Warin II fitzGerold" label="Warin II fitzGerold"/>
<link wikidata="Q719148" start="14614" end="14633" title="William IX, Count of Poitiers" label="William of Poitiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6084031" start="14649" end="14667" title="Isle of May Priory" label="Isle of May Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575611" start="14765" end="14776" title="Isle of May" label="Isle of May"/>
<link wikidata="Q202083" start="14784" end="14798" title="Firth of Forth" label="Firth of Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q216787" start="14822" end="14841" title="David I of Scotland" label="David I of Scotland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64120" wikidata="Q108640" url="?curid=64120" title="Ice skate">
<text>Ice skates are metal blades attached underfoot and used to propel the bearer across a sheet of ice while ice skating.

The first ice skates were made from leg bones of horse, ox or deer, and were attached to feet with leather straps. These skates required a pole with a sharp metal spike that was used for pushing the skater forward, unlike modern bladed skates.

Modern skates come in many different varieties, each suited to specific conditions or activities. People across the globe wear skates recreationally in ice rinks or on frozen bodies of water, and skates are the standard footwear in many sports, including figure skating, bandy, ice hockey, ringette, rink bandy, rinkball, speed skating and tour skating.

==History==

According to a study done by Federico Formenti, University of Oxford, and Alberto Minetti, University of Milan, Finns were the first to develop ice skates some 5,000 years ago from animal bones. This was important for the Finnish populations to save energy in harsh winter conditions when hunting in Finnish Lakeland. Finland has about 187,888 lakes, which separated villages from each other. To travel between villages, the Finnish people had two options: to take a longer route around the lake, or to find a way across the frozen surface of the lake. 
The earliest known skate to use a metal blade was found in Fennoscandia, and was dated to 200 AD. It was fitted with a thin strip of copper folded and attached to the underside of a leather shoe.

Starting in 1976, during excavations of the city of York, UK, 42 pairs of Viking-era ice skates were found at Coppergate; the majority are made from horse leg bones, although cattle leg bones were also used. The bones were cut flat and polished on one side and drilled with a hole at one end. A leather thong, held in place by a wooden peg, was inserted into the hole to attach the skate to the wearer’s ankle. The Viking invasion of York took place on November 1, 866. This would suggest that bone ice skates were being used in England from the ninth century.

William Fitzstephen, writing in the 12th century, described the use of bone skates in London. The following seems to be an Early Modern English translation of the Latin original:
In the 13th century, the Dutch revolutionized ice skating by sharpening the blades of ice skates, which were made of steel at the time.

==Types of ice skates==
There are five main types of ice skates: the figure skate, the ice hockey skate, the bandy skate, the racing skate, and the touring skate.

===Figure skates===
Figure skates are used in the sport of figure skating. Unlike hockey skates, they have &quot;toe picks&quot; on the front of the blade, which are usually made out of stainless steel or aluminium with a steel runner. The toe pick has a variety of uses, but is most commonly used for certain jumps in figure skating, such as the Lutz jump and toe loop, or starting a backspin. Figure skating boots are typically made of several layers of leather and the leather is very stiff to provide ankle support. In addition, the figure skate&#x27;s blade is curved, allowing for minute adjustments in balance and weight distribution.

The base of the figure-skate blade is slightly concave, or &quot;hollow ground&quot;. The hollow, which runs the length of the blade, creates two edges, which come in contact with the ice. The forward part of the blade, the toe-rake, is saw-toothed and is used for jumps and spins on the toes.

===Ice hockey skates===
Ice hockey skates are used for playing the games of ice hockey and ringette but are occasionally used for recreational ice skating alone. Each individual skate consists of a boot, laces, blade, and a blade holder. The boot is generally made of molded plastic, leather (often synthetic), ballistic nylon, or a thermoformed composite material. Each skate blade has two edges. Skates used in competitive ice hockey and ringette rarely use molded plastic for the upper boot, as this results in limited mobility.

===Ice hockey goalie skates===

The skates used by goaltenders are cut lower in the ankle than a normal hockey skate and the boot sits closer to the ice for a lower center of gravity. The boot itself is encased in hardened plastic, called a &quot;cowling&quot;, protecting the toe, ankle and heel from the force of the shot puck. The blade is usually longer and has less rocker (curvature to the blade) to make it easier for the goalie to move side to side in the crease. Goalie skates lack a tendon guard. Unlike regular hockey skates, goalie skates are usually protected by a synthetic material covering the toe-part of the skate. This is to prevent damage from the puck. The blade of the goalie skate is not as useful in turning as regular hockey skates, because the blade is rockered less, thus making turns slightly inconvenient. The material used to make the boot of the goalie skate historically was a harder synthetic material than regular hockey boots.
Sharpening ice hockey skates plays a key factor in a player&#x27;s ability to skate and players will sharpen their skates hundreds of times throughout their career. Similar to figure skates, the blade is hollow ground in cross section, creating two edges that contact and cut into the ice, allowing increased maneuverability. The blades are sharpened with round-edged grinding wheels that create the two edges. The wheels grind out a hollow semi-circle along the length of the underside of the blade, forming the sharp edge on each side. Skate blade sharpness is measured by the thickness of the round-edged grinding wheel being used, the smaller the radius, the sharper the edge will be. The sharpness chosen by a player is based completely upon preference, not player size or level of play. While a radius of hollow is the most common and standard sharpening for most players, the standard radius of hollow for goalies is . 

===Bandy skates===
Bandy skates are used for playing the sports of bandy, rink bandy (bandy variant), and rinkball. The boot is generally made of leather (often synthetic) and often excludes tendon guards. The boot style for bandy skates is lower than the ice hockey version and often doesn&#x27;t cover the ankles. The bandy skate is designed with the intention of preventing them from causing injury to an opponent due to its long, and relatively sharp angled blades. The blade is generally an inch longer than the hockey skates, allowing for higher speeds on the large bandy field (also called a &quot;bandy rink). The Russian bandy skates have an even longer blade and a very low cut shoe.

Bandy blades are sharpened differently than those on ice hockey skates with the bottom part of the bandy blade which touches the ice surface being flatter and generally excluding a hollow. Ice hockey blades are sharpened in a manner that creates two side edges which make contact with the ice. As a result, and by comparison, sharp cornering and &quot;tight turns&quot; which are maneuvers that can be achieved using the design of an ice hockey skate are not achievable on bandy skates. While the design of the modern ice hockey skate allows for sharper and faster maneuverability, modern bandy skates allow for more distance to be covered at a higher speed.

===Racing skates===


Racing skates, also known as speed skates, have long blades and are used for speed skating. A clap skate (or &quot;clapper skate&quot;) is a type of skate where the shoe is connected to the blade using a hinge. Short track racing skates have a longer overall height to the blade to allow for deep edge turns without the boot contacting the ice. For better turning ability, racing skates may have a radius, from for short track to for long track.
Racing skates have a completely flat bottom. There is no hollow, only a squared off bottom with two edges. This improves glide time, by not cutting into the ice.

===Touring skates===


Touring skates (or Nordic skates) are long blades that can be attached, via bindings, to hiking or cross-country ski boots and are used for long distance tour skating on natural ice. The blades are approximately long with a radius of curvature (or rocker) of about . The blades are from wide, with a flat cross-section. The length and long radius of the blades makes touring skates more stable on uneven natural ice than skates with shorter, more rockered blades. Since tour skating often involves walking (kluning) between lakes or around sections not suitable for skating, the removable blades are an asset. Thus, these skates are often called &quot;kluunschaats&quot; in the Netherlands.

With most modern models of skates, the blades are bonded to the bottom of an aluminum foot-plate. A binding for a specific type of boot is mounted on the top of the foot-plate. Traditionally, the bindings held down both toe and heel of the boot (&quot;fixed-heel&quot;). Some bindings require special boots like &quot;telemark&quot; ski boots with a &quot;duck-bill&quot; shaped toe, others, like the Multiskate, have padded adjustable straps that will attach to most hiking boots.

Since the early 1990s, models have been designed for mounting &quot;free-heel&quot; cross-country ski bindings to the skates, and thus attach matching ski boots to the skates. The &quot;free-heel&quot; models give the equivalent effect as the klap skate form of speed skates. There are several makers of these skates in Sweden, Netherlands, and Finland.
Although mainly used for non-competitive touring, &quot;nordic skates&quot; are sometimes used in marathon speed skating races on natural ice, such as Vikingarännet (The Viking Run), a long-distance tour skating event in Sweden

==== Historical wooden touring skates====
Before 1870, most touring skates had a wooden foot-plate which was attached to the boot with leather straps. Examples were the &quot;Gillbergs&quot; skate from Sweden, and the &quot;Stheemann&quot; &quot;wooden Norwegian&quot; from the Netherlands. Even earlier, in the years 1870 to 1900, there were very similar models made in North America, like the &quot;Donaghue&quot; from the U.S. In 1875, the , a design in which the blade extended several inches behind the heel, was introduced in the Netherlands. It was popular with both tour skaters (both casual and competitive) and sprint skaters (), and remained popular until some years after the Second World War.

=== Recreational skates ===
Inexpensive skates for recreational skaters usually resemble either figure skates or hockey skates, but recreational ice skates resembling inline skates with a molded plastic boot are also available. These recreational skates are commonly rented from ice rinks by beginners who do not own their own skates. In the non-American English-speaking world, they are sometimes called &#x27;death wellies&#x27; by skaters who own their own equipment because of their appearance and their reputation for giving the wearer blisters. People who own their own skates may further reduce the risk of blisters by adding a friction management patch to areas inside the skate that could rub or chafe.

===Double runner===
Also known as twin blade skates, cheese cutters, bob skates, or bobby skates, these skates are worn by young children who are learning. The double blades increase stability and help the child to balance.

==See also==
* Inline skates
* Roller skates

==References==
==External links==

* Ice Skates Virtual Museum
* History of Canadian hockey skates</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q108640" start="0" end="10" title="Ice skate" label="Ice skates"/>
<link wikidata="Q23392" start="95" end="98" title="ice" label="ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q779272" start="105" end="116" title="ice skating" label="ice skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282870" start="516" end="525" title="ice rinks" label="ice rinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q38108" start="619" end="633" title="figure skating" label="figure skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q183018" start="635" end="640" title="bandy" label="bandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="642" end="652" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972786" start="654" end="662" title="ringette" label="ringette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844480" start="664" end="674" title="rink bandy" label="rink bandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28378697" start="676" end="684" title="rinkball" label="rinkball"/>
<link wikidata="Q192431" start="686" end="699" title="speed skating" label="speed skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487326" start="704" end="716" title="tour skating" label="tour skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="780" end="800" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q46210" start="823" end="842" title="University of Milan" label="University of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170284" start="844" end="849" title="Finnish people" label="Finns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370633" start="1032" end="1048" title="Finnish Lakeland" label="Finnish Lakeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q604496" start="1345" end="1357" title="Fennoscandia" label="Fennoscandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="1535" end="1539" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="1557" end="1563" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q98414094" start="1593" end="1603" title="Coppergate" label="Coppergate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12900170" start="2045" end="2064" title="William Fitzstephen" label="William Fitzstephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472196" start="2168" end="2188" title="Early Modern English" label="Early Modern English"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2208" end="2213" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4483467" start="2545" end="2557" title="Figure skate" label="Figure skate"/>
<link wikidata="Q349" start="2575" end="2580" title="sport" label="sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q38108" start="2584" end="2598" title="figure skating" label="figure skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889337" start="2835" end="2840" title="figure skating jumps" label="jumps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545606" start="2872" end="2881" title="Lutz jump" label="Lutz jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895063" start="2886" end="2894" title="toe loop" label="toe loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q286" start="2981" end="2988" title="leather" label="leather"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="3539" end="3549" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972786" start="3554" end="3562" title="ringette" label="ringette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317534" start="4047" end="4058" title="goaltender (ice hockey)" label="goaltenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q183018" start="5953" end="5958" title="bandy" label="bandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844480" start="5960" end="5970" title="rink bandy" label="rink bandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28378697" start="5992" end="6000" title="rinkball" label="rinkball"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251164" start="6458" end="6469" title="bandy field" label="bandy field"/>
<link wikidata="Q192431" start="7340" end="7353" title="speed skating" label="speed skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744388" start="7357" end="7367" title="clap skate" label="clap skate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487326" start="8049" end="8061" title="tour skating" label="tour skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853070" start="8402" end="8409" title="kluning" label="kluning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9154" end="9180" title="Ski binding#Nordic" label="cross-country ski bindings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744388" start="9313" end="9323" title="Clap skate" label="klap skate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569917" start="9575" end="9588" title="Vikingarännet" label="Vikingarännet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4483467" start="10456" end="10469" title="figure skates" label="figure skates"/>
<link wikidata="Q616765" start="10527" end="10540" title="inline skates" label="inline skates"/>
<link wikidata="Q260142" start="10777" end="10784" title="wellies" label="wellies"/>
<link wikidata="Q276469" start="10901" end="10909" title="blisters" label="blisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q616765" start="11313" end="11326" title="Inline skates" label="Inline skates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031639" start="11329" end="11342" title="Roller skates" label="Roller skates"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64129" wikidata="Q28924" url="?curid=64129" title="Catacombs of Paris">
<text>The Catacombs of Paris (, ) are underground ossuaries in Paris, France, which hold the remains of more than six million people. Built to consolidate Paris&#x27;s ancient stone quarries, they extend south from the (&quot;Gate of Hell&quot;) former city gate. The ossuary was created as part of the effort to eliminate the effects of the city&#x27;s overflowing cemeteries. Preparation work began shortly after a 1774 series of basement wall collapses around the Holy Innocents&#x27; Cemetery added a sense of urgency to the cemetery-eliminating measure, and from 1788, nightly processions of covered wagons transferred remains from most of Paris&#x27;s cemeteries to a mine shaft opened near the .

The ossuary remained largely forgotten until it became a novelty-place for concerts and other private events in the early 19th century; after further renovations and the construction of accesses around , it was opened to public visitation from 1874. Since 2013, the Catacombs have numbered among the fourteen City of Paris Museums managed by . Although the ossuary comprises only a small section of the underground mines of Paris, Parisians often refer to the entire tunnel network as the catacombs.

==History==

===Paris&#x27;s cemeteries===

Paris&#x27;s earliest burial grounds were to the southern outskirts of the Roman-era Left Bank city. In ruins after the Western Roman Empire&#x27;s 5th-century end and the ensuing Frankish invasions, Parisians eventually abandoned this settlement for the marshy Right Bank: from the 4th century, the first known settlement there was on higher ground around a Saint-Etienne church and burial ground (behind the present ), and urban expansion on the Right Bank began in earnest after other ecclesiastical landowners filled in the marshlands from the late 10th century. Thus, instead of burying its dead away from inhabited areas as usual, the Paris Right Bank settlement began with cemeteries near its centre.

The most central of these cemeteries, a burial ground around the 5th-century Notre-Dame-des-Bois church, became the property of the Saint-Opportune parish after the original church was demolished by the 9th-century Norman invasions. When it became its own parish associated with the church of the &quot;Saints Innocents&quot; from 1130, this burial ground, filling the land between the present rue Saint-Denis, rue de la Ferronnerie, rue de la Lingerie and the rue Berger, had become the city&#x27;s principal cemetery.
By the end of the same century, Saints Innocents was neighbour to the principal Parisian marketplace Les Halles, and already filled to overflowing. To make room for more burials, the long-dead were exhumed and their bones packed into the roofs and walls of &quot;charnier&quot; galleries built inside the cemetery walls. By the end of the 18th century, the central burial ground was a mound of earth filled with centuries of Parisian dead, plus the remains from the Hôtel-Dieu hospital and the Morgue; other Parisian parishes had their own burial grounds, but the conditions in Saints Innocents were the worst.

A series of ineffective decrees limiting the use of the cemetery did little to remedy the situation, and it was not until the late 18th century that it was decided to create three new large-scale suburban burial grounds on the outskirts of the city, and to condemn all existing parish cemeteries within city limits.

===The future ossuary: Paris&#x27;s former mines===
Much of the Left Bank area rests upon rich Lutetian limestone deposits. This stone built much of the city, but it was extracted in suburban locations away from any habitation. Because of the post 12th-century haphazard mining technique of digging wells down to the deposit and extracting it horizontally until depletion, many of these (often illicit) mines were uncharted, and when depleted, often abandoned and forgotten. Paris had annexed its suburbs many times over the centuries, and by the 18th century many of its arrondissements (administrative districts) were or included previously mined territories.

The undermined state of the Left Bank was known to architects as early 17th-century construction of the Val-de-Grâce hospital (most of its building expenses were due to its foundations), but a series of mine cave-ins beginning 1774 with the collapse of a house along the &quot;rue d&#x27;Enfer&quot; (near today&#x27;s crossing of the Avenue Denfert-Rochereau and the boulevard Saint-Michel) caused King Louis XVI to name a commission to investigate the state of the Parisian underground. This resulted in the creation of the &quot;inspection Générale des Carrières&quot; (Inspection of Mines) service.

===Ossuary creation===
The need to eliminate Les Innocents gained urgency from May 31, 1780, when a basement wall in a property adjoining the cemetery collapsed under the weight of the mass grave behind it. The cemetery was closed to the public and all &quot;intra muros&quot; (Latin: &quot;within the [city] walls&quot;) burials were forbidden after 1780. The problem of what to do with the remains crowding &quot;intra muros&quot; cemeteries was still unresolved.

Mine consolidations were still occurring and the underground around the site of the 1777 collapse that had initiated the project had already become a series of stone and masonry inspection passageways that reinforced the streets above. The mine renovation and cemetery closures were both issues within the jurisdiction of the Police Prefect Police Lieutenant-General Alexandre Lenoir, who had been directly involved in the creation of a mine inspection service. Lenoir endorsed the idea of moving Parisian dead to the subterranean passageways that were renovated during 1782. After deciding to further renovate the &quot;Tombe-Issoire&quot; passageways for their future role as an underground sepulchre, the idea became law in late 1785.

A well within a walled property above one of the principal subterranean passageways was dug to receive Les Innocents&#x27; unearthed remains, and the property itself was transformed into a sort of museum for all the headstones, sculptures and other artifacts recovered from the former cemetery. Beginning from an opening ceremony on 7 April the same year, the route between Les Innocents and the &quot;clos de la Tombe-Issoire&quot; became a nightly procession of black cloth-covered wagons carrying the millions of Parisian dead. It would take two years to empty the majority of Paris&#x27;s cemeteries.

Cemeteries whose remains were moved to the Catacombs include Saints-Innocents (the largest by far with about 2 million buried over 600 years of operation), Saint-Étienne-des-Grès (one of the oldest), Madeleine Cemetery, Errancis Cemetery (used for the victims of the French Revolution), and Notre-Dame-des-Blancs-Manteaux. By this way the skeletal remains of several notable victims of the French Revolution were transferred to the Catacombs, including (the date is the date of death): 
*Charlotte Corday (18 July 1793)
*22 Girondists (31 October 1793); among them Jacques Pierre Brissot and Pierre Victurnien Vergniaud
*Louis Philippe II, Duke of Orléans (6 November 1793), father of king Louis Philippe I
*Madame Roland (8 November 1793)
*Madame du Barry (8 December 1793)
*Jacques Hébert (24 March 1794) 
*Georges Jacques Danton (April 5, 1794)
*Camille Desmoulins (April 5, 1794)
*Philippe Fabre d&#x27;Églantine (April 5, 1794)
*Marie-Jean Hérault de Séchelles (April 5, 1794)
*Lucile Duplessis (April 13, 1794), widow of Camille Desmoulins
*Marie Marguerite Françoise Hébert (April 13, 1794), widow of Jacques Hébert
*Antoine-Laurent de Lavoisier (May 8, 1794)
*Madame Élisabeth (May 10, 1794), sister of kings Louis XVI, Louis XVIII and Charles X
*François Hanriot (July 28, 1794)
*Maximilien Robespierre (July 28, 1794)
*Louis Antoine de Saint-Just (July 28, 1794)
*Georges Couthon (July 28, 1794)
*Antoine Simon (July 28, 1794)

===Renovation and ossuary decor===

Catacombs in their first years were a disorganized bone repository, but Louis-Étienne Héricart de Thury, director of the Paris Mine Inspection Service from 1810, had renovations done that would transform the caverns into a visitable mausoleum. In addition to directing the stacking of skulls, femurs and tibias into the patterns seen in the catacombs today he used the cemetery decorations he could find (formerly stored on the Tombe-Issoire property; many had disappeared after the 1789 Revolution) to complement the walls of bones. Also created was a room dedicated to the display of the various minerals found under Paris, and another showing various skeletal deformities found during the catacombs&#x27; creation and renovation. He also added monumental tablets and archways bearing ominous warning inscriptions, and added stone tablets bearing descriptions or other comments about the nature of the ossuary, and to ensure the safety of eventual visitors, it was walled from the rest of Paris&#x27;s Left Bank&#x27;s already-extensive tunnel network.

=== Modern ===
During World War II, Parisian members of the French Resistance used the tunnel system and established the headquarters from where Colonel Rol-Tanguy led the insurrection for the liberation of Paris in June 1944. The Wehrmacht established an underground bunker below Lycée Montaigne, a high school in the 6th arrondissement.

During 2004, police discovered a fully equipped movie theater in an area of the catacombs underneath the Trocadéro. It was equipped with a giant cinema screen, seats for the audience, projection equipment, film reels of recent thrillers and film noir classics, a fully stocked bar, and a complete restaurant with tables and chairs. The group &quot;les UX&quot; took responsibility for the installation.

The film &quot;As Above, So Below&quot;, released in 2014, was the first production that secured permission from the French government to film in the catacombs. They aimed to use no alterations to the environment with the exception of a piano and a car which were hauled into the catacombs and set on fire.

During 2015, Airbnb paid €350,000 as part of a publicity stunt offering customers the chance to stay overnight in the Catacombs.

In August 2017, thieves broke into a cellar from the catacombs and stole more than €250,000 of wine.

===Deaths===
Only one death has officially been confirmed in the Catacombs. In 1793, Philibert Aspairt, a door keeper for the Val-de-Grâce hospital, died in the catacombs. It is thought that he had lost his light source, and was left to die in the darkness. In 1804, 11 years later, his body was found, only a few metres away from a staircase that would have led to an exit. He was only identified by his hospital key ring, and the buttons on his jacket.

==Visits==

As one visits the catacombs, a sign above reads (&quot;Stop! The empire of Death lies here&quot;). The Catacombs of Paris became a curiosity for more privileged Parisians from their creation, an early visitor being the Count of Artois (later Charles X of France) in 1787. Public visits began after its renovation into a proper ossuary and the 1814–1815 war. First allowed only a few times a year with the permission of an authorized mines inspector, but later more frequently and permitted by any mine overseer, a flow of visitors degraded the ossuary to a point where the permission-only rule was restored from 1830, and the catacombs were closed completely from 1833 because of church opposition to exposing human remains to public display. Open again for four visits a year from 1850, public demand caused the government to allow monthly visits from 1867, bi-weekly visits on the first and third Saturday of each month from 1874 (with an extra opening for the November 1 &quot;toussaint&quot; holiday), and weekly visits during the 1878, 1889 (the most visitors yet that year) and 1900 World&#x27;s Fair Expositions. Later they opened for regular daily visits. After an incident of vandalism, the Catacombs were closed to the public during September 2009 and reopened on 19 December of the same year. The Catacombs were reopened to the public on June 16, 2020, with new rules and guidelines for visitors as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Visitors are no longer required to wear masks.

==Disruption of surface structures==
Because the catacombs are directly under the Paris streets, large foundations cannot be built above them and cave-ins have destroyed buildings. For this reason, there are few tall buildings in this area.

== See also ==
* Odessa catacombs
* Catacombs of Rome
* Catacombs of Kom El Shofaqa
* Cataphile

== References ==
==Further reading==
* Quigley, Christine (2001) &quot;Skulls and skeletons: human bone collections and accumulations&quot;. McFarland, Jefferson, NC, US. pp. 22–29
* Riordan, Rick (2008) &quot;The 39 Clues Book 1: The Maze of Bones&quot;. Scholastic Inc. pp. 169–176

==External links==
* Paris Musées</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q28924" start="4" end="22" title="Catacombs of Paris" label="Catacombs of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q255595" start="44" end="53" title="ossuary" label="ossuaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="57" end="62" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="64" end="70" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022916" start="170" end="184" title="Mines of Paris" label="stone quarries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092104" start="461" end="490" title="Holy Innocents&amp;#x27; Cemetery" label="Holy Innocents&amp;#x27; Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022916" start="1113" end="1127" title="mines of Paris" label="mines of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1243" end="1248" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="1363" end="1383" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="1423" end="1431" title="Franks" label="Frankish"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="2167" end="2173" title="Normans" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092104" start="2255" end="2271" title="Holy Innocents&amp;#x27; Cemetery" label="Saints Innocents"/>
<link wikidata="Q2174628" start="2346" end="2361" title="Rue Saint-Denis (Paris)" label="rue Saint-Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3451419" start="2363" end="2384" title="rue de la Ferronnerie" label="rue de la Ferronnerie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2386" end="2404" title="rue de la Lingerie" label="rue de la Lingerie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2413" end="2423" title="rue Berger" label="rue Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q913434" start="2573" end="2583" title="Les Halles" label="Les Halles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294736" start="2938" end="2948" title="Hôtel-Dieu de Paris" label="Hôtel-Dieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q20670733" start="3496" end="3514" title="Lutetian limestone" label="Lutetian limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339583" start="4168" end="4180" title="Val-de-Grâce" label="Val-de-Grâce"/>
<link wikidata="Q895078" start="4432" end="4454" title="boulevard Saint-Michel" label="boulevard Saint-Michel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="4468" end="4477" title="Louis XVI" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q163265" start="5461" end="5475" title="Paris Police Prefecture" label="Police Prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q381885" start="5828" end="5837" title="sepulchre" label="sepulchre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092104" start="6541" end="6557" title="Holy Innocents&amp;#x27; Cemetery" label="Saints-Innocents"/>
<link wikidata="Q166679" start="6636" end="6658" title="Saint-Étienne-des-Grès, Paris" label="Saint-Étienne-des-Grès"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152786" start="6680" end="6698" title="Madeleine Cemetery" label="Madeleine Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972595" start="6700" end="6717" title="Errancis Cemetery" label="Errancis Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="6747" end="6764" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581988" start="6771" end="6801" title="Notre-Dame-des-Blancs-Manteaux" label="Notre-Dame-des-Blancs-Manteaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q216063" start="6968" end="6984" title="Charlotte Corday" label="Charlotte Corday"/>
<link wikidata="Q207776" start="7004" end="7013" title="Girondist" label="Girondist"/>
<link wikidata="Q314984" start="7045" end="7067" title="Jacques Pierre Brissot" label="Jacques Pierre Brissot"/>
<link wikidata="Q747460" start="7072" end="7099" title="Pierre Victurnien Vergniaud" label="Pierre Victurnien Vergniaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q311637" start="7101" end="7135" title="Louis Philippe II, Duke of Orléans" label="Louis Philippe II, Duke of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771" start="7170" end="7186" title="Louis Philippe I" label="Louis Philippe I"/>
<link wikidata="Q236554" start="7188" end="7201" title="Madame Roland" label="Madame Roland"/>
<link wikidata="Q230677" start="7221" end="7236" title="Madame du Barry" label="Madame du Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q209901" start="7256" end="7270" title="Jacques Hébert" label="Jacques Hébert"/>
<link wikidata="Q184623" start="7289" end="7311" title="Georges Danton" label="Georges Jacques Danton"/>
<link wikidata="Q249313" start="7329" end="7347" title="Camille Desmoulins" label="Camille Desmoulins"/>
<link wikidata="Q553446" start="7365" end="7396" title="Fabre d&amp;#x27;Églantine" label="Philippe Fabre d&amp;#x27;Églantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q253747" start="7414" end="7445" title="Marie-Jean Hérault de Séchelles" label="Marie-Jean Hérault de Séchelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q439498" start="7463" end="7479" title="Lucile Duplessis" label="Lucile Duplessis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3292686" start="7527" end="7560" title="Marie Marguerite Françoise Hébert" label="Marie Marguerite Françoise Hébert"/>
<link wikidata="Q39607" start="7604" end="7632" title="Antoine Lavoisier" label="Antoine-Laurent de Lavoisier"/>
<link wikidata="Q274709" start="7648" end="7664" title="Princess Élisabeth of France" label="Madame Élisabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="7697" end="7706" title="Louis XVI of France" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750" start="7708" end="7719" title="Louis XVIII of France" label="Louis XVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758" start="7724" end="7733" title="Charles X of France" label="Charles X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003664" start="7735" end="7751" title="François Hanriot" label="François Hanriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q44197" start="7769" end="7791" title="Maximilien Robespierre" label="Maximilien Robespierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q27764" start="7809" end="7836" title="Louis Antoine de Saint-Just" label="Louis Antoine de Saint-Just"/>
<link wikidata="Q270668" start="7854" end="7869" title="Georges Couthon" label="Georges Couthon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215137" start="7887" end="7900" title="Antoine Simon" label="Antoine Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q55045667" start="8026" end="8057" title="Louis-Étienne Héricart de Thury" label="Louis-Étienne Héricart de Thury"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8075" end="8104" title="Paris Mine Inspection Service" label="Paris Mine Inspection Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q162875" start="8187" end="8196" title="mausoleum" label="mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="8437" end="8452" title="French Revolution" label="1789 Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q937773" start="8958" end="8967" title="Rive Gauche" label="Left Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022916" start="8993" end="9007" title="Mines of Paris" label="tunnel network"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="9032" end="9044" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q157146" start="9070" end="9087" title="French Resistance" label="French Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q558245" start="9163" end="9173" title="Rol-Tanguy" label="Rol-Tanguy"/>
<link wikidata="Q696835" start="9203" end="9222" title="liberation of Paris" label="liberation of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="9241" end="9250" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268857" start="9291" end="9306" title="Lycée Montaigne (Paris)" label="Lycée Montaigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q245546" start="9329" end="9347" title="6th arrondissement of Paris" label="6th arrondissement"/>
<link wikidata="Q28052877" start="9455" end="9464" title="Trocadéro, Paris" label="Trocadéro"/>
<link wikidata="Q185867" start="9591" end="9600" title="film noir" label="film noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q289689" start="9698" end="9704" title="les UX" label="les UX"/>
<link wikidata="Q16248494" start="9769" end="9787" title="As Above, So Below (film)" label="As Above, So Below"/>
<link wikidata="Q528135" start="10379" end="10396" title="Philibert Aspairt" label="Philibert Aspairt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339583" start="10420" end="10432" title="Val-de-Grâce" label="Val-de-Grâce"/>
<link wikidata="Q135302" start="10981" end="10996" title="Count of Artois" label="Count of Artois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758" start="11004" end="11023" title="Charles X of France" label="Charles X of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="12188" end="12205" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q375856" start="12514" end="12530" title="Odesa catacombs" label="Odessa catacombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q741051" start="12533" end="12550" title="Catacombs of Rome" label="Catacombs of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671839" start="12553" end="12580" title="Catacombs of Kom El Shoqafa" label="Catacombs of Kom El Shofaqa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2941668" start="12583" end="12592" title="Cataphile" label="Cataphile"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64131" wikidata="Q1399160" url="?curid=64131" title="William Luther Pierce">
<text>William Luther Pierce III (September 11, 1933 – July 23, 2002) was an American neo-Nazi, white supremacist, and far-right political activist. For more than 30 years, he was one of the highest-profile individuals of the white nationalist movement. A physicist by profession, he was author of the novels &quot;The Turner Diaries&quot; and &quot;Hunter&quot; under the pen name Andrew Macdonald. The former has inspired multiple hate crimes including the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing. Pierce founded the white nationalist National Alliance, an organization which he led for almost 30 years.

Born in Atlanta to a Presbyterian family of Scotch-Irish and English descent, Pierce was a descendant of Thomas H. Watts, the Governor of Alabama and the Attorney General of the Confederate States of America during the American Civil War. Pierce graduated from high school in 1952 and he went on to receive a bachelor&#x27;s degree in physics from Rice University in 1955 as well as a doctorate from University of Colorado at Boulder in 1962. He became an assistant professor of physics at the Oregon State University in that year. In 1965, he left his tenure at Oregon State University and became a senior researcher for the aerospace manufacturer Pratt &amp; Whitney in Connecticut. In 1966, Pierce moved to the Washington, D.C. area and became an associate of George Lincoln Rockwell, founder of the American Nazi Party, who was assassinated in 1967. Pierce became co-leader of the National Youth Alliance, which split in 1974, with Pierce founding the National Alliance.

Pierce&#x27;s novel &quot;The Turner Diaries&quot; (1978) depicts a violent revolution in the United States, followed by a world war and the extermination of non-white races. Another novel by Pierce, &quot;Hunter&quot; (1989) portrays the actions of a lone-wolf white supremacist assassin. In 1985, Pierce relocated the headquarters of the National Alliance to Hillsboro, West Virginia where he founded the Cosmotheist Community Church to receive tax exemption for his organization. Pierce spent the rest of his life in West Virginia hosting a weekly show, &quot;American Dissident Voices&quot;, publishing the internal newsletter &quot;National Alliance Bulletin&quot; (formerly titled Action), and overseeing his publications, &quot;National Vanguard&quot; magazine (originally titled &quot;Attack!&quot;), &quot;Free Speech&quot; and &quot;Resistance,&quot; as well as books which were published by his publishing firm National Vanguard Books, Inc. and the white power music label Resistance Records.

At the time of Pierce&#x27;s death in 2002, the National Alliance was bringing in more than $1 million a year, with more than 1,500 members and a paid national staff of 17 full-time officials. After Pierce&#x27;s death, it entered a period of internal conflict and decline.

== Life and career ==
=== Early life and education ===

William Luther Pierce III was born in Atlanta, Georgia. The son of William Luther Pierce Jr. and Marguerite Farrell, his Presbyterian family was of Scotch-Irish and English descent. Pierce&#x27;s younger brother, Flournoy Sanders, an engineer, assisted Pierce in his political activities. 

His father was born in Christiansburg, Virginia in 1892. His mother was born in Richland, Georgia in 1910, with her family being part of the aristocracy of the Old South, descendants of Thomas H. Watts, the governor of Alabama and attorney general of the Confederate States of America. After the American Civil War, the family lived a working-class existence. Pierce&#x27;s father once served as a government representative on ocean-going cargo ships and sent reports back to Washington, D.C.; he later became manager of an insurance agency but was killed in a car accident in 1943. After the elder Pierce&#x27;s death, the family moved to Montgomery, Alabama, and after that to Dallas, Texas.

Pierce performed well in school; his last two years in high school were spent at the Allen Military Academy in Bryan, Texas. As a teenager, his hobbies and interests were model rockets, chemistry, radios, electronics, and reading science fiction.

After finishing military school in 1951, Pierce worked briefly in an oil field as a roustabout. He was injured when a four-inch (10 cm) pipe fell on his hand, and he spent the rest of that summer working as a shoe salesman. Pierce earned a scholarship to attend Rice University in Houston. He graduated from Rice in 1955 with a bachelor&#x27;s degree in physics. He worked at the Los Alamos National Laboratory before attending graduate school, initially at Caltech during 1955–56. At the University of Colorado in Boulder, Colorado, he earned a master&#x27;s degree and a doctorate in 1962. He taught physics as an assistant professor at Oregon State University from 1962 to 1965.

=== Early political activities ===
His tenure as assistant professor at Oregon State University coincided with the rise of the Civil Rights Movement and later the counterculture. The former, along with the protests against the Vietnam War, he regarded as being led by Jews. In 1965 to finance his political ambitions, Pierce left his tenure at Oregon State University and relocated to North Haven, Connecticut, to work as a senior researcher at the Advanced Materials Research and Development Laboratory of aerospace manufacturer Pratt &amp; Whitney.

After a brief membership in the anti-communist John Birch Society in 1962, he resigned because the Society was uninvolved in race issues. After he moved to Washington, D.C. he became an associate of George Lincoln Rockwell, founder of the American Nazi Party. During this time he was the editor of the party&#x27;s quarterly ideological journal, &quot;National Socialist World&quot;. When Rockwell was murdered in 1967, Pierce became one of the leading members of the National Socialist White People&#x27;s Party, the successor to the ANP.

In 1968, Pierce left the NSWPP and joined Youth for Wallace, an organization supporting the bid for the presidency of George Wallace, the former Governor of Alabama. In 1970, along with Willis Carto he reconfigured Youth for Wallace into the National Youth Alliance. However, a complex dispute between the two men had begun by the late 1960s. By 1971, Pierce and Carto were openly feuding with the latter accusing the former of the theft of the Liberty Lobby mailing list. These issues caused the NYA to split, and by 1974 Pierce&#x27;s wing became known as the National Alliance. Among the founding members of the board of the National Alliance was a University of Illinois professor of classics, Revilo P. Oliver, who was to have major impact of Pierce&#x27;s life both as an adviser and friend.

=== National Alliance ===

The National Alliance was organized in 1974. Pierce intended the organization to be a political vanguard that would ultimately bring about a white nationalist overthrow of the United States Federal Government. Pierce spent the rest of his life living in West Virginia. From this location, he hosted a weekly radio show, &quot;American Dissident Voices&quot; from 1991, the internal newsletter &quot;National Alliance Bulletin&quot; (formerly called &quot;Action&quot;), and oversaw his publications, &quot;National Vanguard&quot; magazine (originally titled &quot;Attack!&quot;), &quot;Free Speech&quot; and &quot;Resistance&quot;, as well as books published by his publishing firm National Vanguard Books, Inc. (many of which promoted Holocaust denial) and the &quot;white power&quot; record company, Resistance Records, which Pierce supported from its inception around 1993 and purchased outright in 1999. On the topic of the Holocaust, he claimed the number of deaths had been exaggerated, and that many of the details had been fabricated.

In 1978, claiming the National Alliance was an educational organization, Pierce applied for and was denied, tax exemption by the Internal Revenue Service. Pierce appealed, but an appellate court upheld the IRS decision. Around the same time, he was interviewed by Herbert Poinsett on &quot;Race and Reason&quot;, a public-access television cable TV talk show co-hosted by former Klansman Tom Metzger.

An anti-Zionist, he attempted during the Yom Kippur War to force McDonnell Douglas into canceling military contracts that sent armaments to Israel by buying shares of the company&#x27;s stock and putting forward the motion at the national shareholder&#x27;s meeting. The company rejected the motion and continued supplying Israel with weapons. Some of Pierce&#x27;s later speeches on &quot;American Dissident Voices&quot; concerning the Arab–Israeli conflict were reprinted in Muslim publications and on websites, including that of the Lebanese Shia Islamist group Hezbollah.

In 1985, Pierce moved his operations from Arlington County, Virginia, to a location in Mill Point, West Virginia, which he paid for with $95,000 in cash. At this location, he founded the Cosmotheist Community Church. In 1986, the church applied again, this time successfully, for federal, state, and local tax exemptions. It lost its state tax exemption for all but 60 acres, which had to be exclusively used for religious purposes. The other parcel was used for both the National Alliance headquarters and the National Vanguard Books business and warehouse, and was denied state tax exemption.

In 1990, the documentary series &quot;Different Drummer&quot; produced a portrait of Pierce, which was aired on PBS. He later participated twice on a public-access television cable TV live talk show hosted by Ron Doggett, &quot;Race and Reality&quot; and aired from Richmond, Virginia.

Pierce was frequently described as a neo-Nazi, although he personally rejected this label. When confronted with the issue by Mike Wallace on &quot;60 minutes&quot;, Pierce described the term as a slander:

:I admire many things that Hitler wrote, many of the programs and policies that he instituted in Germany, but we do not blindly copy anyone else&#x27;s policies or programs. We&#x27;ve formulated our own program in view of the situation that we face here in America today.

In 1998, Pierce was a contributor to a documentary produced by the Discovery Channel about white nationalism in the United States. As the leader of the National Alliance, Pierce established contacts with other nationalist groups in Europe, including the National Democratic Party of Germany, the British National Party (BNP), and the Greek Golden Dawn party. He also had ties to BNP leader John Tyndall Pierce&#x27;s other recruiting efforts included a 51-minute informational video titled &quot;America is a Changing Country&quot;, and forming an anti-globalization group – the Anti-Globalization Action Network – to protest at the G8 summit in Canada in June 2002.

Pierce&#x27;s last public speech was made in Cleveland, Ohio on April 28, 2002. On July 23, 2002, he died of renal failure, three weeks after being diagnosed with cancer that had spread through his body. 

At the time, the National Alliance was bringing in more than $1 million a year, with more than 1,500 members and a paid national staff of 17 full-time officials, and was better known than at any time in its history, after which it entered a period of internal conflict and decline.

== Novels ==
=== &quot;The Turner Diaries&quot; ===
Pierce gained attention following the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing by Timothy McVeigh, who was said to be inspired by &quot;The Turner Diaries&quot; (1978), the novel written by Pierce under the pseudonym Andrew Macdonald. The book is a graphically violent depiction of a future race war in the United States, which includes a detailed description of the &quot;Day of the Rope&quot; mass hangings of many &quot;race traitors&quot; (especially Jews and those in interracial marriages or relationships) in the public streets of Los Angeles, followed by the systematic ethnic cleansing of the city, and eventually the entire world. This violence and killing is called &quot;terrible yet absolutely necessary&quot;. The story is told through the perspective of Earl Turner, an active member of the white revolutionary underground resistance, called The Organization, led by the secret inner circle known as The Order (a reorganized SS).

The part most relevant to the McVeigh case is in an early chapter, when the book&#x27;s main character is placed in charge of bombing the FBI headquarters. Some have pointed out similarities between the bombing in the book and the actual bombing in Oklahoma City that damaged the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building and killed 168 people on April 19, 1995. When McVeigh was arrested later that day, pages from the book were found in his car, with several phrases highlighted, including &quot;But the real value of all of our attacks today lies in the psychological impact, not in the immediate casualties&quot; and &quot;We can still find them and kill them.&quot;

&quot;The Turner Diaries&quot; also inspired a group of white revolutionary nationalists in the early 1980s who called themselves the Silent Brotherhood, or sometimes simply The Order. The Order was an offshoot of the Aryan Nations. They were tired of being merely &quot;armchair revolutionaries&quot;. The Order was connected to numerous crimes, including counterfeiting and bank robbery, and supposedly gave money to the Alliance. The Order&#x27;s leader, Robert Jay Mathews, died in a stand-off with police and federal agents on Whidbey Island, Washington when police fired flares into his hideout, igniting a fire. Other Order members including David Lane were captured and sent to federal prisons. In 1996 Pierce sold the rights to &quot;The Turner Diaries&quot; to the Jewish publisher Lyle Stuart.

On May 19, 1996, Pierce was interviewed on &quot;60 Minutes&quot;, during which Pierce was asked by Mike Wallace if he approved of the Oklahoma City bombing, and he replied &quot;No. No, I don&#x27;t. I&#x27;ve said that over and over again, that I do not approve of the Oklahoma City bombing because the United States is not yet in a revolutionary situation.&quot; A year earlier in a telephone interview with &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, he was quoted as saying: &quot;the Oklahoma City bombing didn&#x27;t make sense politically. Terrorism only makes sense if it can be sustained over a period of time. One day there will be real, organized terrorism done according to plan, aimed at bringing down the government.&quot;

=== &quot;Hunter&quot; ===

In 1989, again under the Andrew Macdonald pen name, Pierce published another novel, &quot;Hunter&quot;, which tells the story of a man named Oscar Yeager, a veteran of the Vietnam War who begins by killing multiple interracial couples. He then assassinates liberal journalists, politicians and bureaucrats in the D.C. area. In interviews, Pierce called &quot;Hunter&quot; more realistic, and described his rationale for writing it as taking the reader through &quot;an educational process&quot;.

== Religion ==
In the 1970s, Pierce adopted the religious philosophy of cosmotheism, based on a mixture of German romanticism, the Darwinian concept of natural selection, and Pierce&#x27;s interpretation of George Bernard Shaw&#x27;s play &quot;Man and Superman&quot;. The Anti-Defamation League and the Southern Poverty Law Center both allege that Pierce utilized cosmotheism in order to acquire tax-exempt status for the National Alliance after he had failed to do so earlier. In 2001, Pierce officiated the Cosmotheist wedding ceremony of Billy Roper, then a top staffer at the National Alliance.

== Personal life ==

Pierce was married five times. His first marriage was to Patricia Jones, a mathematician whom he met while he was attending the California Institute of Technology. They were married in 1957 and had twin sons, Kelvin and Erik, born in 1960. Kelvin was an aerospace engineer, while Erik is a computer scientist. According to Kelvin Pierce, his father had been emotionally and physically abusive. In 2020, Kelvin coauthored &quot;Sins of My Father: Growing Up with America&#x27;s Most Dangerous White Supremacist&quot;, which chronicled his experiences with his father.

William Luther Pierce&#x27;s marriage with Patricia Jones ended in divorce in 1982. The same year, Pierce married Elizabeth Prostel whom he met in the National Alliance office in Arlington. The marriage ended in 1985 and Pierce moved his headquarters to southern West Virginia. Preferring immigrant women from Eastern Europe, in 1986 Pierce married a Hungarian woman named Olga Skerlecz. She is a relative of Iván Skerlecz, Governor of Croatia-Slavonia; the marriage lasted until 1990. Olga moved to California after their divorce. Pierce then married another Hungarian woman named Zsuzsannah in early 1991. They met through an advertisement that Pierce placed in a Hungarian women&#x27;s magazine aimed at arranging international marriages. Leaving him in the summer of 1996, Zsuzsannah moved to Florida. His last marriage in 1997, which lasted until his death, was to another Hungarian woman, known under the pseudonym &quot;Irena&quot;. The marriage between Irena and Pierce was troubled, as he was reportedly &quot;sharp and condescending&quot; leaving her miserable living with him.

== Death ==
Pierce died of kidney failure at his Hillsboro, West Virginia compound on July 23, 2002.

== Works ==
As William Luther Pierce:
* &quot;Who We Are&quot; (2012)
* &quot;Cosmotheism: Divine Aryan Consciousness from Man to Super-Man&quot; (2013) (with Fred Streed &amp; Kevin Alfred Strom)

As Andrew Macdonald:
* &quot;The Turner Diaries&quot; (1978)
* &quot;Hunter&quot; (1984)

In 1993, Pierce wrote the script of the comic book &quot;New World Order Comix #1: The Saga of White Will!!&quot; which was illustrated by Daniel &quot;Rip&quot; Roush and colored by William White Williams.

== References ==
Notes
Bibliography
* 

Further reading

== External links ==

* &quot;National Vanguard&quot;, a publication of the National Alliance
* Pierce&#x27;s entry at History Commons
* William L. Pierce&#x27;s FBI files, obtained under the FOIA and hosted at the Internet Archive:
** FBI headquarters file Part 1
** FBI headquarters file Part 2
** FBI headquarters file Part 3
** Washington field office files</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1399160" start="0" end="25" title="William Luther Pierce" label="William Luther Pierce III"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="79" end="87" title="Neo-Nazism" label="neo-Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="89" end="106" title="White supremacy" label="white supremacist"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="112" end="121" title="Far-right politics" label="far-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q203764" start="122" end="140" title="Activism" label="political activist"/>
<link wikidata="Q278929" start="219" end="236" title="white nationalist" label="white nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="249" end="258" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542194" start="308" end="326" title="The Turner Diaries" label="The Turner Diaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386158" start="343" end="349" title="Hunter (Pierce novel)" label="Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q127843" start="366" end="374" title="pen name" label="pen name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399160" start="375" end="391" title="William Luther Pierce" label="Andrew Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q459409" start="426" end="436" title="hate crime" label="hate crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q217528" start="457" end="478" title="Oklahoma City bombing" label="Oklahoma City bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q733930" start="517" end="534" title="National Alliance (United States)" label="National Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="595" end="602" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="608" end="620" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435494" start="631" end="643" title="Scots-Irish Americans" label="Scotch-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="648" end="655" title="English Americans" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q879281" start="692" end="707" title="Thomas H. Watts" label="Thomas H. Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q558677" start="713" end="732" title="Governor of Alabama" label="Governor of Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501926" start="741" end="757" title="Attorney General" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="765" end="794" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="806" end="824" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="922" end="929" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q842909" start="935" end="950" title="Rice University" label="Rice University"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="972" end="981" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q736674" start="987" end="1020" title="University of Colorado at Boulder" label="University of Colorado at Boulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q861888" start="1081" end="1104" title="Oregon State University" label="Oregon State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q173150" start="1236" end="1255" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney" label="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="1259" end="1270" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="1301" end="1317" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q440145" start="1350" end="1373" title="George Lincoln Rockwell" label="George Lincoln Rockwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q465904" start="1390" end="1409" title="American Nazi Party" label="American Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012039" start="1472" end="1495" title="National Youth Alliance" label="National Youth Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q733930" start="1543" end="1560" title="National Alliance (United States)" label="National Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q103495" start="1686" end="1695" title="world war" label="world war"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="1704" end="1717" title="Genocide" label="extermination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072081" start="1721" end="1736" title="Person of color" label="non-white races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485801" start="1924" end="1948" title="Hillsboro, West Virginia" label="Hillsboro, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1970" end="1998" title="William Luther Pierce#Religion" label="Cosmotheist Community Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q705450" start="2010" end="2023" title="tax exemption" label="tax exemption"/>
<link wikidata="Q733930" start="2298" end="2315" title="National Vanguard (publication)" label="National Vanguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q733930" start="2485" end="2514" title="National Vanguard Books, Inc." label="National Vanguard Books, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q2145745" start="2547" end="2565" title="Resistance Records" label="Resistance Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="2937" end="2944" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376400" start="3213" end="3237" title="Christiansburg, Virginia" label="Christiansburg, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1912978" start="3270" end="3287" title="Richland, Georgia" label="Richland, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q729469" start="3350" end="3359" title="Old South" label="Old South"/>
<link wikidata="Q558677" start="3397" end="3416" title="governor of Alabama" label="governor of Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="3445" end="3474" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="3486" end="3504" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="3666" end="3682" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q29364" start="3830" end="3849" title="Montgomery, Alabama" label="Montgomery, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="3869" end="3882" title="Dallas" label="Dallas, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731500" start="3970" end="3992" title="Allen Academy" label="Allen Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q695556" start="3996" end="4008" title="Bryan, Texas" label="Bryan, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503383" start="4056" end="4068" title="model rocket" label="model rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="4071" end="4080" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594327" start="4217" end="4227" title="roustabout" label="roustabout"/>
<link wikidata="Q842909" start="4395" end="4410" title="Rice University" label="Rice University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="4414" end="4421" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="4487" end="4494" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q379848" start="4513" end="4543" title="Los Alamos National Laboratory" label="Los Alamos National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="4591" end="4598" title="California Institute of Technology" label="Caltech"/>
<link wikidata="Q192517" start="4648" end="4665" title="Boulder, Colorado" label="Boulder, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="4706" end="4715" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q861888" start="4772" end="4795" title="Oregon State University" label="Oregon State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q861888" start="4888" end="4911" title="Oregon State University" label="Oregon State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="4943" end="4964" title="Civil Rights Movement" label="Civil Rights Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995893" start="4979" end="4993" title="Counterculture of the 1960s" label="counterculture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5022" end="5030" title=" List of protests against the Vietnam War" label="protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="5043" end="5054" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="5084" end="5088" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q754769" start="5201" end="5212" title="North Haven, Connecticut" label="North Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q173150" start="5346" end="5365" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney" label="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q585727" start="5415" end="5433" title="John Birch Society" label="John Birch Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q440145" start="5567" end="5590" title="George Lincoln Rockwell" label="George Lincoln Rockwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q465904" start="5607" end="5626" title="American Nazi Party" label="American Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545837" start="6001" end="6023" title="George Wallace presidential campaign, 1968" label="bid for the presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q313776" start="6027" end="6041" title="George Wallace" label="George Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975413" start="6095" end="6107" title="Willis Carto" label="Willis Carto"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012039" start="6151" end="6174" title="National Youth Alliance" label="National Youth Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q733930" start="6471" end="6488" title="National Alliance (United States)" label="National Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="6561" end="6583" title="University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign" label="University of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="6597" end="6605" title="classics" label="classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553312" start="6607" end="6623" title="Revilo P. Oliver" label="Revilo P. Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q733930" start="6739" end="6756" title="National Alliance (United States)" label="National Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875977" start="6821" end="6839" title="Vanguardism" label="political vanguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q278929" start="6876" end="6893" title="white nationalist" label="white nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="6911" end="6943" title="United States Federal Government" label="United States Federal Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="6989" end="7002" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="7471" end="7487" title="Holocaust denial" label="Holocaust denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145745" start="7537" end="7555" title="Resistance Records" label="Resistance Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="7659" end="7672" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q705450" start="7887" end="7900" title="tax exemption" label="tax exemption"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="7908" end="7932" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="Internal Revenue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="8158" end="8166" title="Klansman" label="Klansman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113455" start="8167" end="8178" title="Tom Metzger" label="Tom Metzger"/>
<link wikidata="Q584548" start="8184" end="8196" title="anti-zionism" label="anti-Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100" start="8222" end="8236" title="Yom Kippur War" label="Yom Kippur War"/>
<link wikidata="Q201815" start="8246" end="8263" title="McDonnell Douglas" label="McDonnell Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8669" start="8618" end="8639" title="Arab–Israeli conflict" label="Arab–Israeli conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="8726" end="8730" title="Shia" label="Shia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="8731" end="8739" title="Islamism" label="Islamist"/>
<link wikidata="Q41053" start="8746" end="8755" title="Hezbollah" label="Hezbollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q107126" start="8800" end="8826" title="Arlington County, Virginia" label="Arlington County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6858374" start="8845" end="8870" title="Mill Point, West Virginia" label="Mill Point, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8945" end="8973" title="William Luther Pierce#Religion" label="Cosmotheist Community Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119484" start="9392" end="9409" title="Jacob Young (documentarian)" label="Different Drummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="9466" end="9469" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="9620" end="9638" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="9874" end="9880" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q43404" start="10188" end="10205" title="Discovery Channel" label="Discovery Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q156019" start="10375" end="10411" title="National Democratic Party of Germany" label="National Democratic Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q161269" start="10417" end="10439" title="British National Party" label="British National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q82256" start="10461" end="10472" title="Golden Dawn (Greece)" label="Golden Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749419" start="10511" end="10523" title="John Tyndall (far-right activist)" label="John Tyndall"/>
<link wikidata="Q191442" start="10669" end="10687" title="anti-globalization" label="anti-globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q37143" start="10754" end="10756" title="G8" label="G8"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="10834" end="10843" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q217528" start="11368" end="11394" title="Oklahoma City bombing" label="1995 Oklahoma City bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q220850" start="11398" end="11413" title="Timothy McVeigh" label="Timothy McVeigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542194" start="11452" end="11470" title="The Turner Diaries" label="The Turner Diaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q766875" start="11607" end="11615" title="race war" label="race war"/>
<link wikidata="Q14324792" start="11789" end="11827" title="Interracial marriage" label="interracial marriages or relationships"/>
<link wikidata="Q154278" start="11894" end="11910" title="ethnic cleansing" label="ethnic cleansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="12256" end="12258" title="SS" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="12400" end="12403" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q597408" start="12542" end="12575" title="Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building" label="Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379679" start="13100" end="13109" title="The Order (white supremacist group)" label="The Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q717920" start="13144" end="13157" title="Aryan Nations" label="Aryan Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q550237" start="13384" end="13402" title="Robert Jay Mathews" label="Robert Jay Mathews"/>
<link wikidata="Q360141" start="13458" end="13484" title="Whidbey Island, Washington" label="Whidbey Island, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q175788" start="13575" end="13585" title="David Lane (Neo-Nazi)" label="David Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q15501071" start="13718" end="13729" title="Lyle Stuart" label="Lyle Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q247869" start="13781" end="13791" title="60 Minutes" label="60 Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q325487" start="13832" end="13844" title="Mike Wallace" label="Mike Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="14149" end="14168" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386158" start="14578" end="14584" title="Hunter (Pierce novel)" label="Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174634" start="15057" end="15068" title="cosmotheism" label="cosmotheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477112" start="15092" end="15110" title="German romanticism" label="German romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q183493" start="15116" end="15125" title="Darwinian" label="Darwinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="15137" end="15154" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="15192" end="15211" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="George Bernard Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q725409" start="15230" end="15246" title="Man and Superman" label="Man and Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q158818" start="15258" end="15280" title="Anti-Defamation League" label="Anti-Defamation League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061914" start="15289" end="15316" title="Southern Poverty Law Center" label="Southern Poverty Law Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q705450" start="15382" end="15392" title="tax exemption" label="tax-exempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q733930" start="15408" end="15425" title="National Alliance (United States)" label="National Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q55767458" start="15527" end="15538" title="Billy Roper" label="Billy Roper"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="15735" end="15769" title="California Institute of Technology" label="California Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798668" start="15861" end="15879" title="aerospace engineering" label="aerospace engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q82594" start="15897" end="15915" title="computer scientist" label="computer scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6100181" start="16584" end="16597" title="Iván Skerlecz" label="Iván Skerlecz"/>
<link wikidata="Q577017" start="16599" end="16607" title="Ban (title)" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q533558" start="16611" end="16627" title="Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia" label="Croatia-Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q476921" start="17291" end="17305" title="kidney failure" label="kidney failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485801" start="17313" end="17337" title="Hillsboro, West Virginia" label="Hillsboro, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064078" start="17543" end="17561" title="Kevin Alfred Strom" label="Kevin Alfred Strom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542194" start="17593" end="17611" title="The Turner Diaries" label="The Turner Diaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386158" start="17633" end="17639" title="Hunter (Pierce novel)" label="Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774683" start="18038" end="18053" title="History Commons" label="History Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="18081" end="18084" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003780" start="18111" end="18115" title="Freedom of Information Act (United States)" label="FOIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="18134" end="18150" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64132" wikidata="Q458336" url="?curid=64132" title="Barry Hannah">
<text>Barry Hannah (April 23, 1942 – March 1, 2010) was an American novelist and short story writer from Mississippi. Hannah was born in Meridian, Mississippi, on April 23, 1942, and grew up in Clinton, Mississippi. He wrote eight novels and five short story collections.

His first novel, &quot;Geronimo Rex&quot; (1972), was nominated for the National Book Award. &quot;Airships&quot;, his 1978 collection of short stories about the Vietnam War, the American Civil War, and the modern South, won the Arnold Gingrich Short Fiction Award. The following year, Hannah received the prestigious Award in Literature from the American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters. Hannah won a Guggenheim, the Robert Penn Warren Lifetime Achievement Award, and the PEN/Malamud Award for excellence in the art of the short story.

Hannah was twice the recipient of a Mississippi Institute of Arts and Letters Award in Fiction and received Mississippi&#x27;s prestigious Governor&#x27;s Award in 1989 for distinguished representation of the state of Mississippi in artistic and cultural matters. For a brief time Hannah lived in Los Angeles and worked as a writer for the film director Robert Altman. He was director of the MFA program at the University of Mississippi, in Oxford, where he taught creative writing for 28 years. He died on March 1, 2010, of a heart attack.

==Early life==
Hannah was born in Meridian, Mississippi, on April 23, 1942, and grew up in Clinton, Mississippi. He had three children, a daughter Lee and two sons, Barry Jr. and Ted. He was married three times, the last to Susan (Varas) Hannah (1946–2010).

==Education==
At Mississippi College, Hannah majored in pre-med but later switched to literature. He earned a Bachelor of Arts degree from Mississippi College in Clinton in 1964. He spent the next three years at the University of Arkansas, where he earned a Master of Arts in 1966 and a Master of Fine Arts in 1967.

==Writing==
Barry Hannah&#x27;s fictions contain situational humor that spans a wide gamut, from the surreal to grotesque and black humor. His first publication was a story that was placed in a national anthology of the best college writing when he was a student at the University of Arkansas. Soon after that, Hannah wrote &quot;Mother Rooney Unscrolls the Hurt&quot;:
Hannah&#x27;s first novel, the coming-of-age tale &quot;Geronimo Rex&quot; (1972), was nominated for the National Book Award. &quot;Nightwatchmen&quot; (1973), his second novel, was a difficult book, and it is his only work never to be reissued in paperback. Hannah returned to form, however, with the short-story collection &quot;Airships&quot; (1978). Most of the stories in the volume were first published in &quot;Esquire&quot; magazine by its fiction editor at the time, Gordon Lish. The short novel &quot;Ray&quot; (1980) was a critical success and a minor breakthrough for Hannah, and one of his best-known novels.

After the grotesque Western &quot;Never Die&quot; (1991), Hannah stuck to short stories for the rest of the decade, first with the immense &quot;Bats Out of Hell&quot; (1993), which featured 23 stories over close to 400 pages, making it Hannah&#x27;s longest book, and then with &quot;High Lonesome&quot; (1996), which was nominated for the Pulitzer Prize. After a near-fatal bout with non-Hodgkin lymphoma, Hannah returned in 2001 with &quot;Yonder Stands Your Orphan&quot; (the title is taken from Bob Dylan&#x27;s song &quot;It&#x27;s All Over Now, Baby Blue&quot;), his longest novel since &quot;Geronimo Rex&quot;. In this novel, Hannah returned to a small community north of Vicksburg and to some of the characters featured in stories from &quot;Airships&quot; and &quot;Bats Out of Hell&quot;.

Hannah attempted one more novel, which underwent several title changes. In a 2003 interview with the &quot;Austin Chronicle&quot;, Hannah called it &quot;Last Days&quot;. A 2005 interview with Hannah in &quot;The Paris Review&quot; featured a manuscript page from the then-titled &quot;Long, Last, Happy&quot;. Then a 2009 issue of the literary journal &quot;Gulf Coast&quot; featured an excerpt from the novel, titled &quot;Sick Soldier at Your Door&quot;. The same excerpt was printed in the June 2009 issue of &quot;Harper&#x27;s Magazine&quot;. A subsequent interview with Tom Franklin in the Summer 2009 issue of &quot;Tin House&quot; revealed that &quot;Sick Soldier at Your Door&quot; had been reconceived as a collection of short stories. The stories were published in November 2011 by Grove Press under the title &quot;Long, Last, Happy: New and Selected Stories&quot;.

==Teaching==
Hannah taught creative writing at the Iowa Writers&#x27; Workshop, Clemson University, Bennington College, Middlebury College, the University of Alabama, Texas State University, and the University of Montana - Missoula. He was a frequent visiting writer at the summer creative writing seminars at Sewanee.

Hannah was the director of the M.F.A. program at the University of Mississippi, where he was known as a &quot;generous mentor&quot;. Early during his tenure at the University of Mississippi, he came to class drunk and was known for &quot;drinking heavily&quot;. His students included Larry Brown, Bob Shacochis, Donna Tartt and Wells Tower.

==Death==
Hannah died of a heart attack in Oxford, Mississippi, on March 1, 2010, at the age of 67. His death was just days before the 17th annual Oxford Conference for the Book, held in his hometown. Hannah and his work were the focus of that year&#x27;s conference.

==Awards==
*The William Faulkner Prize, given by the University of Rennes
*The Bellaman Foundation Award in Fiction
*The Arnold Gingrich Short Fiction Award
*The Award for Literature from the American Academy of Arts and Letters
*The PEN/Malamud Award for Short Fiction
*Robert Penn Warren Lifetime Achievement Award
*Guggenheim Fellowship (1983)

==Publications==

===Novels===
*&quot;Geronimo Rex&quot; (1972)
*&quot;Nightwatchmen&quot; (1973)
*&quot;Ray&quot; (1980)
*&quot;The Tennis Handsome&quot; (1983)
*&quot;Hey Jack!&quot; (1987)
*&quot;Boomerang&quot; (1989)
*&quot;Never Die&quot; (1991)
*&quot;Yonder Stands Your Orphan&quot; (2001)

===Story collections===
*&quot;Airships&quot; (1978)
*&quot;Captain Maximus&quot; (1985)
*&quot;Bats out of Hell&quot; (1993)
*&quot;High Lonesome&quot; (1996)
*&quot;Long, Last, Happy: New and Selected Stories&quot; (Nov. 2010)

===Essays===
*&quot;Memories of Tennessee Williams&quot;, &quot;Mississippi Review&quot;, Vol. 48, 1995.
*&quot;Introduction&quot; &quot;The Book of Mark&quot;, Pocket Canon, Grove-Atlantic, 1999.

==References==
==External links==
* &quot;Southern Destroyer&quot; in &quot;Austin Chronicle&quot;
* Writers Remember Barry Hannah by Claire Howorth
* Barry Hannah&#x27;s Long Shadow by Wells Tower
* Kim Herzinger, &quot;On the New Fiction&quot; &quot;Mississippi Review&quot;, Vol. 14, No. 1/2 (Winter, 1985), pp. 7–22. 
*Literary Mourning: Thoughts on Barry Hannah</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q458336" start="0" end="12" title="Barry Hannah" label="Barry Hannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625963" start="62" end="70" title="novelist" label="novelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q49084" start="75" end="86" title="short story" label="short story"/>
<link wikidata="Q118152" start="131" end="152" title="Meridian, Mississippi" label="Meridian, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q540861" start="188" end="195" title="Clinton, Mississippi" label="Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="429" end="440" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="446" end="464" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014386" start="496" end="511" title="Arnold Gingrich" label="Arnold Gingrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q463281" start="614" end="664" title="American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters" label="American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316544" start="679" end="689" title="Guggenheim Fellowship" label="Guggenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q312720" start="695" end="713" title="Robert Penn Warren" label="Robert Penn Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227401" start="750" end="767" title="PEN/Malamud Award" label="PEN/Malamud Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879209" start="851" end="898" title="Mississippi Institute of Arts and Letters Award" label="Mississippi Institute of Arts and Letters Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q55163" start="1169" end="1182" title="Robert Altman" label="Robert Altman"/>
<link wikidata="Q118152" start="1391" end="1412" title="Meridian, Mississippi" label="Meridian, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q540861" start="1448" end="1455" title="Clinton, Mississippi" label="Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="1457" end="1468" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879096" start="1633" end="1652" title="Mississippi College" label="Mississippi College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="1726" end="1742" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070333" start="1832" end="1854" title="University of Arkansas" label="University of Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091008" start="1874" end="1888" title="Master of Arts" label="Master of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4175466" start="1903" end="1922" title="Master of Fine Arts" label="Master of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092460" start="2034" end="2041" title="Surreal humour" label="surreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q218248" start="2045" end="2054" title="grotesque" label="grotesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="2059" end="2070" title="black humor" label="black humor"/>
<link wikidata="Q223945" start="2334" end="2352" title="Bildungsroman" label="coming-of-age tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q572316" start="2408" end="2427" title="National Book Award" label="National Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q762195" start="2721" end="2728" title="Esquire (magazine)" label="Esquire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1704428" start="2779" end="2790" title="Gordon Lish" label="Gordon Lish"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="2946" end="2953" title="Western (genre)" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="3267" end="3281" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138590" start="3312" end="3332" title="non-Hodgkin lymphoma" label="non-Hodgkin lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="3426" end="3435" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301311" start="3454" end="3487" title="It&amp;#x27;s All Over Now, Baby Blue" label="It&amp;#x27;s All Over Now, Baby Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519844" start="3835" end="3851" title="Austin Chronicle" label="Austin Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988628" start="3937" end="3953" title="The Paris Review" label="The Paris Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q5617399" start="4087" end="4097" title="Gulf Coast (magazine)" label="Gulf Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170076" start="4247" end="4269" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15075954" start="4305" end="4317" title="Tom Franklin (author)" label="Tom Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777164" start="4522" end="4533" title="Grove Press" label="Grove Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q108830649" start="4556" end="4599" title="Long, Last, Happy" label="Long, Last, Happy: New and Selected Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q662801" start="4659" end="4686" title="Iowa Writers&amp;#x27; Workshop" label="Iowa Writers&amp;#x27; Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q631066" start="4688" end="4706" title="Clemson University" label="Clemson University"/>
<link wikidata="Q817902" start="4708" end="4726" title="Bennington College" label="Bennington College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357891" start="4728" end="4746" title="Middlebury College" label="Middlebury College"/>
<link wikidata="Q492318" start="4752" end="4773" title="University of Alabama" label="University of Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495387" start="4775" end="4797" title="Texas State University" label="Texas State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302336" start="4807" end="4839" title="University of Montana - Missoula" label="University of Montana - Missoula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138384" start="4981" end="5006" title="University of Mississippi" label="University of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218029" start="5212" end="5223" title="Larry Brown (author)" label="Larry Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933931" start="5225" end="5238" title="Bob Shacochis" label="Bob Shacochis"/>
<link wikidata="Q255339" start="5240" end="5251" title="Donna Tartt" label="Donna Tartt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081662" start="5256" end="5267" title="Wells Tower" label="Wells Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="5297" end="5309" title="myocardial infarction" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q983822" start="5313" end="5332" title="Oxford, Mississippi" label="Oxford, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987282" start="5592" end="5612" title="University of Rennes" label="University of Rennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014386" start="5660" end="5675" title="Arnold Gingrich" label="Arnold Gingrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q463281" start="5731" end="5767" title="American Academy of Arts and Letters" label="American Academy of Arts and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q312720" start="5810" end="5828" title="Robert Penn Warren" label="Robert Penn Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316544" start="5857" end="5878" title="Guggenheim Fellowship" label="Guggenheim Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q108830649" start="6353" end="6396" title="Long, Last, Happy" label="Long, Last, Happy: New and Selected Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081662" start="6800" end="6811" title="Wells Tower" label="Wells Tower"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64137" wikidata="Q2357346" url="?curid=64137" title="Christopher Scarver">
<text>Christopher J. Scarver Sr. (born July 6, 1969) is an American convicted murderer. He is best known for the 1994 murders of his fellow inmates Jeffrey Dahmer and Jesse Anderson, both convicted murderers, at the Columbia Correctional Institution in Wisconsin. The three inmates were on a work detail together in the prison gymnasium, and had a confrontation while unsupervised. Scarver had concealed a metal bar that he used to beat and fatally injure Dahmer and Anderson. Scarver was convicted and sentenced to two further life sentences for these murders. He had already been sentenced to life in prison after being convicted of the murder of Steve Lohman in 1990.

==Early life==
Scarver is the second of five children and was born and raised in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. He attended James Madison High School before dropping out in the eleventh grade. His mother forced him out of her house after he became addicted to alcohol and marijuana. 

Scarver was hired as a trainee carpenter in a Wisconsin Conservation Corps job program. He said that his supervisor, Edward Patts, promised that upon completion of this program he would be hired full-time. After Patts was dismissed, Scarver did not gain a full-time job there. 

He began to drink heavily. Later he said that while drunk, he started to hear voices calling him the &quot;chosen one&quot;. He was later diagnosed with schizophrenia and was said to have been suffering from messianic delusions.

==Murder of Steve Lohman==
On June 1, 1990, Scarver went to the Wisconsin Conservation Corps training office and found site manager John Feyen and employee Steve Lohman present. Forcing Lohman down at gunpoint, Scarver demanded money from Feyen. Upon receiving only US$15 from him (), the enraged Scarver shot Lohman once in the head, killing him. According to authorities, Scarver said: &quot;Now do you think I&#x27;m kidding? I need more money.&quot; After Scarver shot Lohman twice more, both post-mortem, Feyen wrote Scarver a check for US$3,000 (). As Feyen fled outside to his car, Scarver fired at him, but missed.

In 1992, Scarver was convicted of murder at a jury trial and sentenced to life in prison. He was incarcerated at the Columbia Correctional Institution in Portage, Wisconsin.

==Murders of Jeffrey Dahmer and Jesse Anderson==
Two years later, on the morning of November 28, 1994, Scarver was assigned to a work detail in the gymnasium with two other inmates: Jesse Anderson, convicted for murdering his wife; and Jeffrey Dahmer, a serial killer. When corrections officers left the three unsupervised, a confrontation ensued. Scarver went out and retrieved a metal bar from the weight room, which he used to bludgeon Dahmer. He then attacked Anderson with a wooden stick at the showers. He returned to his cell and informed a corrections officer &quot;God told me to do it. Jesse Anderson and Jeffrey Dahmer are dead.&quot;

Both men were mortally wounded by the beatings. Dahmer was declared dead an hour after arriving at the hospital. Anderson died two days later after doctors removed him from life support. 

Scarver was assessed for mental illness and found competent to stand trial on murder charges for the two killings. He changed his &quot;not guilty&quot; plea to &quot;no contest&quot; in exchange for being transferred to a federal penitentiary, was convicted of each murder, and received two more life sentences. When asked if he believed his sentence was just, Scarver was quoted as having said &quot;Nothing white people do to blacks is just.&quot;

===Aftermath===
In 1995, Scarver was transferred into the custody of the Federal Bureau of Prisons under the register number #08157-045. At the time, prison officials in Wisconsin believed they did not have a facility secure enough to house Scarver. Scarver underwent psychiatric evaluation again at the MCFP Springfield and was later transferred to ADX Florence, the federal supermax in Florence, Colorado, where he remained until 2000.

In 2000, Scarver was transferred to the Wisconsin Secure Program Facility when it opened. In 2001, federal district court judge Barbara Crabb ordered that Scarver and about three dozen other seriously mentally ill inmates be relocated from the Wisconsin facility. Scarver was eventually relocated to the Centennial Correctional Facility in Colorado.

In 2005, Scarver brought a federal civil rights suit against officials of the Wisconsin Secure Program Facility arguing that he had been subjected to cruel and unusual punishment, contrary to his constitutional rights. A district court judge dismissed the suit against several of the defendants and ruled that the actions of the remaining officials could not be considered unlawful. Scarver unsuccessfully appealed the decision in 2006. Scarver would later say that he had been held for 16 years in solitary confinement as a result of the murders of Dahmer and Anderson.

In 2012, an agent representing Scarver announced that he was willing to write a book about the murder of Dahmer.

==See also==
* List of homicides in Wisconsin

==References==
==External links==
*Court TV&#x27;s Crime Library
*The Child Left Behind, The Words and Poetry of Christopher J. Scarver (old site, archived May 20, 2015)
*Christopher J. Scarver blog</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2357346" start="0" end="26" title="Christopher Scarver" label="Christopher J. Scarver Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q298364" start="142" end="156" title="Jeffrey Dahmer" label="Jeffrey Dahmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186106" start="161" end="175" title="Jesse Anderson" label="Jesse Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149667" start="210" end="243" title="Columbia Correctional Institution (Wisconsin)" label="Columbia Correctional Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="247" end="256" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545137" start="522" end="536" title="Life imprisonment in the United States" label="life sentences"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="747" end="756" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="758" end="767" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728215" start="781" end="806" title="James Madison Academic Campus" label="James Madison High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q203605" start="973" end="982" title="Carpentry" label="carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="1374" end="1387" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269462" start="1429" end="1448" title="Messiah complex" label="messianic delusions"/>
<link wikidata="Q41482" start="1948" end="1959" title="post-mortem" label="post-mortem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149667" start="2192" end="2225" title="Columbia Correctional Institution (Wisconsin)" label="Columbia Correctional Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q260619" start="2229" end="2247" title="Portage, Wisconsin" label="Portage, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186106" start="2432" end="2446" title="Jesse Anderson" label="Jesse Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q298364" start="2486" end="2500" title="Jeffrey Dahmer" label="Jeffrey Dahmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733896" start="3253" end="3263" title="no contest" label="no contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400015" start="3611" end="3636" title="Federal Bureau of Prisons" label="Federal Bureau of Prisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495382" start="3842" end="3858" title="United States Medical Center for Federal Prisoners" label="MCFP Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q75721" start="3888" end="3900" title="ADX Florence" label="ADX Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q344836" start="3914" end="3922" title="Supermax prison" label="supermax"/>
<link wikidata="Q289483" start="3926" end="3944" title="Florence, Colorado" label="Florence, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027273" start="4017" end="4050" title="Wisconsin Secure Program Facility" label="Wisconsin Secure Program Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858771" start="4105" end="4118" title="Barbara Brandriff Crabb" label="Barbara Crabb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059136" start="4281" end="4313" title="Centennial Correctional Facility" label="Centennial Correctional Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027273" start="4406" end="4439" title="Wisconsin Secure Program Facility" label="Wisconsin Secure Program Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q115765291" start="5029" end="5059" title="List of homicides in Wisconsin" label="List of homicides in Wisconsin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64141" wikidata="Q408047" url="?curid=64141" title="Acetonitrile">
<text>Acetonitrile, often abbreviated MeCN (methyl cyanide), is the chemical compound with the formula and structure . This colourless liquid is the simplest organic nitrile (hydrogen cyanide is a simpler nitrile, but the cyanide anion is not classed as organic). It is produced mainly as a byproduct of acrylonitrile manufacture. It is used as a polar aprotic solvent in organic synthesis and in the purification of butadiene. The skeleton is linear with a short distance of 1.16 Å.

Acetonitrile was first prepared in 1847 by the French chemist Jean-Baptiste Dumas.

==Applications==
Acetonitrile is used mainly as a solvent in the purification of butadiene in refineries. Specifically, acetonitrile is fed into the top of a distillation column filled with hydrocarbons including butadiene, and as the acetonitrile falls down through the column, it absorbs the butadiene which is then sent from the bottom of the tower to a second separating tower. Heat is then employed in the separating tower to separate the butadiene.

In the laboratory, it is used as a medium-polarity non-protic solvent that is miscible with water and a range of organic solvents, but not saturated hydrocarbons. It has a convenient range of temperatures at which it is a liquid, and a high dielectric constant of 38.8. With a dipole moment of 3.92 D, acetonitrile dissolves a wide range of ionic and nonpolar compounds and is useful as a mobile phase in HPLC and LC–MS.

It is widely used in battery applications because of its relatively high dielectric constant and ability to dissolve electrolytes. For similar reasons, it is a popular solvent in cyclic voltammetry.

Its ultraviolet transparency UV cutoff, low viscosity and low chemical reactivity make it a popular choice for high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC).

Acetonitrile plays a significant role as the dominant solvent used in oligonucleotide synthesis from nucleoside phosphoramidites.

Industrially, it is used as a solvent for the manufacture of pharmaceuticals and photographic film.

===Organic synthesis===
Acetonitrile is a common two-carbon building block in organic synthesis of many useful chemicals, including acetamidine hydrochloride, thiamine, and 1-naphthaleneacetic acid. Its reaction with cyanogen chloride affords malononitrile.

===As an electron pair donor===
Acetonitrile has a free electron pair at the nitrogen atom, which can form many transition metal nitrile complexes. Being weakly basic, it is an easily displaceable ligand. For example, bis(acetonitrile)palladium dichloride is prepared by heating a suspension of palladium chloride in acetonitrile:
A related complex is tetrakis(acetonitrile)copper(I) hexafluorophosphate . The groups in these complexes are rapidly displaced by many other ligands.

It also forms Lewis adducts with group 13 Lewis acids like boron trifluoride. In superacids, it is possible to protonate acetonitrile.

==Production==
Acetonitrile is a byproduct from the manufacture of acrylonitrile by catalytic ammoxidation of propylene. Most is combusted to support the intended process but an estimated several thousand tons are retained for the above-mentioned applications. Production trends for acetonitrile thus generally follow those of acrylonitrile. Acetonitrile can also be produced by many other methods, but these are of no commercial importance as of 2002. Illustrative routes are by dehydration of acetamide or by hydrogenation of mixtures of carbon monoxide and ammonia. In , of acetonitrile were produced in the US.

===Acetonitrile shortage in 2008–2009 ===
Starting in October 2008, the worldwide supply of acetonitrile was low because Chinese production was shut down for the Olympics. Furthermore, a U.S. factory was damaged in Texas during Hurricane Ike. Due to the global economic slowdown, the production of acrylonitrile used in acrylic fibers and acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) resins decreased. Acetonitrile is a byproduct in the production of acrylonitrile and its production also decreased, further compounding the acetonitrile shortage. The global shortage of acetonitrile continued through early 2009.

==Safety==

===Toxicity===
Acetonitrile has only modest toxicity in small doses. It can be metabolised to produce hydrogen cyanide, which is the source of the observed toxic effects. Generally the onset of toxic effects is delayed, due to the time required for the body to metabolize acetonitrile to cyanide (generally about 2–12 hours).

Cases of acetonitrile poisoning in humans (or, to be more specific, of cyanide poisoning after exposure to acetonitrile) are rare but not unknown, by inhalation, ingestion and (possibly) by skin absorption. The symptoms, which do not usually appear for several hours after the exposure, include breathing difficulties, slow pulse rate, nausea, and vomiting. Convulsions and coma can occur in serious cases, followed by death from respiratory failure. The treatment is as for cyanide poisoning, with oxygen, sodium nitrite, and sodium thiosulfate among the most commonly used emergency treatments.

It has been used in formulations for nail polish remover, despite its toxicity. At least two cases have been reported of accidental poisoning of young children by acetonitrile-based nail polish remover, one of which was fatal. Acetone and ethyl acetate are often preferred as safer for domestic use, and acetonitrile has been banned in cosmetic products in the European Economic Area since March 2000.

====Metabolism and excretion====

In common with other nitriles, acetonitrile can be metabolised in microsomes, especially in the liver, to produce hydrogen cyanide, as was first shown by Pozzani &quot;et al.&quot; in 1959. The first step in this pathway is the oxidation of acetonitrile to glycolonitrile by an NADPH-dependent cytochrome P450 monooxygenase. The glycolonitrile then undergoes a spontaneous decomposition to give hydrogen cyanide and formaldehyde. Formaldehyde, a toxin and a carcinogen on its own, is further oxidized to formic acid, which is another source of toxicity.

The metabolism of acetonitrile is much slower than that of other nitriles, which accounts for its relatively low toxicity. Hence, one hour after administration of a potentially lethal dose, the concentration of cyanide in the rat brain was that for a propionitrile dose 60 times lower (see table).

The relatively slow metabolism of acetonitrile to hydrogen cyanide allows more of the cyanide produced to be detoxified within the body to thiocyanate (the rhodanese pathway). It also allows more of the acetonitrile to be excreted unchanged before it is metabolised. The main pathways of excretion are by exhalation and in the urine.

==See also==
*Trichloroacetonitrile – a derivative of acetonitrile used to protect alcohol groups, and also used as a reagent in the Overman rearrangement

==References==
==External links==
* WebBook page for C2H3N
* International Chemical Safety Card 0088
* National Pollutant Inventory - Acetonitrile fact sheet
* NIOSH Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards
* Chemical Summary for Acetonitrile (CAS No. 75-05-8), Office of Pollution Prevention and Toxics, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
* Simulation of acetonitrile
* How Did Organic Matter Reach Earth? Cosmic Detectives Trace Origin of Complex Organic Molecules, on: SciTechDaily. September 10, 2020. Source: Tokyo University of Science: Acetonitrile found in molecular cloud Sgr B2(M) at the center of our galaxy.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q408047" start="0" end="12" title="Acetonitrile" label="Acetonitrile"/>
<link wikidata="Q408047" start="32" end="36" title="Acetonitrile" label="MeCN"/>
<link wikidata="Q408047" start="38" end="52" title="Acetonitrile" label="methyl cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11173" start="62" end="79" title="chemical compound" label="chemical compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q83147" start="89" end="96" title="chemical formula" label="formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q500256" start="101" end="110" title="Chemical structure" label="structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q333936" start="160" end="167" title="nitrile" label="nitrile"/>
<link wikidata="Q26075" start="169" end="185" title="hydrogen cyanide" label="hydrogen cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q55076544" start="216" end="223" title="cyanide" label="cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="248" end="255" title="Organic compound" label="organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q342968" start="298" end="311" title="acrylonitrile" label="acrylonitrile"/>
<link wikidata="Q27949284" start="341" end="362" title="polar aprotic solvent" label="polar aprotic solvent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153832" start="366" end="383" title="organic synthesis" label="organic synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q161503" start="411" end="420" title="butadiene" label="butadiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226179" start="438" end="444" title="Linear molecular geometry" label="linear"/>
<link wikidata="Q863695" start="458" end="466" title="Bond length" label="distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q81454" start="475" end="476" title="angstrom" label="Å"/>
<link wikidata="Q164824" start="541" end="560" title="Jean-Baptiste Dumas" label="Jean-Baptiste Dumas"/>
<link wikidata="Q161503" start="644" end="653" title="butadiene" label="butadiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436074" start="721" end="740" title="distillation column" label="distillation column"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="753" end="764" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q100786927" start="1070" end="1080" title="protic solvent" label="non-protic"/>
<link wikidata="Q906367" start="1097" end="1105" title="Miscibility" label="miscible"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027242" start="1260" end="1279" title="dielectric constant" label="dielectric constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q735135" start="1296" end="1309" title="Electric dipole moment" label="dipole moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q40603" start="1318" end="1319" title="Debye" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q381233" start="1424" end="1428" title="High-performance liquid chromatography" label="HPLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q873864" start="1433" end="1438" title="Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry" label="LC–MS"/>
<link wikidata="Q267298" start="1462" end="1469" title="Battery (electricity)" label="battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q162908" start="1558" end="1569" title="electrolyte" label="electrolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147647" start="1620" end="1638" title="cyclic voltammetry" label="cyclic voltammetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q556977" start="1670" end="1679" title="UV cutoff" label="UV cutoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q128709" start="1685" end="1694" title="viscosity" label="viscosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q778774" start="1703" end="1722" title="chemical reactivity" label="chemical reactivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q381233" start="1752" end="1790" title="high-performance liquid chromatography" label="high-performance liquid chromatography"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620256" start="1870" end="1895" title="oligonucleotide synthesis" label="oligonucleotide synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152027" start="1901" end="1927" title="nucleoside phosphoramidite" label="nucleoside phosphoramidite"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="1992" end="2006" title="pharmaceutical" label="pharmaceutical"/>
<link wikidata="Q6293" start="2012" end="2029" title="photographic film" label="photographic film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153832" start="2110" end="2127" title="organic synthesis" label="organic synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q27283372" start="2164" end="2189" title="acetamidine hydrochloride" label="acetamidine hydrochloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q83187" start="2191" end="2199" title="thiamine" label="thiamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q161660" start="2205" end="2229" title="1-naphthaleneacetic acid" label="1-naphthaleneacetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q415075" start="2249" end="2266" title="cyanogen chloride" label="cyanogen chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q419572" start="2275" end="2288" title="malononitrile" label="malononitrile"/>
<link wikidata="Q47519831" start="2403" end="2437" title="transition metal nitrile complexes" label="transition metal nitrile complexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q193161" start="2488" end="2494" title="ligand" label="ligand"/>
<link wikidata="Q72443973" start="2509" end="2546" title="bis(acetonitrile)palladium dichloride" label="bis(acetonitrile)palladium dichloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q419904" start="2586" end="2604" title="palladium chloride" label="palladium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q7706565" start="2643" end="2694" title="tetrakis(acetonitrile)copper(I) hexafluorophosphate" label="tetrakis(acetonitrile)copper(I) hexafluorophosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q900337" start="2815" end="2825" title="Lewis acid" label="Lewis acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q409602" start="2832" end="2849" title="boron trifluoride" label="boron trifluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q407364" start="2854" end="2863" title="superacid" label="superacid"/>
<link wikidata="Q342968" start="2976" end="2989" title="acrylonitrile" label="acrylonitrile"/>
<link wikidata="Q63963" start="3003" end="3015" title="ammoxidation" label="ammoxidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q151324" start="3019" end="3028" title="propylene" label="propylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q342968" start="3236" end="3249" title="acrylonitrile" label="acrylonitrile"/>
<link wikidata="Q421721" start="3404" end="3413" title="acetamide" label="acetamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q214166" start="3420" end="3433" title="hydrogenation" label="hydrogenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="3449" end="3464" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="3469" end="3476" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="3687" end="3695" title="2008 Olympics" label="Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q392603" start="3753" end="3766" title="Hurricane Ike" label="Hurricane Ike"/>
<link wikidata="Q143496" start="3864" end="3895" title="acrylonitrile butadiene styrene" label="acrylonitrile butadiene styrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q342968" start="3969" end="3982" title="acrylonitrile" label="acrylonitrile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="4223" end="4234" title="Metabolism" label="metabolised"/>
<link wikidata="Q26075" start="4246" end="4262" title="hydrogen cyanide" label="hydrogen cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q191733" start="4795" end="4805" title="pulse rate" label="pulse rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="4807" end="4813" title="nausea" label="nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q852376" start="4829" end="4839" title="Convulsion" label="Convulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q159557" start="4845" end="4849" title="coma" label="coma"/>
<link wikidata="Q767485" start="4901" end="4920" title="respiratory failure" label="respiratory failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q883082" start="4946" end="4963" title="cyanide poisoning" label="cyanide poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="4970" end="4976" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q339975" start="4978" end="4992" title="sodium nitrite" label="sodium nitrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q339866" start="4998" end="5016" title="sodium thiosulfate" label="sodium thiosulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q223807" start="5106" end="5125" title="nail polish remover" label="nail polish remover"/>
<link wikidata="Q49546" start="5296" end="5303" title="Acetone" label="Acetone"/>
<link wikidata="Q407153" start="5308" end="5321" title="ethyl acetate" label="ethyl acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="5430" end="5452" title="European Economic Area" label="European Economic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q333936" start="5527" end="5534" title="nitrile" label="nitrile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="5557" end="5568" title="Metabolism" label="metabolised"/>
<link wikidata="Q547502" start="5572" end="5581" title="microsome" label="microsome"/>
<link wikidata="Q26075" start="5620" end="5636" title="hydrogen cyanide" label="hydrogen cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q25807" start="5763" end="5777" title="glycolonitrile" label="glycolonitrile"/>
<link wikidata="Q28747" start="5784" end="5789" title="NADPH" label="NADPH"/>
<link wikidata="Q407693" start="5800" end="5815" title="cytochrome P450" label="cytochrome P450"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901821" start="5816" end="5829" title="monooxygenase" label="monooxygenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q161210" start="5922" end="5934" title="formaldehyde" label="formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q161233" start="6010" end="6021" title="formic acid" label="formic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q414458" start="6312" end="6325" title="propionitrile" label="propionitrile"/>
<link wikidata="Q77747995" start="6499" end="6510" title="thiocyanate" label="thiocyanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q423139" start="6516" end="6525" title="rhodanese" label="rhodanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q723153" start="6709" end="6730" title="Trichloroacetonitrile" label="Trichloroacetonitrile"/>
<link wikidata="Q898525" start="6770" end="6777" title="protecting group" label="protect"/>
<link wikidata="Q104116" start="6778" end="6792" title="hydroxyl" label="alcohol groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q723816" start="6828" end="6849" title="Overman rearrangement" label="Overman rearrangement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735049" start="7426" end="7435" title="Sagittarius B2" label="Sgr B2(M)"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="7453" end="7463" title="Milky Way" label="our galaxy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64146" wikidata="Q461624" url="?curid=64146" title="Kristian Birkeland">
<text>Kristian Olaf Bernhard Birkeland (born 13 December 1867 – 15 June 1917) was a Norwegian space physicist, inventor, and professor of physics at the Royal Fredriks University in Oslo. He is best remembered for his theories of atmospheric electric currents that elucidated the nature of the aurora borealis. In order to fund his research on the aurorae, he invented the electromagnetic cannon and the Birkeland–Eyde process of fixing nitrogen from the air. Birkeland was nominated for the Nobel Prize seven times.

==Life and death==
Birkeland was born in Christiania (Oslo today) to Reinart Birkeland and Ingeborg (née Ege) and wrote his first scientific paper at the age of 18. Birkeland married Ida Charlotte Hammer in May 1905. They had no children and, due to Birkeland&#x27;s preoccupation with his work, they divorced in 1911.

Suffering from severe paranoia due to his use of barbital as a sleeping aid, he died under mysterious circumstances in his room in the Hotel Seiyoken in Tokyo while visiting colleagues at the University of Tokyo. A post-mortem revealed that Birkeland had taken 10 g of barbital the night he died, instead of the 0.5 g recommended. The time of death was estimated at 3am on 15 June 1917. Some authors have claimed that he committed suicide. &quot;On the nightstand lay a revolver&quot;.

==Research==

Birkeland organized several expeditions to Norway&#x27;s high-latitude regions where he established a network of observatories under the auroral regions to collect magnetic field data. The results of the Norwegian Polar Expedition conducted from 1899 to 1900 contained the first determination of the global pattern of electric currents in the polar region from ground magnetic field measurements. The discovery of X-rays inspired Birkeland to develop vacuum chambers to study the influence of magnets on cathode rays. Birkeland noticed that an electron beam directed toward a terrella, a model of the Earth consisting of a spherical magnet, was guided toward the magnetic poles and produced rings of light around the poles and concluded that the aurora could be produced in a similar way. He developed a theory in which energetic electrons were ejected from sunspots on the solar surface, directed to the Earth, and guided to the Earth&#x27;s polar regions by the geomagnetic field where they produced the visible aurora. This is essentially the theory of the aurora today.

Birkeland proposed in 1908 in his book &quot;The Norwegian Aurora Polaris Expedition 1902–1903&quot; that polar electric currents, today referred to as auroral electrojets, were connected to a system of currents that flowed along geomagnetic field lines into and away from the polar region. Such field-aligned currents are known today as Birkeland currents in his honour. He provided a diagram of field-aligned currents in the book, and this diagram was reproduced on the back of the Norwegian 200 kroner 7th series banknote in the lower right corner, and his terrella experiment is shown on the front at the left with a portrait of Birkeland on the right. The book on the 1902–1903 expedition contains chapters on magnetic storms on the Earth and their relationship to the Sun, the origin of the Sun itself, Halley&#x27;s comet, and the rings of Saturn.

Birkeland&#x27;s vision of what are now known as Birkeland currents became the source of a controversy that continued for over half a century, because their existence could not be confirmed from ground-based measurements alone. His theory was disputed and ridiculed at the time as a fringe theory by mainstream scientists, most notoriously by the eminent British geophysicist and mathematician Sydney Chapman who argued the mainstream view that currents could not cross the vacuum of space and therefore the currents had to be generated by the Earth. Birkeland&#x27;s theory of the aurora continued to be dismissed by mainstream astrophysicists after his death in 1917. It was notably championed by the Swedish plasma scientist Hannes Alfvén, but Alfvén&#x27;s work in turn was also disputed by Chapman.

Proof of Birkeland&#x27;s theory of the aurora only came in 1967 after a probe was sent into space. The crucial results were obtained from U.S. Navy satellite 1963-38C, launched in 1963 and carrying a magnetometer above the ionosphere. Magnetic disturbances were observed on nearly every pass over the high-latitude regions of the Earth. These were originally interpreted as hydromagnetic waves, but on later analysis it was realized that they were due to field-aligned or Birkeland currents.

The scale of Birkeland&#x27;s research enterprises was such that funding became an overwhelming obstacle. Recognizing that technological invention could bring wealth, he developed an electromagnetic cannon and, with some investors, formed a firearms company. The coil-gun worked, except the high muzzle velocities he predicted (600 m/s) were not produced. The most he could get from his largest machine was 100 m/s, corresponding to a disappointing projectile range of only 1 km. So he renamed the device an aerial torpedo and arranged a demonstration with the express aim of selling the company. At the demonstration, one of the coils shorted and produced a sensational inductive arc complete with noise, flame, and smoke. This was the first failure of any of the launchers that Birkeland had built. It could easily have been repaired and another demonstration organized.

However, fate intervened in the form of an engineer named Sam Eyde. At a dinner party only one week later, Eyde told Birkeland that there was an industrial need for the biggest flash of lightning that can be brought down to Earth in order to make artificial fertilizer. Birkeland&#x27;s reply was, &quot;I have it!&quot; There were no more attempts to sell the firearms company, and he worked with Eyde only long enough to build a plasma arc device for the nitrogen fixation process. The pair worked to develop the prototype furnace into a design that was economically viable for large-scale manufacture. The resulting company, Norsk Hydro, hugely enriched Norway, and Birkeland then enjoyed adequate funding for research, his only real interest.

The Birkeland–Eyde process is relatively inefficient in terms of energy consumption. Therefore, in the 1910s and 1920s, it was gradually replaced in Norway by a combination of the Haber process and the Ostwald process.

In 1913, Birkeland may have been the first to predict that plasma was ubiquitous in space. He wrote: &quot;It seems to be a natural consequence of our points of view to assume that the whole of space is filled with electrons and flying electric ions of all kinds. We have assumed that each stellar system in evolutions throws off electric corpuscles into space. It does not seem unreasonable therefore to think that the greater part of the material masses in the universe is found, not in the solar systems or nebulae, but in &#x27;empty&#x27; space.&quot;

In 1916, Birkeland was probably the first person to successfully predict that the solar wind behaves as do all charged particles in an electric field: &quot;From a physical point of view it is most probable that solar rays are neither exclusively negative nor positive rays, but of both kinds&quot;. In other words, the solar wind consists of both negative electrons and positive ions.
The first complete map of the statistical location of Birkeland currents in the Earth&#x27;s polar region was developed in 1974 by A.J. Zmuda and J.C. Armstrong and refined in 1976 by T. Iijima and T.A. Potemra

As a scholar with wide interests, Birkeland joined the control commission of NSFPS (Norwegian Society For Psychic Research). The 299 members of the society included, by 1922, people like prime minister Gunnar Knudsen, as well as a wide range of doctors, professors and shipowners. The society arranged circles experimenting with dancing tables and automatic writing, but attracted more attention arranging controlled experiments with invited foreign mediums. In 1912 it was the alleged medium Etta Wriedt from Detroit, famous for her &quot;spirit trumpet&quot;, who was exposed as a fraud. Mrs Wriedt&#x27;s &quot;trumpet&quot; should have been speaking with the &quot;spirit voice&quot; of, among others, Hypatia, but in Norway the &quot;trumpet blows&quot; were exposed as explosions produced by potassium and water. Professor Birkeland exclaimed on that occasion, &quot;I&#x27;m supposedly against all witch burnings, but a teeny weeny one in honour of Mrs Wriedt would not have been in the way.&quot;

==Legacy==
Birkeland&#x27;s theory of the aurora was eventually confirmed and accepted as correct.

An example of one of his experiments is depicted on the left front of a previous version (issued in 1994) of the Norwegian 200 kroner note; it shows a magnetized terrella, simulating the Earth, suspended in an evacuated chamber. Birkeland&#x27;s face appears a second time in a watermark in the blank space above the drawing of the terrella, and his rudimentary magnetosphere appears on the back, but is only visible under ultraviolet light. The ring encircling the magnetic pole depicted on the back of the bank note is similar to the patterns predicted by Birkeland and shown more recently by satellites. His drawing of what became known as Birkeland currents from his book, &quot;The Norwegian Aurora Polaris Expedition 1902–1903&quot;, is shown on the back of the banknote at the right.

In 2017, Yara International ordered the , which will be the world&#x27;s first autonomous ship and is named after Birkeland. It will enter service in 2018 and be fully autonomous by 2020.

==Quotes==
:&quot;It seems to be a natural consequence of our points of view to assume that the whole of space is filled with electrons and flying electric ions of all kinds.&quot; — Kristian Birkeland 1913

:&quot;A very few lonely pioneers make their way to high places never before visited . . . they create the living conditions of mankind and the majority are living on their work.&quot; — Kristian Birkeland

==References==
== Further reading ==
===Books===
*Full text of &quot;The Norwegian Aurora Polaris Expedition 1902–1903&quot; (158 MB)
*Kristian Birkeland, The First Space Scientist(2005) by Egeland, Alv, Burke, William J.
*Lucy Jago (2002). &quot;The Northern Lights&quot;. London: Penguin Books. 

===Articles===
*More articles from the NASA Astrophysics Data System

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q461624" start="0" end="32" title="Kristian Birkeland" label="Kristian Olaf Bernhard Birkeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="78" end="87" title="Norway" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643326" start="88" end="103" title="space physics" label="space physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q486156" start="147" end="172" title="University of Oslo" label="Royal Fredriks University"/>
<link wikidata="Q40609" start="288" end="303" title="aurora borealis" label="aurora borealis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053583" start="367" end="389" title="Coilgun" label="electromagnetic cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q383908" start="398" end="420" title="Birkeland–Eyde process" label="Birkeland–Eyde process"/>
<link wikidata="Q272467" start="424" end="430" title="nitrogen fixation process" label="fixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="431" end="439" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="486" end="497" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="566" end="570" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229994" start="854" end="862" title="paranoia" label="paranoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q412409" start="881" end="889" title="barbital" label="barbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="985" end="990" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842" start="1024" end="1043" title="University of Tokyo" label="University of Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="1497" end="1511" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="1747" end="1753" title="X-rays" label="X-rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q39555" start="1909" end="1917" title="terrella" label="terrella"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="2238" end="2243" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q60670" start="2276" end="2289" title="polar regions" label="polar regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q40609" start="2347" end="2353" title="Aurora (astronomy)" label="aurora"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2560" end="2579" title="Electrojet#Auroral Electrojet" label="auroral electrojets"/>
<link wikidata="Q803957" start="2746" end="2764" title="Birkeland currents" label="Birkeland currents"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2892" end="2932" title="Banknotes of the Norwegian krone#200 kroner note (outdated)" label="Norwegian 200 kroner 7th series banknote"/>
<link wikidata="Q39555" start="2968" end="2976" title="terrella" label="terrella"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="3146" end="3151" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="3182" end="3185" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q23054" start="3217" end="3236" title="Halley&amp;#x27;s comet" label="Halley&amp;#x27;s comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="3255" end="3261" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q803957" start="3313" end="3331" title="Birkeland currents" label="Birkeland currents"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504601" start="3547" end="3560" title="fringe theory" label="fringe theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q46255" start="3627" end="3639" title="Geophysics" label="geophysicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="3644" end="3657" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q711256" start="3658" end="3672" title="Sydney Chapman (mathematician)" label="Sydney Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q54945" start="3992" end="4005" title="Hannes Alfvén" label="Hannes Alfvén"/>
<link wikidata="Q333921" start="4270" end="4282" title="magnetometer" label="magnetometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q162219" start="4293" end="4303" title="ionosphere" label="ionosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053583" start="4746" end="4768" title="Coilgun" label="electromagnetic cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688039" start="5071" end="5085" title="aerial torpedo" label="aerial torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q923364" start="5495" end="5503" title="Sam Eyde" label="Sam Eyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="5684" end="5705" title="artificial fertilizer" label="artificial fertilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q272467" start="5894" end="5919" title="nitrogen fixation process" label="nitrogen fixation process"/>
<link wikidata="Q511031" start="6065" end="6076" title="Norsk Hydro" label="Norsk Hydro"/>
<link wikidata="Q383908" start="6189" end="6211" title="Birkeland–Eyde process" label="Birkeland–Eyde process"/>
<link wikidata="Q213669" start="6365" end="6378" title="Haber process" label="Haber process"/>
<link wikidata="Q591214" start="6387" end="6402" title="Ostwald process" label="Ostwald process"/>
<link wikidata="Q79833" start="7045" end="7055" title="solar wind" label="solar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q803957" start="7403" end="7420" title="Birkeland current" label="Birkeland current"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="7748" end="7762" title="prime minister" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q560949" start="7763" end="7777" title="Gunnar Knudsen" label="Gunnar Knudsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2682005" start="7909" end="7926" title="automatic writing" label="automatic writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q583271" start="8011" end="8018" title="mediumship" label="mediums"/>
<link wikidata="Q15996382" start="8054" end="8065" title="Etta Wriedt" label="Etta Wriedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="8071" end="8078" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q8338" start="8108" end="8115" title="trumpet" label="trumpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11903" start="8267" end="8274" title="Hypatia" label="Hypatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="8359" end="8368" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="8373" end="8378" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q188494" start="8466" end="8480" title="witch burnings" label="witch burnings"/>
<link wikidata="Q40609" start="8609" end="8615" title="Aurora (astronomy)" label="aurora"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8780" end="8805" title="Banknotes of the Norwegian krone#200 kroner note" label="Norwegian 200 kroner note"/>
<link wikidata="Q39555" start="8829" end="8837" title="terrella" label="terrella"/>
<link wikidata="Q803957" start="9310" end="9328" title="Birkeland currents" label="Birkeland currents"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64148" wikidata="Q2444273" url="?curid=64148" title="NOK">
<text>Nok or NOK may refer to:

== Companies and organizations ==
*NYSE stock ticker for Nokia Corporation, based in Finland
*Nok Air, an airline of Thailand
* National Women&#x27;s Organization (Narodowa Organizacja Kobiet or NOK), a socio-political organization in Poland
* Nintendo of Korea, the Korean division of the Japanese video game company Nintendo

== People ==
* Nok, the stage name of Yollada Suanyot, a politician and entertainer from Thailand
* Andrew Jonathan Nok, Nigerian scientist

== Places ==
* Nok, a village and archeological site in Nigeria 
* Nok (Togo), a cave and archeological site in Togo
* Kiel Canal (Nord-Ostsee-Kanal), a canal in northern Germany
* Nok Kundi, a town in Western Pakistan

== Other uses ==
* &quot;Nok&quot; (bird), a genus of birds
* Nok culture, an ancient civilization in Nigeria
* Next of kin, a person&#x27;s closest living blood relative(s)
* Nok, the main protagonist of the Nintendo DS version of the video game &quot;James Cameron&#x27;s Avatar: The Game&quot;
* Norwegian krone (currency code: NOK)
* nok, the ISO 639 code for the Nooksack language

== See also ==
*Nock (disambiguation)
*Nøkk, Scandinavian water spirits
*NOC (disambiguation)
*Nauck (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2444273" start="0" end="3" title="NOK" label="Nok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444273" start="7" end="10" title="NOK" label="NOK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418" start="83" end="100" title="Nokia" label="Nokia Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065088" start="120" end="127" title="Nok Air" label="Nok Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q11789667" start="154" end="188" title="National Women&amp;#x27;s Organization" label="National Women&amp;#x27;s Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="270" end="287" title="Nintendo of Korea" label="Nintendo of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054794" start="392" end="407" title="Yollada Suanyot" label="Yollada Suanyot"/>
<link wikidata="Q20675871" start="454" end="473" title="Andrew Jonathan Nok" label="Andrew Jonathan Nok"/>
<link wikidata="Q7047825" start="510" end="513" title="Nok" label="Nok"/>
<link wikidata="Q7047829" start="562" end="572" title="Nok (Togo)" label="Nok (Togo)"/>
<link wikidata="Q144825" start="614" end="624" title="Kiel Canal" label="Kiel Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4327118" start="676" end="685" title="Nok Kundi" label="Nok Kundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q62267545" start="734" end="756" title="Nok (bird)" label="&amp;quot;Nok&amp;quot; (bird)"/>
<link wikidata="Q927291" start="777" end="788" title="Nok culture" label="Nok culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q531216" start="827" end="838" title="Next of kin" label="Next of kin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="968" end="1005" title="James Cameron&amp;#x27;s Avatar: The Game" label="James Cameron&amp;#x27;s Avatar: The Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q132643" start="1014" end="1029" title="Norwegian krone" label="Norwegian krone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3343396" start="1083" end="1100" title="Nooksack language" label="Nooksack language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637265" start="1118" end="1139" title="Nock (disambiguation)" label="Nock (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q830493" start="1141" end="1145" title="Nøkk" label="Nøkk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2683280" start="1175" end="1195" title="NOC (disambiguation)" label="NOC (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971767" start="1197" end="1219" title="Nauck (disambiguation)" label="Nauck (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64149" wikidata="Q132643" url="?curid=64149" title="Norwegian krone">
<text>The krone (, abbreviation: kr (also NKr for distinction); code: NOK), plural &quot;kroner&quot;, is the currency of the Kingdom of Norway (including overseas territories and dependencies). It was traditionally known as the Norwegian [[Crown (currency)|crown]] in English; however, this has fallen out of common usage. It is nominally subdivided into 100 &quot;øre&quot;, although the last coins denominated in øre were withdrawn in 2012.

The krone was the thirteenth-most-traded currency in the world by value in April 2010, down three positions from 2007.
The Norwegian krone is also informally accepted in many shops in Sweden and Finland that are close to the Norwegian border, and also in some shops in the Danish ferry ports of Hirtshals and Frederikshavn. Norwegians spent 14.1 billion NOK on border shopping in 2015 compared to 10.5 billion NOK spent in 2010. Border shopping is a fairly common practice amongst Norwegians, though it is seldom done on impulse. Money is spent mainly on food articles, alcohol, and tobacco, in that order, usually in bulk or large quantities. This is due to considerably higher taxes and fees on tobacco and alcohol purchased domestically in Norway.

== History ==
The krone was introduced in 1875, replacing the Norwegian speciedaler/spesidaler at a rate of 4 kroner = 1 speciedaler. In doing so, Norway joined the Scandinavian Monetary Union, which had been established in 1873. The Scandinavian currencies were mutually exchangeable at par until 1914 with the suspension of the gold standard due to World War I. After this date, the currencies of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden ceased to be mutually equivalent to each other.

Within the Scandinavian Monetary Union, the krone was on a gold standard of 2,480 kroner = 1 kilogram of pure gold (1 krone = 403.226 milligrams of gold). The gold standard was suspended from 1914 to 1916 and from 1920 to 1928, and in 1931 it was permanently suspended. In 1933 the krone was pegged to the pound sterling at 1 pound = 19.9 kroner, and in 1939 the krone was pegged to the U.S. dollar at $1 = 4.4 kroner.

During the German occupation (1940–1945) in the Second World War, the krone was initially pegged to the Reichsmark at a rate of 1 krone = 0.6 Reichsmark, later reduced to 0.57. After the war, a peg of 1 pound = 20 kroner was established in 1946, equivalent to US$1 = 4.963 kroner before the 1949 devaluation of sterling revised it to US$1 = 7.142 kroner.

In December 1992, the Central Bank of Norway abandoned the fixed exchange rate system in favor of floating exchange rates (managed float) due to the heavy speculation against the Norwegian currency in the early 1990s, which lost the central bank around two billion kroner in defensive purchases of the NOK through the usage of foreign currency reserves for a relatively short period of time.

===Summary of denominations issued===
Sources:

==Coins==
In 1875, coins were introduced (some dated 1874) in denominations of 10 and 50 øre and 1 and 10 kroner. These coins also bore the denomination in the previous currency, as 3, 15, and 30 skillings and specidaler. Between 1875 and 1878, the new coinage was introduced in full, in denominations of 1, 2, 5, 10, 25, and 50 øre and 1, 2, and 10 kroner. The 1, 2, and 5 øre were struck in bronze; the 10, 25, and 50 øre and 1 and 2 kroner, in silver; and the 10 and 20 kroner, in gold.

The last gold coins were issued in 1910; silver was replaced by cupro-nickel in 1920. Between 1917 and 1921, iron temporarily replaced bronze. 1917 also saw the last issuance of 2 kroner coins. During the German occupation of Norway in the Second World War, zinc was used in place of cupro-nickel in 10, 25, and 50 øre coins and production of the 1 krone piece was suspended.

In 1963, 5 kroner coins were introduced. Production of 1 and 2 øre coins ceased in 1972. The following year, the size of the 5-øre coin was reduced; production of the denomination ceased in 1982, along with the minting of the 25 øre. Ten-kroner coins were introduced in 1983. In 1992, the last 10 øre coins were minted.

Between 1994 and 1998, a new coinage was introduced, consisting of 50 øre, 1, 5, 10, and 20 kroner. These are the only coins that are currently legal tender, with the exception of the 50 øre coin which was withdrawn on 1 May 2012. It was withdrawn because it was no longer circulating as an ordinary coin used for payment. However, banks in Norway still exchanged 50 øre coins for higher values until 2022.

The 10 and 20 kroner coins carry the effigy of the current monarch. Previously the 1 and 5 kroner coins also carried the royal effigy, but now these denominations are decorated only with stylistic royal or national symbols. The royal motto of the monarch (King Harald&#x27;s motto is &quot;&quot;, meaning &quot;Everything for Norway&quot;) is also inscribed on the 10 kroner coin.

Coins and banknotes of the Norwegian krone are distributed by the Central Bank of Norway.

Up to 25 coins of any single denomination is considered &quot;&quot;—a legally recognized method of payment, in which the intended recipient can not refuse payment, according to Norwegian law.

===Use of 10 Syrian pound coins in Norway===

The characteristics of the ten Syrian pound (LS 10) coin have been found to so closely resemble the Norwegian 20 kroner (NKr 20) coin that it can fool vending machines, coins-to-cash machines, arcade machines, and any other coin-operated, automated service machine in the country. Machines are unable to tell the coins apart, owing to their almost identical weight and size.

As of mid-February 2017, LS 10 was worth NKr 0.39, making the 20-kroner coin 51.5 times more valuable than the 10-pound coin. While not easy to find in Norway, the Syrian coins are still used in automated machines there with such frequency that , the Norwegian postal service, decided to close many of their coins-to-cash machines on 18 February 2006, with plans to develop a system able to differentiate between the two coins. In the summer of 2005, a Norwegian man was sentenced to 30 day suspended sentence, for having used Syrian coins in arcade machines in the municipality of Bærum.

==Banknotes==

In 1877, Norges Bank introduced notes for 5, 10, 50, 100, 500, and 1000 kroner. In 1917, 1 krone notes were issued, and 2 kroner notes were issued between 1918 and 1922. Because of metal shortages, 1 and 2 kroner notes were again issued between 1940 and 1950. In 1963, 5 kroner notes were replaced by coins, with the same happening to the 10 kroner notes in 1984. Two hundred kroner notes were introduced in 1994.

== Exchange rates ==

The value of the Norwegian krone compared to other currencies varies considerably from one year to another, mainly based on changes in oil prices and interest rates. In 2002 the Norwegian krone grew to record high levels against the United States dollar and the euro. On 2 January 2002, 100 kroner were worth US$11.14 ($1 = 8.98 kroner). In July 2002, the krone hit a high at 100 kroner = $13.7 ($1 = 7.36 kroner). In addition to the high level of interest, which increased further on 4 July 2002, to 7 percent, the price of oil was high. At the time Norway was the world&#x27;s third largest oil exporter.

In 2005, oil prices reached record levels of more than 60 dollars per barrel. Although interest rates had decreased to around 2 percent, the Norwegian krone grew even stronger.

However, in late 2007 and early 2008, the dollar suffered a steady depreciation against all other major currencies. The Norwegian krone was gaining value at the same time; as a result, the krone became stronger than ever compared to the dollar, making the dollar worth about 5 kroner in April 2008. By October 2008, the dollar had recovered and was worth approximately 7 kroner. Following 2009, the krone once again saw strong growth, making the dollar worth about 5.8 kroner as of the beginning of 2010.

Since the mid-2010s, the Norwegian krone has been slowly but steadily weakening against most currencies. This presents a mystery, as Norway&#x27;s economy has been strong and growing, and the decline cannot be fully explained by either oil price changes or interest rate differences between countries. However, , the krone is still overvalued based on the Big Mac Index.

== See also ==
* Danish krone
* Economy of Norway
* Estonian kroon
* Gold reserves of Norway
* Icelandic króna
* Scandinavian Monetary Union
* Swedish krona

== Notes ==
== References ==
==External links==
* Factors that influence the krone exchange rate, information from Norges Bank in 2000.
* The banknotes of Norway 
* Official exchange rates in Norway </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q132643" start="4" end="9" title="Norwegian krone" label="krone"/>
<link wikidata="Q308229" start="13" end="25" title="currency sign" label="abbreviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q132643" start="27" end="29" title="Norwegian krone" label="kr"/>
<link wikidata="Q132643" start="36" end="39" title="Norwegian krone" label="NKr"/>
<link wikidata="Q37431" start="58" end="62" title="ISO 4217" label="code"/>
<link wikidata="Q132643" start="64" end="67" title="Norwegian krone" label="NOK"/>
<link wikidata="Q8142" start="104" end="112" title="currency" label="currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="120" end="137" title="Kingdom of Norway" label="Kingdom of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576537" start="149" end="186" title="List of possessions of Norway" label="overseas territories and dependencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q132643" start="223" end="259" title="Norwegian krone" label="Norwegian [[Crown (currency)|crown]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533172" start="360" end="363" title="øre" label="øre"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="623" end="629" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="634" end="641" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q846052" start="734" end="743" title="Hirtshals" label="Hirtshals"/>
<link wikidata="Q27452" start="748" end="761" title="Frederikshavn" label="Frederikshavn"/>
<link wikidata="Q470982" start="800" end="815" title="border trade" label="border shopping"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935769" start="1253" end="1285" title="Norwegian speciedaler" label="Norwegian speciedaler/spesidaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q60812" start="1356" end="1383" title="Scandinavian Monetary Union" label="Scandinavian Monetary Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q173509" start="1521" end="1534" title="gold standard" label="gold standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q173509" start="1726" end="1739" title="gold standard" label="gold standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="1973" end="1987" title="pound sterling" label="pound sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="2054" end="2065" title="U.S. dollar" label="U.S. dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q819274" start="2098" end="2115" title="Occupation of Norway by Nazi Germany" label="German occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2135" end="2151" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q66143" start="2177" end="2183" title="Fixed exchange-rate system" label="pegged"/>
<link wikidata="Q155009" start="2191" end="2201" title="German Reichsmark" label="Reichsmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q970769" start="2465" end="2487" title="Norges Bank" label="Central Bank of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q594063" start="2541" end="2563" title="floating exchange rate" label="floating exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441769" start="3080" end="3089" title="Skilling (Scandinavian monetary unit)" label="skillings"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3615" end="3631" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909792" start="4279" end="4288" title="withdrawal of low-denomination coins" label="withdrawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q189955" start="4540" end="4547" title="list of Norwegian monarchs" label="monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q57287" start="4737" end="4748" title="Harald V of Norway" label="King Harald"/>
<link wikidata="Q132643" start="4864" end="4869" title="coins of the Norwegian krone" label="Coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773011" start="4874" end="4883" title="banknotes of the Norwegian krone" label="banknotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q970769" start="4930" end="4952" title="Norges Bank" label="Central Bank of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16915192" start="5133" end="5146" title="Law of Norway" label="Norwegian law"/>
<link wikidata="Q240468" start="5226" end="5238" title="Syrian pound" label="Syrian pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542215" start="5341" end="5459" title="Slug (coin)" label="fool vending machines, coins-to-cash machines, arcade machines, and any other coin-operated, automated service machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737759" start="6062" end="6080" title="suspended sentence" label="suspended sentence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5803752" start="6137" end="6149" title="municipalities of Norway" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q57076" start="6153" end="6158" title="Bærum" label="Bærum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6748" end="6758" title="Petroleum#Pricing" label="oil prices"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="6846" end="6866" title="United States dollar" label="United States dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="6875" end="6879" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q297279" start="7129" end="7141" title="price of oil" label="price of oil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7206" end="7218" title="Economy of Norway#Oil-exporting country" label="oil exporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q178506" start="7291" end="7297" title="barrel (unit)" label="barrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379783" start="8038" end="8059" title="Norway&amp;#x27;s economy" label="Norway&amp;#x27;s economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q297279" start="8141" end="8150" title="oil price" label="oil price"/>
<link wikidata="Q179179" start="8162" end="8175" title="interest rate" label="interest rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q309187" start="8261" end="8274" title="Big Mac Index" label="Big Mac Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q25417" start="8294" end="8306" title="Danish krone" label="Danish krone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379783" start="8309" end="8326" title="Economy of Norway" label="Economy of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q129983" start="8329" end="8343" title="Estonian kroon" label="Estonian kroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18559379" start="8346" end="8369" title="Gold reserves of Norway" label="Gold reserves of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q131473" start="8372" end="8387" title="Icelandic króna" label="Icelandic króna"/>
<link wikidata="Q60812" start="8390" end="8417" title="Scandinavian Monetary Union" label="Scandinavian Monetary Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q122922" start="8420" end="8433" title="Swedish krona" label="Swedish krona"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64150" wikidata="Q42712" url="?curid=64150" title="Sphynx cat">
<text>The Sphynx cat (pronounced , ) also known as the Canadian Sphynx, is a breed of cat known for its lack of fur. Hairlessness in cats is a naturally occurring genetic mutation, and the Sphynx was developed through selective breeding of these animals, starting in the 1960s. 

The skin has a texture of chamois leather, as it has fine hairs, or the cat may be completely hairless. Whiskers may be present, either whole or broken, or may be totally absent. Per the breed standards, they have a somewhat wedge-shaped head with large eyes and ears, quite long legs and tail, and neat rounded paws. Their skin is the color that their fur would be, and all the usual cat markings (solid, point, van, tabby, tortie, etc.) may be found on the Sphynx cat&#x27;s skin. Because they have no fur, Sphynx cats lose body heat more readily than coated cats, making them both warm to the touch and prone to seeking out warm places.

==Breed standards==

The breed standard from The International Cat Association (TICA) calls for:

* Wedge-shaped heads with prominent cheekbones
* Large, lemon-shaped eyes
* Very large ears with hair on inside, but soft down on outside base
* Well-muscled, powerful neck of medium length
* Medium length torso, barrel-chested, and full, round abdomen, sometimes called a pot belly
* Paw pads thicker than other cats, giving the appearance of walking on cushions
* Whiplike, tapering tail from body to tip, (sometimes with fur all over tail or a puff of fur on the tip, like a lion)
* Muscular body

==History of the cat breed==
The contemporary breed of Sphynx cat is distinct from the Russian hairless cat breeds, like Peterbald and Donskoy. Although hairless cats have been reported throughout history, breeders in Europe have been developing the Sphynx breed since the early 1960s. Two different sets of hairless felines discovered in North America in the 1970s provided the foundation cats for what was shaped into the existing Sphynx breed.

The current American and European Sphynx breed is descended from two lines of natural mutations:
* Dermis and Epidermis (1975) barn cats from the Pearson family of Wadena, Minnesota
* Bambi, Punkie and Paloma (1978) stray cats found in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, and raised by Shirley Smith

=== Toronto ===
The Canadian Sphynx breed was started in 1966 in Toronto, Ontario, when a hairless male kitten named Prune was born to a black and white domestic shorthair queen (Elizabeth).

After purchasing these cats in 1966 and initially referring to them as &quot;Moonstones&quot; and &quot;Canadian Hairless&quot;, Ridyadh Bawa, a science graduate of the University of Toronto, combined efforts with his mother Yania, a longtime Siamese breeder, and Keese and Rita Tenhoves to develop a breed of cats which was subsequently renamed as &quot;Sphynx&quot;. The Bawas and the Tenhoves were the first individuals able to determine the autosomal recessive nature of the Sphynx gene for hairlessness while also being successful in transforming this knowledge into a successful breeding program with kittens which were eventually capable of reproducing. The Tenhoves were initially able to obtain for the new breed provisional showing status through the Cat Fanciers&#x27; Association (CFA) but ultimately had the status revoked in 1971, when it was felt by the CFA Board that the breed had concerns over fertility.

The first breeders had rather vague ideas about Sphynx genetics and faced a number of problems. The genetic pool was very limited and many kittens died. There was also a problem with many of the females suffering convulsions. In 1978, cat breeder Shirley Smith found three hairless kittens on the streets of her neighborhood. In 1983, she sent two of them to Dr. Hugo Hernandez in the Netherlands to breed the two kittens, named Punkie and Paloma, to a white Devon Rex named Curare van Jetrophin. The resulting litter produced five kittens: two males from this litter (Q. Ramses and Q. Ra) were used, along with Punkie&#x27;s half-sister, Paloma.

=== Minnesota ===
The first noted naturally occurring foundation Sphynx originated as hairless stray barn cats in Wadena, Minnesota, at the farm of Milt and Ethelyn Pearson. The Pearsons identified hairless kittens occurring in several litters of their domestic shorthair barn cats in the mid-1970s. Two hairless female kittens born in 1975 and 1976, Epidermis and Dermis, were sold to Oregon breeder Kim Mueske, and became an important part of the Sphynx breeding program. Also working with the Pearson line of cats was breeder Georgiana Gattenby of Brainerd, Minnesota, who outcrossed with Cornish Rex cats.

==Genetics and breeding==
Other hairless breeds may have body shapes or temperaments that differ from those of Sphynx standards. There are, for example, new hairless breeds, including the Don Sphynx and the Peterbald from Russia, which arose from their own spontaneous gene mutations. The standard for the Sphynx differs between cat associations such as The International Cat Association (TICA), Fédération Internationale Féline (FIFE) and Cat Fanciers&#x27; Association (CFA).

=== Breeding ===
In 2010, DNA analysis confirmed that Sphynx hairlessness was produced by a different allele of the same gene that produces the short curly hair of the Devon Rex (termed the &quot;re&quot; allele), with the Sphynx&#x27;s allele being incompletely dominant over the Devon allele and both being recessive to the wild type. Other associations may vary, and the Russian Blue is a permitted outcross in the Governing Council of the Cat Fancy (GCCF). 

=== Genetics ===
The Sphynx&#x27;s distinctive hairlessness is primarily due to a mutation in the KRT71 gene, which also affects other breeds, such as the Devon Rex and Selkirk Rex, albeit with different outcomes. This gene is responsible for the keratinization of the hair follicle. In the Sphynx, the mutation, known as &quot;hr&quot;, leads to a complete loss of function, damaging the structure of the hair. Normally, KRT71 helps produce strong hair that is securely anchored to the skin. However, due to the &quot;hr&quot; mutation, the hair of Sphynx cats lacks a solid root or bulb, making it extremely weak. Consequently, the hair is fragile and loosely attached, causing it to fall out easily and contributing to the breed&#x27;s nearly hairless appearance. Sphynx cats may still retain very soft, short hair on parts of their body, such as the nose, tails, and toes, but overall, their coat is significantly reduced and lacks the typical structure seen in other cats. 

In the Devon Rex mutation, a residual activity of the protein still exists. The Selkirk Rex allele (sadr) is dominant over the wild type gene, which is dominant over the Devon Rex allele (re) and the Sphynx (hr), which forms an allelic series of : KRT71SADRE &gt; KRT71+ &gt; KRT71re &gt; KRT71hr.

==Behavior==
Sphynx are known for their extroverted behavior. They display a high level of energy, intelligence, curiosity and affection for their owners. They are one of the more dog-like breeds of cats, frequently greeting their owners at the door and are friendly when meeting strangers. Sphynx cats tend to be highly attached to their owners, often demanding large amounts of attention, and if said attention is not given, can get into trouble. The mischievous cats love to cuddle for body warmth, due to their lack of fur. A study was conducted by the &quot;Journal of Veterinary Behavior&quot; in 2012, and while further research needs to be conducted, purebred Sphynx cats were rated by their owners as friendlier than purebred European cats.

==Care==
Care should be taken to limit the Sphynx cat&#x27;s exposure to outdoor sunlight at length, as they can develop sunburn and skin damage similar to that of humans. In general, Sphynx cats should never be allowed outdoors unattended, as they have limited means to conserve body heat when it is cold. In some climates, owners provide coats or other clothing in the winter to help them conserve body heat.

While they lack much of the fur of other cat breeds, Sphynxes are not necessarily hypoallergenic. Allergies to cats are triggered by a protein called Fel d1, not cat hair itself. Fel d1 is a protein primarily found in cat saliva and sebaceous glands. Those with cat allergies may react to direct contact with Sphynx cats. Even though reports exist that some people with allergies successfully tolerate Sphynx cats, they are fewer than those who have allergic reactions. 

The skin of the Sphynx cat is known for its excessive production of a greasy secretion, which often results in the accumulation of a sticky, dark brown, or reddish-brown layer that necessitates regular cleaning. Furthermore, Sphynx cats typically produce more earwax than most hairy domestic cats. This increased wax production is attributed to the minimal to absent hair within their ears, which allows for the accumulation of dirt, skin oils (sebum), and ear wax, thereby requiring frequent cleaning. Additionally, they often accumulate oils and debris under their nails and within their numerous skin folds due to the lack of fur. Regular maintenance of these areas, including the nails and skin folds, is essential for the health and hygiene of the breed.

==Health==
The Sphynx faces challenges because of its lack of protective fur. Skin cancer may be a problem if exposed to sunlight for long durations of time. 

The lack of hair can cause health issues with kittens in the first weeks of life because of susceptibility to respiratory infections. Reputable breeders should not let their kittens go to new homes without being at least 14 weeks of age to ensure the kitten is mature enough to cope in a new environment.

In a review of over 5,000 cases of urate urolithiasis the Sphynx was over-represented, with four recorded cases out of a population of 28.

=== Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy ===
The breed does have instances of the genetic disorder hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). Other domestic cat breeds prone to HCM include Persian, Ragdoll, Norwegian Forest cat, Siberian cats, British Shorthair and Maine Coon; however, any domestic cat including mixed breeds can acquire HCM. Studies are being undertaken to understand the links in breeding and the disorder. Cats are screened for HCM disease with echocardiography (ultrasound of the heart), as well as with additional tests determined by the veterinarian cardiologist including electrocardiogram (EKG, ECG), chest radiographs (X-rays), and/or blood tests.

The Sphynx cat has a high rate of heart disease, either as HCM or mitral valve dysplasia. In a 2012 study of 114 Sphynx cats, 34% were found to have an abnormal heart, with 16 cats having mitral valve dysplasia and 23 cats having HCM. These prevalences were found in cats with an average age of 2.62 years. Male cats developed more severe disease than female cats and often developed it earlier, at an average age of 19 months for males and 29 months for females. Since the prevalence of genetic heart disease is high in this breed, many breeders will recommend screening for HCM yearly.

As HCM progresses into an advanced stage, cats may experience congestive heart failure (CHF) or thromboembolism.

=== Congenital myasthenic syndrome ===
Congenital myasthenic syndrome (CMS) previously referred to as muscular dystrophy, myopathy or spasticity, is a type of inherited neuromuscular disorder associated with alpha-dystroglycan deficiency, found in Sphynx and in Devon Rex cats as well as variants of these breeds, which can occur between the first 3 to 23 weeks of their life. This condition has also been described, but is rarely seen. Cats affected by CMS show generalized muscle weakness and fatigue, as well as ventroflexion of the head and neck, head bobbing, and scapulae protrusion.

==See also==
* Donskoy cat
* List of cat body-type mutations
* List of cat breeds

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42712" start="4" end="14" title="Sphynx cat" label="Sphynx cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q42712" start="49" end="64" title="Sphynx cat" label="Canadian Sphynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q42707" start="71" end="83" title="List of cat breeds" label="breed of cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q197204" start="106" end="109" title="fur" label="fur"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="127" end="130" title="cat" label="cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q995745" start="212" end="230" title="selective breeding" label="selective breeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450533" start="300" end="315" title="chamois leather" label="chamois leather"/>
<link wikidata="Q42709" start="960" end="993" title="The International Cat Association" label="The International Cat Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140549" start="1286" end="1295" title="Abdominal obesity" label="pot belly"/>
<link wikidata="Q42663" start="1635" end="1644" title="Peterbald" label="Peterbald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303" start="1649" end="1656" title="Donskoy cat" label="Donskoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924228" start="2126" end="2143" title="Wadena, Minnesota" label="Wadena, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="2198" end="2205" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="2207" end="2214" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q126478118" start="2406" end="2424" title="Domestic short-haired cat" label="domestic shorthair"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="2614" end="2635" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q42604" start="2688" end="2695" title="Siamese cat" label="Siamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050099" start="3206" end="3236" title="Cat Fanciers&amp;#x27; Association" label="Cat Fanciers&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="3424" end="3432" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q189800" start="3469" end="3481" title="gene pool" label="genetic pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q852376" start="3582" end="3592" title="convulsion" label="convulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q42570" start="3828" end="3837" title="Devon Rex" label="Devon Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="4403" end="4409" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q897435" start="4568" end="4587" title="Brainerd, Minnesota" label="Brainerd, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q42559" start="4609" end="4620" title="Cornish Rex" label="Cornish Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303" start="4816" end="4826" title="Don Sphynx" label="Don Sphynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q42663" start="4835" end="4844" title="Peterbald" label="Peterbald"/>
<link wikidata="Q42709" start="4982" end="5015" title="The International Cat Association" label="The International Cat Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q42584" start="5024" end="5056" title="Fédération Internationale Féline" label="Fédération Internationale Féline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050099" start="5068" end="5098" title="Cat Fanciers&amp;#x27; Association" label="Cat Fanciers&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q80726" start="5209" end="5215" title="allele" label="allele"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="5228" end="5232" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q42570" start="5275" end="5284" title="Devon Rex" label="Devon Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="5357" end="5378" title="incompletely dominant" label="incompletely dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q128723" start="5433" end="5442" title="wild type" label="wild type"/>
<link wikidata="Q42654" start="5481" end="5493" title="Russian Blue" label="Russian Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q42543" start="5525" end="5559" title="Governing Council of the Cat Fancy" label="Governing Council of the Cat Fancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q80726" start="6642" end="6648" title="allele" label="allele"/>
<link wikidata="Q21002392" start="7029" end="7044" title="Puppy cat" label="dog-like breeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q540834" start="8094" end="8108" title="hypoallergenic" label="hypoallergenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092156" start="8162" end="8168" title="Fel d1" label="Fel d1"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="8203" end="8210" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q155925" start="8234" end="8240" title="saliva" label="saliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q212328" start="8245" end="8261" title="sebaceous glands" label="sebaceous glands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923669" start="9746" end="9764" title="Bladder stone (animal)" label="urate urolithiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364270" start="9941" end="9968" title="hypertrophic cardiomyopathy" label="hypertrophic cardiomyopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42610" start="10023" end="10030" title="Persian cat" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42688" start="10032" end="10039" title="Ragdoll" label="Ragdoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q42667" start="10041" end="10061" title="Norwegian Forest cat" label="Norwegian Forest cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q42630" start="10063" end="10075" title="Siberian cat" label="Siberian cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q29273" start="10078" end="10095" title="British Shorthair" label="British Shorthair"/>
<link wikidata="Q42659" start="10100" end="10110" title="Maine Coon" label="Maine Coon"/>
<link wikidata="Q216933" start="10300" end="10316" title="echocardiography" label="echocardiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q79785" start="10431" end="10448" title="Electrocardiography" label="electrocardiogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283318" start="10461" end="10477" title="chest radiograph" label="chest radiograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5692507" start="10576" end="10598" title="mitral valve dysplasia" label="mitral valve dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="11161" end="11185" title="Heart failure" label="congestive heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751330" start="11195" end="11210" title="Venous thrombosis" label="thromboembolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508800" start="11252" end="11282" title="Congenital myasthenic syndrome" label="Congenital myasthenic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319588" start="11427" end="11439" title="dystroglycan" label="dystroglycan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303" start="11819" end="11830" title="Donskoy cat" label="Donskoy cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q542635" start="11833" end="11864" title="List of cat body-type mutations" label="List of cat body-type mutations"/>
<link wikidata="Q42707" start="11867" end="11885" title="List of cat breeds" label="List of cat breeds"/>
</links>
</doc>
