<doc id="63876" wikidata="Q131110" url="?curid=63876" title="History of the United States">
<text>The history of the lands that became the United States began with the arrival of the first people in the Americas around 15,000 BC. After European colonization of North America began in the late 15th century, wars and epidemics decimated Indigenous societies. By the 1760s, the thirteen British colonies were established. The Southern Colonies built an agricultural system on slave labor, enslaving millions from Africa. After defeating France, the British Parliament imposed a series of taxes; resistance to these taxes, especially the Boston Tea Party in 1773, led to Parliament issuing the Intolerable Acts designed to end self-government.

In 1776, the United States declared its independence. Led by General George Washington, it won the Revolutionary War in 1783. The Constitution was adopted in 1789, and a Bill of Rights was added in 1791 to guarantee inalienable rights. Washington, the first president, and his adviser Alexander Hamilton created a strong central government. The Louisiana Purchase in 1803 doubled the size of the country. Encouraged by available, inexpensive land and the notion of manifest destiny, the country expanded to the Pacific Coast. The resulting expansion of slavery was increasingly controversial. After the election of Abraham Lincoln as president in 1860, the southern states seceded to form the pro-slavery Confederate States of America, and started the Civil War. The Confederates&#x27; defeat in 1865 led to the abolition of slavery. In the subsequent Reconstruction era, the national government gained explicit duty to protect individual rights. White southern Democrats regained their political power in the South in 1877, often using paramilitary suppression of voting and Jim Crow laws to maintain white supremacy.

The United States became the world&#x27;s leading industrial power in the 20th century, largely due to entrepreneurship, industrialization, and the arrival of millions of immigrant workers. A national railroad network was completed, and large-scale mines and factories were established. Dissatisfaction with corruption, inefficiency, and traditional politics stimulated the Progressive movement, leading to reforms including the federal income tax, direct election of Senators, citizenship for many Indigenous people, alcohol prohibition, and women&#x27;s suffrage. Initially neutral during World War I, the United States declared war on Germany in 1917, joining the successful Allies. After the prosperous Roaring Twenties, the Wall Street crash of 1929 marked the onset of the decade-long worldwide Great Depression. President Franklin D. Roosevelt&#x27;s New Deal programs, including unemployment relief and social security, defined modern American liberalism. Following the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, the United States entered World War II, helping defeat Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy in the European theater. In the Pacific War, America defeated Imperial Japan after using nuclear weapons on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.

The United States and the Soviet Union emerged as rival superpowers during the Cold War; the two countries confronted each other indirectly in the arms race, the Space Race, propaganda campaigns, and proxy wars. In the 1960s, in large part due to the civil rights movement, social reforms enforced the constitutional rights of voting and freedom of movement to African Americans. In the 1980s, Ronald Reagan&#x27;s presidency realigned American politics towards reductions in taxes and regulations. The Cold War ended when the Soviet Union was dissolved in 1991, leaving the United States as the world&#x27;s sole superpower. Foreign policy after the Cold War has often focused on conflicts in the Middle East, especially after the September 11 attacks. In the 21st century, the country was negatively affected by the Great Recession and the COVID-19 pandemic. In the 2020s, America withdrew from the war in Afghanistan, intervened in the Russian invasion of Ukraine, and got involved in the Middle Eastern crisis.

==Indigenous inhabitants==


It is not definitively known how or when Native Americans first settled the Americas. The prevailing theory proposes that people from Eurasia followed game across Beringia, a land bridge that connected Siberia to present-day Alaska during the Ice Age, and then spread southward, perhaps as early as 30,000 years ago. These early inhabitants, called Paleo-Indians, soon diversified into hundreds of culturally distinct groups.

===Paleo-Indians===

By 10,000 BCE, humans were well-established throughout North America. Originally, Paleo-Indians hunted Ice Age megafauna like mammoths, but as they began to go extinct, people turned instead to bison as a food source, and later foraging for berries and seeds. Paleo-Indians in central Mexico were the first in the Americas to farm, around 8,000 BCE. Eventually, the knowledge began to spread northward. By 3,000 BCE, corn was being grown in the valleys of Arizona and New Mexico, followed by primitive irrigation systems and, by 300 BCE, early villages of the Hohokam.

One of the earlier cultures in the present-day United States was the Clovis culture (9,100 to 8,850 BCE), who are primarily identified by the use of fluted spear points called the Clovis point. The Folsom culture was similar, but is marked by the use of the Folsom point.

A later migration around 8,000 BCE included Na-Dene-speaking peoples, who reached the Pacific Northwest by 5,000 BCE. From there, they migrated along the Pacific Coast and into the interior. Another group, the Oshara tradition people, who lived from 5,500 BCE to 600 CE, were part of the Archaic Southwest.

===Mound builders and pueblos===

The Adena began constructing large earthwork mounds around 600 BCE. They are the earliest known people to have been Mound Builders, although there are mounds in the United States that predate this culture. The Adenans were absorbed into the Hopewell tradition, a powerful people who traded tools and goods across a wide territory. They continued the Adena tradition of mound-building and pioneered a trading system called the Hopewell Exchange System, which at its greatest extent ran from the present-day Southeast up to the Canadian side of Lake Ontario. By 500 CE, the Hopewellians had been absorbed into the larger Mississippian culture.

The Mississippians were a broad group of tribes. Their most important city was Cahokia, near modern-day St. Louis, Missouri. At its peak in the 12th century, the city had an estimated population of 20,000, larger than the population of London at the time. The entire city was centered around a mound that stood tall. Cahokia, like many other cities and villages of the time, depended on hunting, foraging, trading, and agriculture, and developed a class system with slaves and human sacrifice that was influenced by societies to the south, like the Mayans.

In the Southwest, the Anasazi began constructing stone and adobe pueblos around 900 BCE. These apartment-like structures were often built into cliff faces, as seen in the Cliff Palace at Mesa Verde. Some grew to be the size of cities, with Pueblo Bonito along the Chaco River in New Mexico once consisting of 800 rooms.

===Northwest and northeast===

The Indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest were likely the most affluent Native Americans. Many distinct cultural groups and political entities developed there, but they all shared certain beliefs, traditions, and practices, such as the centrality of salmon as a resource and spiritual symbol. Permanent villages began to develop in this region as early as 1,000 BCE, and these communities celebrated by the gift-giving feast of the potlatch.

In present-day upstate New York, the Iroquois formed a confederacy of tribal peoples in the mid-15th century, consisting of the Oneida, Mohawk, Onondaga, Cayuga, and Seneca. Each tribe had seats in a group of 50 sachem chiefs. It has been suggested that their culture contributed to political thinking during the development of the United States government. The Iroquois were powerful, waging war with many neighboring tribes, and later, Europeans. As their territory expanded, smaller tribes were forced further west, including the Osage, Kaw, Ponca, and Omaha peoples.

===Native Hawaiians===
The exact date for the settling of Hawaii is disputed but the first settlement most likely took place between 940 and 1130 CE. Around 1200 CE, Tahitian explorers found and began settling the area. This marked the rise of the Hawaiian civilization, which would be largely separated from the rest of the world until the arrival of the British 600 years later. Europeans under the British explorer James Cook arrived in the Hawaiian Islands in 1778, and within five years of contact, European military technology would help Kamehameha I conquer most of the island group, and eventually unify the islands for the first time, establishing the Hawaiian Kingdom.

===Puerto Rico===
The island of Puerto Rico has been settled for at least 4,000 years. Starting with the Ortoiroid culture, successive generations of native migrations arrived replacing or absorbing local populations. By the year 1000 Arawak people had arrived from South America via the Lesser Antilles; these settlers would become the Taíno encountered by the Spanish in 1493. Upon European contact a native population between 30,000 and 60,000 was likely, led by a single chief called a Cacique. Colonization resulted in the decimation of the local inhabitants due to the harsh Encomienda system and epidemics caused by Old World diseases. Puerto Rico would remain a part of Spain until American annexation in 1898.

==European colonization (1075–1754)==
===Norse exploration===
The earliest recorded European mention of America is in a treatise by the medieval chronicler Adam of Bremen, circa 1075, where it is referred to as Vinland. It is also extensively referred to in the Norse Vinland sagas. The strongest archaeological evidence of the existence of Norse settlements in America is located in Canada; there is significant scholarly debate as to whether Norse explorers also made landfall in New England.

===Early settlements===

Europeans brought horses, cattle, and hogs to the Americas and took back maize, turkeys, tomatoes, potatoes, tobacco, beans, and squash to Europe. Many explorers and early settlers died after being exposed to new diseases in the Americas. However, the effects of new Eurasian diseases carried by the colonists, especially smallpox and measles, were much worse for the Native Americans, as they had no immunity to them. They suffered epidemics and died in very large numbers, usually before large-scale European settlement began. Their societies were disrupted by the scale of deaths.

====Spanish contact====
Spanish explorers were the first Europeans, after the Norse, to reach the present-day United States, after the voyages of Christopher Columbus (beginning in 1492) established possessions in the Caribbean, including the modern-day U.S. territories of Puerto Rico, and parts of the U.S. Virgin Islands. Juan Ponce de León landed in Florida in 1513. Spanish expeditions quickly reached the Appalachian Mountains, the Mississippi River, the Grand Canyon, and the Great Plains.

In 1539, Hernando de Soto extensively explored the Southeast, and a year later Francisco Coronado explored from Arizona to central Kansas in search of gold. Escaped horses from Coronado&#x27;s party spread over the Great Plains, and the Plains Indians mastered horsemanship within a few generations. Small Spanish settlements eventually grew to become important cities, such as San Antonio, Albuquerque, Tucson, Los Angeles, and San Francisco.

====Dutch mid-Atlantic====
The Dutch East India Company sent explorer Henry Hudson to search for a Northwest Passage to Asia in 1609. New Netherland was established in 1621 by the company to capitalize on the North American fur trade. Growth was slow at first due to mismanagement by the Dutch and Native American conflicts. After the Dutch purchased the island of Manhattan from the Native Americans, the land was named New Amsterdam and became the capital of New Netherland. The town rapidly expanded and in the mid-1600s it became an important trading center. Despite being Calvinists and building the Reformed Church in America, the Dutch were tolerant of other religions and cultures and traded with the Iroquois to the north.

The colony served as a barrier to British expansion from New England, and as a result a series of wars were fought. The colony was taken over by Britain as New York in 1664 and its capital was renamed New York City.

====Swedish settlement====

In the early years of the Swedish Empire, Swedish, Dutch, and German stockholders formed the New Sweden Company to trade furs and tobacco in North America. The company&#x27;s first expedition was led by Peter Minuit, who had been governor of New Netherland from 1626 to 1631, and landed in Delaware Bay in March 1638. The settlers founded Fort Christina at the site of modern-day Wilmington, Delaware, and made treaties with Indigenous peoples for land ownership on both sides of the Delaware River.

Over the following seventeen years, 12 more expeditions brought settlers from the Swedish Empire to New Sweden. The colony established 19 permanent settlements along with many farms, extending into modern-day Maryland, Pennsylvania, and New Jersey. It was incorporated into New Netherland in 1655 after a Dutch invasion from the neighboring New Netherland colony during the Second Northern War.

====French and Spanish ====
Giovanni da Verrazzano landed in North Carolina in 1524, and was the first European to sail into New York Harbor and Narragansett Bay. In the 1540s, French Huguenots settled at Fort Caroline near present-day Jacksonville, Florida. In 1565, Spanish forces led by Pedro Menéndez destroyed the settlement and established the first Spanish settlement in what would become the United States — St. Augustine.

Most French lived in Quebec and Acadia (modern Canada), but far-reaching trade relationships with Native Americans spread their influence. French colonists in small villages along the Mississippi and Illinois rivers lived in farming communities that served as a grain source for Gulf Coast settlements. The French established plantations in Louisiana along with settling New Orleans, Mobile and Biloxi.

===British colonies===

The English, drawn in by Francis Drake&#x27;s raids on Spanish treasure ships leaving the New World, settled the strip of land along the east coast in the 1600s. The early British colonies were established by private groups seeking profit, and were marked by starvation, disease, and Native American attacks. Many immigrants were people seeking religious freedom or escaping political oppression, peasants displaced by the Industrial Revolution, or those simply seeking adventure and opportunity. Between the late 1610s and the Revolution, the British shipped an estimated 50,000 to 120,000 convicts to their American colonies.

In some areas, Native Americans taught colonists how to grow local crops. In others, they attacked the settlers. Virgin forests provided an ample supply of building material and firewood. Natural inlets and harbors lined the coast, providing easy ports for essential trade with Europe. Settlements remained close to the coast due to this as well as Native American resistance and the Appalachian Mountains in the interior.

====First settlement in Jamestown====

The first successful English colony, Jamestown, was established by the Virginia Company in 1607 on the James River in Virginia. The colonists were preoccupied with the search for gold and were ill-equipped for life in the New World. Captain John Smith held the fledgling Jamestown together in the first year, and the colony descended into anarchy and nearly failed when he returned to England two years later. John Rolfe began experimenting with tobacco from the West Indies in 1612, and by 1614 the first shipment arrived in London. It became Virginia&#x27;s chief source of revenue within a decade.

In 1624, after years of disease and Indian attacks, including the Powhatan attack of 1622, King James I revoked the Virginia Company&#x27;s charter and made Virginia a royal colony.

====New England Colonies====
New England was initially settled primarily by Puritans fleeing religious persecution. The Pilgrims sailed for Virginia on the Mayflower in 1620, but were knocked off course by a storm and landed at Plymouth, where they agreed to a social contract of rules in the Mayflower Compact. About half died in the first winter. Like Jamestown, Plymouth suffered from disease and starvation, but local Wampanoag Indians taught the colonists how to farm maize.

Plymouth was followed by the Puritans and Massachusetts Bay Colony in 1630. They maintained a charter for self-government separate from England, and elected founder John Winthrop as governor. Roger Williams opposed Winthrop&#x27;s treatment of Native Americans and religious intolerance, and established the colony of Providence Plantations, later Rhode Island, on the basis of freedom of religion. Other colonists established settlements in the Connecticut River Valley, and on the coasts of present-day New Hampshire and Maine. Native American attacks continued, with the most significant occurring in the 1637 Pequot War and the 1675 King Philip&#x27;s War.

New England became a center of commerce and industry due to the poor, mountainous soil making agriculture difficult. Rivers were harnessed to power grain mills and sawmills, and the numerous harbors facilitated trade. Tight-knit villages developed around these industrial centers, and Boston became one of America&#x27;s most important ports.

====Middle Colonies====

In the 1660s, the Middle Colonies of New York, New Jersey, and Delaware were established in the former Dutch New Netherland, and were characterized by a large degree of ethnic and religious diversity. At the same time, the Iroquois of New York, strengthened by years of fur trading with Europeans, formed the powerful Iroquois Confederacy.

The last colony in this region was Pennsylvania, established in 1681 by William Penn as a home for religious dissenters, including Quakers, Methodists, and the Amish. The capital of the colony, Philadelphia, became a dominant commercial center in a few short years. While Quakers populated the city, German immigrants began to flood into the Pennsylvanian hills and forests, while the Scots-Irish pushed into the far western frontier.

====Southern Colonies====

The overwhelmingly rural Southern Colonies contrasted sharply with the New England and Middle Colonies. After Virginia, the second British colony south of New England was Maryland, established as a Catholic haven in 1632. The economy of these two colonies was built entirely on yeoman farmers and planters. The planters established themselves in the Tidewater region of Virginia, establishing massive plantations with slave labor.

In 1670, the Province of Carolina was established, and Charleston became the region&#x27;s great trading port. While Virginia&#x27;s economy was also based on tobacco, Carolina was more diversified, exporting rice, indigo, and lumber as well. In 1712, it was divided in two, creating North and South Carolina. The Georgia Colony was established by James Oglethorpe in 1732 as a border to Spanish Florida and a reform colony for former prisoners and the poor.

====Religion====
Religiosity expanded greatly after the First Great Awakening, a religious revival in the 1740s led by preachers such as Jonathan Edwards and George Whitefield. American Evangelicals affected by the Awakening added a new emphasis on divine outpourings of the Holy Spirit and conversions that implanted new believers with an intense love for God. Revivals encapsulated those hallmarks and carried the newly created evangelicalism into the early republic, setting the stage for the Second Great Awakening in the late 1790s. In the early stages, evangelicals in the South, such as Methodists and Baptists, preached for religious freedom and abolition of slavery.

====Government====
Each of the American colonies had a slightly different governmental structure. Typically, a colony was ruled by a governor appointed from London who controlled the executive administration and relied upon a locally elected legislature to vote on taxes and make laws. By the 18th century, the American colonies were growing very rapidly as a result of low death rates along with ample supplies of land and food. The colonies were richer than most parts of Britain, and attracted a steady flow of immigrants, especially teenagers who arrived as indentured servants.

====Servitude and slavery====
Over half of all European immigrants to Colonial America arrived as indentured servants. Typically, people would sign a contract agreeing to a set term of labor, usually four to seven years, and in return would receive transport to America and a piece of land at the end of their servitude. In some cases, ships&#x27; captains received rewards for the delivery of poor migrants, and so extravagant promises and kidnapping were common.

The first African slaves arrived in 1619. Initially regarded as indentured servants who could buy their freedom, the institution of slavery began to harden and the involuntary servitude became lifelong as the demand for labor on tobacco and rice plantations grew in the 1660s. Slavery became identified with brown skin color, and the children of slave women were born slaves (&quot;partus sequitur ventrem&quot;). By the 1770s African slaves comprised a fifth of the American population.

The question of independence from Britain did not arise as long as the colonies needed British military support against the French and Spanish powers. Those threats were gone by 1765. However, London continued to regard the American colonies as existing for the benefit of the mother country in a policy known as mercantilism.

Colonial America was defined by a severe labor shortage that used forms of unfree labor, such as slavery and indentured servitude. The British colonies were also marked by a policy of avoiding strict enforcement of parliamentary laws, known as salutary neglect. This permitted the development of an American spirit distinct from that of its European founders.
==Revolutionary period (1754–1793)==
=== Lead-up to the Revolution ===
The French and Indian War (1754–1763), part of the larger Seven Years&#x27; War, was a watershed event in the political development of the colonies. The influence of the French and Native Americans, the main rivals of the British Crown in the colonies and Canada, was significantly reduced and the territory of the Thirteen Colonies expanded into New France in Canada and Louisiana. The war effort also resulted in greater political integration of the colonies, as reflected in the Albany Congress and symbolized by Benjamin Franklin&#x27;s call for the colonies to &quot;Join, or Die.&quot;
King George III issued the Royal Proclamation of 1763, to organize the new North American empire and protect the Native Americans from colonial expansion west of the Appalachian Mountains. Strains developed in the relations between the colonists and the Crown. The British Parliament passed the Stamp Act of 1765, imposing a tax on the colonies without going through the colonial legislatures. Crying &quot;No taxation without representation&quot;, the colonists refused to pay. The Boston Tea Party in 1773 was a direct action to protest the new tax on tea. Parliament responded the next year with the Intolerable Acts, stripping Massachusetts of its historic right of self-government and putting it under military rule, which sparked outrage and resistance in all thirteen colonies. Patriot leaders from every colony convened the First Continental Congress to coordinate their resistance. The Congress called for a boycott of British trade, published a list of rights and grievances, and petitioned the king to rectify those grievances. This appeal had no effect.

=== American Revolution ===

The Second Continental Congress voted to declare independence on July 2, 1776. The Declaration of Independence presented arguments in favor of the rights of citizens, stating that all men are created equal, supporting the rights of Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness, and demanding the consent of the governed. The Founding Fathers were guided by the ideology of republicanism, rejecting the monarchism of Great Britain. The Declaration of Independence was signed by members of the Congress on July 4. This date has since been commemorated as Independence Day.

The American Revolutionary War began with the Battles of Lexington and Concord on April 19, 1775. George Washington was appointed general of the Continental Army. Washington&#x27;s crossing of the Delaware River began a series of victories that expelled British forces from New Jersey. The British began the Saratoga campaign in 1777 to capture Albany, New York, as a choke point. After American victory at Saratoga, France, the Netherlands, and Spain began providing support to the Continental Army. Britain responded to defeat in the northern theater by advancing in the southern theater, beginning with the Capture of Savannah in 1778. American forces reclaimed the south in 1781, and the British Army was defeated in the Siege of Yorktown on October 19, 1781.

King George III formally ordered the end of hostilities on December 5, 1782, recognizing American independence. The Treaty of Paris was signed on September 3, 1783, and was ratified by the Congress of the Confederation on January 14, 1784.

===Confederation period===
The Articles of Confederation were ratified as the governing law of the United States, written to limit the powers of the central government in favor of states. This caused economic decline, as the government was unable to pass economic legislation and pay its debts. Nationalists worried that the confederate nature of the union was too fragile to withstand an armed conflict with any adversarial states, or even internal revolts such as Shays&#x27; Rebellion of 1786 in Massachusetts.

In the 1780s the western regions were ceded by the states to Congress and became territories. With the migration of settlers to the Northwest, soon they became states. The American Indian Wars continued in the 1780s as settlers moved west. The Northwestern Confederacy and American settlers began fighting the Northwest Indian War in the late 1780s; the Northwestern Confederacy received British support, but the settlers received little assistance from the American government.

Nationalists – most of them war veterans – organized in every state and convinced Congress to call the Philadelphia Convention in 1787. The delegates from every state wrote a new Constitution that created a federal government with a strong president and powers of taxation. The new government reflected the prevailing republican ideals of guarantees of individual liberty and of constraining the power of government through separation of powers. The constitution was ratified by a sufficient number of states in 1788 to begin forming a federal government.

== Early republic (1793–1830) ==

The United States Electoral College chose George Washington as the first President in 1789. The national capital moved from New York to Philadelphia in 1790 and finally to Washington, D.C., in 1800.

The major accomplishment of the Washington Administration was creating a strong national government that was recognized by all Americans. His government, following the vigorous leadership of Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton, assumed the debts of the states, created the Bank of the United States, and set up a uniform system of tariffs and other taxes to pay off the debt and provide a financial infrastructure. To support his programs Hamilton created the Federalist Party. To assuage the Anti-Federalists who feared a too-powerful central government, the Congress adopted the United States Bill of Rights in 1791, which guaranteed individual liberties such as freedom of speech and religious practice.

Thomas Jefferson and James Madison formed an opposition Republican Party (usually called the Democratic-Republican Party). Hamilton and Washington presented the country in 1794 with the Jay Treaty that reestablished good relations with Britain. The Jeffersonians vehemently protested, and the voters aligned behind one party or the other, thus setting up the First Party System. The treaty passed, but politics became intensely heated. Serious challenges to the new federal government included the Northwest Indian War, the ongoing Cherokee–American wars, and the 1794 Whiskey Rebellion, in which western settlers protested against a federal tax on liquor.
Washington refused to serve more than two terms – setting a precedent. John Adams, a Federalist, defeated Jefferson in the 1796 election. War loomed with France and the Federalists used the opportunity to try to silence the Republicans with the Alien and Sedition Acts, build up a large army with Hamilton at the head, and prepare for a French invasion. However, the Federalists became divided after Adams sent a successful peace mission to France that ended the Quasi-War of 1798.

===Increasing demand for slave labor===

During the first two decades after the Revolutionary War, there were dramatic changes in the status of slavery among the states and an increase in the number of freed blacks. Inspired by revolutionary ideals of equality and influenced by their lesser economic reliance on slavery, northern states abolished slavery.

States of the Upper South made manumission easier, resulting in an increase in the proportion of free blacks in the Upper South (as a percentage of the total non-white population) from less than one percent in 1792 to more than 10 percent by 1810. By that date, a total of 13.5 percent of all blacks in the United States were free. In 1807, with four million slaves already in the United States, Congress severed U.S. involvement with the Atlantic slave trade.

===Second Great Awakening===

The Second Great Awakening was a Protestant revival movement that affected virtually all of society during the early 19th century and led to rapid church growth. The movement began around 1790, gained momentum by 1800, and, after 1820 membership rose rapidly among Baptist and Methodist congregations, whose preachers led the movement. It was past its peak by the 1840s.

It enrolled millions of new members in existing evangelical denominations and led to the formation of new denominations. The Second Great Awakening stimulated the establishment of many reform movements, including abolitionism and temperance.

===Louisiana and Jeffersonian republicanism===

Jefferson defeated Adams massively for the presidency in the 1800 election. Jefferson&#x27;s major achievement as president was the Louisiana Purchase in 1803, which provided U.S. settlers with vast potential for expansion west of the Mississippi River.
Jefferson supported expeditions to explore and map the new domain, most notably the Lewis and Clark Expedition. Jefferson believed deeply in republicanism and argued it should be based on the independent yeoman farmer and planter; he distrusted cities, factories and banks. He also distrusted the federal government and judges, and tried to weaken the judiciary. Although the Constitution specified a Supreme Court, its functions were vague until John Marshall, the Chief Justice of the United States (1801–1835), defined them, especially the power to overturn acts of Congress or states that violated the Constitution, first enunciated in 1803 in &quot;Marbury v. Madison&quot;.

===War of 1812===

Americans were increasingly angered by the British violation of American ships&#x27; neutral rights to harm France, the coercion of 10,000 American sailors needed by the Royal Navy to fight Napoleon, and British support for hostile Indians attacking American settlers in the American Midwest with the goal of creating a pro-British Indian barrier state to block American expansion westward. They may also have wished to annex all or part of British North America, although this is still heavily debated. Despite strong opposition from the Northeast, especially from Federalists who did not want to disrupt trade with Britain, Congress declared war on the United Kingdom on June 18, 1812.
Both sides tried to invade the other and were repulsed. The American militia proved ineffective because the soldiers were reluctant to leave home, and efforts to invade Canada repeatedly failed. The British blockade ruined American commerce, bankrupted the Treasury, and further angered New Englanders, who smuggled supplies to Britain. The Americans under General William Henry Harrison finally gained naval control of Lake Erie and defeated the Indians under Tecumseh in Canada, while Andrew Jackson ended the Indian threat in the Southeast. The Indian threat to expansion into the Midwest was permanently ended. The British invaded and occupied much of Maine.

In 1814, the British raided and burned Washington but were repelled at Baltimore, where &quot;The Star-Spangled Banner&quot; was written to celebrate the American success. In upstate New York, a major British invasion of New York State was turned back at the Battle of Plattsburgh. In early 1815, Andrew Jackson decisively defeated a major British invasion at the Battle of New Orleans, and the Americans finally claimed victory on February 18, as news came almost simultaneously of Jackson&#x27;s victory of New Orleans and the peace treaty that left the prewar boundaries in place. This &quot;second war of independence&quot; helped lead to an emerging American identity that cemented national pride over state pride. The War of 1812 also dispelled America&#x27;s negative perception of a standing army as opposed to ill-equipped and poorly-trained militias.

===Era of Good Feelings===

National euphoria after the victory at New Orleans ruined the prestige of the Federalists and they no longer played a significant role as a political party. President Madison and most Republicans realized they were foolish to let the First Bank of the United States close down, for its absence greatly hindered the financing of the war. With the assistance of foreign bankers, they chartered the Second Bank of the United States in 1816.

The Republicans also imposed tariffs designed to protect the infant industries that had been created when Britain was blockading the U.S. With the collapse of the Federalists as a party, the adoption of many Federalist principles by the Republicans, and the systematic policy of President James Monroe in his two terms (1817–1825) to downplay partisanship, society entered an Era of Good Feelings and closed out the First Party System.

The Monroe Doctrine, expressed in 1823, proclaimed the United States&#x27; opinion that European powers should no longer colonize or interfere in the Americas. This was a defining moment in U.S. foreign policy.

In 1832, President Andrew Jackson ran for a second term under the slogan &quot;Jackson and no bank&quot; and did not renew the charter of the Second Bank, dissolving the bank in 1836. Jackson was convinced that central banking was used by the elite to take advantage of the average American, and instead implemented publicly owned banks in various states, popularly known as &quot;pet banks&quot;.

==Expansion and reform (1830–1848)==
===Second Party System===
The former Jeffersonian (Democratic-Republican) party split into factions over the choice of a successor to President James Monroe, and the party faction that supported many of the old Jeffersonian principles, led by Andrew Jackson and Martin Van Buren, became the Democratic Party. As Norton explains the transformation in 1828:
Opposing factions led by Henry Clay helped form the Whig Party. The Democratic Party had a small but decisive advantage over the Whigs until the 1850s, when the Whigs fell apart over the issue of slavery.

===Westward expansion and manifest destiny===
The country grew rapidly in population and area, as pioneers pushed the frontier of settlement west. Native American tribes in some places resisted militarily, but they were overwhelmed by settlers and the army, and after 1830, were relocated to reservations in the west. That year, Congress passed the Indian Removal Act, which authorized the president to negotiate treaties that exchanged Native American tribal lands in the eastern states for lands west of the Mississippi River. Its goal was primarily to remove Native Americans, including the Five Civilized Tribes, from desirable lands in the American Southeast. Thousands of deaths resulted from the relocations, as seen in the Cherokee Trail of Tears, which resulted in approximately 2,000 to 8,000 of the 16,543 relocated Cherokee dying along the way. Many of the Seminole Indians in Florida refused to move west, and fought the Army for years in the Seminole Wars.
The first settlers in the west were the Spanish in New Mexico (&quot;Californios&quot;), followed by over 100,000 California Gold Rush miners (&#x27;49ers). California grew rapidly, and by 1880, San Francisco had become the economic hub of the Pacific Coast, with a diverse population of a quarter million. From the early 1830s to 1869, the Oregon Trail and its offshoots were used by over 300,000 settlers headed to California, Oregon, and other points in the far west. Wagon trains took five or six months on foot.

Manifest destiny was the belief that American settlers were destined to expand across the continent. Manifest destiny was rejected by modernizers, especially the Whigs like Henry Clay and Abraham Lincoln who wanted to build cities and factories – not more farms. Democrats strongly favored expansion, and won the key election of 1844. After a bitter debate in Congress, the Republic of Texas was annexed in 1845, leading to the Mexican–American War. The U.S. Army invaded Mexico at several points, captured Mexico City, and won the war decisively. The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo ended the war in 1848. Many Democrats wanted to annex all of Mexico, but that idea was rejected by White Southerners, who argued that incorporating millions of Mexican people, mainly of mixed race, would undermine the U.S. as an exclusively white republic. Instead, the U.S. took Texas and the lightly settled northern parts (California and New Mexico). Simultaneously, gold was discovered in California in 1848. To clear the state for settlers, the U.S. government began a policy of extermination since termed the California genocide. A peaceful compromise with Britain gave the U.S. ownership of the Oregon Country, which was renamed the Oregon Territory.
The demand for guano (prized as an agricultural fertilizer) led the U.S. to pass the Guano Islands Act in 1856, which enabled U.S. citizens to take possession, in the name of the country, of unclaimed islands containing guano deposits. Under the act, the U.S. annexed nearly 100 islands in the Pacific Ocean and the Caribbean Sea. By 1903, 66 of these islands were recognized as U.S. territories.

The women&#x27;s suffrage movement began with the 1848 National Convention of the Liberty Party. Presidential candidate Gerrit Smith established women&#x27;s suffrage as a party goal. One month later, the Seneca Falls Convention was organized, signing the Declaration of Sentiments demanding equal rights for women, including the right to vote. The women&#x27;s rights campaign during first-wave feminism was led by Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Lucy Stone and Susan B. Anthony, among others. Stone and Paulina Wright Davis organized the prominent and influential National Women&#x27;s Rights Convention in 1850.

==Civil War and Reconstruction (1848–1877)==

=== Divisions between North and South ===

The central issue after 1848 was the expansion of slavery, with the anti-slavery elements in the North pitted against the pro-slavery elements in the South. By 1860, there were four million slaves in the South. A small number of Northerners sought the immediate abolition of slavery, while much larger numbers in the North were opposed to the expansion of slavery and sought to put it on the path to extinction. There were violent reactions to abolitionist advocates in the North, notably the burning of an anti-slavery society in Pennsylvania Hall.

There was resistance to slavery by both peaceful and violent means. Slave rebellions by Gabriel Prosser (1800), Denmark Vesey (1822), Nat Turner (1831), and John Brown (1859) caused fear in the white South, where stricter oversight of slaves was imposed, and the rights of free Black people were reduced. Southern white Democrats insisted that slavery was of economic, social, and cultural benefit, even to the slaves themselves. Supporters of slavery argued that a sudden end to the slave economy would have a fatal economic impact in the South, causing widespread unemployment and chaos; slave labor was the foundation of their economy. The plantations were highly profitable because of the heavy European demand for raw cotton. Northern cities and regional industries were tied economically to slavery through banking, shipping, and manufacturing, including their textile mills. In addition, Southern states benefited from slavery by having an increased apportionment in Congress due to the partial counting of slaves in their populations.
The issue of slavery in the new territories was seemingly settled by the Compromise of 1850, which included the admission of California as a free state in exchange for no federal restrictions on slavery placed on Utah or New Mexico. A point of contention was the Fugitive Slave Act, requiring the states to cooperate with slave owners when attempting to recover escaped slaves. Previously, an escaped slave that reached a non-slave state was presumed to have attained freedom under the Compromise of 1820.

The Missouri Compromise was repealed in 1854 with the Kansas–Nebraska Act; promoted by Stephen Douglas in the name of &quot;popular sovereignty&quot; and democracy, this act of Congress permitted voters to decide on the legality of slavery in each territory. Anti-slavery forces rose in anger and alarm, forming the new Republican Party. Pro- and anti- contingents rushed to Kansas to vote for or against slavery, resulting in a miniature civil war called Bleeding Kansas. By the late 1850s, the young Republican Party dominated nearly all Northern states, and hence the electoral colleges. The party insisted that slavery would never be allowed to expand and would therefore slowly die out.

The Supreme Court&#x27;s 1857 decision in &quot;Dred Scott v. Sandford&quot; ruled that the Compromise was unconstitutional, and that free Black people were not U.S. citizens. The decision enraged Northerners, and the Republicans worried that the decision could be used to expand slavery.

=== Civil War ===

After Abraham Lincoln won the 1860 election, seven Southern states seceded from the Union and formed the Confederate States of America (Confederacy) on February 8, 1861. The Civil War began on April 12, 1861, when Confederate forces attacked a U.S. military installation at Fort Sumter in South Carolina. In response, Lincoln called on the states to send troops to recapture forts, protect Washington D.C., and &quot;preserve the Union&quot;. Lincoln&#x27;s call led to four more states seceding and joining the Confederacy. A few of the (northernmost) slave states did not secede and became known as the border states; these were Delaware, Maryland, Kentucky, and Missouri. During the war, the northwestern portion of Virginia seceded from the Confederacy, becoming the new Union state of West Virginia.

The two armies&#x27; first major battle was the First Battle of Bull Run, which proved to both sides that the war would be much longer than anticipated. In the western theater, the Union Army was relatively successful, with major battles such as Perryville and Shiloh, along with Union Navy gunboat dominance of navigable rivers producing strategic Union victories and destroying major Confederate operations. Warfare in the eastern theater began poorly for the Union. U.S. General George B. McClellan failed to capture the Confederate capital of Richmond, Virginia, in his Peninsula campaign and retreated after attacks from Confederate General Robert E. Lee. Meanwhile, in 1861 and 1862, both sides concentrated on raising and training new armies. The Union successfully gained control of the border states, driving the Confederates out. Lee&#x27;s Army of Northern Virginia won battles in late 1862 and spring 1863, but he pushed too hard and ignored the Union threat in the west. He invaded Pennsylvania in search of supplies and to cause war-weariness in the North.
The Emancipation Proclamation, issued by Lincoln on January 1, 1863, freed 3 million slaves in designated areas of the Confederacy. In perhaps the turning point of the war, Lee&#x27;s army was badly beaten by the Army of the Potomac at the July 1863 Battle of Gettysburg, and barely made it back to Virginia. Survivors of the battle were immediately redeployed to suppress the New York City draft riots by Irish Americans protesting Civil War conscription and the city&#x27;s free Black population. In July 1863, Union forces under General Ulysses S. Grant gained control of the Mississippi River at the Battle of Vicksburg, splitting the Confederacy. In 1864, Union General William Tecumseh Sherman marched south from Chattanooga to capture Atlanta, a decisive victory that ended war jitters among Republicans in the North and helped Lincoln win re-election. Sherman&#x27;s march to the sea was almost unopposed. Much of the South was destroyed, and could no longer provide desperately needed supplies to its armies. In spring 1864, Grant launched a war of attrition and pursued Lee to the final Appomattox campaign, which resulted in Lee surrendering in April 1865. By June 1865, the Union Army controlled all of the Confederacy and liberated all of the designated slaves.
The Civil War was the world&#x27;s earliest industrial war. Railroads, the telegraph, steamships, and mass-produced weapons were employed extensively. Civilian factories, mines, shipyards, and were mobilized. Foreign trade increased, with the U.S. providing both food and cotton to Britain, and Britain sending in manufactured products and thousands of volunteers for the Union Army (and a few to the Confederate army). The Union blockade shut down Confederate ports. It remains the deadliest war in American history, resulting in the deaths of about 750,000 soldiers and an undetermined number of civilian casualties. About ten percent of all Northern males 20–45 years old, and thirty percent of all Southern white males aged 18–40 died. Many Black people died after being dislocated during the war and Reconstruction.

=== Reconstruction ===
Reconstruction lasted from the end of the war until 1877. Lincoln supported the Ten Percent Plan for states&#x27; re-admission, and the right of Black people to vote. Lincoln was assassinated in April 1865 by John Wilkes Booth, and succeeded by Andrew Johnson.
After the war, the far west was developed and settled, first by wagon trains and riverboats, and then by the first transcontinental railroad. Many Northern European immigrants took up low-cost or free farms in the Prairie States. Mining for silver and copper encouraged development.
The severe threats of starvation and displacement of the unemployed Freedmen were met by the first major federal relief agency, the Freedmen&#x27;s Bureau, operated by the Army. The bureau also took in freed slaves. Three &quot;Reconstruction Amendments&quot; expanded civil rights for black Americans: the 1865 Thirteenth Amendment outlawed slavery; the 1868 Fourteenth Amendment guaranteed equal rights and citizenship for Black people; the 1870 Fifteenth Amendment prevented race from being used to disenfranchise men.
Ex-Confederates remained in control of most Southern states for over two years, until the Radical Republicans gained control of Congress in the 1866 elections. Johnson, who sought good treatment for ex-Confederates, was virtually powerless in the face of Congress; he was impeached, but the Senate&#x27;s attempt to remove him from office failed by one vote. Congress enfranchised black men and temporarily banned many ex-Confederate leaders from holding office. New Republican governments came to power based on a coalition of Freedmen made up of Carpetbaggers (new arrivals from the North), and Scalawags (native white Southerners), backed by the Army. Opponents said they were corrupt and violated the rights of whites. State by state, the New Republicans lost power to a conservative-Democratic coalition, which gained control of the South by 1877. In response to Radical Reconstruction, the Ku Klux Klan (KKK) emerged in 1867 as a white-supremacist organization opposed to black civil rights and Republican rule. President Ulysses Grant&#x27;s enforcement of the Ku Klux Klan Act of 1870 shut them down. Paramilitary groups, such as the White League and Red Shirts emerging around 1874, openly intimidated and attacked Black people voting.

Reconstruction ended after the disputed 1876 election. The Compromise of 1877 gave Republican Rutherford B. Hayes the presidency in exchange for removing all remaining federal troops in the South. In 1882, the United States passed the Chinese Exclusion Act (which barred all Chinese immigrants except for students and businessmen), and the Immigration Act of 1882 (which barred all immigrants with mental health issues). From 1890 to 1908, southern states effectively disenfranchised Black and poor white voters by making voter registration more difficult through poll taxes and literacy tests. Black people were segregated from whites in the violently-enforced Jim Crow system.

==Gilded Age and the Progressive Era (1877–1914)==
=== After Reconstruction ===

The &quot;Gilded Age&quot; was a term that Mark Twain used to describe the period of the late 19th century with a dramatic expansion of American wealth and prosperity, underscored by mass corruption in government. Some historians have argued that the United States was effectively plutocratic for at least part of the era. As financiers and industrialists such as J.P. Morgan and John D. Rockefeller began to amass vast fortunes, many observers were concerned that the nation was losing its pioneering egalitarian spirit.

An unprecedented wave of immigration from Europe served to both provide the labor for American industry and create diverse communities in previously undeveloped areas. From 1880 to 1914, peak years of immigration, more than 22 million people migrated to the country. Most were unskilled workers who quickly found jobs in mines, mills, and factories. Many immigrants were craftsmen and farmers who purchased inexpensive land on the prairies. Poverty, growing inequality and dangerous working conditions, along with socialist and anarchist ideas diffusing from European immigrants, led to the rise of the labor movement.

Dissatisfaction on the part of the growing middle class with the corruption and inefficiency of politics, and the failure to deal with increasingly important urban and industrial problems, led to the dynamic progressive movement starting in the 1890s. Progressives called for the modernization and reform of decrepit institutions in the fields of politics, education, medicine, and industry. &quot;Muckraking&quot; journalists exposed corruption in business and government, and highlighted rampant inner-city poverty. Progressives implemented antitrust laws and regulated such industries of meatpacking, drugs, and railroads. Four new constitutional amendments – the Sixteenth through Nineteenth – resulted from progressive activism, bringing the federal income tax, direct election of Senators, prohibition, and female suffrage.

In 1881, President James A. Garfield was assassinated by Charles Guiteau.

====Unions and strikes====


Skilled workers banded together to control their crafts and raise wages by forming labor unions in industrial areas of the Northeast. Samuel Gompers led the American Federation of Labor (1886–1924), coordinating multiple unions. In response to heavy debts and decreasing farm prices, wheat and cotton farmers joined the Populist Party.

The Panic of 1893 created a severe nationwide depression. Many railroads went bankrupt. Labor unrest involved numerous strikes, most notably the violent Pullman Strike of 1894, which was forcibly shut down by federal troops. One of the disillusioned leaders of the Pullman strike, Eugene V. Debs, went on to become the leader of the Socialist Party of America.

==== Economic growth ====
Important legislation of the era included the 1883 Civil Service Act, which mandated a competitive examination for applicants for government jobs, the 1887 Interstate Commerce Act, which ended railroads&#x27; discrimination against small shippers, and the 1890 Sherman Antitrust Act, which outlawed monopolies in business.

After 1893, the Populist Party gained strength among farmers and coal miners, but was overtaken by the even more popular Free silver movement, which demanded using silver to enlarge the money supply and end the depression. Financial and railroad communities fought back hard, arguing that only the gold standard would save the economy. In the 1896 presidential election, conservative Republican William McKinley defeated silverite William Jennings Bryan.
Prosperity returned under McKinley. The gold standard was enacted, and the tariff was raised. By 1900, the U.S. had the strongest economy in the world. McKinley was assassinated by Leon Czolgosz in 1901, and was succeeded by Theodore Roosevelt.

The period also saw a major transformation of the banking system, with the arrival of the first credit union in 1908 and the creation of the Federal Reserve System in 1913. Apart from two short recessions in 1907 and 1920, the economy remained prosperous and growing until 1929.

==== Imperialism ====

The United States Army continued to fight wars with Native Americans as settlers encroached on their traditional lands. Gradually the U.S. purchased tribal lands and extinguished their claims, forcing most tribes onto subsidized reservations. According to the U.S. Census Bureau in 1894, from 1789 to 1894, the Indian Wars killed 19,000 white people and more than 30,000 Indians.

The Spanish–American War began when Spain refused American demands to reform its oppressive policies in Cuba. The war was a series of quick American victories on land and at sea. At the Treaty of Paris peace conference the United States acquired the Philippines, Puerto Rico, and Guam. Cuba became an independent country, under close American tutelage. William Jennings Bryan led his Democratic Party in opposition to control of the Philippines, which he denounced as imperialism. After defeating an insurrection by Filipino nationalists, the United States achieved little in the Philippines except in education. Infrastructural development lost much of its early vigor with the failure of the railroads.

By 1908, however, Americans lost interest in an empire and turned their international attention to the Caribbean, especially the building of the Panama Canal. The canal opened in 1914 and increased trade with Japan and the rest of the Far East. A key innovation was the Open Door Policy, whereby the imperial powers were given equal access to Chinese business, with none of them allowed to take control of China.

==== Women&#x27;s suffrage ====

The women&#x27;s suffrage movement reorganized after the Civil War. By the end of the 19th century, a few Western states had granted women full voting rights, and women gained rights in areas such as property and child custody law.

Around 1912, the feminist movement reawakened, putting an emphasis on its demands for equality and arguing that the corruption of American politics demanded purification by women. Alice Paul split from the large, moderate National American Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA), led by Carrie Chapman Catt, and formed the more militant National Woman&#x27;s Party. Suffragists were arrested during their &quot;Silent Sentinels&quot; pickets at the White House and taken as political prisoners.

The anti-suffragist argument that only men could fight in a war, therefore only men deserved the right to vote, was refuted by the participation of American women on the home front in World War I. The success of women&#x27;s suffrage was demonstrated by the politics of some U.S. states that were already allowing women to vote, including Montana, which elected the first woman to the House of Representatives, Jeannette Rankin. The main resistance came from the South, where white leaders were worried about the threat of black women being allowed to vote. Congress passed the Nineteenth Amendment in 1919, and women first voted in 1920. Politicians responded to the new electorate by emphasizing issues of special interest to women, especially prohibition, child health, and world peace.

==Modern America and World Wars (1914–1945)==

===World War I and the interwar years===


As World War I raged in Europe from 1914, President Woodrow Wilson declared neutrality, but warned Germany that resumption of unrestricted submarine warfare against American ships would mean war. Germany decided to take the risk, and try to win by cutting off supplies to Britain through the sinking of ships such as the RMS &quot;Lusitania&quot;. The U.S. declared war in April 1917.

By the summer of 1918 soldiers in General John J. Pershing&#x27;s American Expeditionary Forces arrived at the rate of 10,000 a day, while Germany was unable to replace its losses. Dissent against the war was suppressed by the Sedition Act of 1918 and Espionage Act of 1917. Over 2,000 were imprisoned for speaking out against the war.

The Allies won in November 1918. Wilson dominated the 1919 Paris Peace Conference, putting his geopolitical hopes in the new League of Nations as Germany was treated harshly in the Treaty of Versailles (1919). Wilson refused to compromise with Senate Republicans over the issue of Congressional power to declare war, and the Senate rejected the Treaty and the League. Instead, the United States chose to pursue unilateralism. The aftershock of Russia&#x27;s October Revolution resulted in fears of Communism in the United States, leading to a Red Scare and the deportation of non-citizens considered subversive.

Despite the Progressive-era modernization of hospitals and medical schools, the country lost around 550,000 lives to the Spanish flu pandemic in 1918 and 1919. During the &quot;Roaring&quot; 1920s, the economy expanded. African-Americans benefited from the Great Migration and had more cultural power, an example being the Harlem Renaissance which spread jazz music. Meanwhile, the Ku Klux Klan had a resurgence, and the Immigration Act of 1924 was passed to strictly limit the number of new entries.

Prohibition began in 1920, when the manufacture, sale, import and export of alcohol were prohibited by the Eighteenth Amendment. Bootlegged alcohol in the cities ended up under the control of gangs, who fought each other for territory. Italian bootleggers in New York City gradually formed the Mafia crime syndicate. In 1933, President Franklin D. Roosevelt repealed prohibition.

===Great Depression and the New Deal===

The Great Depression (1929–1939) and the New Deal (1933–1936) were decisive moments in American political, economic, and social history. A financial bubble was fueled by an inflated stock market, which led to the Wall Street crash on October 29, 1929. This, along with other economic factors, triggered a worldwide depression. The United States experienced deflation as prices fell, unemployment soared from 3% in 1929 to 25% in 1933, farm prices fell by half, and manufacturing output plunged by one-third.

The New Deal enacted by President Franklin D. Roosevelt was a series of permanent reform programs including Social Security, unemployment relief and insurance, public housing, bankruptcy insurance, farm subsidies, and regulation of financial securities. It also provided unemployment relief through the Works Progress Administration (WPA) and for young men, the Civilian Conservation Corps. Large-scale spending projects designed to rebuild infrastructure were under the purview of the Public Works Administration.

State governments introduced the sales tax to pay for new programs. Ideologically, the New Deal established modern liberalism in the United States. The New Deal coalition won re-election for Roosevelt in 1936, 1940, and 1944. The Second New Deal in 1935 and 1936 brought the economy further left, building up labor unions through the Wagner Act. Roosevelt weakened his second term by a failed effort to pack the Supreme Court, which had been a center of conservative resistance to his programs. The economy essentially recovered by 1936, but long-term unemployment remained a problem until it was solved by wartime spending. Most of the relief programs were dropped in the 1940s, when the conservatives regained power in Congress through the Conservative coalition.

=== World War II ===


During the Depression, the United States remained focused on domestic concerns. U.S. legislation in the Neutrality Acts sought to avoid foreign conflicts; however, policy clashed with increasing anti-Nazi feelings following the German invasion of Poland in September 1939 that started World War II. At first, Roosevelt positioned the U.S. as the &quot;Arsenal of Democracy&quot;, pledging full-scale financial and munitions support for the Allies and Lend-Lease agreements – but no military personnel.

Japan tried to neutralize America&#x27;s power in the Pacific by attacking Pearl Harbor in 1941, but instead it catalyzed American support to enter the war. Roosevelt&#x27;s Executive Order 9066 resulted in over 120,000 Americans of Japanese descent being removed from their homes and placed in internment camps. The Allies fought against Germany in the European theater and Japan in the Pacific War. The United States was one of the &quot;Allied Big Four&quot;, alongside the United Kingdom, Soviet Union, and China.

The U.S. gave the Allied war effort money, food, petroleum, technology, and military personnel. The U.S. focused on maximizing its national economic output, causing a dramatic increase in GDP, the end of unemployment, and a rise in civilian consumption, even as 40% of the GDP went to the war effort. A wartime production boom led to the end of the Great Depression. Tens of millions of workers moved into the active labor force and to higher-productivity jobs. Labor shortages encouraged industries to look for new sources of workers, finding new roles for women and Black people. Economic mobilization was managed by the War Production Board. Most durable goods became unavailable or were tightly rationed, while housing for industrial jobs was in short supply. Prices and wages were controlled, and Americans saved a high portion of their incomes, which led to post-war growth.

The U.S. stopped Japanese expansion in the Pacific in 1942; after the loss of the Philippines to Japanese conquests, as well as a draw in the Battle of the Coral Sea in May, the American Navy then inflicted a decisive blow at Midway in June 1942. The Allied forces built up a garrison on Guadalcanal island, formerly held by the Japanese, after the successes of the Battle of the Eastern Solomons and the Battle of Guadalcanal. The Japanese then stopped advancing south, and the U.S. began taking New Guinea. Japan also lost their invasion of the Alaskan Aleutian Islands, allowing the U.S. to begin attacking the Japanese-controlled Kuril Islands.

American ground forces assisted in the North African campaign and the collapse of Fascist Italy in 1943. A more significant European front was opened on D-Day, June 6, 1944, in which Allied forces invaded Nazi-occupied France. The Allies began pushing the Germans out of France in the Normandy campaign. After Allied forces landed at the French Riviera in Operation Dragoon, Hitler allowed his army to retreat from Normandy. Roosevelt died in 1945, and was succeeded by Harry Truman. The western front stopped short of Berlin, leaving the Soviets to take it in the Battle of Berlin. The Nazi regime formally capitulated in May 1945, ending the war in Europe. 

In the Pacific, the U.S. implemented an island hopping strategy toward Tokyo. The Philippines was eventually reconquered, after Japan and the United States fought in history&#x27;s largest naval battle, the Battle of Leyte Gulf. After the war, the U.S. granted the Philippines independence.

Military research and development increased during the war, leading to the Manhattan Project, a secret effort to harness nuclear fission to produce atomic bombs; the first nuclear device was detonated on July 16, 1945. U.S. airfields in the Mariana Islands allowed for easier bombing of Japan and hard-fought U.S. victories at Iwo Jima and Okinawa in 1945. The U.S. prepared to invade Japan&#x27;s home islands, but they dropped atomic bombs on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, compelling Japan to surrender and ending World War II. The U.S. occupied Japan (and part of Germany). 400,000 American military personnel and civilians were killed. Nuclear weapons have not been used since the war ended, and a &quot;long peace&quot; began between the global powers, but they still competed in the Cold War.

== Post-war America (1945–1981) ==

===Economic boom and the beginning of the Cold War===

==== Truman administration ====

In the decades after World War II, the United States became a global influence in economic, political, military, cultural, and technological affairs. Following World War II, the United States emerged as one of the two dominant superpowers, the Soviet Union being the other. The U.S. Senate approved U.S. participation in the United Nations (UN), which marked a turn away from traditional American isolationism and toward increased international involvement. The United States and other major Allied powers became the foundation of the UN Security Council. The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) was created in 1947.

America wished to rescue Europe from the devastation of World War II, and to contain the expansion of communism, represented by the Soviet Union. U.S. foreign policy during the Cold War was built around the support of Western Europe and Japan along with the policy of containment (containing the spread of communism). The Truman Doctrine in 1947 was the U.S.&#x27; attempt to secure trading partners in Europe, by providing military and economic aid to Greece and Turkey to counteract the threat of communist expansion in the Balkans. In 1948, the United States replaced piecemeal financial aid programs with a comprehensive Marshall Plan, which pumped money into Western Europe, and removed trade barriers, while modernizing the managerial practices of businesses and governments. Post-war American aid to Europe totaled $25 billion, out of the U.S. GDP of $258 billion in 1948.

In 1949, the United States, rejecting the long-standing policy of no military alliances in peacetime, formed the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) alliance. In response, the Soviets formed the Warsaw Pact of communist states, leading to the &quot;Iron Curtain&quot;. In 1949, the Soviets performed their first nuclear weapon test. This escalated the risk of nuclear warfare; the threat of mutually assured destruction, however, prevented both powers from nuclear war, and resulted the proxy wars in which the two sides did not directly confront each other.

The U.S. fought against communists in the Korean War and Vietnam War, and toppled left-wing governments in the third world to try to stop its spread, such as Iran in 1953 and Guatemala in 1954. McCarthyism was a widespread government program led by Senator Joseph McCarthy to expose communists in government and business. Hollywood was targeted by the House Un-American Activities Committee. Gay people were targeted under the McCarthyist Lavender Scare.

==== Eisenhower administration ====

Dwight D. Eisenhower was elected president in 1952 in a landslide. He ended the Korean War, and avoided any other major conflict. He cut military spending by relying on advanced technology, such as nuclear weapons carried by long-range bombers and intercontinental missiles. After Stalin died in 1953, Eisenhower worked to obtain friendlier relationships with the Soviet Union. At home, he ended McCarthyism, expanded the Social Security program, and presided over a decade of bipartisan cooperation.

Domestically, after 1948, America entered an economic boom: 60% of the American population had attained a &quot;middle-class&quot; standard of living by the mid-1950s, compared with only 31% in the 1928 and 1929. Between 1947 and 1960, the average real income for American workers increased by as much as it had in the previous half-century. The economy allowed for an affordable lifestyle with large families; this created the baby boom, in which millions of children were born at increased rates from 1945 to 1964. Many Americans moved into suburban neighborhoods.
In the 1954 Supreme Court decision &quot;Brown v. Board of Education&quot;, public school segregation was ruled unconstitutional. When nine Black students were threatened over their admission into all-white Little Rock Central High School, Eisenhower sent in a thousand National Guard troops to ensure peace. Starting in the late 1950s, institutionalized racism across the United States, but especially in the South, was increasingly challenged by the growing civil rights movement. The activism of Rosa Parks and Martin Luther King Jr. led to the boycott of segregated public buses in Montgomery, Alabama in 1955, organized by King and the Montgomery Improvement Association. They faced multiple acts of violence, but continued the boycott for a year, until the Supreme Court ordered the city to desegregate the buses.

The Soviets unexpectedly surpassed American technology in 1957 with Sputnik, the first Earth satellite. The R-7 missile which launched Sputnik into space could have hypothetically dropped a nuclear bomb into U.S. air space from above; new American fears regarding Soviet power began the Space Race, a competition between the two countries to prove their technological superiority through space exploration. In 1958, Eisenhower created the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) for this purpose. Angst about the weaknesses of American education led to large-scale federal support for science education and research.

===Civil unrest and social reforms===

In 1960, John F. Kennedy was elected President. His administration saw the acceleration of the country&#x27;s role in the Space Race, escalation of the American role in the Vietnam War, the Bay of Pigs Invasion, and the Cuban Missile Crisis. President Kennedy was assassinated on November 22, 1963. Lyndon B. Johnson then became president. He secured congressional passage of his Great Society programs, dealing with civil rights, the end of legal segregation, Medicare, extension of welfare, federal aid to education at all levels, subsidies for the arts and humanities, environmental activism, and a series of programs designed to wipe out poverty.

==== Civil rights and counterculture movements ====
For years, nonviolent civil rights activists organized direct actions, such as the 1963 Birmingham campaign and 1965 Selma to Montgomery march, where they also became victims of violence. Along with Supreme Court decisions like &quot;Loving v. Virginia&quot; and the 1963 March on Washington, these movements achieved great steps toward equality with laws like the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Voting Rights Act of 1965, and the Fair Housing Act of 1968. These ended the Jim Crow laws that had legalized racial segregation. Native Americans protested federal courts, highlighting the federal government&#x27;s failure to honor treaties involving them. One of the most outspoken Native American groups was the American Indian Movement (AIM). In the 1960s, Cesar Chavez began organizing poorly paid Mexican-American farm workers in California, eventually forming the country&#x27;s first successful union of farm workers, the United Farm Workers of America (UFW).


Amid the Cold War, the United States entered the Vietnam War, whose growing unpopularity fed already existing social movements. Feminism and the environmental movement became political forces, and progress continued toward civil rights for all Americans. A counterculture revolution in the late sixties and early seventies further divided Americans in a &quot;culture war&quot; but also brought forth more liberated social views. Frustrations with the seemingly slow progress of the integration movement led to the emergence of more radical politics, such as the Black Power movement. The summer of 1967 saw opposing philosophies in two widespread movements, the more peaceful summer of love and the radical long, hot summer, which included nationwide riots. Martin Luther King Jr. was assassinated in 1968. The modern gay rights movement started after the Stonewall riots in 1969.

A new consciousness of the inequality of American women began sweeping the nation, starting with the 1963 publication of Betty Friedan&#x27;s best-seller, &quot;The Feminine Mystique&quot;, which critiqued the American cultural idea that women could only find fulfillment through their roles as wives, mothers, and keepers of the home. In 1966, Friedan and others established the National Organization for Women (NOW) to advocate for women&#x27;s rights. Protests began, and the new women&#x27;s liberation movement grew in size and power, gaining much media attention. The proposed Equal Rights Amendment to the Constitution, passed by Congress in 1972, was defeated by a conservative coalition mobilized by Phyllis Schlafly. However, many federal laws established women&#x27;s equal status under the law, such as those equalizing pay, employment, education, employment opportunities, and credit between genders, and ending pregnancy discrimination. State laws criminalized spousal abuse and marital rape, and the Supreme Court ruled that the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment applied to women. Social custom and consciousness began to change, accepting women&#x27;s equality. Abortion, deemed by the Supreme Court as a fundamental right in &quot;Roe v. Wade&quot; (1973), is still a point of debate.

=== Nixon administration ===
President Richard Nixon (1969–1974) largely continued the New Deal and Great Society programs he inherited. Nixon created the Environmental Protection Agency, opened relations with China, and attempted to gradually turn the Vietnam War effort over to the South Vietnamese. He negotiated the peace treaty in 1973 which secured the release of POWs and led to the withdrawal of U.S. troops. The war had cost the lives of 58,000 American troops. Nixon manipulated the fierce distrust between the Soviet Union and China to the advantage of the U.S., achieving &quot;détente&quot; with both parties. He was also president during the U.S.&#x27; landing on the Moon in 1969.

The Watergate scandal, involving Nixon&#x27;s cover-up of his operatives&#x27; break-in into the Democratic National Committee headquarters, destroyed his political base and forced his resignation on August 9, 1974. He was succeeded by Vice President Gerald Ford.

=== Ford and Carter administrations ===

The Fall of Saigon on April 30, 1975, ended the Vietnam War. In Central America, the U.S. government supported right-wing governments against left-wing groups, such as in El Salvador and Guatemala. In South America, they supported Argentina and Chile, who carried out Operation Condor, a campaign of assassinations of exiled political opponents by Southern Cone governments, created at the behest of Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet in 1975.

The OPEC oil embargo marked a long-term economic transition: energy prices skyrocketed, and American factories faced serious competition from foreign automobiles, clothing, electronics, and consumer goods. By the late 1970s, the economy suffered an energy crisis, slow economic growth, high unemployment, very high inflation, and high interest rates (stagflation). Since economists agreed on deregulation, many of the New Deal era regulations were ended. Meanwhile, the first mass-market personal computers were being developed in California&#x27;s Silicon Valley.

Jimmy Carter was elected president in 1976. Carter brokered the Camp David Accords between Israel and Egypt. In 1979, Iranian students stormed the U.S. embassy in Tehran and took 66 Americans hostage. Carter lost the 1980 election to the Republican Ronald Reagan. On January 20, 1981, minutes after Carter&#x27;s term ended, the remaining U.S. captives were released.

==Contemporary America (1981–present)==
=== Reagan and George H. W. Bush administrations ===
President Ronald Reagan&#x27;s conservative policies produced a major political realignment with his 1980 and 1984 landslide elections. Reagan&#x27;s neoliberal economic policies (dubbed &quot;Reaganomics&quot;) included the implementation of the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981. Reagan continued to downsize government taxation and regulation; New Deal and Great Society programs were ended. The U.S. experienced a recession in 1982, but after inflation decreased, unemployment then decreased, and the economic growth rate increased from 4.5% in 1982 to 7.2% in 1984. However, homelessness and economic inequality also rose.

The Reagan administration&#x27;s expansion of the War on Drugs led to an increase in incarceration, particularly among African Americans, with the number of people imprisoned for drug offences rising from 50,000 to 400,000 between 1980 and 1997. Manufacturing industries moving out of inner cities increased poverty in those areas; poverty increased drug dealing and contributed to the crack epidemic, which led to increased crime and incarceration. The government also reacted slowly to the AIDS crisis, and banned reliable information on the disease, which led to higher infection rates.

Reagan ordered a buildup of the U.S. military, incurring additional budget deficits. The 1983 invasion of Grenada and 1986 bombing of Libya were popular in the U.S., though Reagan&#x27;s backing of the Contra rebels was mired in the controversy over the Iran–Contra affair. Reagan also introduced a complicated missile defense system known as the Strategic Defense Initiative. The Soviets reacted harshly because they thought it violated the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, and would give the U.S. a major military advantage, so they stopped negotiating disarmament deals until the late 1980s.

Reagan met four times with Gorbachev, and their summit conferences led to the signing of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty. The Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, ending the Cold War. For the remainder of the 20th century, the United States emerged as the world&#x27;s sole remaining superpower and continued to intervene in international affairs during the 1990s.

The Gulf War against Iraq started during George H. W. Bush&#x27;s administration. The war started when Iraq invaded neighboring Kuwait in 1990. After an international U.S.-led offensive, Kuwait was taken back. Under Bush, the U.S. also became involved in wars in Panama, Somalia, Bosnia, and Croatia. In 1992, there were riots in Los Angeles over police brutality.

=== Clinton administration ===
Elected in 1992, President Bill Clinton oversaw economic expansion and passed the first balanced federal budget in 30 years. Much of the economic boom was a side effect of the Digital Revolution, and new business opportunities created by the Internet. During Clinton&#x27;s administration, the U.S. was involved in wars in Haiti and Kosovo.

Conservative Republicans heavily won the 1994 midterm elections in a &quot;Republican Revolution&quot; which was built around the Contract with America policy agenda. Newt Gingrich was chosen as House Speaker, and he would heavily influence the Republican Party to engage in &quot;confrontational&quot; political speech. Clinton&#x27;s leadership after the Oklahoma City bombing increased his popularity, and he won in the 1996 presidential elections. In 1998, Clinton was impeached by the House of Representatives on charges of lying under oath about a sexual relationship with White House intern Monica Lewinsky. He was acquitted by the Senate.

In 2000, the dot-com bubble, a widespread overvaluation of Internet company stocks, burst and hurt the U.S. economy. The close presidential election in 2000 between Governor George W. Bush and Al Gore was extremely close and produced a dramatic dispute over the counting of votes. Bush ultimately won.

=== George W. Bush administration ===
On September 11, 2001, 19 al-Qaeda hijackers commandeered four commercial planes to be used in suicide attacks. Two were crashed intentionally into both Twin Towers of the World Trade Center in New York City, and a third into the Pentagon in Arlington, Virginia. The fourth plane was re-taken by the passengers and crew and crashed into an empty field. Every building of the World Trade Center partially or completely collapsed, massively damaging the surrounding area and blanketing Lower Manhattan in toxic dust clouds. 2,977 victims died in the attacks. On September 20, Bush announced a &quot;war on terror&quot;.

In October 2001, the U.S. and NATO invaded Afghanistan and ousted the Taliban regime, which had harbored al-Qaeda and its leader Osama bin Laden. Bin Laden escaped to Pakistan, starting a manhunt. The U.S. established new domestic efforts to prevent future attacks. The Patriot Act increased the power of government to monitor communications and removed legal restrictions on intelligence sharing between federal law enforcement agencies. The government&#x27;s indefinite detention of terrorism suspects captured abroad at the Guantanamo Bay detention camp led to allegations of human rights abuses and violations of international law. The Department of Homeland Security was created to lead federal counter-terrorism activities.

In March 2003, the U.S. launched an invasion of Iraq, claiming Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction (WMDs). Intelligence backing WMDs were later found to be inaccurate. The war led to the collapse of the Iraqi government and the eventual capture of Hussein. The Iraq War fueled international protests and gradually saw domestic support decline.

In 2005, Hurricane Katrina killed 1,800 people around New Orleans after the city&#x27;s levees broke. In 2007, after years of violence by the Iraqi insurgency, Bush deployed more troops in a strategy dubbed &quot;the surge&quot;. While the death toll decreased, the political stability of Iraq remained in doubt. In 2008, the U.S. entered the Great Recession. Multiple overlapping crises were involved, especially the housing market crisis, a subprime mortgage crisis, soaring oil prices, an automotive industry crisis, rising unemployment, and the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression. The financial crisis threatened the stability of the entire economy in September 2008, when Lehman Brothers failed, and other giant banks were in grave danger. Starting in October, the federal government lent $245 billion to financial institutions through the bipartisan Troubled Asset Relief Program.

=== Obama administration ===
Barack Obama, the first multiracial president, was elected in 2008. He signed the Don&#x27;t Ask, Don&#x27;t Tell Repeal Act, which allowed people to serve in the military while openly gay. To help the economy, he signed the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, Consumer Assistance to Recycle and Save Act, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (informally &quot;Obamacare&quot;), and the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The unemployment rate began falling as the economy and labor markets experienced a recovery. These changes to the economic system created new political movements, such as the Occupy movement and the Tea Party movement. The recession officially ended in mid-2009. Following the 2010 midterm elections, Congress was in gridlock, leading to the Budget Control Act of 2011. The economic expansion that followed the Great Recession was the longest in U.S. history; the unemployment rate reached a 50-year low in 2019. Despite the strong economy, increases in the cost of living surpassed increases in wages.

In 2009, Obama issued an executive order banning the use of torture. He ordered the closure of secret CIA-run prisons overseas, and sought to close the Guantanamo Bay detention camp, but his efforts were stymied by Congress. American military personnel left Iraq in 2011. Meanwhile, Obama increased involvement in Afghanistan, adding 30,000 troops, while proposing to begin withdrawal in 2014. The U.S., with NATO, intervened in the Libyan Civil War in 2011. In May 2011, Osama bin Laden was killed in Pakistan in a Navy SEALs raid ordered by Obama. While al-Qaeda was near collapse in Afghanistan, affiliated organizations continued to operate in Yemen and other remote areas, as the CIA used drones to hunt down its leadership. In October, Obama sent troops to Central Africa to fight the Lord&#x27;s Resistance Army.

Following Obama&#x27;s 2012 re-election, Congressional gridlock continued, resulting in the first government shutdown since the Clinton administration. In 2012, the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting in Newtown, Connecticut, led to unsuccessful attempts from Obama to promote gun reform. The Boston Marathon bombing of 2013 killed three people and injured more than 260. In 2013, the U.S. also started a counter-terrorist intervention in Niger, and began a covert operation to train rebels in Syria who were fighting against the terrorist group ISIS. The latter program was publicized and expanded in 2014. That year, ISIS grew in scope in the Middle East, and inspired many terrorist attacks in the United States, including the 2015 San Bernardino attack. The U.S. and its allies began a significant military offensive against ISIS in Iraq which lasted from 2014 to 2021. In December 2014, Obama officially ended the combat mission in Afghanistan. The shooting of Black teen Michael Brown by police officer Darren Wilson, and a grand jury declining to charge Wilson with murder, led to the Ferguson unrest in Missouri in 2014 and 2015. In 2012, President Obama became the first president to openly support same-sex marriage. The Supreme Court provided federal recognition of same-sex marriages in 2013, and then legalized gay marriage nationwide with &quot;Obergefell v. Hodges&quot; in 2015. Also in 2015, the U.S. joined the international Paris Agreement on climate change.

=== First Trump administration ===
In November 2016, Donald Trump was elected president. The election&#x27;s legitimacy was disputed when the FBI and Congress investigated if Russia interfered in the election to help Trump win. There were also accusations of collusion between Trump&#x27;s campaign and Russian officials. The Mueller report concluded that Russia attempted to help Trump&#x27;s campaign, but there was no evidence of &quot;explicit&quot; collusion.

During Trump&#x27;s presidency, he espoused an &quot;America First&quot; ideology, placing restrictions on asylum seekers, expanding the wall on the U.S.-Mexico border, and banning immigration from seven Muslim-majority countries. Many of his actions were challenged in court. He confirmed three new Supreme Court justices (cementing a conservative majority), started a trade war with China, signed the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, and removed the U.S. from the Paris Agreement. In 2018, the administration separated families which were illegally immigrating to the country. After public outcry, Trump rescinded the policy. A whistleblower complaint alleged that Trump had withheld foreign aid from Ukraine under the demand that they investigate the business dealings of Hunter Biden; Hunter&#x27;s father, Democrat Joe Biden, would be Trump&#x27;s opponent in the 2020 presidential election. Trump was impeached for abuse of power and obstruction of congress, but was acquitted in 2020.

In the 2010s and early 2020s, Americans became more politically polarized. The #MeToo movement exposed alleged sexual harassment and abuse in the workplace. Many celebrities were accused of misconduct or rape. The Black Lives Matter movement gained support after multiple police killings of African-Americans. White supremacy also grew. The 2017 Women&#x27;s March against Trump&#x27;s presidency was one of the largest protests in American history. Multiple mass shootings, including the 2016 Pulse Nightclub shooting, 2017 Las Vegas shooting, and 2018 Parkland shooting, led to increased calls for gun reform, such as in the March for Our Lives student protest movement.

COVID-19 started spreading in China in 2019. In March 2020, the WHO declared a pandemic. American state and local governments imposed stay-at-home orders to slow the virus&#x27; spread, reducing patient overload in hospitals. By April, the U.S. had the most cases of any country, at 100,000. On April 11, the U.S. death toll became the highest in the world at 20,000, and by May 2022, one million had died. Unemployment rates were the highest since the Great Depression. The biggest mass vaccination campaign in U.S. history started in December 2020.
The May 2020 murder of George Floyd caused mass protests and riots in many cities over police brutality. Many organizations attempted to rid themselves of institutionalized racism. 2020 was also marked by a rise in domestic terrorist threats and widespread conspiracy theories around mail-in voting and COVID-19. The QAnon conspiracy theory gained publicity. Multiple major cities were hit by rioting and fighting between far-left anti-fascist groups and far-right groups like the Proud Boys.Joe Biden defeated Trump in the 2020 election. Trump repeatedly made false claims of massive voter fraud and election rigging, leading to the January 6 United States Capitol attack by supporters of Trump and right-wing militias. The attack was widely described as a coup d&#x27;état. It led to Trump&#x27;s impeachment for incitement of insurrection, making him the only U.S. president to be impeached twice. The Senate later acquitted Trump, despite some fellow Republicans voting against him. Kamala Harris was inaugurated as the first Black, Asian, and female vice president.

=== Biden administration ===
In 2021, Biden finished the withdrawal of American troops from Afghanistan which started under Trump. After an evacuation of over 120,000 American citizens, Afghanistan fell to the Taliban in August. Biden signed into law the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021, a $1.9 trillion stimulus bill. He also proposed a significant expansion of the social safety net through the Build Back Better Act, but those efforts, along with voting rights legislation, failed in Congress. He signed bills regarding infrastructure, gun reform, inflation reduction, and healthcare for veterans, among other issues. New preventative restrictions were put in place in reaction to the SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant.

In 2022, following Russia&#x27;s full-scale invasion of Ukraine, the Biden administration provided extensive military and economic aid to Ukraine, approving tens of billions of dollars in assistance and coordinating sanctions against Russia with NATO allies. The U.S. also supplied advanced weaponry, including artillery and missile defense systems, while reinforcing NATO’s eastern flank in response to the conflict.

In the early 2020s, Republican-led states began rollbacks of LGBT rights. In 2022, the Supreme Court ruled in &quot;Dobbs v. Jackson&quot; that having an abortion is not a protected Constitutional right, overturning &quot;Roe v. Wade&quot; and &quot;Planned Parenthood v. Casey&quot; and sparking nationwide protests. Biden appointed Ketanji Brown Jackson to become the first Black woman to serve on the court. In 2023, Trump began appearing in court as a defendant in multiple notable criminal trials. Meanwhile, the U.S. began supporting Israel in the Israel-Hamas war and protecting shipping in the Red Sea from attacks by the Yemeni Houthis.

In May 2024, Trump became the first former president convicted of a crime, when he was found guilty of 34 felony counts for falsifying business documents related to his paying off of Stormy Daniels. In July, the Supreme Court ruled in &quot;Trump v. United States&quot; that presidents are somewhat immune from criminal prosecution, helping Trump before his planned election subversion trial. Later in July, Biden dropped out of the 2024 race, endorsing Kamala Harris. During the election season, there were two assassination attempts on Trump. Trump won the 2024 presidential election. Biden delivered his farewell address from the Oval Office on January 15, 2025. He opened with an announcement that a hostage release deal was reached between Israel and Hamas. Additionally, he advocated for continued renewable energy investment, strengthening checks and balances in government, and the dangers of what he termed the ‘tech industrial complex’.

=== Second Trump administration ===
Donald Trump won the 2024 presidential election becoming only the second president to be elected to non-consecutive terms after Grover Cleveland. The election was certified by Congress on January 6, 2025, and Trump assumed office on January 20.

==See also==

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* in 
* 
* 
* Hamlin, C. H. (1927) &quot;The war myth in United States history&quot; New York: The Vanguard Press
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* 
* 
* , American history public radio show hosted by Ed Ayers, Brian Balogh, and Peter Onuf</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="41" end="54" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q13925462" start="81" end="113" title="Peopling of the Americas" label="the first people in the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="138" end="176" title="European colonization of North America" label="European colonization of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="278" end="303" title="thirteen British colonies" label="thirteen British colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569779" start="326" end="343" title="Southern Colonies" label="Southern Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="376" end="387" title="Slavery in the United States" label="slave labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="389" end="419" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="enslaving millions from Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q681416" start="427" end="443" title="French and Indian Wars" label="defeating France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="457" end="467" title="Parliament of Great Britain" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q19024" start="537" end="553" title="Boston Tea Party" label="Boston Tea Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365292" start="593" end="609" title="Intolerable Acts" label="Intolerable Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="671" end="696" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="declared its independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="713" end="730" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="743" end="760" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="774" end="786" title="Constitution of the United States" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="814" end="828" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q29677" start="860" end="878" title="inalienable rights" label="inalienable rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="902" end="911" title="President of the United States" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="929" end="947" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="989" end="1007" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q474184" start="1109" end="1125" title="manifest destiny" label="manifest destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="1155" end="1168" title="West Coast of the United States" label="Pacific Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="1259" end="1274" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q698842" start="1288" end="1295" title="1860 United States presidential election" label="in 1860"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042941" start="1317" end="1324" title="Ordinance of Secession" label="seceded"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="1349" end="1378" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1396" end="1405" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q175613" start="1456" end="1476" title="Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="abolition of slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="1496" end="1514" title="Reconstruction era" label="Reconstruction era"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="1540" end="1589" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="gained explicit duty to protect individual rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101979" start="1694" end="1715" title="Voter suppression in the United States" label="suppression of voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="1720" end="1733" title="Jim Crow laws" label="Jim Crow laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="1746" end="1761" title="white supremacy" label="white supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q217200" start="1885" end="1902" title="Second Industrial Revolution" label="industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819571" start="1912" end="1952" title="European emigration" label="arrival of millions of immigrant workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635158" start="2138" end="2158" title="Progressive Era" label="Progressive movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308197" start="2193" end="2211" title="federal income tax" label="federal income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="2282" end="2301" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="alcohol prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246745" start="2307" end="2328" title="Women&amp;#x27;s suffrage in the United States" label="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2355" end="2366" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745451" start="2386" end="2409" title="American entry into World War I" label="declared war on Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="2442" end="2448" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q13468437" start="2471" end="2487" title="Roaring Twenties" label="Roaring Twenties"/>
<link wikidata="Q201684" start="2493" end="2518" title="Wall Street crash of 1929" label="Wall Street crash of 1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q696482" start="2565" end="2581" title="Great Depression in the United States" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="2593" end="2614" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="2622" end="2630" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184791" start="2675" end="2690" title="Social Security (United States)" label="social security"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152203" start="2700" end="2726" title="modern American liberalism" label="modern American liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="2742" end="2773" title="Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor" label="Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2801" end="2813" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="2830" end="2842" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="2847" end="2860" title="Fascist Italy" label="Fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44700" start="2868" end="2884" title="European theater" label="European theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="2893" end="2904" title="Pacific War" label="Pacific War"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="2923" end="2937" title="Imperial Japan" label="Imperial Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="2950" end="2964" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="2969" end="2991" title="Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="Hiroshima and Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3020" end="3032" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489259" start="3050" end="3060" title="superpower" label="superpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="3073" end="3081" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q322348" start="3141" end="3150" title="arms race" label="arms race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932" start="3156" end="3166" title="Space Race" label="Space Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q864113" start="3194" end="3203" title="proxy war" label="proxy war"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="3245" end="3266" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="3388" end="3401" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="3521" end="3555" title="Dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union was dissolved in 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152871" start="3635" end="3653" title="Post–Cold War era" label="after the Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116408" start="3675" end="3703" title="List of modern conflicts in the Middle East" label="conflicts in the Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="3726" end="3746" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4610355" start="3812" end="3827" title="Great Recession in the United States" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873577" start="3836" end="3853" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the United States" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q105694892" start="3869" end="3913" title="2020–2021 U.S. troop withdrawal from Afghanistan" label="America withdrew from the war in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q111338146" start="3915" end="3960" title="United States and the Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="intervened in the Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q124373310" start="3986" end="4007" title="Middle Eastern crisis (2023–present)" label="Middle Eastern crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13925462" start="4103" end="4123" title="Settlement of the Americas" label="settled the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="4173" end="4180" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223930" start="4190" end="4194" title="Game (hunting)" label="game"/>
<link wikidata="Q190927" start="4202" end="4210" title="Beringia" label="Beringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q864812" start="4214" end="4225" title="land bridge" label="land bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="4241" end="4248" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="4264" end="4270" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="4282" end="4289" title="Last Glacial Period" label="Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q888099" start="4388" end="4401" title="Paleo-Indians" label="Paleo-Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q730371" start="4598" end="4607" title="megafauna" label="megafauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q36715" start="4613" end="4620" title="mammoth" label="mammoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q18099" start="4681" end="4686" title="bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="4943" end="4950" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="4955" end="4965" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="4989" end="4999" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255768" start="5047" end="5054" title="Hohokam" label="Hohokam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485378" start="5126" end="5140" title="Clovis culture" label="Clovis culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q44475" start="5213" end="5218" title="spear" label="spear"/>
<link wikidata="Q140654" start="5237" end="5249" title="Clovis point" label="Clovis point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257815" start="5255" end="5269" title="Folsom culture" label="Folsom culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464871" start="5315" end="5327" title="Folsom point" label="Folsom point"/>
<link wikidata="Q26986" start="5374" end="5381" title="Na-Dene" label="Na-Dene"/>
<link wikidata="Q12603" start="5416" end="5433" title="Pacific Northwest" label="Pacific Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="5484" end="5497" title="West Coast of the United States" label="Pacific Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7106572" start="5540" end="5556" title="Oshara tradition" label="Oshara tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4070542" start="5618" end="5635" title="Archaic Southwest" label="Archaic Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q355841" start="5676" end="5681" title="Adena culture" label="Adena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349587" start="5707" end="5716" title="Earthworks (archaeology)" label="earthwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q262714" start="5788" end="5802" title="Mound Builders" label="Mound Builders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584134" start="5823" end="5828" title="mound" label="mound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305793" start="5913" end="5931" title="Hopewell tradition" label="Hopewell tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062" start="6215" end="6227" title="Lake Ontario" label="Lake Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052095" start="6291" end="6312" title="Mississippian culture" label="Mississippian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q333661" start="6394" end="6401" title="Cahokia" label="Cahokia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="6419" end="6438" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q280444" start="6609" end="6614" title="Monks Mound" label="mound"/>
<link wikidata="Q45914" start="6864" end="6870" title="Mayans" label="Mayans"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="6880" end="6889" title="Southwestern United States" label="Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q478805" start="6895" end="6902" title="Anasazi" label="Anasazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979068" start="7044" end="7056" title="Cliff Palace" label="Cliff Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q237128" start="7060" end="7070" title="Mesa Verde" label="Mesa Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060888" start="7113" end="7126" title="Pueblo Bonito" label="Pueblo Bonito"/>
<link wikidata="Q28873478" start="7137" end="7148" title="Chaco River" label="Chaco River"/>
<link wikidata="Q210561" start="7229" end="7272" title="Indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest" label="Indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="7481" end="7487" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q756880" start="7663" end="7671" title="potlatch" label="potlatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018923" start="7689" end="7705" title="upstate New York" label="upstate New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="7711" end="7719" title="Iroquois" label="Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q170156" start="7729" end="7740" title="Confederation" label="confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093666" start="7802" end="7808" title="Oneida Indian Nation" label="Oneida"/>
<link wikidata="Q116971" start="7810" end="7816" title="Mohawk people" label="Mohawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q21056" start="7818" end="7826" title="Onondaga people" label="Onondaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q210334" start="7828" end="7834" title="Cayuga people" label="Cayuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q213422" start="7840" end="7846" title="Seneca people" label="Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433209" start="7886" end="7899" title="Sachem" label="sachem chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q947650" start="8207" end="8212" title="Osage Nation" label="Osage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723904" start="8214" end="8217" title="Kaw people" label="Kaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754891" start="8219" end="8224" title="Ponca" label="Ponca"/>
<link wikidata="Q120601" start="8230" end="8235" title="Omaha people" label="Omaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282763" start="8412" end="8420" title="Tahitians" label="Tahitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="8664" end="8674" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q214910" start="8790" end="8802" title="Kamehameha I" label="Kamehameha I"/>
<link wikidata="Q156418" start="8907" end="8923" title="Hawaiian Kingdom" label="Hawaiian Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q601260" start="9031" end="9048" title="Ortoiroid culture" label="Ortoiroid culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q117244" start="9161" end="9167" title="Arawak" label="Arawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q93259" start="9214" end="9229" title="Lesser Antilles" label="Lesser Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q210623" start="9263" end="9268" title="Taíno" label="Taíno"/>
<link wikidata="Q599898" start="9416" end="9423" title="Cacique" label="Cacique"/>
<link wikidata="Q396287" start="9507" end="9517" title="Encomienda" label="Encomienda"/>
<link wikidata="Q698513" start="9766" end="9774" title="Gesta Hammaburgensis ecclesiae pontificum" label="treatise"/>
<link wikidata="Q109244" start="9802" end="9816" title="Adam of Bremen" label="Adam of Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q192823" start="9857" end="9864" title="Vinland" label="Vinland"/>
<link wikidata="Q950587" start="9914" end="9927" title="Vinland sagas" label="Vinland sagas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211290" start="9987" end="9992" title="Norsemen" label="Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="10128" end="10139" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339301" start="10296" end="10302" title="Cucurbita" label="squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q182581" start="10568" end="10576" title="Immunity (medical)" label="immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979955" start="10591" end="10609" title="Native American disease and epidemics" label="suffered epidemics"/>
<link wikidata="Q126236" start="10776" end="10793" title="Conquistador" label="Spanish explorers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18578423" start="10887" end="10918" title="voyages of Christopher Columbus" label="voyages of Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12213222" start="10951" end="10979" title="Spanish West Indies" label="possessions in the Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352230" start="11006" end="11022" title="U.S. territories" label="U.S. territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q541745" start="11026" end="11037" title="Captaincy General of Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703" start="11056" end="11075" title="U.S. Virgin Islands" label="U.S. Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q185974" start="11077" end="11095" title="Juan Ponce de León" label="Juan Ponce de León"/>
<link wikidata="Q555528" start="11106" end="11113" title="Spanish Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="11163" end="11184" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="11190" end="11207" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q118841" start="11213" end="11225" title="Grand Canyon" label="Grand Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="11235" end="11247" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q60040" start="11259" end="11275" title="Hernando de Soto" label="Hernando de Soto"/>
<link wikidata="Q271974" start="11329" end="11347" title="Francisco Coronado" label="Francisco Coronado"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="11628" end="11639" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="11641" end="11652" title="Albuquerque" label="Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="11654" end="11660" title="Tucson" label="Tucson"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="11726" end="11750" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q179167" start="11765" end="11777" title="Henry Hudson" label="Henry Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q81136" start="11794" end="11811" title="Northwest Passage" label="Northwest Passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q382593" start="11829" end="11843" title="New Netherland" label="New Netherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q502534" start="11904" end="11928" title="North American fur trade" label="North American fur trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5556538" start="11983" end="11988" title="Dutch colonization of the Americas" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="12060" end="12069" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q223308" start="12116" end="12129" title="New Amsterdam" label="New Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="12272" end="12282" title="Calvinists" label="Calvinists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136834" start="12300" end="12326" title="Reformed Church in America" label="Reformed Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="12404" end="12412" title="Iroquois" label="Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q633593" start="12485" end="12496" title="New England Confederation" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q755170" start="12516" end="12530" title="Anglo-Dutch Wars" label="series of wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q769668" start="12584" end="12592" title="Province of New York" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12699" end="12713" title="Sweden#Swedish Empire" label="Swedish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q322187" start="12766" end="12784" title="New Sweden Company" label="New Sweden Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q312889" start="12876" end="12888" title="Peter Minuit" label="Peter Minuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q738808" start="12963" end="12975" title="Delaware Bay" label="Delaware Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063470" start="13012" end="13026" title="Fort Christina" label="Fort Christina"/>
<link wikidata="Q174224" start="13053" end="13073" title="Wilmington, Delaware" label="Wilmington, Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="13157" end="13171" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="13383" end="13391" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="13393" end="13405" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="13411" end="13421" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q654006" start="13548" end="13567" title="Second Northern War" label="Second Northern War"/>
<link wikidata="Q147676" start="13598" end="13620" title="Giovanni da Verrazzano" label="Giovanni da Verrazzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138301" start="13695" end="13710" title="New York Harbor" label="New York Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241943" start="13715" end="13731" title="Narragansett Bay" label="Narragansett Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="13754" end="13763" title="Huguenots" label="Huguenots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438483" start="13775" end="13788" title="Fort Caroline" label="Fort Caroline"/>
<link wikidata="Q16568" start="13806" end="13818" title="Jacksonville" label="Jacksonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q553152" start="13860" end="13874" title="Pedro Menéndez" label="Pedro Menéndez"/>
<link wikidata="Q487988" start="13986" end="13999" title="St. Augustine, Florida" label="St. Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="14023" end="14029" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q207353" start="14034" end="14040" title="Acadia" label="Acadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8321" start="14202" end="14210" title="Illinois River" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="14373" end="14384" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q79875" start="14386" end="14392" title="Mobile, Alabama" label="Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q490720" start="14397" end="14403" title="Biloxi" label="Biloxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q36517" start="14455" end="14468" title="Francis Drake" label="Francis Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q702252" start="14485" end="14507" title="Spanish treasure fleet" label="Spanish treasure ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="14853" end="14874" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q323813" start="15559" end="15568" title="Jamestown, Virginia" label="Jamestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061207" start="15593" end="15609" title="Virginia Company of London" label="Virginia Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q422487" start="15625" end="15636" title="James River" label="James River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="15640" end="15648" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q228024" start="15763" end="15773" title="John Smith (explorer)" label="John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q433948" start="15932" end="15942" title="John Rolfe" label="John Rolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q616307" start="16190" end="16213" title="Powhatan attack of 1622" label="Powhatan attack of 1622"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="16220" end="16227" title="James VI and I" label="James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="16336" end="16347" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="16383" end="16391" title="Puritans" label="Puritans"/>
<link wikidata="Q855700" start="16427" end="16435" title="Pilgrims (Plymouth Colony)" label="Pilgrims"/>
<link wikidata="Q126195" start="16535" end="16543" title="Plymouth Colony" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q868502" start="16600" end="16617" title="Mayflower Compact" label="Mayflower Compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047264" start="16729" end="16738" title="Wampanoag" label="Wampanoag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="16830" end="16854" title="Massachusetts Bay Colony" label="Massachusetts Bay Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q720766" start="16953" end="16966" title="John Winthrop" label="John Winthrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q391591" start="16980" end="16994" title="Roger Williams" label="Roger Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="17106" end="17128" title="Providence Plantations" label="Providence Plantations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335224" start="17136" end="17148" title="Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="17234" end="17251" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="17293" end="17306" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="17311" end="17316" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207617" start="17401" end="17411" title="Pequot War" label="Pequot War"/>
<link wikidata="Q862257" start="17425" end="17447" title="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War" label="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="17735" end="17741" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841282" start="17837" end="17852" title="Middle Colonies" label="Middle Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q769668" start="17856" end="17864" title="Province of New York" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335128" start="17866" end="17876" title="Province of New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571194" start="17882" end="17890" title="Delaware Colony" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="18042" end="18050" title="Iroquois" label="Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475732" start="18195" end="18207" title="Province of Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q209152" start="18232" end="18244" title="William Penn" label="William Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="18291" end="18298" title="Quakers" label="Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="18300" end="18310" title="Methodists" label="Methodists"/>
<link wikidata="Q104444" start="18320" end="18325" title="Amish" label="Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="18354" end="18366" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="18460" end="18466" title="German Americans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435494" start="18545" end="18556" title="Scotch-Irish Americans" label="Scots-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569779" start="18648" end="18665" title="Southern Colonies" label="Southern Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452027" start="18794" end="18802" title="Province of Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q862823" start="18901" end="18907" title="yeoman" label="yeoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800894" start="18973" end="18982" title="Tidewater (region)" label="Tidewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201620" start="19024" end="19035" title="Plantation complexes in the Southern United States" label="plantations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044394" start="19068" end="19088" title="Province of Carolina" label="Province of Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="19110" end="19120" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334526" start="19339" end="19344" title="Province of North Carolina" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513167" start="19349" end="19363" title="Province of South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q785035" start="19369" end="19383" title="Georgia Colony" label="Georgia Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q527835" start="19403" end="19419" title="James Oglethorpe" label="James Oglethorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344888" start="19571" end="19592" title="First Great Awakening" label="First Great Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q313073" start="19652" end="19668" title="Jonathan Edwards (theologian)" label="Jonathan Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q314399" start="19673" end="19690" title="George Whitefield" label="George Whitefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="19701" end="19713" title="Evangelicals" label="Evangelicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q58646537" start="19790" end="19801" title="Holy Spirit in Christianity" label="Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q285667" start="20011" end="20033" title="Second Great Awakening" label="Second Great Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="20109" end="20119" title="Methodists" label="Methodists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857726" start="20124" end="20132" title="Baptists in the United States" label="Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122364" start="20874" end="20893" title="indentured servants" label="indentured servants"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="21252" end="21266" title="Slavery in the United States" label="African slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3896875" start="21624" end="21647" title="partus sequitur ventrem" label="partus sequitur ventrem"/>
<link wikidata="Q162527" start="22044" end="22056" title="mercantilism" label="mercantilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="22134" end="22146" title="unfree labor" label="unfree labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539285" start="22156" end="22163" title="Slavery in the colonial history of the United States" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215535" start="22303" end="22319" title="salutary neglect" label="salutary neglect"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="22494" end="22515" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="22548" end="22569" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="22712" end="22725" title="British Crown" label="British Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="22805" end="22822" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="22837" end="22847" title="New France" label="New France"/>
<link wikidata="Q658054" start="22862" end="22871" title="Louisiana (New France)" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301178" start="22972" end="22987" title="Albany Congress" label="Albany Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="23006" end="23023" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136099" start="23062" end="23074" title="Join, or Die" label="Join, or Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="23082" end="23097" title="King George III" label="King George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q209573" start="23109" end="23135" title="Royal Proclamation of 1763" label="Royal Proclamation of 1763"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="23347" end="23365" title="British Parliament" label="British Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335777" start="23377" end="23394" title="Stamp Act of 1765" label="Stamp Act of 1765"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115885" start="23489" end="23523" title="No taxation without representation" label="No taxation without representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q19024" start="23565" end="23581" title="Boston Tea Party" label="Boston Tea Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365292" start="23685" end="23701" title="Intolerable Acts" label="Intolerable Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365374" start="23867" end="23874" title="Patriot (American Revolution)" label="Patriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q252612" start="23914" end="23940" title="First Continental Congress" label="First Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231641" start="23999" end="24023" title="Continental Association" label="boycott of British trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249412" start="24037" end="24066" title="Declaration and Resolves of the First Continental Congress" label="list of rights and grievances"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178435" start="24072" end="24091" title="Petition to the King" label="petitioned the king"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983034" start="24182" end="24209" title="Second Continental Congress" label="Second Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="24261" end="24288" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q266449" start="24358" end="24383" title="all men are created equal" label="all men are created equal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075797" start="24410" end="24452" title="Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness" label="Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162861" start="24472" end="24495" title="consent of the governed" label="consent of the governed"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="24501" end="24517" title="Founding Fathers" label="Founding Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q877848" start="24549" end="24562" title="republicanism" label="republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q216669" start="24578" end="24588" title="monarchism" label="monarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512984" start="24643" end="24649" title="Signing of the United States Declaration of Independence" label="signed"/>
<link wikidata="Q48812938" start="24713" end="24725" title="Commemoration of the American Revolution" label="commemorated"/>
<link wikidata="Q86591" start="24729" end="24745" title="Independence Day (United States)" label="Independence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="24752" end="24778" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q778010" start="24794" end="24826" title="Battles of Lexington and Concord" label="Battles of Lexington and Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="24846" end="24863" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="24893" end="24909" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971587" start="24929" end="24959" title="George Washington&amp;#x27;s crossing of the Delaware River" label="crossing of the Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q126876" start="25056" end="25073" title="Saratoga campaign" label="Saratoga campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="25093" end="25109" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q400005" start="25116" end="25127" title="choke point" label="choke point"/>
<link wikidata="Q846674" start="25144" end="25163" title="Battles of Saratoga" label="victory at Saratoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059295" start="25284" end="25300" title="Northern theater of the American Revolutionary War" label="northern theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988161" start="25321" end="25337" title="Southern theater of the American Revolutionary War" label="southern theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037058" start="25358" end="25377" title="Capture of Savannah" label="Capture of Savannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q459447" start="25473" end="25490" title="Siege of Yorktown" label="Siege of Yorktown"/>
<link wikidata="Q217450" start="25629" end="25644" title="Treaty of Paris (1783)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195929" start="25702" end="25731" title="Congress of the Confederation" label="Congress of the Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="25785" end="25810" title="Articles of Confederation" label="Articles of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449701" start="25954" end="25970" title="Financial costs of the American Revolutionary War" label="economic decline"/>
<link wikidata="Q170156" start="26079" end="26090" title="Confederation" label="confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q392601" start="26220" end="26241" title="Shays&amp;#x27; Rebellion" label="Shays&amp;#x27; Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="26429" end="26435" title="U.S. state" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q849680" start="26441" end="26461" title="American Indian Wars" label="American Indian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186402" start="26513" end="26537" title="Northwestern Confederacy" label="Northwestern Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656995" start="26579" end="26599" title="Northwest Indian War" label="Northwest Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q405475" start="26852" end="26875" title="Philadelphia Convention" label="Philadelphia Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="26928" end="26940" title="Constitution of the United States" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q29677" start="27102" end="27120" title="Natural rights and legal rights" label="individual liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="27173" end="27193" title="separation of powers" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="27344" end="27375" title="United States Electoral College" label="United States Electoral College"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="27413" end="27422" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824580" start="27572" end="27597" title="Washington Administration" label="Washington Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="27750" end="27768" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q934187" start="27815" end="27840" title="First Bank of the United States" label="Bank of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="27873" end="27879" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="28002" end="28018" title="Federalist Party" label="Federalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q257855" start="28035" end="28051" title="Anti-Federalists" label="Anti-Federalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="28123" end="28151" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="United States Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="28250" end="28266" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="28271" end="28284" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q42186" start="28343" end="28370" title="Democratic-Republican Party" label="Democratic-Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568837" start="28436" end="28446" title="Jay Treaty" label="Jay Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453498" start="28609" end="28627" title="First Party System" label="First Party System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656995" start="28748" end="28768" title="Northwest Indian War" label="Northwest Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122685" start="28782" end="28804" title="Cherokee–American wars" label="Cherokee–American wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q377542" start="28819" end="28836" title="Whiskey Rebellion" label="Whiskey Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="28978" end="28988" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118757" start="29152" end="29175" title="Alien and Sedition Acts" label="Alien and Sedition Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q655480" start="29370" end="29379" title="Quasi-War" label="Quasi-War"/>
<link wikidata="Q13534615" start="29592" end="29604" title="Free negro" label="freed blacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399638" start="29762" end="29773" title="Upper South" label="Upper South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454489" start="29779" end="29790" title="manumission" label="manumission"/>
<link wikidata="Q13534615" start="29845" end="29856" title="free blacks" label="free blacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="30187" end="30207" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="Atlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857726" start="30505" end="30512" title="Baptists in the United States" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="30517" end="30526" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="30825" end="30837" title="Abolitionism in the United States" label="abolitionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q333247" start="30842" end="30852" title="Temperance movement" label="temperance"/>
<link wikidata="Q698106" start="30964" end="30977" title="1800 United States presidential election" label="1800 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="31035" end="31053" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q505802" start="31241" end="31267" title="Lewis and Clark Expedition" label="Lewis and Clark Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277720" start="31298" end="31311" title="Republicanism in the United States" label="republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q862823" start="31361" end="31367" title="yeoman" label="yeoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="31558" end="31571" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q310829" start="31604" end="31617" title="John Marshall" label="John Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="31623" end="31657" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="Chief Justice of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q538242" start="31811" end="31829" title="Marbury v. Madison" label="Marbury v. Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566803" start="31977" end="31985" title="Impressment" label="coercion"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="32027" end="32037" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="32132" end="32148" title="American Midwest" label="American Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q21070813" start="32189" end="32209" title="Indian barrier state" label="Indian barrier state"/>
<link wikidata="Q248452" start="32298" end="32319" title="British North America" label="British North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="32396" end="32405" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892411" start="32492" end="32526" title="United States declaration of war on the United Kingdom" label="declared war on the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11869" start="32910" end="32932" title="William Henry Harrison" label="William Henry Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q990715" start="32941" end="32974" title="Battle of Lake Erie" label="gained naval control of Lake Erie"/>
<link wikidata="Q257808" start="33006" end="33014" title="Tecumseh" label="Tecumseh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="33032" end="33046" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q897786" start="33230" end="33258" title="Burning of Washington" label="raided and burned Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850527" start="33268" end="33289" title="Battle of Baltimore" label="repelled at Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q44696" start="33303" end="33327" title="The Star-Spangled Banner" label="The Star-Spangled Banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237111" start="33468" end="33489" title="Battle of Plattsburgh" label="Battle of Plattsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q41894" start="33573" end="33594" title="Battle of New Orleans" label="Battle of New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324198" start="33738" end="33750" title="Treaty of Ghent" label="peace treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241" start="33896" end="33910" title="national pride" label="national pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365383" start="34000" end="34013" title="standing army" label="standing army"/>
<link wikidata="Q934187" start="34333" end="34364" title="First Bank of the United States" label="First Bank of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263849" start="34495" end="34527" title="Second Bank of the United States" label="Second Bank of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815" start="34827" end="34839" title="James Monroe" label="James Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384794" start="34914" end="34934" title="Era of Good Feelings" label="Era of Good Feelings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453498" start="34954" end="34972" title="First Party System" label="First Party System"/>
<link wikidata="Q181026" start="34979" end="34994" title="Monroe Doctrine" label="Monroe Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q744448" start="35165" end="35184" title="U.S. foreign policy" label="U.S. foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="35206" end="35220" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815" start="35767" end="35779" title="James Monroe" label="James Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="35866" end="35880" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11820" start="35885" end="35901" title="Martin Van Buren" label="Martin Van Buren"/>
<link wikidata="Q319630" start="36004" end="36014" title="Henry Clay" label="Henry Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q42183" start="36031" end="36041" title="Whig Party (United States)" label="Whig Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q42183" start="36108" end="36113" title="Whig Party (United States)" label="Whigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q786008" start="36534" end="36552" title="Indian Removal Act" label="Indian Removal Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q319421" start="36779" end="36800" title="Five Civilized Tribes" label="Five Civilized Tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q750448" start="36925" end="36939" title="Trail of Tears" label="Trail of Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="37012" end="37020" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q474202" start="37054" end="37070" title="Seminole Indians" label="Seminole Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q900693" start="37141" end="37154" title="Seminole Wars" label="Seminole Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191886" start="37196" end="37217" title="Spanish in New Mexico" label="Spanish in New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285219" start="37225" end="37236" title="Californios" label="Californios"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="37270" end="37290" title="California Gold Rush" label="California Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q862312" start="37497" end="37509" title="Oregon Trail" label="Oregon Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q13393124" start="37627" end="37638" title="Wagon train" label="Wagon train"/>
<link wikidata="Q474184" start="37674" end="37690" title="Manifest destiny" label="Manifest destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q319630" start="37847" end="37857" title="Henry Clay" label="Henry Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="37862" end="37877" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870571" start="37937" end="37946" title="History of the Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q698731" start="37991" end="38007" title="1844 United States presidential election" label="election of 1844"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187072" start="38048" end="38077" title="Texas annexation" label="Republic of Texas was annexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="38102" end="38122" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546566" start="38172" end="38192" title="Battle for Mexico City" label="captured Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q616109" start="38226" end="38253" title="Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo" label="Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q21071188" start="38353" end="38370" title="White Southerners" label="White Southerners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209676" start="38414" end="38428" title="Mexican people" label="Mexican people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187072" start="38524" end="38539" title="Texas annexation" label="U.S. took Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q22090310" start="38769" end="38788" title="California genocide" label="California genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q388164" start="38856" end="38870" title="Oregon Country" label="Oregon Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420228" start="38894" end="38910" title="Oregon Territory" label="Oregon Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q170185" start="38927" end="38932" title="guano" label="guano"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="38960" end="38970" title="fertilizer" label="fertilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q513470" start="38997" end="39014" title="Guano Islands Act" label="Guano Islands Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246745" start="39314" end="39344" title="Women&amp;#x27;s suffrage in the United States" label="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346026" start="39392" end="39405" title="Liberty Party (United States, 1840)" label="Liberty Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104317" start="39430" end="39442" title="Gerrit Smith" label="Gerrit Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736155" start="39515" end="39538" title="Seneca Falls Convention" label="Seneca Falls Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q4156977" start="39566" end="39591" title="Declaration of Sentiments" label="Declaration of Sentiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517986" start="39695" end="39714" title="first-wave feminism" label="first-wave feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q465335" start="39726" end="39748" title="Elizabeth Cady Stanton" label="Elizabeth Cady Stanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q452281" start="39750" end="39760" title="Lucy Stone" label="Lucy Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q192245" start="39765" end="39781" title="Susan B. Anthony" label="Susan B. Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154940" start="39807" end="39827" title="Paulina Wright Davis" label="Paulina Wright Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336961" start="39868" end="39907" title="National Women&amp;#x27;s Rights Convention" label="National Women&amp;#x27;s Rights Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="40248" end="40289" title="Abolitionism in the United States" label="sought the immediate abolition of slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163749" start="40538" end="40555" title="Pennsylvania Hall (Philadelphia)" label="Pennsylvania Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q124428073" start="40626" end="40642" title="Slave rebellion and resistance in the United States" label="Slave rebellions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393002" start="40646" end="40661" title="Gabriel Prosser" label="Gabriel Prosser"/>
<link wikidata="Q721096" start="40670" end="40683" title="Denmark Vesey" label="Denmark Vesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967898" start="40692" end="40702" title="Nat Turner&amp;#x27;s Rebellion" label="Nat Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223430" start="40715" end="40725" title="John Brown&amp;#x27;s raid on Harpers Ferry" label="John Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569861" start="40863" end="40887" title="Southern Democrats" label="Southern white Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201620" start="41201" end="41212" title="Plantation complexes in the Southern United States" label="plantations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505660" start="41425" end="41438" title="textile mills" label="textile mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q39392" start="41674" end="41692" title="Compromise of 1850" label="Compromise of 1850"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573058" start="41742" end="41752" title="Slave states and free states" label="free state"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921545" start="41864" end="41882" title="Fugitive Slave Act" label="Fugitive Slave Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q727854" start="42087" end="42105" title="Compromise of 1820" label="Compromise of 1820"/>
<link wikidata="Q619762" start="42162" end="42181" title="Kansas–Nebraska Act" label="Kansas–Nebraska Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229762" start="42232" end="42251" title="Popular sovereignty in the United States" label="popular sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870609" start="42428" end="42444" title="History of the Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q331377" start="42564" end="42579" title="Bleeding Kansas" label="Bleeding Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q690462" start="42849" end="42871" title="Dred Scott v. Sandford" label="Dred Scott v. Sandford"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="43116" end="43131" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q698842" start="43140" end="43153" title="1860 United States presidential election" label="1860 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q687031" start="43177" end="43184" title="seceded" label="seceded"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="43215" end="43244" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="43284" end="43293" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q543165" start="43324" end="43395" title="Battle of Fort Sumter" label="Confederate forces attacked a U.S. military installation at Fort Sumter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241234" start="43436" end="43456" title="President Lincoln&amp;#x27;s 75,000 volunteers" label="called on the states"/>
<link wikidata="Q669269" start="43715" end="43728" title="Border states (American Civil War)" label="border states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="43900" end="43913" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q221469" start="43964" end="43988" title="First Battle of Bull Run" label="First Battle of Bull Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988047" start="44076" end="44091" title="Western Theater of the American Civil War" label="western theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="44097" end="44107" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631029" start="44162" end="44172" title="Battle of Perryville" label="Perryville"/>
<link wikidata="Q943277" start="44177" end="44183" title="Battle of Shiloh" label="Shiloh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550003" start="44196" end="44206" title="Union Navy" label="Union Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q749397" start="44341" end="44356" title="Eastern Theater of the American Civil War" label="eastern theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q310192" start="44398" end="44417" title="George B. McClellan" label="George B. McClellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="44463" end="44481" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154050" start="44490" end="44508" title="Peninsula campaign" label="Peninsula campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q492324" start="44513" end="44536" title="Seven Days Battles" label="retreated after attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q165557" start="44562" end="44575" title="Robert E. Lee" label="Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q689847" start="44767" end="44792" title="Army of Northern Virginia" label="Army of Northern Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377639" start="44903" end="44923" title="Gettysburg campaign" label="invaded Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917424" start="44959" end="44972" title="war-weariness" label="war-weariness"/>
<link wikidata="Q391358" start="44991" end="45016" title="Emancipation Proclamation" label="Emancipation Proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856051" start="45134" end="45158" title="turning point of the American Civil War" label="turning point of the war"/>
<link wikidata="Q653089" start="45200" end="45219" title="Army of the Potomac" label="Army of the Potomac"/>
<link wikidata="Q33132" start="45237" end="45257" title="Battle of Gettysburg" label="Battle of Gettysburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q220497" start="45364" end="45389" title="New York City draft riots" label="New York City draft riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162775" start="45420" end="45442" title="Conscription in the United States" label="Civil War conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="45527" end="45543" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066253" start="45591" end="45610" title="Battle of Vicksburg" label="Battle of Vicksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q188936" start="45662" end="45686" title="William Tecumseh Sherman" label="William Tecumseh Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q186702" start="45706" end="45717" title="Chattanooga" label="Chattanooga"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="45729" end="45736" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q698908" start="45830" end="45845" title="1864 United States presidential election" label="win re-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052780" start="45847" end="45878" title="Sherman&amp;#x27;s march to the sea" label="Sherman&amp;#x27;s march to the sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q831550" start="46038" end="46054" title="war of attrition" label="war of attrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q621676" start="46084" end="46103" title="Appomattox campaign" label="Appomattox campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355391" start="46127" end="46139" title="Battle of Appomattox Court House" label="surrendering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290702" start="46306" end="46320" title="Industrial warfare" label="industrial war"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="46337" end="46346" title="telegraph" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="46663" end="46679" title="Confederate army" label="Confederate army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044143" start="46860" end="46879" title="civilian casualties" label="civilian casualties"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="47107" end="47121" title="Reconstruction era" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983570" start="47159" end="47163" title="Compromise of 1877" label="1877"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699410" start="47187" end="47203" title="Ten Percent Plan" label="Ten Percent Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025404" start="47286" end="47298" title="Assassination of Abraham Lincoln" label="assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q180914" start="47316" end="47333" title="John Wilkes Booth" label="John Wilkes Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q8612" start="47352" end="47366" title="Andrew Johnson" label="Andrew Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753108" start="47477" end="47508" title="first transcontinental railroad" label="first transcontinental railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q841571" start="47719" end="47727" title="Freedmen" label="Freedmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928426" start="47783" end="47805" title="Freedmen&amp;#x27;s Bureau" label="Freedmen&amp;#x27;s Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302780" start="47879" end="47904" title="Reconstruction Amendments" label="Reconstruction Amendments"/>
<link wikidata="Q175613" start="47963" end="47983" title="Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Thirteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="48011" end="48031" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q191614" start="48099" end="48118" title="Fifteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fifteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11833539" start="48263" end="48282" title="Radical Republicans" label="Radical Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356920" start="48317" end="48331" title="1866 elections" label="1866 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149795" start="48438" end="48454" title="Impeachment of Andrew Johnson" label="he was impeached"/>
<link wikidata="Q109619944" start="48478" end="48499" title="Impeachment trial of Andrew Johnson" label="attempt to remove him"/>
<link wikidata="Q113886" start="48721" end="48733" title="Carpetbagger" label="Carpetbagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2228835" start="48770" end="48778" title="Scalawag" label="Scalawag"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="49069" end="49081" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649437" start="49241" end="49257" title="Ku Klux Klan Act" label="Ku Klux Klan Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2516642" start="49315" end="49327" title="White League" label="White League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305032" start="49332" end="49342" title="Red Shirts (United States)" label="Red Shirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q72251" start="49459" end="49472" title="1876 United States presidential election" label="1876 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983570" start="49478" end="49496" title="Compromise of 1877" label="Compromise of 1877"/>
<link wikidata="Q35686" start="49513" end="49532" title="Rutherford B. Hayes" label="Rutherford B. Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073716" start="49654" end="49675" title="Chinese Exclusion Act" label="Chinese Exclusion Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q10534749" start="49759" end="49782" title="Immigration Act of 1882" label="Immigration Act of 1882"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282172" start="49887" end="49902" title="Disenfranchisement after the Reconstruction era" label="disenfranchised"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503357" start="49983" end="49993" title="Poll taxes in the United States" label="poll taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647568" start="49998" end="50011" title="literacy test" label="literacy test"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="50081" end="50089" title="Jim Crow" label="Jim Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753636" start="50190" end="50200" title="Gilded Age" label="Gilded Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="50223" end="50233" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q131708" start="50461" end="50472" title="plutocratic" label="plutocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q54168" start="50544" end="50555" title="J.P. Morgan" label="J.P. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q160278" start="50560" end="50579" title="John D. Rockefeller" label="John D. Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309633" start="50728" end="50739" title="Immigration to the United States" label="immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870925" start="51217" end="51226" title="History of the socialist movement in the United States" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q265385" start="51231" end="51240" title="Anarchism in the United States" label="anarchist"/>
<link wikidata="Q627125" start="51306" end="51320" title="Labor history of the United States" label="labor movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q821102" start="51531" end="51551" title="progressive movement" label="progressive movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474197" start="51715" end="51749" title="Muckraker" label="&amp;quot;Muckraking&amp;quot; journalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q194938" start="51990" end="51999" title="Sixteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Sixteenth"/>
<link wikidata="Q205304" start="52008" end="52018" title="Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Nineteenth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308197" start="52070" end="52088" title="federal income tax" label="federal income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q34597" start="52173" end="52190" title="James A. Garfield" label="James A. Garfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q364232" start="52211" end="52226" title="Charles Guiteau" label="Charles Guiteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q282657" start="52392" end="52406" title="Samuel Gompers" label="Samuel Gompers"/>
<link wikidata="Q464242" start="52415" end="52443" title="American Federation of Labor" label="American Federation of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q337794" start="52578" end="52592" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (United States)" label="Populist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418422" start="52599" end="52612" title="Panic of 1893" label="Panic of 1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348639" start="52748" end="52762" title="Pullman Strike" label="Pullman Strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q334993" start="52876" end="52890" title="Eugene V. Debs" label="Eugene V. Debs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353232" start="52928" end="52954" title="Socialist Party of America" label="Socialist Party of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162467" start="53034" end="53051" title="Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act" label="Civil Service Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057024" start="53139" end="53162" title="Interstate Commerce Act" label="Interstate Commerce Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425088" start="53244" end="53265" title="Sherman Antitrust Act" label="Sherman Antitrust Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500299" start="53428" end="53439" title="Free silver" label="Free silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q173509" start="53605" end="53618" title="gold standard" label="gold standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q699201" start="53650" end="53676" title="1896 United States presidential election" label="1896 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q35041" start="53702" end="53718" title="William McKinley" label="William McKinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q205282" start="53738" end="53760" title="William Jennings Bryan" label="William Jennings Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866985" start="53927" end="53939" title="Assassination of William McKinley" label="assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q348187" start="53943" end="53956" title="Leon Czolgosz" label="Leon Czolgosz"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="53987" end="54005" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q745877" start="54104" end="54116" title="credit union" label="credit union"/>
<link wikidata="Q53536" start="54149" end="54171" title="Federal Reserve System" label="Federal Reserve System"/>
<link wikidata="Q844449" start="54216" end="54220" title="Panic of 1907" label="1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260911" start="54225" end="54229" title="Depression of 1920–1921" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q849680" start="54353" end="54379" title="American Indian Wars" label="wars with Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="54540" end="54552" title="Indian reservation" label="reservations"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="54571" end="54589" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="54696" end="54716" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="54796" end="54800" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q847137" start="54878" end="54893" title="Treaty of Paris (1898)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="54942" end="54953" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="54955" end="54966" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="54972" end="54976" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q205282" start="55045" end="55067" title="William Jennings Bryan" label="William Jennings Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q605269" start="55160" end="55171" title="American imperialism" label="imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q214456" start="55192" end="55229" title="Philippine–American War" label="insurrection by Filipino nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="55543" end="55555" title="Panama Canal" label="Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051734" start="55668" end="55684" title="Open Door Policy" label="Open Door Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15580856" start="56095" end="56112" title="feminist movement" label="feminist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q127328" start="56258" end="56268" title="Alice Paul" label="Alice Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966921" start="56300" end="56344" title="National American Woman Suffrage Association" label="National American Woman Suffrage Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q270207" start="56361" end="56380" title="Carrie Chapman Catt" label="Carrie Chapman Catt"/>
<link wikidata="Q623009" start="56411" end="56438" title="National Woman&amp;#x27;s Party" label="National Woman&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157083" start="56485" end="56501" title="Silent Sentinels" label="Silent Sentinels"/>
<link wikidata="Q217105" start="56548" end="56566" title="political prisoner" label="political prisoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892527" start="56740" end="56765" title="United States home front during World War I" label="home front in World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q232407" start="56981" end="56997" title="Jeannette Rankin" label="Jeannette Rankin"/>
<link wikidata="Q205304" start="57148" end="57168" title="Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Nineteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="57316" end="57327" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="57454" end="57465" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="57503" end="57517" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119089" start="57577" end="57607" title="unrestricted submarine warfare" label="unrestricted submarine warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551560" start="57772" end="57797" title="Sinking of the RMS Lusitania" label="RMS &amp;quot;Lusitania&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892405" start="57808" end="57820" title="United States declaration of war on Germany (1917)" label="declared war"/>
<link wikidata="Q272383" start="57879" end="57895" title="John J. Pershing" label="John J. Pershing"/>
<link wikidata="Q464176" start="57903" end="57932" title="American Expeditionary Forces" label="American Expeditionary Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445331" start="58064" end="58084" title="Sedition Act of 1918" label="Sedition Act of 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118913" start="58089" end="58110" title="Espionage Act of 1917" label="Espionage Act of 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="58178" end="58184" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="58228" end="58255" title="1919 Paris Peace Conference" label="1919 Paris Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="58299" end="58316" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="58355" end="58375" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q785893" start="58585" end="58598" title="unilateralism" label="unilateralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="58632" end="58650" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092510" start="58717" end="58726" title="First Red Scare" label="Red Scare"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="58908" end="58919" title="Spanish flu" label="Spanish flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q13468437" start="58964" end="58971" title="Roaring Twenties" label="Roaring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506365" start="59044" end="59059" title="Great Migration (African American)" label="Great Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q829895" start="59110" end="59128" title="Harlem Renaissance" label="Harlem Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="59142" end="59146" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="59169" end="59181" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434492" start="59208" end="59231" title="Immigration Act of 1924" label="Immigration Act of 1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="59289" end="59300" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="Prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q156784" start="59396" end="59416" title="Eighteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Eighteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977245" start="59418" end="59436" title="Rum-running" label="Bootlegged alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q125752" start="59583" end="59588" title="American Mafia" label="Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="59625" end="59646" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880101" start="59647" end="59667" title="Cullen-Harrison Act" label="repealed prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q696482" start="59715" end="59731" title="Great Depression in the United States" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="59752" end="59760" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q207781" start="59850" end="59866" title="financial bubble" label="financial bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q201684" start="59924" end="59941" title="Wall Street crash" label="Wall Street crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910703" start="59980" end="60002" title="Causes of the Great Depression" label="other economic factors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814941" start="60026" end="60036" title="economic depression" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q161081" start="60068" end="60077" title="deflation" label="deflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184791" start="60328" end="60343" title="Social Security (United States)" label="Social Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550813" start="60345" end="60378" title="Social Security Act" label="unemployment relief and insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336890" start="60380" end="60394" title="National Housing Act of 1934" label="public housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4563193" start="60396" end="60416" title="1933 Banking Act" label="bankruptcy insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q536633" start="60418" end="60432" title="Agricultural Adjustment Act" label="farm subsidies"/>
<link wikidata="Q994506" start="60438" end="60472" title="Securities Act of 1933" label="regulation of financial securities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200079" start="60523" end="60552" title="Works Progress Administration" label="Works Progress Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094508" start="60582" end="60609" title="Civilian Conservation Corps" label="Civilian Conservation Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177134" start="60706" end="60733" title="Public Works Administration" label="Public Works Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152203" start="60844" end="60882" title="modern liberalism in the United States" label="modern liberalism in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975718" start="60888" end="60906" title="New Deal coalition" label="New Deal coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q634429" start="60940" end="60944" title="1936 United States presidential election" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q699416" start="60946" end="60950" title="1940 United States presidential election" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="60956" end="60960" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443448" start="60966" end="60981" title="Second New Deal" label="Second New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154442" start="61070" end="61080" title="Wagner Act" label="Wagner Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163103" start="61478" end="61500" title="Conservative coalition" label="Conservative coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q914092" start="61630" end="61645" title="Neutrality Acts of the 1930s" label="Neutrality Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="61726" end="61730" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="61761" end="61779" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="61811" end="61823" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796425" start="61878" end="61898" title="Arsenal of Democracy" label="Arsenal of Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="61966" end="61972" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q207637" start="61977" end="61987" title="Lend-Lease" label="Lend-Lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="62094" end="62116" title="Attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attacking Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159918" start="62203" end="62223" title="Executive Order 9066" label="Executive Order 9066"/>
<link wikidata="Q936604" start="62285" end="62340" title="Internment of Japanese Americans" label="removed from their homes and placed in internment camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q44700" start="62383" end="62399" title="European theater" label="European theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="62417" end="62428" title="Pacific War" label="Pacific War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945433" start="62469" end="62484" title="Four Policemen" label="Allied Big Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="62506" end="62520" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="62522" end="62534" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="62540" end="62545" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="62597" end="62606" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497122" start="62851" end="62874" title="Military production during World War II" label="wartime production boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536750" start="63171" end="63191" title="War Production Board" label="War Production Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175954" start="63512" end="63535" title="Japanese occupation of the Philippines" label="Philippines to Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q207165" start="63572" end="63595" title="Battle of the Coral Sea" label="Battle of the Coral Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q173034" start="63656" end="63662" title="Battle of Midway" label="Midway"/>
<link wikidata="Q192767" start="63718" end="63729" title="Guadalcanal" label="Guadalcanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q696479" start="63796" end="63826" title="Battle of the Eastern Solomons" label="Battle of the Eastern Solomons"/>
<link wikidata="Q217145" start="63835" end="63856" title="Battle of Guadalcanal" label="Battle of Guadalcanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="63927" end="63937" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q249708" start="63955" end="63969" title="Aleutian Islands campaign" label="their invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="63985" end="64001" title="Aleutian Islands" label="Aleutian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q80389" start="64064" end="64077" title="Kuril Islands" label="Kuril Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="64119" end="64141" title="North African campaign" label="North African campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885257" start="64150" end="64175" title="Fall of the Fascist regime in Italy" label="collapse of Fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="64233" end="64238" title="D-Day" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748708" start="64285" end="64305" title="Nazi-occupied France" label="Nazi-occupied France"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="64365" end="64382" title="Normandy campaign" label="Normandy campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q182822" start="64418" end="64432" title="French Riviera" label="French Riviera"/>
<link wikidata="Q221111" start="64436" end="64453" title="Operation Dragoon" label="Operation Dragoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="64515" end="64519" title="Death of Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="died"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="64550" end="64562" title="Harry Truman" label="Harry Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q154182" start="64645" end="64661" title="Battle of Berlin" label="Battle of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q700983" start="64679" end="64699" title="German Instrument of Surrender" label="formally capitulated"/>
<link wikidata="Q700924" start="64713" end="64737" title="End of World War II in Europe" label="ending the war in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q646500" start="64781" end="64804" title="Leapfrogging (strategy)" label="island hopping strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q308999" start="64948" end="64968" title="Battle of Leyte Gulf" label="Battle of Leyte Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837141" start="64994" end="65030" title="Treaty of Manila (1946)" label="granted the Philippines independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="65042" end="65066" title="research and development" label="research and development"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="65108" end="65125" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q11429" start="65154" end="65169" title="nuclear fission" label="nuclear fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="65181" end="65193" title="atomic bombs" label="atomic bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q207342" start="65224" end="65250" title="Trinity (nuclear test)" label="detonated on July 16, 1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q153732" start="65274" end="65289" title="Mariana Islands" label="Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q180182" start="65360" end="65368" title="Battle of Iwo Jima" label="Iwo Jima"/>
<link wikidata="Q192660" start="65373" end="65380" title="Battle of Okinawa" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q300879" start="65411" end="65443" title="Operation Downfall" label="invade Japan&amp;#x27;s home islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="65454" end="65474" title="Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="dropped atomic bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q34664" start="65501" end="65510" title="Hiroshima" label="Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="65515" end="65523" title="Nagasaki" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q696251" start="65589" end="65603" title="occupied Japan" label="occupied Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q55304" start="65609" end="65624" title="American occupation zone in Germany" label="part of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777062" start="65758" end="65768" title="Long Peace" label="long peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="65839" end="65847" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="66218" end="66230" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="66299" end="66313" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155530" start="66362" end="66383" title="American isolationism" label="American isolationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="66509" end="66528" title="UN Security Council" label="UN Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="66534" end="66561" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="66692" end="66701" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q29071" start="66858" end="66869" title="containment" label="containment"/>
<link wikidata="Q171375" start="66912" end="66927" title="Truman Doctrine" label="Truman Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="67215" end="67228" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="67584" end="67618" title="North Atlantic Treaty Organization" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="67672" end="67683" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q124425" start="67726" end="67738" title="Iron Curtain" label="Iron Curtain"/>
<link wikidata="Q586755" start="67783" end="67808" title="RDS-1" label="first nuclear weapon test"/>
<link wikidata="Q637802" start="67868" end="67896" title="mutually assured destruction" label="mutually assured destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="68079" end="68089" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="68094" end="68105" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="" start="68111" end="68159" title="United States involvement in regime change#1945–1991: Cold War" label="toppled left-wing governments in the third world"/>
<link wikidata="Q593774" start="68195" end="68207" title="1953 Iranian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="Iran in 1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q976887" start="68212" end="68229" title="1954 Guatemalan coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="Guatemala in 1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q207066" start="68231" end="68242" title="McCarthyism" label="McCarthyism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189197" start="68294" end="68309" title="Joseph McCarthy" label="Joseph McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q945795" start="68389" end="68427" title="House Un-American Activities Committee" label="House Un-American Activities Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896360" start="68476" end="68490" title="Lavender Scare" label="Lavender Scare"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="68530" end="68550" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q699548" start="68555" end="68572" title="1952 United States presidential election" label="elected president"/>
<link wikidata="Q507720" start="68755" end="68772" title="long-range bomber" label="long-range bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q177471" start="68778" end="68802" title="intercontinental missile" label="intercontinental missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090983" start="68811" end="68830" title="Death and state funeral of Joseph Stalin" label="Stalin died in 1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634334" start="69077" end="69090" title="Post–World War II economic expansion" label="economic boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q610548" start="69460" end="69469" title="baby boom" label="baby boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091971" start="69564" end="69597" title="Suburbanization" label="moved into suburban neighborhoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q875738" start="69640" end="69667" title="Brown v. Board of Education" label="Brown v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190828" start="69734" end="69753" title="Little Rock Nine" label="nine Black students"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140040" start="69806" end="69837" title="Little Rock Central High School" label="Little Rock Central High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617137" start="69954" end="69985" title="Racism in the United States" label="racism across the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="70009" end="70014" title="Southern United States" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="70059" end="70080" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q41921" start="70098" end="70108" title="Rosa Parks" label="Rosa Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="70113" end="70135" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q249367" start="70147" end="70181" title="Montgomery bus boycott" label="boycott of segregated public buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q29364" start="70185" end="70195" title="Montgomery, Alabama" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3862427" start="70240" end="70274" title="Montgomery Improvement Association" label="Montgomery Improvement Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q80811" start="70488" end="70495" title="Sputnik" label="Sputnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q221675" start="70528" end="70539" title="R-7 Semyorka" label="R-7 missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780403" start="70643" end="70653" title="High-altitude nuclear explosion" label="from above"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932" start="70707" end="70717" title="Space Race" label="Space Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="70859" end="70904" title="National Aeronautics and Space Administration" label="National Aeronautics and Space Administration"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="71018" end="71035" title="Science education#United States" label="science education"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="71099" end="71114" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q699590" start="71119" end="71136" title="1960 United States presidential election" label="elected President"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824562" start="71138" end="71156" title="Presidency of John F. Kennedy" label="His administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="71263" end="71274" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q191721" start="71280" end="71300" title="Bay of Pigs Invasion" label="Bay of Pigs Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="71310" end="71330" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193484" start="71350" end="71366" title="Assassination of John F. Kennedy" label="was assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="71389" end="71406" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191264" start="71470" end="71483" title="Great Society" label="Great Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q559392" start="71551" end="71559" title="Medicare (United States)" label="Medicare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381339" start="71662" end="71684" title="Environmental movement in the United States" label="environmental activism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118976" start="71692" end="71739" title="War on poverty" label="series of programs designed to wipe out poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q76611" start="71805" end="71815" title="nonviolent" label="nonviolent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935359" start="71882" end="71901" title="Birmingham campaign" label="Birmingham campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061891" start="71911" end="71936" title="Selma to Montgomery march" label="Selma to Montgomery march"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345835" start="72028" end="72046" title="Loving v. Virginia" label="Loving v. Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128871" start="72066" end="72085" title="March on Washington" label="March on Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="72159" end="72183" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="Civil Rights Act of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608064" start="72189" end="72214" title="Voting Rights Act of 1965" label="Voting Rights Act of 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094483" start="72224" end="72248" title="Fair Housing Act of 1968" label="Fair Housing Act of 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="72266" end="72279" title="Jim Crow laws" label="Jim Crow laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="72299" end="72317" title="racial segregation" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q465140" start="72504" end="72528" title="American Indian Movement" label="American Indian Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q355425" start="72550" end="72562" title="Cesar Chavez" label="Cesar Chavez"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="72592" end="72608" title="Mexican-American" label="Mexican-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887749" start="72719" end="72749" title="United Farm Workers of America" label="United Farm Workers of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="72808" end="72819" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="72887" end="72895" title="Feminism" label="Feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8189417" start="72904" end="72926" title="environmental movement" label="environmental movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="72982" end="72994" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995893" start="73016" end="73041" title="counterculture of the 1960s" label="counterculture revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q880483" start="73322" end="73333" title="Black Power" label="Black Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q932701" start="73436" end="73450" title="summer of love" label="summer of love"/>
<link wikidata="Q17044485" start="73467" end="73483" title="Long, hot summer of 1967" label="long, hot summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q757963" start="73545" end="73565" title="Assassination of Martin Luther King Jr." label="assassinated in 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612907" start="73578" end="73597" title="gay rights movement" label="gay rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q51402" start="73616" end="73631" title="Stonewall riots" label="Stonewall riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q234604" start="73763" end="73776" title="Betty Friedan" label="Betty Friedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438791" start="73803" end="73824" title="The Feminine Mystique" label="The Feminine Mystique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967556" start="74022" end="74053" title="National Organization for Women" label="National Organization for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q429923" start="74225" end="74247" title="Equal Rights Amendment" label="Equal Rights Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q434669" start="74351" end="74367" title="Phyllis Schlafly" label="Phyllis Schlafly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384135" start="74463" end="74477" title="Equal Pay Act of 1963" label="equalizing pay"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="74479" end="74489" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="employment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133007" start="74491" end="74500" title="Title IX" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q96377340" start="74502" end="74526" title="Equal Employment Opportunity Act of 1972" label="employment opportunities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384117" start="74532" end="74538" title="Equal Credit Opportunity Act" label="credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239887" start="74560" end="74591" title="Pregnancy Discrimination Act" label="ending pregnancy discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="74617" end="74630" title="spousal abuse" label="spousal abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198705" start="74635" end="74647" title="marital rape" label="marital rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137223" start="74686" end="74709" title="equal protection clause" label="equal protection clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="74717" end="74737" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237872" start="74881" end="74898" title="fundamental right" label="fundamental right"/>
<link wikidata="Q300950" start="74908" end="74919" title="Roe v. Wade" label="Roe v. Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="75002" end="75015" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="75118" end="75149" title="Environmental Protection Agency" label="Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q862054" start="75151" end="75167" title="1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China" label="opened relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q927708" start="75184" end="75242" title="Vietnamization" label="attempted to gradually turn the Vietnam War effort over to"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="75247" end="75260" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q696802" start="75283" end="75303" title="Paris Peace Accords" label="peace treaty in 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q155705" start="75553" end="75560" title="détente" label="détente"/>
<link wikidata="Q43653" start="75630" end="75649" title="Apollo 11" label="landing on the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="75664" end="75681" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185863" start="75757" end="75786" title="Democratic National Committee" label="Democratic National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="75911" end="75922" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q482456" start="75970" end="75984" title="Fall of Saigon" label="Fall of Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783607" start="76137" end="76148" title="Salvadoran civil war" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282732" start="76153" end="76162" title="Guatemalan civil war" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q645986" start="76197" end="76206" title="National Reorganization Process" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704093" start="76211" end="76216" title="Military dictatorship of Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q156017" start="76234" end="76250" title="Operation Condor" label="Operation Condor"/>
<link wikidata="Q236118" start="76314" end="76327" title="Southern Cone" label="Southern Cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q368" start="76383" end="76399" title="Augusto Pinochet" label="Augusto Pinochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="76414" end="76430" title="OPEC oil embargo" label="OPEC oil embargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574284" start="76659" end="76672" title="1970s Energy Crisis" label="energy crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q185245" start="76761" end="76772" title="stagflation" label="stagflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q902410" start="76802" end="76814" title="deregulation" label="deregulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="76898" end="76915" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q163820" start="76959" end="76973" title="Silicon Valley" label="Silicon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="76976" end="76988" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q309204" start="77040" end="77058" title="Camp David Accords" label="Camp David Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="77139" end="77145" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q589673" start="77150" end="77175" title="Iran hostage crisis" label="took 66 Americans hostage"/>
<link wikidata="Q699716" start="77193" end="77206" title="1980 United States presidential election" label="1980 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="77225" end="77238" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="77448" end="77461" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306826" start="77508" end="77529" title="political realignment" label="political realignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q699716" start="77539" end="77543" title="1980 United States presidential election" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q699744" start="77548" end="77552" title="1984 United States presidential election" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="77588" end="77598" title="neoliberal" label="neoliberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q608537" start="77631" end="77642" title="Reaganomics" label="Reaganomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333403" start="77685" end="77718" title="Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981" label="Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326569" start="77856" end="77873" title="Early 1980s recession" label="recession in 1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q185517" start="78117" end="78129" title="War on Drugs" label="War on Drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991290" start="78140" end="78165" title="United States incarceration rate" label="increase in incarceration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758527" start="78453" end="78467" title="crack epidemic" label="crack epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q125821240" start="78537" end="78551" title="Ronald Reagan and AIDS" label="reacted slowly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099260" start="78559" end="78570" title="HIV/AIDS in the United States" label="AIDS crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q501866" start="78752" end="78771" title="invasion of Grenada" label="invasion of Grenada"/>
<link wikidata="Q922661" start="78781" end="78797" title="1986 United States bombing of Libya" label="bombing of Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q286810" start="78860" end="78866" title="Contras" label="Contra"/>
<link wikidata="Q273659" start="78912" end="78930" title="Iran–Contra affair" label="Iran–Contra affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q211031" start="79005" end="79033" title="Strategic Defense Initiative" label="Strategic Defense Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q287422" start="79105" end="79134" title="Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty" label="Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q331662" start="79216" end="79227" title="disarmament" label="disarmament"/>
<link wikidata="Q169401" start="79350" end="79390" title="Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty" label="Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q131630594" start="79396" end="79417" title="Soviet Union collapse" label="Soviet Union collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="79635" end="79643" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="79652" end="79656" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="79672" end="79689" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q856650" start="79739" end="79765" title="Iraqi invasion of Kuwait" label="invaded neighboring Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115894" start="79798" end="79816" title="Coalition of the Gulf War" label="U.S.-led offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q459282" start="79894" end="79900" title="United States invasion of Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428977" start="79902" end="79909" title="Operation Gothic Serpent" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="79911" end="79917" title="Bosnian War" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q68969" start="79923" end="79930" title="Croatian War of Independence" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q696187" start="79952" end="79972" title="1992 Los Angeles riots" label="riots in Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q17164849" start="79978" end="79994" title="Police brutality in the United States" label="police brutality"/>
<link wikidata="Q699776" start="80028" end="80043" title="1992 United States presidential election" label="Elected in 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="80055" end="80067" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765208" start="80110" end="80139" title="Economic policy of the Bill Clinton administration" label="first balanced federal budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q956129" start="80204" end="80222" title="Digital Revolution" label="Digital Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="80270" end="80278" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026486" start="80351" end="80356" title="Operation Uphold Democracy" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q190029" start="80361" end="80367" title="Kosovo War" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892454" start="80411" end="80433" title="1994 midterm elections" label="1994 midterm elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387981" start="80445" end="80466" title="Republican Revolution" label="Republican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3689146" start="80500" end="80521" title="Contract with America" label="Contract with America"/>
<link wikidata="Q182788" start="80537" end="80550" title="Newt Gingrich" label="Newt Gingrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q217528" start="80727" end="80748" title="Oklahoma City bombing" label="Oklahoma City bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q659166" start="80793" end="80820" title="1996 United States presidential election" label="1996 presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200400" start="80831" end="80852" title="Impeachment of Bill Clinton" label="Clinton was impeached"/>
<link wikidata="Q310229" start="80899" end="80915" title="lying under oath" label="lying under oath"/>
<link wikidata="Q212659" start="80968" end="80983" title="Monica Lewinsky" label="Monica Lewinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q79721" start="81031" end="81045" title="dot-com bubble" label="dot-com bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q4008379" start="81060" end="81073" title="overvaluation" label="overvaluation"/>
<link wikidata="Q327959" start="81145" end="81174" title="2000 United States presidential election" label="presidential election in 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="81192" end="81206" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q19673" start="81211" end="81218" title="Al Gore" label="Al Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461720" start="81263" end="81297" title="2000 United States presidential election recount in Florida" label="dispute over the counting of votes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="81362" end="81380" title="September 11, 2001" label="September 11, 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="81385" end="81393" title="al-Qaeda" label="al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q217327" start="81454" end="81468" title="suicide attack" label="suicide attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235" start="81531" end="81549" title="World Trade Center (1973–2001)" label="World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="81553" end="81566" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q11208" start="81585" end="81597" title="the Pentagon" label="the Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q107126" start="81601" end="81620" title="Arlington, Virginia" label="Arlington, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q638603" start="81626" end="81638" title="United Airlines Flight 93" label="fourth plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900110" start="81699" end="81710" title="Stonycreek Township, Somerset County, Pennsylvania" label="empty field"/>
<link wikidata="Q62179" start="81777" end="81786" title="Collapse of the World Trade Center" label="collapsed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059842" start="81862" end="81879" title="Health effects arising from the September 11 attacks" label="toxic dust clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="81956" end="81969" title="war on terror" label="war on terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q19646470" start="82013" end="82032" title="United States invasion of Afghanistan" label="invaded Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="82048" end="82055" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="82107" end="82122" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q10900938" start="82166" end="82173" title="Manhunt for Osama bin Laden" label="manhunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q221689" start="82248" end="82259" title="Patriot Act" label="Patriot Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4085867" start="82439" end="82459" title="indefinite detention" label="indefinite detention"/>
<link wikidata="Q357" start="82505" end="82534" title="Guantanamo Bay detention camp" label="Guantanamo Bay detention camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q11231" start="82618" end="82649" title="Department of Homeland Security" label="Department of Homeland Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="82742" end="82761" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="an invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="82787" end="82801" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q49394" start="82806" end="82833" title="weapons of mass destruction" label="weapons of mass destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780506" start="82972" end="82979" title="Capture of Saddam Hussein" label="capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="82996" end="83004" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140595" start="83012" end="83034" title="protests against the Iraq War" label="international protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229755" start="83053" end="83077" title="Public opinion in the United States on the invasion of Iraq" label="domestic support decline"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="83089" end="83106" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="83168" end="83173" title="levee" label="levee"/>
<link wikidata="Q926905" start="83222" end="83238" title="Iraqi insurgency (2003–2011)" label="Iraqi insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6067814" start="83293" end="83302" title="Iraq War troop surge of 2007" label="the surge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4610355" start="83423" end="83438" title="Great Recession in the United States" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q622464" start="83498" end="83519" title="United States housing market correction" label="housing market crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q844541" start="83523" end="83547" title="subprime mortgage crisis" label="subprime mortgage crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356061" start="83549" end="83567" title="2000s energy crisis" label="soaring oil prices"/>
<link wikidata="Q16250635" start="83572" end="83598" title="effects of the 2008–2010 automotive industry crisis on the United States" label="automotive industry crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="83635" end="83651" title="2007–2008 financial crisis" label="financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q212900" start="83772" end="83787" title="Lehman Brothers" label="Lehman Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097742" start="83951" end="83980" title="Troubled Asset Relief Program" label="Troubled Asset Relief Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="84012" end="84024" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="84063" end="84078" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="elected in 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660063" start="84094" end="84136" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Ask, Don&amp;#x27;t Tell Repeal Act" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Ask, Don&amp;#x27;t Tell Repeal Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q466637" start="84237" end="84283" title="American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009" label="American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035245" start="84285" end="84328" title="Car Allowance Rebate System" label="Consumer Assistance to Recycle and Save Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414593" start="84334" end="84376" title="Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act" label="Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234044" start="84421" end="84478" title="Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act" label="Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q939103" start="84655" end="84670" title="Occupy movement" label="Occupy movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q19042" start="84679" end="84697" title="Tea Party movement" label="Tea Party movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351781" start="84757" end="84779" title="2010 midterm elections" label="2010 midterm elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q19977634" start="84797" end="84805" title="Gridlock (politics)" label="gridlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985020" start="84822" end="84848" title="Budget Control Act of 2011" label="Budget Control Act of 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419896" start="85109" end="85151" title="Executive Order 13491" label="executive order banning the use of torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q108131731" start="85179" end="85201" title="CIA black sites" label="secret CIA-run prisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419895" start="85216" end="85231" title="Executive Order 13492" label="sought to close"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118977" start="85337" end="85346" title="Withdrawal of U.S. troops from Iraq (2007–2011)" label="left Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028129" start="85458" end="85468" title="Withdrawal of U.S. troops from Afghanistan (2011–2016)" label="withdrawal"/>
<link wikidata="Q210714" start="85499" end="85509" title="2011 military intervention in Libya" label="intervened"/>
<link wikidata="Q81545" start="85517" end="85533" title="Libyan civil war (2011)" label="Libyan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q19085" start="85572" end="85582" title="Killing of Osama bin Laden" label="was killed"/>
<link wikidata="Q178033" start="85600" end="85610" title="Navy SEALs" label="Navy SEALs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195578" start="85778" end="85784" title="Unmanned combat aerial vehicle" label="drones"/>
<link wikidata="Q39207593" start="85832" end="85861" title="Operation Observant Compass" label="sent troops to Central Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q108462" start="85875" end="85902" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Resistance Army" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Resistance Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4226" start="85928" end="85944" title="2012 United States presidential election" label="2012 re-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q15015307" start="85997" end="86055" title="2013 United States federal government shutdown" label="first government shutdown since the Clinton administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q906933" start="86070" end="86107" title="Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting" label="Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q738356" start="86111" end="86131" title="Newtown, Connecticut" label="Newtown, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305384" start="86184" end="86194" title="Gun politics in the United States" label="gun reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q11086137" start="86200" end="86223" title="Boston Marathon bombing" label="Boston Marathon bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q60764577" start="86312" end="86342" title="US military intervention in Niger" label="counter-terrorist intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q20990715" start="86385" end="86406" title="Syrian Train and Equip Program" label="train rebels in Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="86453" end="86457" title="ISIS" label="ISIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q18121212" start="86497" end="86505" title="US intervention in the Syrian civil war" label="expanded"/>
<link wikidata="Q21613643" start="86637" end="86663" title="2015 San Bernardino attack" label="2015 San Bernardino attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q18159629" start="86709" end="86740" title="US-led intervention in Iraq (2014–2021)" label="military offensive against ISIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q17501769" start="86861" end="86869" title="Killing of Michael Brown" label="shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q17560945" start="86999" end="87014" title="Ferguson unrest" label="Ferguson unrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893525" start="87161" end="87202" title="United States v. Windsor" label="federal recognition of same-sex marriages"/>
<link wikidata="Q19866992" start="87266" end="87286" title="Obergefell v. Hodges" label="Obergefell v. Hodges"/>
<link wikidata="Q21707860" start="87350" end="87365" title="Paris Agreement" label="Paris Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="87369" end="87383" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="87439" end="87451" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q65057487" start="87524" end="87531" title="Crossfire Hurricane (FBI investigation)" label="the FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q104850135" start="87536" end="87544" title="Senate Intelligence Committee report on Russian interference in the 2016 United States presidential election" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q28005470" start="87568" end="87594" title="Russian interference in the 2016 United States elections" label="interfered in the election"/>
<link wikidata="Q73746818" start="87630" end="87654" title="Links between Trump associates and Russian officials" label="accusations of collusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q63213423" start="87712" end="87726" title="Mueller report" label="Mueller report"/>
<link wikidata="Q28530590" start="87905" end="87918" title="America First (policy)" label="America First"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631595" start="87975" end="87993" title="Mexico–United States border wall" label="expanding the wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q30949469" start="88025" end="88081" title="Trump travel ban" label="banning immigration from seven Muslim-majority countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q27629714" start="88142" end="88174" title="Donald Trump Supreme Court candidates" label="three new Supreme Court justices"/>
<link wikidata="Q51557538" start="88222" end="88242" title="China–United States trade war" label="trade war with China"/>
<link wikidata="Q42955478" start="88255" end="88276" title="Tax Cuts and Jobs Act" label="Tax Cuts and Jobs Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q55025660" start="88353" end="88371" title="Trump administration family separation policy" label="separated families"/>
<link wikidata="Q68451938" start="88519" end="88552" title="Trump–Ukraine scandal" label="withheld foreign aid from Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944264" start="88617" end="88629" title="Hunter Biden" label="Hunter Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="88662" end="88671" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="88711" end="88737" title="2020 United States presidential election" label="2020 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q79063280" start="88749" end="88758" title="First impeachment of Donald Trump" label="impeached"/>
<link wikidata="Q79077052" start="88811" end="88824" title="First impeachment trial of Donald Trump" label="was acquitted"/>
<link wikidata="Q97357722" start="88887" end="88908" title="Political polarization in the United States" label="politically polarized"/>
<link wikidata="Q42133786" start="88914" end="88920" title="Me Too movement" label="#MeToo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600530" start="89049" end="89067" title="Black Lives Matter" label="Black Lives Matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q28100410" start="89176" end="89199" title="2017 Women&amp;#x27;s March" label="2017 Women&amp;#x27;s March"/>
<link wikidata="Q24561572" start="89329" end="89353" title="Orlando nightclub shooting" label="Pulse Nightclub shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q41522095" start="89360" end="89378" title="Las Vegas shooting" label="Las Vegas shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q48714898" start="89389" end="89406" title="Parkland shooting" label="Parkland shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q50317608" start="89462" end="89481" title="March for Our Lives" label="March for Our Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="89509" end="89517" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="89573" end="89576" title="WHO" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="89588" end="89596" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q88307738" start="89643" end="89661" title="stay-at-home order" label="stay-at-home order"/>
<link wikidata="Q90091577" start="89695" end="89720" title="Flattening the curve" label="reducing patient overload"/>
<link wikidata="Q105938904" start="89984" end="90033" title="COVID-19 vaccination in the United States" label="biggest mass vaccination campaign in U.S. history"/>
<link wikidata="Q95579249" start="90073" end="90095" title="murder of George Floyd" label="murder of George Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q95965839" start="90108" end="90126" title="George Floyd protests" label="protests and riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="90317" end="90336" title="conspiracy theories" label="conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q101010358" start="90344" end="90358" title="Postal voting in the 2020 United States elections" label="mail-in voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q51213808" start="90377" end="90382" title="QAnon" label="QAnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37093861" start="90491" end="90510" title="Antifa (United States)" label="anti-fascist groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q29096457" start="90541" end="90551" title="Proud Boys" label="Proud Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q122942665" start="90621" end="90633" title="Election denial movement in the United States" label="false claims"/>
<link wikidata="Q104705419" start="90694" end="90732" title="January 6 United States Capitol attack" label="January 6 United States Capitol attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="90818" end="90834" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q104713215" start="90859" end="90870" title="Second impeachment of Donald Trump" label="impeachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q104830111" start="90978" end="90987" title="Second impeachment trial of Donald Trump" label="acquitted"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="91047" end="91060" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q97738250" start="91065" end="91076" title="Inauguration of Joe Biden" label="inaugurated"/>
<link wikidata="Q105694892" start="91189" end="91218" title="2020–2021 U.S. troop withdrawal from Afghanistan" label="withdrawal of American troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q108274219" start="91272" end="91316" title="2021 Kabul airlift" label="evacuation of over 120,000 American citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q107461898" start="91330" end="91349" title="Fall of Afghanistan" label="fell to the Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q105246837" start="91387" end="91419" title="American Rescue Plan Act of 2021" label="American Rescue Plan Act of 2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q109236245" start="91530" end="91551" title="Build Back Better Act" label="Build Back Better Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q60768961" start="91583" end="91608" title="Freedom to Vote Act" label="voting rights legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q107563916" start="91656" end="91670" title="Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act" label="infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q112728299" start="91672" end="91682" title="Bipartisan Safer Communities Act" label="gun reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468254" start="91684" end="91703" title="Inflation Reduction Act" label="inflation reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q111941879" start="91709" end="91732" title="Honoring our PACT Act of 2022" label="healthcare for veterans"/>
<link wikidata="Q107055182" start="91821" end="91845" title="SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant" label="SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="91867" end="91911" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russia&amp;#x27;s full-scale invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q118640352" start="92315" end="92339" title="2020s anti-LGBT movement in the United States" label="rollbacks of LGBT rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q107058269" start="92383" end="92399" title="Dobbs v. Jackson" label="Dobbs v. Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107009" start="92517" end="92544" title="Planned Parenthood v. Casey" label="Planned Parenthood v. Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q111823202" start="92564" end="92583" title="2022 abortion rights protests in the United States" label="nationwide protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q6395324" start="92601" end="92622" title="Ketanji Brown Jackson" label="Ketanji Brown Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q117350102" start="92736" end="92768" title="Indictments against Donald Trump" label="multiple notable criminal trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="92821" end="92837" title="Israel-Hamas war" label="Israel-Hamas war"/>
<link wikidata="Q123912788" start="92842" end="92861" title="Operation Prosperity Guardian" label="protecting shipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042087" start="92904" end="92911" title="Houthis" label="Houthis"/>
<link wikidata="Q117349399" start="93017" end="93033" title="Prosecution of Donald Trump in New York" label="34 felony counts"/>
<link wikidata="Q51025585" start="93083" end="93111" title="Stormy Daniels–Donald Trump scandal" label="paying off of Stormy Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q124842709" start="93155" end="93177" title="Trump v. United States (2024)" label="Trump v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q117751636" start="93213" end="93245" title="Presidential immunity in the United States" label="immune from criminal prosecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q121087450" start="93280" end="93305" title="Federal prosecution of Donald Trump (election obstruction case)" label="election subversion trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q127688165" start="93328" end="93339" title="Withdrawal of Joe Biden from the 2024 United States presidential election" label="dropped out"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="93368" end="93381" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="93422" end="93448" title="List of United States presidential assassination attempts and plots#Donald Trump" label="two assassination attempts"/>
<link wikidata="Q131766711" start="93517" end="93537" title="Joe Biden&amp;#x27;s farewell address" label="his farewell address"/>
<link wikidata="Q123005094" start="93618" end="93638" title="Israel–Hamas war hostage crisis" label="hostage release deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="93761" end="93780" title="checks and balances" label="checks and balances"/>
<link wikidata="Q131939846" start="93835" end="93858" title="Tech-industrial complex" label="tech industrial complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q101110072" start="93919" end="93945" title="2024 United States presidential election" label="2024 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="94026" end="94042" title="Grover Cleveland" label="Grover Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343985" start="94447" end="94455" title="Edward L. Ayers" label="Ed Ayers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="63879" wikidata="Q185142" url="?curid=63879" title="Initial public offering">
<text>An initial public offering (IPO) or stock launch is a public offering in which shares of a company are sold to institutional investors and usually also to retail (individual) investors. An IPO is typically underwritten by one or more investment banks, who also arrange for the shares to be listed on one or more stock exchanges. Through this process, colloquially known as &quot;floating&quot;, or &quot;going public&quot;, a privately held company is transformed into a public company. Initial public offerings can be used to raise new equity capital for companies, to monetize the investments of private shareholders such as company founders or private equity investors, and to enable easy trading of existing holdings or future capital raising by becoming publicly traded.

After the IPO, shares are traded freely in the open market at what is known as the free float. Stock exchanges stipulate a minimum free float both in absolute terms (the total value as determined by the share price multiplied by the number of shares sold to the public) and as a proportion of the total share capital (i.e., the number of shares sold to the public divided by the total shares outstanding). Although IPO offers many benefits, there are also significant costs involved, chiefly those associated with the process such as banking and legal fees, and the ongoing requirement to disclose important and sometimes sensitive information.

Details of the proposed offering are disclosed to potential purchasers in the form of a lengthy document known as a prospectus. Most companies undertake an IPO with the assistance of an investment banking firm acting in the capacity of an underwriter. Underwriters provide several services, including help with correctly assessing the value of shares (share price) and establishing a public market for shares (initial sale). Alternative methods such as the Dutch auction have also been explored and applied for several IPOs.

==History==
The earliest form of a company which issued &quot;public shares&quot; was the case of the &quot;publicani&quot; during the Roman Republic, although this claim is not shared by all modern scholars. Like modern joint-stock companies, the &quot;publicani&quot; were legal bodies independent of their members whose ownership was divided into shares, or &quot;parts&quot;. There is evidence that these shares were sold to public investors and traded in a type of over-the-counter market in the Forum, near the Temple of Castor and Pollux. The shares fluctuated in value, encouraging the activity of speculators, or &quot;quaestors&quot;. Mere evidence remains of the prices for which &quot;parts&quot; were sold, the nature of initial public offerings, or a description of stock market behavior. &quot;Publicani&quot; lost favor with the fall of the Republic and the rise of the Empire.

In the United States, the first IPO was the public offering of Bank of North America around 1783.

==Advantages and disadvantages==
===Advantages===
When a company becomes publicly listed, the money paid by the investing public for the newly issued shares goes directly to the company (primary offering) as well as to any early private investors who opt to sell all or a portion of their holdings (secondary offerings) as part of the larger IPO. An IPO, therefore, allows a company to tap into a wide pool of potential investors to provide itself with capital for future growth, repayment of the debt, or working capital. A company selling common shares is never required to repay the capital to its public investors. Those investors must endure the unpredictable nature of the open market to price and trade their shares. After the IPO, when shares are traded in the market, money passes between public investors. For early private investors who choose to sell shares as part of the IPO process, the IPO represents an opportunity to monetize their investment. After the IPO, once shares are traded in the open market, investors holding large blocks of shares can either sell those shares piecemeal in the open market or sell a large block of shares directly to the public, at a fixed price, through a secondary market offering. This type of offering is not dilutive since no new shares are being created. Stock prices can change dramatically during a company&#x27;s first days in the public market.

Once a company is listed, it is able to issue additional common shares in a number of different ways, one of which is the follow-on offering. This method provides capital for various corporate purposes through the issuance of equity (see stock dilution) without incurring any debt. This ability to quickly raise potentially large amounts of capital from the marketplace is a key reason many companies seek to go public.

An IPO accords several benefits to the previously private company:

* Enlarging and diversifying equity base
* Enabling cheaper access to capital
* Increasing exposure, prestige, and public image
* Attracting and retaining better management and employees through liquid equity participation
* Facilitating acquisitions (potentially in return for shares of stock)
* Creating multiple financing opportunities: equity, convertible debt, cheaper bank loans, etc.
* Benefits for pre-IPO owners in the form of Tax Receivable Agreements

===Disadvantages===
There are several disadvantages to completing an initial public offering:

* Significant legal, accounting, and marketing costs, many of which are ongoing
* Requirement to disclose financial and business information
* Meaningful time, effort, and attention required of management
* Risk that required funding will not be raised
* Public dissemination of information that may be useful to competitors, suppliers and customers.
* Loss of control and stronger agency problems due to new shareholders
* Increased risk of litigation, including private securities class actions and shareholder derivative actions

==Procedure==
IPO procedures are governed by different laws in different countries. In the United States, IPOs are regulated by the United States Securities and Exchange Commission under the Securities Act of 1933. In the United Kingdom, the UK Listing Authority reviews and approves prospectuses and operates the listing regime.

===Planning===
Planning is crucial to a successful IPO. One book suggests the following seven planning steps:
# develop impressive management and professional team
# grow the company&#x27;s business with an eye to the public marketplace
# obtain audited financial statements using IPO-accepted accounting principles
# clean up the company&#x27;s act
# establish antitakeover defenses
# develop good corporate governance
# create insider bail-out opportunities and take advantage of IPO windows.

===Retention of underwriters===
IPOs generally involve one or more investment banks known as &quot;underwriters&quot;. The company offering its shares, called the &quot;issuer&quot;, enters into a contract with a lead underwriter to sell its shares to the public. The underwriter then approaches investors with offers to sell those shares.

A large IPO is usually underwritten by a &quot;syndicate&quot; of investment banks, the largest of which take the position of &quot;lead underwriter&quot;. Upon selling the shares, the underwriters retain a portion of the proceeds as their fee. This fee is called an underwriting spread. The spread is calculated as a discount from the price of the shares sold (called the gross spread). Components of an underwriting spread in an initial public offering (IPO) typically include the following (on a per-share basis): Manager&#x27;s fee, Underwriting fee—earned by members of the syndicate, and the Concession—earned by the broker-dealer selling the shares. The Manager would be entitled to the entire underwriting spread. A member of the syndicate is entitled to the underwriting fee and the concession. A broker-dealer who is not a member of the syndicate but sells shares would receive only the concession, while the member of the syndicate who provided the shares to that broker-dealer would retain the underwriting fee. Usually, the managing/lead underwriter, also known as the bookrunner, typically the underwriter selling the largest proportions of the IPO, takes the highest portion of the gross spread, up to 8% in some cases.

Multinational IPOs may have many syndicates to deal with differing legal requirements in both the issuer&#x27;s domestic market and other regions. For example, an issuer based in the E.U. may be represented by the major selling syndicate in its domestic market, Europe, in addition to separate group corporations or selling them for US/Canada and Asia. Usually, the lead underwriter in the head selling group is also the lead bank in the other selling groups.

Because of the wide array of legal requirements and because it is an expensive process, IPOs also typically involve one or more law firms with major practices in securities law, such as the Magic Circle firms of London and the white-shoe firms of New York City.

Financial historians Richard Sylla and Robert E. Wright have shown that before 1860 most early U.S. corporations sold shares in themselves directly to the public without the aid of intermediaries like investment banks. The direct public offering (DPO), as they term it, was not done by auction but rather at a share price set by the issuing corporation. In this sense, it is the same as the fixed price public offers that were the traditional IPO method in most non-US countries in the early 1990s. The DPO eliminated the agency problem associated with offerings intermediated by investment banks.

===Allocation and pricing===
The sale (allocation and pricing) of shares in an IPO may take several forms. Common methods include:
*Best efforts contract
*Firm commitment contract
*All-or-none contract
*Bought deal
Public offerings are sold to both institutional investors and retail clients of the underwriters. A licensed securities salesperson (Registered Representative in the US and Canada) selling shares of a public offering to his clients is paid a portion of the selling concession (the fee paid by the issuer to the underwriter) rather than by his client. In some situations, when the IPO is not a &quot;hot&quot; issue (undersubscribed), and where the salesperson is the client&#x27;s advisor, it is possible that the financial incentives of the advisor and client may not be aligned.

The issuer usually allows the underwriters an option to increase the size of the offering by up to 15% under a specific circumstance known as the greenshoe or overallotment option. This option is always exercised when the offering is considered a &quot;hot&quot; issue, by virtue of being oversubscribed.

In the US, clients are given a preliminary prospectus, known as a red herring prospectus, during the initial quiet period. The red herring prospectus is so named because of a bold red warning statement printed on its front cover. The warning states that the offering information is incomplete, and may be changed. The actual wording can vary, although most roughly follow the format exhibited on the Facebook IPO red herring. During the quiet period, the shares cannot be offered for sale. Brokers can, however, take indications of interest from their clients. At the time of the stock launch, after the Registration Statement has become effective, indications of interest can be converted to buy orders, at the discretion of the buyer. Sales can only be made through a final prospectus cleared by the Securities and Exchange Commission.

The final step in preparing and filing the final IPO prospectus is for the issuer to retain one of the major financial &quot;printers&quot;, who print (and today, also electronically file with the SEC) the registration statement on Form S-1. Typically, preparation of the final prospectus is actually performed at the printer, wherein one of their multiple conference rooms the issuer, issuer&#x27;s counsel (attorneys), underwriter&#x27;s counsel (attorneys), the lead underwriter(s), and the issuer&#x27;s accountants/auditors make final edits and proofreading, concluding with the filing of the final prospectus by the financial printer with the Securities and Exchange Commission.

Before legal actions initiated by New York Attorney General Eliot Spitzer, which later became known as the Global Settlement enforcement agreement, some large investment firms had initiated favorable research coverage of companies in an effort to aid corporate finance departments and retail divisions engaged in the marketing of new issues. The central issue in that enforcement agreement had been judged in court previously. It involved the conflict of interest between the investment banking and analysis departments of ten of the largest investment firms in the United States. The investment firms involved in the settlement had all engaged in actions and practices that had allowed the inappropriate influence of their research analysts by their investment bankers seeking lucrative fees. A typical violation addressed by the settlement was the case of CSFB and Salomon Smith Barney, which were alleged to have engaged in the inappropriate spinning of &quot;hot&quot; IPOs and issued fraudulent research reports in violation of various sections within the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.

===Pricing===

A company planning an IPO typically appoints a lead manager, known as a bookrunner, to help it arrive at an appropriate price at which the shares should be offered. There are two primary ways in which the price of an IPO can be determined. Either the company, with the help of its lead managers, fixes a price (&quot;fixed price method&quot;), or the price can be determined through analysis of confidential investor demand data compiled by the bookrunner (&quot;book building&quot;).

Historically, many IPOs have been underpriced. The effect of underpricing an IPO is to generate additional interest in the stock and a rapid rise in share price when it first becomes publicly traded (known as an &quot;IPO pop&quot;). Flipping, or quickly selling shares for a profit, can lead to significant gains for investors who were allocated shares of the IPO at the offering price. However, underpricing an IPO results in lost potential capital for the issuer. One extreme example is theglobe.com IPO which helped fuel the IPO &quot;mania&quot; of the late 1990s internet era. Underwritten by Bear Stearns on 13 November 1998, the IPO was priced at $9 per share. The share price quickly increased 1,000% on the opening day of trading, to a high of $97. Selling pressure from institutional flipping eventually drove the stock back down, and it closed the day at $63. Although the company did raise about $30  million from the offering, it is estimated that with the level of demand for the offering and the volume of trading that took place they might have left upwards of $200 million on the table.

The danger of overpricing is also an important consideration. If a stock is offered to the public at a higher price than the market will pay, the underwriters may have trouble meeting their commitments to sell shares. Even if they sell all of the issued shares, the stock may fall in value on the first day of trading. If so, the stock may lose its marketability and hence even more of its value. This could result in losses for investors, many of whom being the most favored clients of the underwriters. Perhaps the best-known example of this is the Facebook IPO in 2012.

Underwriters, therefore, take many factors into consideration when pricing an IPO, and attempt to reach an offering price that is low enough to stimulate interest in the stock but high enough to raise an adequate amount of capital for the company. When pricing an IPO, underwriters use a variety of key performance indicators and non-GAAP measures. The process of determining an optimal price usually involves the underwriters (&quot;syndicate&quot;) arranging share purchase commitments from leading institutional investors.

Some researchers (Friesen &amp; Swift, 2009) believe that the underpricing of IPOs is less a deliberate act on the part of issuers and/or underwriters, and more the result of an over-reaction on the part of investors (Friesen &amp; Swift, 2009). One potential method for determining to underprice is through the use of IPO underpricing algorithms. Other researchers have discovered that firms with higher revenues from licensing-based technology commercialization exhibit greater IPO underpricing, while a firm&#x27;s stock of patents mitigates this effect.

====Dutch auction====
A Dutch auction allows shares of an initial public offering to be allocated based only on price aggressiveness, with all successful bidders paying the same price per share. One version of the Dutch auction is OpenIPO, which is based on an auction system designed by economist William Vickrey. This auction method ranks bids from highest to lowest, then accepts the highest bids that allow all shares to be sold, with all winning bidders paying the same price. It is similar to the model used to auction Treasury bills, notes, and bonds since the 1990s. Before this, Treasury bills were auctioned through a discriminatory or pay-what-you-bid auction, in which the various winning bidders each paid the price (or yield) they bid, and thus the various winning bidders did not all pay the same price. Both discriminatory and uniform price or &quot;Dutch&quot; auctions have been used for IPOs in many countries, although only uniform price auctions have been used so far in the US. Large IPO auctions include Japan Tobacco, Singapore Telecom, BAA Plc and Google (ordered by size of proceeds).

A variation of the Dutch auction has been used to take a number of U.S. companies public including Morningstar, Interactive Brokers Group, Overstock.com, Ravenswood Winery, Clean Energy Fuels, and Boston Beer Company. In 2004, Google used the Dutch auction system for its initial public offering. Traditional U.S. investment banks have shown resistance to the idea of using an auction process to engage in public securities offerings. The auction method allows for equal access to the allocation of shares and eliminates the favorable treatment accorded important clients by the underwriters in conventional IPOs. In the face of this resistance, the Dutch auction is still a little used method in U.S. public offerings, although there have been hundreds of auction IPOs in other countries.

In determining the success or failure of a Dutch auction, one must consider competing objectives. If the objective is to reduce risk, a traditional IPO may be more effective because the underwriter manages the process, rather than leaving the outcome in part to random chance in terms of who chooses to bid or what strategy each bidder chooses to follow. From the viewpoint of the investor, the Dutch auction allows everyone equal access. Moreover, some forms of the Dutch auction allow the underwriter to be more active in coordinating bids and even communicating general auction trends to some bidders during the bidding period. Some have also argued that a uniform price auction is more effective at price discovery, although the theory behind this is based on the assumption of independent private values (that the value of IPO shares to each bidder is entirely independent of their value to others, even though the shares will shortly be traded on the aftermarket). Theory that incorporates assumptions more appropriate to IPOs does not find that sealed bid auctions are an effective form of price discovery, although possibly some modified form of auction might give a better result.

In addition to the extensive international evidence that auctions have not been popular for IPOs, there is no U.S. evidence to indicate that the Dutch auction fares any better than the traditional IPO in an unwelcoming market environment. A Dutch auction IPO by WhiteGlove Health, Inc., announced in May 2011 was postponed in September of that year, after several failed attempts to price. An article in &quot;the Wall Street Journal&quot; cited the reasons as &quot;broader stock-market volatility and uncertainty about the global economy have made investors wary of investing in new stocks&quot;.

===Quiet period===

Under American securities law, there are two-time windows commonly referred to as &quot;quiet periods&quot; during an IPO&#x27;s history. The first and the one linked above is the period of time following the filing of the company&#x27;s S-1 but before SEC staff declare the registration statement effective. During this time, issuers, company insiders, analysts, and other parties are legally restricted in their ability to discuss or promote the upcoming IPO (U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2005).

The other &quot;quiet period&quot; refers to a period of 10 calendar days following an IPO&#x27;s first day of public trading. During this time, insiders and any underwriters involved in the IPO are restricted from issuing any earnings forecasts or research reports for the company. When the quiet period is over, generally the underwriters will initiate research coverage on the firm. A three-day waiting period exists for any member that has acted as a manager or co-manager in a secondary offering.

===Delivery of shares===
Not all IPOs are eligible for delivery settlement through the DTC system, which would then either require the physical delivery of the stock certificates to the clearing agent bank&#x27;s custodian or a delivery versus payment (DVP) arrangement with the selling group firm.

===Stag profit (flipping)===
&quot;Stag profit&quot; is a situation in the stock market before and immediately after a company&#x27;s initial public offering (or any new issue of shares). A &quot;stag&quot; is a party or individual who subscribes to the new issue expecting the price of the stock to rise immediately upon the start of trading. Thus, stag profit is the financial gain accumulated by the party or individual resulting from the value of the shares rising. This term is more popular in the United Kingdom than in the United States. In the US, such investors are usually called flippers, because they get shares in the offering and then immediately turn around &quot;flipping&quot; or selling them on the first day of trading.

==Largest IPOs==

==Largest IPO markets==
Prior to 2009, the United States was the leading issuer of IPOs in terms of total value. Since that time, however, China (Shanghai, Shenzhen and Hong Kong) has been the leading issuer, raising $73 billion (almost double the amount of money raised on the New York Stock Exchange and Nasdaq combined) up to the end of November 2011.
==See also==
*Alternative public offering
*Direct public offering
*Public offering without listing
*Reverse takeover
*Smaller reporting company
*Special-purpose acquisition company
*Venture capital

==References==

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* Chambers, Clem (2006-07-14). &quot;Who needs stock exchanges?&quot; &quot;Exchanges Handbook&quot;. Mondo Visione. Accessed 21 September 2011.
* 
* 
* Hu, Bei and Vannucci, Cecile. Bloomberg.com Published 2010-10-29. Retrieved 2011-09-21
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
*Nasdaq database of all U.S. Initial Public Offerings beginning Jan. 1997

Read More</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="3" end="26" title="Initial public offering" label="initial public offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="28" end="31" title="Initial public offering" label="IPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="36" end="48" title="Initial public offering" label="stock launch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627483" start="54" end="69" title="public offering" label="public offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665188" start="111" end="133" title="institutional investor" label="institutional investor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898080" start="206" end="218" title="Underwriting" label="underwritten"/>
<link wikidata="Q319845" start="234" end="250" title="Investment banking" label="investment banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q11691" start="312" end="326" title="stock exchange" label="stock exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q891723" start="471" end="485" title="public company" label="public company"/>
<link wikidata="Q289845" start="570" end="578" title="monetize" label="monetize"/>
<link wikidata="Q476115" start="647" end="661" title="private equity" label="private equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11691" start="872" end="886" title="Stock exchange" label="Stock exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q669584" start="1539" end="1549" title="prospectus (finance)" label="prospectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q727746" start="1880" end="1893" title="Dutch auction" label="Dutch auction"/>
<link wikidata="Q285101" start="2057" end="2065" title="publican" label="publican"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="2084" end="2098" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q66320" start="2419" end="2435" title="over-the-counter (finance)" label="over-the-counter"/>
<link wikidata="Q180212" start="2450" end="2455" title="Roman Forum" label="Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q380530" start="2466" end="2493" title="Temple of Castor and Pollux" label="Temple of Castor and Pollux"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="2806" end="2814" title="Roman Republic" label="Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="2835" end="2841" title="Roman Empire" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q806690" start="2907" end="2928" title="Bank of North America" label="Bank of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q289845" start="3878" end="3886" title="monetize" label="monetize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077369" start="4123" end="4134" title="fixed price" label="fixed price"/>
<link wikidata="Q243749" start="4146" end="4171" title="secondary market offering" label="secondary market offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q17014339" start="4467" end="4485" title="follow-on offering" label="follow-on offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464622" start="4583" end="4597" title="stock dilution" label="stock dilution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056625" start="5182" end="5198" title="convertible debt" label="convertible debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053211" start="5774" end="5789" title="principal–agent problem" label="agency problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="6057" end="6105" title="United States Securities and Exchange Commission" label="United States Securities and Exchange Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q994506" start="6116" end="6138" title="Securities Act of 1933" label="Securities Act of 1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449586" start="6167" end="6187" title="UK Listing Authority" label="UK Listing Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q319845" start="6819" end="6834" title="investment bank" label="investment bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898080" start="6851" end="6862" title="underwriter" label="underwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q681615" start="7140" end="7149" title="syndicate" label="syndicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883952" start="7360" end="7379" title="underwriting spread" label="underwriting spread"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610524" start="7466" end="7478" title="gross spread" label="gross spread"/>
<link wikidata="Q893013" start="8175" end="8185" title="bookrunner" label="bookrunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610524" start="8290" end="8302" title="gross spread" label="gross spread"/>
<link wikidata="Q613142" start="8918" end="8926" title="law firm" label="law firm"/>
<link wikidata="Q422125" start="8952" end="8966" title="securities law" label="securities law"/>
<link wikidata="Q945334" start="8980" end="8992" title="Magic Circle (law)" label="Magic Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157326" start="9017" end="9032" title="white-shoe firm" label="white-shoe firm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329326" start="9074" end="9087" title="Richard Sylla" label="Richard Sylla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343914" start="9092" end="9108" title="Robert E. Wright" label="Robert E. Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280378" start="9276" end="9298" title="direct public offering" label="direct public offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883948" start="9784" end="9805" title="Best efforts contract" label="Best efforts contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883948" start="9807" end="9831" title="Firm commitment contract" label="Firm commitment contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883948" start="9833" end="9853" title="All-or-none contract" label="All-or-none contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949414" start="9855" end="9866" title="Bought deal" label="Bought deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309418" start="10000" end="10025" title="Registered Representative" label="Registered Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544793" start="10595" end="10604" title="greenshoe" label="greenshoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135990" start="10821" end="10843" title="red herring prospectus" label="red herring prospectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024388" start="11272" end="11295" title="indication of interest" label="indications of interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="11791" end="11794" title="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission" label="SEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11675" start="12340" end="12353" title="Eliot Spitzer" label="Eliot Spitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570634" start="12387" end="12404" title="Global Settlement" label="Global Settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q650241" start="12439" end="12455" title="Financial institution" label="investment firms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134763" start="12531" end="12548" title="corporate finance" label="corporate finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q648945" start="12679" end="12685" title="Declaratory ruling" label="judged"/>
<link wikidata="Q319845" start="12756" end="12774" title="investment banking" label="investment banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416279" start="12779" end="12787" title="Financial analyst" label="analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002423" start="13138" end="13142" title="Credit Suisse First Boston" label="CSFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034767" start="13147" end="13167" title="Salomon Smith Barney" label="Salomon Smith Barney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999032" start="13341" end="13372" title="Securities Exchange Act of 1934" label="Securities Exchange Act of 1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q893013" start="13462" end="13472" title="bookrunner" label="bookrunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q359805" start="13853" end="13866" title="book building" label="book building"/>
<link wikidata="Q96201898" start="14110" end="14118" title="Flipping" label="Flipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q15209696" start="14152" end="14158" title="Profit (accounting)" label="profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711640" start="14366" end="14378" title="theglobe.com" label="theglobe.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q813018" start="14475" end="14487" title="Bear Stearns" label="Bear Stearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898080" start="15970" end="15982" title="underwriters" label="underwriters"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002497" start="16402" end="16428" title="IPO underpricing algorithm" label="IPO underpricing algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q727746" start="16666" end="16679" title="Dutch auction" label="Dutch auction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095801" start="16873" end="16880" title="OpenIPO" label="OpenIPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q295673" start="16940" end="16955" title="William Vickrey" label="William Vickrey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17167" end="17181" title="United States Treasury security#Treasury bill" label="Treasury bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935124" start="17586" end="17607" title="uniform price auction" label="uniform price auction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389504" start="17853" end="17864" title="Morningstar, Inc." label="Morningstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q20011294" start="17866" end="17891" title="Interactive Brokers Group" label="Interactive Brokers Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301958" start="17893" end="17906" title="Overstock.com" label="Overstock.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q894558" start="17951" end="17970" title="Boston Beer Company" label="Boston Beer Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242611" start="19248" end="19263" title="price discovery" label="price discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="20146" end="20169" title="the Wall Street Journal" label="the Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q756115" start="20224" end="20234" title="volatility (finance)" label="volatility"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469919" start="20594" end="20597" title="SEC Form S-1" label="S-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191721" start="21457" end="21467" title="Depository Trust &amp;amp; Clearing Corporation" label="DTC system"/>
<link wikidata="Q855349" start="21530" end="21547" title="stock certificate" label="stock certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955720" start="21598" end="21621" title="delivery versus payment" label="delivery versus payment"/>
<link wikidata="Q15209696" start="22025" end="22031" title="Profit (accounting)" label="profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q96201898" start="22349" end="22357" title="flipping" label="flipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q739514" start="22574" end="22582" title="Shanghai Stock Exchange" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q517750" start="22584" end="22592" title="Shenzhen Stock Exchange" label="Shenzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q496672" start="22597" end="22606" title="Hong Kong Stock Exchange" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q13677" start="22706" end="22729" title="New York Stock Exchange" label="New York Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q82059" start="22734" end="22740" title="Nasdaq" label="Nasdaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736548" start="22797" end="22824" title="Alternative public offering" label="Alternative public offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280378" start="22826" end="22848" title="Direct public offering" label="Direct public offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257934" start="22850" end="22881" title="Public offering without listing" label="Public offering without listing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020015" start="22883" end="22899" title="Reverse takeover" label="Reverse takeover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543647" start="22901" end="22926" title="Smaller reporting company" label="Smaller reporting company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308203" start="22928" end="22963" title="Special-purpose acquisition company" label="Special-purpose acquisition company"/>
<link wikidata="Q219409" start="22965" end="22980" title="Venture capital" label="Venture capital"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23367" end="23376" title="NTPC Green IPO 2024: 19 नवंबर को खुलेगा एनटीपीसी ग्रीन का आईपीओ, यहां जानिए प्राइस बैंक से लेकर जीएमपी तक" label="Read More"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="63880" wikidata="Q416070" url="?curid=63880" title="Acarnania">
<text>Acarnania () is a region of west-central Greece that lies along the Ionian Sea, west of Aetolia, with the Achelous River for a boundary, and north of the gulf of Calydon, which is the entrance to the Gulf of Corinth. Today it forms the western part of the regional unit of Aetolia-Acarnania. The capital and principal city in ancient times was Stratos. The north side of Acarnania of the Corinthian Gulf was considered part of the region of Epirus.

Acarnania&#x27;s foundation in Greek mythology was traditionally ascribed to Acarnan, son of Alcmaeon.
==History==

===Pre-Peloponnesian War===
The name of Acarnania appears to have been unknown in the earliest times. Homer (8th century BC) only calls the country opposite Ithaca and Cephalonia, under the general name of &quot;Epeirus&quot; (῎ηπειρος), or the mainland, although he frequently mentions the Aetolians.

The country is said to have been originally inhabited by the Taphii (or Teleboae), the Leleges, and the Curetes. The Taphii, or Teleboae were chiefly found in the islands off the western coast of Acarnania, where they maintained themselves by piracy. The Leleges were more widely disseminated, and were also in possession at one period of Aetolia, Locris, and other parts of Greece. The Curetes are said to have come from Aetolia, and to have settled in Acarnania, after they had been expelled from the former country by Aetolus and his followers. The name of Acarnania is derived from Acarnan, the son of Alcmaeon, who is said to have settled at the mouth of the Achelous. If this tradition is of any value, it would intimate that an Argive colony settled on the coast of Acarnania at an early period. 

In the 7th century BC, Greek influence in the region became prominent when Corinth settled Anactorium, Sollium and Leucas, and Kefalonia settled Astacus. The original inhabitants of the country were driven more into the interior; they never made much progress in the arts of civilised life; and even at the time of the Peloponnesian War, they were a rude and barbarous people, engaged in continual wars with their neighbours, and living by robbery and piracy. The settlements of Alyzeia, Coronta, Limnaea, Medion, Oeniadae, Palaerus, Phoitiai and Stratus are also mentioned by Thucydides, this latter city being the seat of a loose confederation of Acarnanian powers that was maintained until the late 1st century BC.

The ancient Acarnanians, however, were Greeks, and as such were allowed to contend in the great Pan-Hellenic games, although they were closely connected with their neighbors, the Agraeans and Amphilochians on the Ambracian Gulf, who were barbarian or non-Hellenic nations. Like other rude mountaineers, the Acarnanians are praised for their fidelity and courage. They formed good light-armed troops, and were excellent slingers. They lived, for the most part, dispersed in villages, retiring, when attacked, to the mountains. Strabo relates that they were united, however, in a political League (the Acarnanian League), of which Aristotle wrote an account in a work now lost (). Thucydides mentions a hill, named Olpae, near the Amphilochian Argos, which the Acarnanians had fortified as a place of judicial meeting for the settlement of disputes. The meetings of the League were usually held at Stratus, which was the chief town in Acarnania; but, in the time of the Romans, the meetings took place either at Thyrium, or at Leucas, the latter of which places became, at that time, the chief city in Acarnania. 

At an early period, when part of Amphilochia belonged to the Acarnanians, they used to hold a public judicial congress at Olpae, a fortified hill about from Argos Amphilochicum. Of the constitution of their League, we have scarcely any particulars. We learn from an inscription found at Punta, the site of ancient Actium, that there were a council and a general assembly of the people, by which decrees were passed: . At the head of the League, there was a strategus (Στρατηγός) or general; and the Council had a secretary (γραμματεύς), who appears to have been a person of importance, as in the Achaean and Aetolian Leagues. The chief priest (ἱεραπόλος) of the temple of Apollo at Actium seems to have been a person of high rank; and either his name or that of the strategus was employed for official dates, like that of the first Archon at Athens.

===Classical and Hellenistic period===
Because it is located strategically on the maritime route to Italy, Acarnania was involved in many wars. Their hatred against the Corinthian settlers, who had deprived them of all their best ports, naturally led the Acarnanians to side with the Athenians; but the immediate cause of their alliance with the latter arose from the expulsion of the Amphilochians from the town of Argos Amphilochicum by the Corinthian settlers from Ambracia, about 432 BC. The Acarnanians espoused the cause of the expelled Amphilochians, and in order to obtain the restoration of the latter, they applied for assistance to Athens. The Athenians accordingly sent an expedition under Phormio, who took Argos, expelled the Ambraciots, and restored the town to the Amphilochians and Acarnanians. An alliance was now formally concluded between the Acarnamians and Athenians. The only towns of Acarnania which did not join it were Oeniadae and Astacus. 

The Acarnanians were of great service in maintaining the supremacy of Athens in the western part of Greece, and they distinguished themselves particularly in 426 BC, when they gained a signal victory under the command of Demosthenes over the Peloponnesians and Ambraciots at the Battle of Olpae. At the conclusion of this campaign they concluded a peace with the Ambraciots, although they still continued allies of Athens. In 391 BC we find the Acarnanians engaged in war with the Achaeans, who had taken possession of Calydon in Aetolia; and as the latter were hard-pressed by the Acarnanians, they applied for aid to the Lacedaemonians (Spartans), who sent an army into Acarnania, commanded by King Agesilaus. The latter ravaged the country, but his expedition was not attended with any lasting consequences, whilst the cities of Acarnania surrendered to the Lacedaemonians under Agesilaus, and continued to be Spartan allies for a time, they joined the Second Athenian League in 375 BC. The Acarnanians later sided with the Boeotians in their fight against Sparta, and with Athens against Philip II of Macedon at Chaeronea.

After the time of Alexander the Great, in 314 BC, at the behest of the Macedonian king Cassander, the settlements of Acarnania lying near the Aetolian border were conglomerated into fewer, larger settlements. Still, border conflicts with the Aetolians were frequent, and led to Acarnania&#x27;s territory being partitioned between Aetolia and Epirus in, c. 250 BC. After the fall of the king of Epirus, the Acarnanian territory that had been given to Epirus regained its independence, and Leucas became the capital of the region, but conflict with the Aetolians remained. The Acarnanians in consequence united themselves closely to the Macedonian kings, to whom they remained faithful in their various vicissitudes of fortune. They refused to desert the cause of Philip in his war with the Romans, and it was not till after the capture of Leucas, their principal town, and the defeat of Philip at the Battle of Cynoscephalae that they submitted to Rome. When Antiochus III king of Syria, invaded Greece, 191 BC, the Acarnanians were persuaded by their countryman Mnasilochus to espouse his cause; but on the expulsion of Antiochus from Greece, they came again under the supremacy of Rome. In the settlement of the affairs of Greece by Aemilius Paulus and the Roman commissioners after the defeat of Perseus (168 BC), Leucas was separated from Acarnania, and the city of Thyrreion was appointed the new capital. 

===Roman and Byzantine period===
In the 1st century BC, Acarnania suffered greatly at the hands of pirates, and in Roman civil wars. When Greece was reduced to the form of a Roman province, it is doubtful whether Acarnania was annexed to the province of Achaea or of Epirus, but it is mentioned at a later time as part of Epirus. The inhabitants of several of its towns were removed by Augustus to Nicopolis, which he founded after the Battle of Actium, and Acarnania fell under that city&#x27;s rule; and in the time of Augustus emperor the country is described by Strabo as utterly worn out and exhausted.

In 395, it became part of the Eastern Roman Empire. When the empire was attacked by Western powers in the Fourth Crusade (1204), Acarnania passed to the Despotate of Epirus and in 1348 it was conquered by Serbia. Then in 1480 it fell to the Ottoman Empire. Since 1832 it has been part of Greece.

===Modern===
==Geography==
Acarnania is composed of three main regions: 1) a rocky coastline, 2) a rugged strip of mountain range that follows the coastline, and 3) plains lying between these mountains and the Achelous River.

Anciently, Acarnania was reckoned the most westerly province of Greece, bounded on the north by the Ambracian Gulf, on the northeast by Amphilochia, on the west and southwest by the Ionian Sea, and on the east by Aetolia. It contained about . Under the Romans, or probably a little earlier, the river Achelous formed the boundary between Acarnania and Aetolia; but in the time of the Peloponnesian War, the territory of Oeniadae, which was one of the Acarnanian towns, extended east of this river. The interior of Acarnania was covered with forests and mountains of no great elevation. Between these mountains there are several lakes, and many fertile valleys. The chief river of the country is the Achelous, which in the lower part of its course flows through a vast plain of great natural fertility, called after itself the Paracheloitis. By the 19th century, the plain was covered with marshes, and the greater part of it appeared to have been formed by the alluvial depositions of the Achelous. Owing to this circumstance, and to the river having frequently altered its channel, the southern part of the coast of Acarnania has undergone numerous changes since antiquity. The chief affluent of the Achelous in Acarnania is the Anapus (Ἄναπος), which flowed into the main stream 80 stadia south of Stratus. 

There are several promontories on the coast, but of these only two are especially named by writers in antiquity, the promontory of Actium and that of Crithote (Κριθωτή), on the west coast, forming one side of the small bay, on which the town of Astacus stood. Of the inland lakes, the only one mentioned by name by the classical writers is that of Melite (Μελίτη; the modern Lake Trichonida), 30 stadia long and 20 broad, north of the mouth of the Achelous, in the territory of Oeniadae. There was a lagoon, or salt lake, between Leucas and the Ambracian gulf, to which Strabo gives the name of Myrtuntium (Μυρτούντιον). Although the soil of Acarnania was fertile, it was not much cultivated by the inhabitants. The products of the country are rarely mentioned by the ancient writers. Pliny speaks of iron mines, and also of a pearl-fishery off Actium. The chief wealth of the inhabitants consisted in their herds and flocks, which pastured in the rich meadows in the lower part of the Achelous. There were numerous islands off the western coast of Acarnania. Of these the most important were the Echinades, extending from the mouth of the Achelous along the shore to the North; the Taphiae Insulae, lying between Leucas and Acarnania, and Leucas itself, which originally formed part of the mainland of Acarnania, but was afterwards separated from the latter by a canal.

==List of Acarnanians==
*Carnus, seer of Apollo who established the cult of Apollo Carneus among the Dorians; see also Carneia.
*Amphilytus, seer of Peisistratos (Athens).
*Megistias, seer at the battle of Thermopylae.
*Lysimachus of Acarnania one of the tutors of Alexander the Great
*Philip of Acarnania, one of the physicians of Alexander the Great
*Machatas (sculptor)
*Aristomenes of Acarnania, guardian and regent of Ptolemy V Epiphanes
*Alexander of Acarnania, general of Antiochus the Great

==See also==
*Acarnanian League
*List of cities in ancient Acarnania.
*List of cities in Acarnania
*List of traditional Greek place names

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* 

==Attribution==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q416070" start="0" end="9" title="Acarnania" label="Acarnania"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="41" end="47" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q37495" start="68" end="78" title="Ionian Sea" label="Ionian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q26857" start="88" end="95" title="Aetolia" label="Aetolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q203923" start="106" end="120" title="Achelous River" label="Achelous River"/>
<link wikidata="Q750313" start="162" end="169" title="Calydon" label="Calydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q209682" start="200" end="215" title="Gulf of Corinth" label="Gulf of Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234255" start="256" end="269" title="regional units of Greece" label="regional unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q202624" start="273" end="290" title="Aetolia-Acarnania" label="Aetolia-Acarnania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795792" start="344" end="351" title="Stratos, Greece" label="Stratos"/>
<link wikidata="Q209682" start="388" end="403" title="Corinthian Gulf" label="Corinthian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q565751" start="441" end="447" title="Epirus" label="Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="481" end="496" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q30096902" start="527" end="534" title="Acarnan" label="Acarnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q591089" start="543" end="551" title="Alcmaeon (mythology)" label="Alcmaeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="668" end="673" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060492" start="723" end="729" title="Homer&amp;#x27;s Ithaca" label="Ithaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q178488" start="734" end="744" title="Cephalonia" label="Cephalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432910" start="930" end="936" title="Taphii" label="Taphii"/>
<link wikidata="Q375221" start="956" end="963" title="Leleges" label="Leleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q12879305" start="973" end="980" title="Curetes (tribe)" label="Curetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q26857" start="1208" end="1215" title="Aetolia" label="Aetolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q659791" start="1217" end="1223" title="Locris" label="Locris"/>
<link wikidata="Q410748" start="1390" end="1397" title="Aetolus" label="Aetolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q221925" start="1455" end="1462" title="Acarnan (son of Alcmaeon)" label="Acarnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q591089" start="1475" end="1483" title="Alcmaeon (mythology)" label="Alcmaeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q203923" start="1533" end="1541" title="Achelous River" label="Achelous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363688" start="1749" end="1756" title="Ancient Corinth" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q12873561" start="1765" end="1775" title="Anactorium" label="Anactorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11950686" start="1777" end="1784" title="Sollium" label="Sollium"/>
<link wikidata="Q190138" start="1789" end="1795" title="Lefkada" label="Leucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q178488" start="1801" end="1810" title="Kefalonia" label="Kefalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q746362" start="1819" end="1826" title="Astakos" label="Astacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q33745" start="1993" end="2010" title="Peloponnesian War" label="Peloponnesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q450546" start="2153" end="2160" title="Alyzeia" label="Alyzeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11915699" start="2162" end="2169" title="Coronta" label="Coronta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11931948" start="2171" end="2178" title="Limnaea (Acarnania)" label="Limnaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806982" start="2180" end="2186" title="Medion (polis)" label="Medion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016870" start="2188" end="2196" title="Oeniadae" label="Oeniadae"/>
<link wikidata="Q981081" start="2198" end="2206" title="Palaerus" label="Palaerus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187057" start="2208" end="2216" title="Phoitiai" label="Phoitiai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795792" start="2221" end="2228" title="Stratos, Greece" label="Stratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="2251" end="2261" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="Q24915809" start="2300" end="2340" title="Acarnanian League" label="loose confederation of Acarnanian powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q26857" start="2572" end="2580" title="Agraeans" label="Agraeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q470461" start="2585" end="2598" title="Amphilochians" label="Amphilochians"/>
<link wikidata="Q284841" start="2606" end="2620" title="Ambracian Gulf" label="Ambracian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="2919" end="2925" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q24915809" start="2993" end="3010" title="Acarnanian League" label="Acarnanian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="3022" end="3031" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="3072" end="3082" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="Q16613536" start="3106" end="3111" title="Olpae" label="Olpae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748292" start="3122" end="3140" title="Amphilochian Argos" label="Amphilochian Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795792" start="3289" end="3296" title="Stratos, Greece" label="Stratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799781" start="3403" end="3410" title="Thyrium" label="Thyrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q216551" start="3820" end="3826" title="Actium" label="Actium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363688" start="4526" end="4533" title="Ancient Corinth" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="4641" end="4650" title="Athens" label="Athenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q470461" start="4742" end="4755" title="Amphilochians" label="Amphilochians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748292" start="4773" end="4792" title="Argos Amphilochicum" label="Argos Amphilochicum"/>
<link wikidata="Q661559" start="4825" end="4833" title="Ambracia" label="Ambracia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338787" start="5059" end="5066" title="Phormio" label="Phormio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016870" start="5302" end="5310" title="Oeniadae" label="Oeniadae"/>
<link wikidata="Q746362" start="5315" end="5322" title="Astakos" label="Astacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q504986" start="5547" end="5558" title="Demosthenes (general)" label="Demosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q617924" start="5605" end="5620" title="Battle of Olpae" label="Battle of Olpae"/>
<link wikidata="Q750313" start="5845" end="5852" title="Calydon" label="Calydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26857" start="5856" end="5863" title="Aetolia" label="Aetolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="5949" end="5963" title="Spartans" label="Lacedaemonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q271850" start="6022" end="6036" title="Agesilaus II" label="King Agesilaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338980" start="6282" end="6304" title="Second Athenian League" label="Second Athenian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q8257871" start="6353" end="6360" title="Boeotia" label="Boeotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130650" start="6418" end="6438" title="Philip II of Macedon" label="Philip II of Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q200716" start="6442" end="6451" title="Battle of Chaeronea (338 BC)" label="Chaeronea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="6472" end="6491" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q207183" start="6541" end="6550" title="Cassander" label="Cassander"/>
<link wikidata="Q26857" start="6596" end="6603" title="Aetolia" label="Aetolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11266977" start="6797" end="6803" title="Epirus (ancient state)" label="Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q190138" start="6943" end="6949" title="Lefkada" label="Leucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q237248" start="7217" end="7223" title="Philip V of Macedon" label="Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q190138" start="7293" end="7299" title="Lefkada" label="Leucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q391087" start="7355" end="7378" title="Battle of Cynoscephalae" label="Battle of Cynoscephalae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365" start="7413" end="7426" title="Antiochus III the Great" label="Antiochus III"/>
<link wikidata="Q298168" start="7689" end="7704" title="Aemilius Paulus" label="Aemilius Paulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q207363" start="7753" end="7760" title="Perseus of Macedon" label="Perseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799781" start="7824" end="7833" title="Thyrreion" label="Thyrreion"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="7966" end="7973" title="Piracy" label="pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747183" start="7982" end="7998" title="List of Roman civil wars and revolts" label="Roman civil wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q204772" start="8121" end="8127" title="Achaia (Roman province)" label="Achaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820754" start="8134" end="8140" title="Epirus (Roman province)" label="Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="8253" end="8261" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q943637" start="8265" end="8274" title="Nicopolis" label="Nicopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q160387" start="8303" end="8319" title="Battle of Actium" label="Battle of Actium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="8506" end="8526" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Eastern Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q51656" start="8582" end="8596" title="Fourth Crusade" label="Fourth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q187684" start="8629" end="8648" title="Despotate of Epirus" label="Despotate of Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406298" start="8681" end="8687" title="Serbian Empire" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="8717" end="8731" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q391379" start="8983" end="8997" title="Achelous" label="Achelous River"/>
<link wikidata="Q284841" start="9100" end="9114" title="Ambracian Gulf" label="Ambracian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q470461" start="9136" end="9147" title="Amphilochia" label="Amphilochia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37495" start="9182" end="9192" title="Ionian Sea" label="Ionian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q26857" start="9213" end="9220" title="Aetolia" label="Aetolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q203923" start="9301" end="9309" title="Achelous River" label="Achelous"/>
<link wikidata="Q33745" start="9384" end="9401" title="Peloponnesian War" label="Peloponnesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016870" start="9420" end="9428" title="Oeniadae" label="Oeniadae"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790474" start="9826" end="9839" title="Paracheloitis" label="Paracheloitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q56278470" start="10230" end="10236" title="Anapus (Acarnania)" label="Anapus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795792" start="10300" end="10307" title="Stratos, Greece" label="Stratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q216551" start="10442" end="10448" title="Actium" label="Actium"/>
<link wikidata="Q24888066" start="10461" end="10469" title="Cape Skopia" label="Crithote"/>
<link wikidata="Q746362" start="10556" end="10563" title="Astakos" label="Astacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422965" start="10686" end="10701" title="Lake Trichonida" label="Lake Trichonida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016870" start="10789" end="10797" title="Oeniadae" label="Oeniadae"/>
<link wikidata="Q190138" start="10841" end="10847" title="Lefkada" label="Leucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="10881" end="10887" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10906" end="10916" title="Myrtuntium (lake)" label="Myrtuntium"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="11096" end="11101" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny"/>
<link wikidata="Q767387" start="11408" end="11417" title="Echinades" label="Echinades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432910" start="11494" end="11509" title="Taphiae Insulae" label="Taphiae Insulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044177" start="11708" end="11714" title="Carnus" label="Carnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q203711" start="11784" end="11791" title="Dorians" label="Dorians"/>
<link wikidata="Q744759" start="11802" end="11809" title="Carneia" label="Carneia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11812" end="11822" title="Amphilytus" label="Amphilytus"/>
<link wikidata="Q242172" start="11832" end="11853" title="Peisistratos (Athens)" label="Peisistratos (Athens)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809117" start="11856" end="11865" title="Megistias" label="Megistias"/>
<link wikidata="Q452941" start="11903" end="11926" title="Lysimachus of Acarnania" label="Lysimachus of Acarnania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184616" start="11969" end="11988" title="Philip of Acarnania" label="Philip of Acarnania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723449" start="12036" end="12055" title="Machatas (sculptor)" label="Machatas (sculptor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q666967" start="12057" end="12081" title="Aristomenes of Alyzeia" label="Aristomenes of Acarnania"/>
<link wikidata="Q39957" start="12106" end="12125" title="Ptolemy V Epiphanes" label="Ptolemy V Epiphanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720493" start="12127" end="12149" title="Alexander of Acarnania" label="Alexander of Acarnania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365" start="12162" end="12181" title="Antiochus the Great" label="Antiochus the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q24915809" start="12197" end="12214" title="Acarnanian League" label="Acarnanian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6609823" start="12216" end="12251" title="List of cities in ancient Acarnania" label="List of cities in ancient Acarnania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6609822" start="12254" end="12281" title="List of cities in Acarnania" label="List of cities in Acarnania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572457" start="12283" end="12320" title="List of traditional Greek place names" label="List of traditional Greek place names"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="63881" wikidata="Q1058256" url="?curid=63881" title="Languages of the United States">
<text>The most commonly used language in the United States is English (especially American English), which is the de facto national language. In addition, 32 U.S. states out of 50 and all five U.S. territories have declared English as an official language. The majority of the U.S. population (78%) speaks only English at home as of 2023, according to the American Community Survey (ACS) of the U.S. Census Bureau. The remainder of the population speaks many other languages at home, most notably Spanish (13.4% of the population). Asian languages such as Chinese (around 1% of the population), Tagalog, and Vietnamese are also widely spoken, in addition to the Indigenous languages of Native Americans, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and native populations in the U.S. unincorporated territories. Many languages were brought into the United States during its earliest history from Europe, Africa, Asia, other parts of the Americas, and Oceania, with some of them developing into dialects (such as Gullah), creole languages (such as Louisiana Creole), and pidgin languages. American Sign Language (ASL) and Interlingua, an international auxiliary language, were created in the United States.

The majority of foreign language speakers in the U.S. are bilingual or multilingual, and they commonly speak English. Although 22% of U.S. residents report that they speak a language other than English at home, only 8.4% of these same residents speak English less than &quot;very well&quot;. Approximately 430 languages are spoken or signed by the population, of which 177 are indigenous to the U.S. or its territories.

==Most common languages==
Based on annual data from the American Community Survey (ACS), the U.S. Census Bureau regularly publishes information on the most common languages spoken at home. It also reports on the English-speaking ability of people who speak a language other than English at home. In 2023, Spanish speakers made up about three-fifths of all speakers of languages other than English in the United States. In 2017, the U.S. Census Bureau published information on the number of speakers of some 350 languages as surveyed by the ACS from 2009 to 2013, but it does not regularly tabulate and report data for that many languages.

The most spoken native languages at home in the United States in 2020 were:

# English (only language spoken in the household) 245.69 million
# Spanish 42.03 million
# Chinese (including Mandarin, Cantonese, Hokkien and all other varieties) 3.40 million
# Tagalog (including Filipino) 1.71 million
# Vietnamese 1.52 million
# Arabic 1.39 million
# French 1.18 million
# Korean 1.07 million
# Russian 1.04 million
# Portuguese 937,000
# Haitian Creole 895,000
# Hindi 865,000
# German 857,000
# Polish 533,000
# Italian 513,000
# Urdu 508,000
# Persian (including Farsi, Dari and Tajik) 472,000
# Telugu 460,000
# Japanese 455,000
# Gujarati 437,000
# Bengali 403,000
# Tamil 341,000
# Punjabi 319,000
# Thais (including Central Thai and Lao) 284,000
# Serbo-Croatian (including Bosnian, Croatian, Montenegrin, and Serbian) 266,000
# Armenian 256,000
# Greek 253,000
# Hmong 240,000
# Hebrew 215,000
# Khmer 193,000
# Navajo 155,000
# other Indo-European languages 662,000
# Yoruba, Twi, Igbo and other languages of West Africa 640,000
# Amharic, Somali, and other Afro-Asiatic languages 596,000
# Dutch, Afrikaans, Frisian, Luxembourgish, Scots, Yiddish, Pennsylvania Dutch, Low German, and other West Germanic languages 574,000
# Ilocano, Samoan, Hawaiian, and other Austronesian languages 486,000
# Other languages of Asia 460,000
# Nepali, Marathi, and other Indic languages 448,000
# Ukrainian and other Slavic languages 385,000
# Swahili and other languages of Central, Eastern, and Southern Africa 288,000
# Malayalam, Kannada, and other Dravidian languages 280,000
# Other Native languages of North America 169,000
# other and unspecified languages 327,000
The ACS is not a full census but an annual sample-based survey conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau. The language statistics are based on responses to a three-part question asked about all members of a target U.S. household who are at least five years old. The first part asks if they &quot;speak a language other than English at home.&quot; If so, the head of the household or main respondent is asked to report which language each member speaks in the home, and how well each individual speaks English. It does not ask how well individuals speak any other language of the household. Thus, some respondents might have only limited speaking ability in those languages. In addition, it is difficult to make historical comparisons of the numbers of speakers because language questions used by the U.S. Census changed numerous times before 1980.

The ACS does not tabulate the number of people who report the use of American Sign Language at home, so such data must come from other sources. While modern estimates indicate that American Sign Language was signed by as many as 500,000 Americans in 1972 (the last official survey of sign language), estimates as recently as 2011 were closer to 100,000. Various cultural factors, such as the passage of the Americans with Disabilities Act, have resulted in far greater educational opportunities for hearing-impaired children, which could double or triple the number of current users of American Sign Language.

English is the most common language spoken in U.S. homes, with approximately 239 million speakers as well as numerous bilingual speakers. Spanish is spoken by approximately 35 million people. The United States has the world&#x27;s fourth largest Spanish-speaking population, outnumbered only by Mexico, Colombia, and Argentina; other estimates put the United States at over 50 million, second only to Mexico. Throughout the Southwestern United States and Puerto Rico, long-established Spanish-speaking communities coexist with large numbers of more recent Hispanophone immigrants. Although many new Latin American immigrants are less than fluent in English, nearly all second-generation Hispanic and Latino Americans speak English fluently, while only about half still speak Spanish.

According to the 2000 U.S. Census, people of German ancestry made up the largest single ethnic group in the United States, but German language was the fourth most-spoken language in the country. Italian, Polish, and French are still widely spoken among populations descending from immigrants from those countries in the early 20th century, but the use of these languages is dwindling as the older generations die. Russian is also spoken by immigrant populations.

Tagalog and Vietnamese have over one million speakers each in the United States, almost entirely within recent immigrant populations. Both languages, along with the varieties of Chinese (mostly Cantonese, Taishanese, and Standard Mandarin), Japanese, and Korean, are now used in elections in Alaska, California, Hawaii, Illinois, New York, Texas, and Washington.

Native American languages are spoken in smaller pockets of the country, but these populations are decreasing, and the languages are seldom widely used outside of reservations. Besides English, Spanish, French, German, Navajo and other Native American languages, all other languages are usually learned from immigrant ancestors that came after the time of independence or learned through some form of education.

American Sign Language is the most common sign language in the United States, although there are unrelated sign languages that have also been developed in the States and territories—mostly in the Pacific. No concrete numbers exist for signers but something upwards of 250,000 is common.
The most widely taught foreign languages in the United States, in terms of enrollment numbers from kindergarten through university undergraduate education, are Spanish, French, and German. Other commonly taught languages include Latin, Japanese, American Sign Language, Italian, and Chinese.

==Official languages==
The United States has never had an official language at the federal level, but English is typically used at the federal level and in states that do not have an official language. Outside of Puerto Rico, English is the primary language used for legislation, regulations, executive orders, treaties, federal court rulings, and all other official pronouncements. Nonetheless, laws require documents such as ballots to be printed in multiple languages when there are large numbers of non-English speakers in an area.

Thirty-two of the 50 states have adopted legislation granting official or co-official status to English, in some cases as part of what has been called the English-only movement. Typically only &quot;English&quot; is specified, not a particular variety like American English. (From 1923 to 1969, the state of Illinois recognized its official language as &quot;American&quot;.)

Hawaiian and English are the official languages of Hawaii, reflecting the Hawaiian Kingdom&#x27;s history of trade and diplomacy with Britain in the decades prior to its annexation by the United States in 1898. Alaska has made some 20 native languages official, along with English; for example, Alaska provides voting information in Iñupiaq, Central Yup&#x27;ik, Gwich&#x27;in, Siberian Yupik, and Koyukon among others. On July 1, 2019, a law went into effect making Lakota, Dakota, and Nakota the official indigenous languages of South Dakota. 
French is a &quot;de facto&quot;, but unofficial, language in Maine and Louisiana, and since 1848 New Mexico law has granted Spanish speakers in the state the right to receive many services in Spanish. The government of Louisiana offers services and most documents in both English and French, and New Mexico does so in English and Spanish.

English is at least one of the official languages in all five permanently inhabited U.S. territories. In Puerto Rico, both English and Spanish are official, although Spanish has been declared the principal official language. The school system and the government operate almost entirely in Spanish, but federal law requires the United States District Court for the District of Puerto Rico to use English, like the rest of the federal court system.

Guam recognizes English and Chamorro. In the U.S. Virgin Islands, English is the only official language. In American Samoa, both English and Samoan are officially recognized; English is common but Samoan is also seen in some official communications. In the Northern Mariana Islands, English, Chamorro, and Carolinian are official.

In New Mexico, although the state constitution does not specify an official language, laws are published in English and Spanish, and government materials and services are legally required (by Act) to be made accessible to speakers of both languages as well as Navajo and various Pueblo languages. New Mexico also has its own dialect of Spanish, which differs from Spanish spoken in Latin America.

Algonquian, Cherokee, and Sioux are among many other Native American languages which are official or co-official on many U.S. Indian reservations and Pueblos. In Oklahoma before statehood in 1907, territory officials debated whether or not to have Cherokee, Choctaw, and Muscogee languages as co-official, but the idea never gained ground. Cherokee is officially recognized by the Cherokee Nation within the Cherokee tribal jurisdiction area in eastern Oklahoma.

After New Amsterdam (formerly a Dutch colony) was transferred to English administration (becoming the Province of New York) in the late 17th century, English supplanted Dutch as the official language. However, &quot;Dutch remained the primary language for many civil and ecclesiastical functions and most private affairs for the next century.&quot; The Jersey Dutch dialect is now extinct.

California has agreed to allow the publication of state documents in other languages to represent minority groups and immigrant communities. Languages such as Spanish, Chinese, Korean, Tagalog, Persian, Russian, Vietnamese, and Thai appear in official state documents, and the Department of Motor Vehicles publishes in nine languages.

The issue of multilingualism also applies in the states of Arizona and Texas. While the constitution of Texas has no official language policy, Arizona passed a proposition in 2006 declaring English as the official language. Nonetheless, Arizona law requires the distribution of voting ballots in Spanish, as well as indigenous languages such as Navajo, O&#x27;odham and Hopi, in counties where they are spoken.

A popular urban legend called the Muhlenberg legend claims that German was almost made an official language of the United States but lost by one vote. In reality, it was a request by a group of German immigrants to have an official translation of laws into German. House speaker Frederick Muhlenberg has since become associated with the legend.

===Education===
Bilingual education in the United States, often a different concept from language immersion or dual-language school programs, is an area of political controversy. In standard bilingual classes, the non-English language (typically Spanish or Chinese) is utilized over a period of time when students&#x27; English-language proficiency is lacking. Otherwise the medium of instruction at almost all U.S. schools, at all levels, is English. The exceptions are in language classes such as French or German, or in general education in the territory of Puerto Rico, where Spanish is standard. English is the language of instruction in the territory of American Samoa, despite most students speaking Samoan as their native language.

There are also hundreds of language immersion and dual-language schools across the United States that teach in a variety of languages, including Spanish, Hawaiian, Chamorro, French, and Mandarin Chinese (for example, the Mandarin Immersion Magnet School in Texas). However, English is a mandatory class in all these schools.

==Historic languages==

Some of the first European languages to be spoken in the U.S. were English, Dutch, French, Spanish, and Swedish.

From the mid-19th century, the nation had large numbers of immigrants who spoke little or no English. The laws, constitutions, and legislative proceedings of some states and territories appeared in the languages of politically important immigrant groups. There have been bilingual schools and local newspapers in such languages as German, Ukrainian, Hungarian, Irish, Italian, Norwegian, Greek, Polish, Swedish, Romanian, Czech, Japanese, Yiddish, Hebrew, Lithuanian, Welsh, Cantonese, Bulgarian, Dutch, Portuguese, Persian, Arabic and others. These flourished despite English-only laws in some jurisdictions prohibiting church services, telephone conversations, and even conversations in the street or on railway platforms in a language other than English, up until the first of these laws was ruled unconstitutional in 1923 (&quot;Meyer v. Nebraska&quot;).

Typically, immigrant languages tend to be lost through assimilation within two or three generations.

Several states and territories have native populations who spoke their own language prior to joining the United States, and have maintained their original languages for centuries. The languages include Alaskan Russian, Louisiana French, New Mexican Spanish, Pennsylvania Dutch, and Puerto Rican Spanish.

===English (245.69 million speakers)===

English was inherited from British colonization, and it is spoken by the majority of the population. English has become increasingly common; when the United States was founded, just 40% of Americans spoke English.. In 2002, 87% of Americans spoke English as their first language. It serves as the de facto national language, the language in which government business is carried out. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, 80% spoke only English at home and all but approximately 13,600,000 U.S. residents age 5 and over speak English &quot;well&quot; or &quot;very well&quot;.

American English is different from British English in terms of spelling (one example being the dropped &quot;u&quot; in words such as color/colour), grammar, vocabulary, pronunciation, and slang usage. The differences are not usually a barrier to effective communication between an American English and a British English speaker.

Some states, like California, have amended their constitutions to make English the only official language, but in practice, this only means that official government documents must &quot;at least&quot; be in English, and &quot;does not&quot; mean that they should be exclusively available only in English. For example, the standard California Class C driver&#x27;s license examination is available in 32 different languages.

===Spanish (42.03 million speakers)===
Spanish was also inherited from colonization and is sanctioned as official in the commonwealth of Puerto Rico, where it is the general language of instruction in schools and universities. In the 50 states, the District of Columbia, and all territories except Puerto Rico, Spanish is taught as a foreign or second language. It is spoken at home in areas with large Hispanic populations: the Southwestern United States along the border with Mexico, as well as in Florida, parts of California, the District of Columbia, Illinois, New Jersey, and New York. In Hispanic communities across the country, bilingual signs in both Spanish and English may be quite common. Furthermore, numerous neighborhoods exist (such as Washington Heights in New York City or Little Havana in Miami) in which entire city blocks will have only Spanish-language signs and Spanish-speaking people.

Younger generations of non-Hispanics in the United States choose to study Spanish as a foreign or second language in far greater numbers than other second-language options. This might be due in part to the growing Hispanic population and the increasing popularity of Latin American movies and music performed in the Spanish language. A 2009 American Community Survey (ACS) conducted by the United States Census Bureau, showed that Spanish was spoken at home by over 35 million people aged 5 or older, making the United States the world&#x27;s fifth-largest Spanish-speaking community, outnumbered only by Mexico, Colombia, Spain, and Argentina. Since then, the number of persons reported on the ACS to speak Spanish at home has increased (see table).

====New Mexican Spanish====
In northern New Mexico and southern Colorado, Spanish speakers have been isolated for centuries in the southern Rockies, and developed a distinct dialect of Spanish spoken nowhere else: New Mexican Spanish. The dialect features a mix of Castilian, Galician and, more recently, Mexican Spanish, as well as Pueblo loan words. New Mexican Spanish also contains a large proportion of English loan words, particularly for technological words (e.g. &quot;bos&quot;, &quot;troca&quot;, and &quot;telefón&quot;).

Speakers of New Mexican Spanish are mainly descendants of Spanish colonists who arrived in New Mexico in the sixteenth through the eighteenth centuries. During this time, contact with the rest of Spanish America was limited, and New Mexican Spanish developed on its own course. In the meantime, Spanish colonists coexisted with and intermarried with Puebloan peoples and Navajos. After the Mexican–American War, New Mexico and all its inhabitants came under the governance of the English-speaking United States, and for the next hundred years, English-speakers increased in number.

====Puerto Rican Spanish====
Puerto Rican Spanish is the main language and dialect of the people of Puerto Rico, as well as many people descended from Puerto Ricans elsewhere throughout the United States.

====Spanglish====
Spanglish is a code-switching variant of Spanish and English and is spoken in areas with large bilingual populations of Spanish and English speakers, such as along the Mexico–United States border (California, Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas), Florida, and New York City.

===Chinese (3.4 million speakers)===

The population of Chinese speakers in the United States was increasing rapidly in the 20th century because the number of Chinese immigrants has increased at a rate of more than 50% since 1940. 2.8 million Americans speak some variety of Chinese, which combined are counted by the federal census as the third most-spoken language in the country. Until the late 20th century, Yue dialects, including Cantonese and Taishanese, were the most common dialects among immigrants and the descendants of immigrants, especially in California. Since the opening of the People&#x27;s Republic of China, Mandarin, the official language in the PRC and Republic of China (Taiwan), has become increasingly prevalent. Many Americans of all ethnic backgrounds are also learning Mandarin and, to a far lesser extent, Cantonese.

In New York City in 2002, Mandarin was spoken as a native language among only 10% of Chinese speakers but was predicted to replace Cantonese as the lingua franca among Chinese speakers.

Chinese-Americans in the California Gold Rush and their descendants spoke a variety of the Cantonese language influenced by American English and American societal concepts foreign to Cantonese speakers in Modern China, either through direct English translations such as &quot;Alpine&quot; borrowed from (Alpine County, California), or neologisms such as &quot;Yellow Eagle&quot; (Gold dollar), &quot;Emancipated Woman&quot; (Feminist), and &quot;Telephone&quot;. It also maintains older Qing Dynasty Cantonese vocabulary that has fallen out of use in Cantonese spoken in Modern China.

===French (1.18 million speakers; 2.07 million including Haitian Creole)===
French is the seventh most spoken language in the United States according to the 2020 ACS. It is the fourth most common if Haitian Creole (a French-based dialect that is not mutually intelligible with standard French) is combined and counted as French. The ACS lists Haitian Creole separately from French, which encompasses standard French, Louisiana Creole, and Louisiana Cajun varieties. In the United States, French is spoken mainly by the Louisiana Creole, native French, Cajun, and French-Canadian populations, along with more recent immigrants from Haiti. It is widely spoken in Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, and in Louisiana, with notable Francophone enclaves in St. Clair County, Michigan, many rural areas of the Upper Peninsula of Michigan and the northern San Francisco Bay area. Because of its legacy in Louisiana, that state is served by the Council for the Development of French in Louisiana (CODOFIL), the only state agency in the United States whose mission is to serve a linguistic population. In October 2018, Louisiana became the first U.S. state to join the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie.

Three varieties of French developed within what is now the United States in colonial times including Louisiana French, Missouri French, and New England French (essentially a variant of Canadian French). French is the second-most-spoken language in the states of Louisiana and Maine. The largest French-speaking communities in the United States reside in Northeast Maine; Hollywood and Miami, Florida; New York City; certain areas of rural Louisiana; and small minorities in Vermont and New Hampshire. Many of the New England communities are connected to the dialect found across the border in Quebec or New Brunswick. More than 13 million Americans possess primary French heritage, but only 2 million speak French, or any regional creoles and variations language at home. The largest concentration of French speakers in the country is in Louisiana.

====Louisiana French====
Louisiana French (; ) is an umbrella term for the dialects and varieties of the French language spoken traditionally in colonial Lower Louisiana. As of today Louisiana French is primarily used in the U.S. state of Louisiana, specifically in the southern parishes.

French is spoken across ethnic and racial lines by Louisiana French people who may identify as Cajuns or Creoles as well as Chitimacha, Houma, Biloxi, Tunica, Choctaw, Acadians, and French Indian among others. For these reasons, as well as the relatively small influence Acadian French has had on the region, the label Louisiana French or Louisiana Regional French () is generally regarded as more accurate and inclusive than &quot;Cajun French&quot; and is the preferred term by linguists and anthropologists. However, &quot;Cajun French&quot; is commonly used in lay discourse by speakers of the language and other inhabitants of Louisiana.

===German (857,000 speakers; 1.29 million including Yiddish and Pennsylvania German dialects)===
German was the 13th most common language spoken at home, according to the 2020 ACS survey. If German-related dialects such as Yiddish and varieties such as Pennsylvania German (Amish) are included, German ranks among the top ten languages spoken in U.S. homes. (The ACS lists both Yiddish and Pennsylvania German separately from German.) In the United States, German was a widely spoken language in some American colonies, especially Pennsylvania, where a number of German-speaking Protestants and other religious minorities settled to escape persecution in Europe. Another wave of settlement occurred when Germans fleeing the failure of 19th-century German revolutions immigrated to the United States. Throughout the century, a large number of these immigrants settled in urban areas, where entire neighborhoods were German-speaking and numerous local German-language newspapers and periodicals were established. Germans also took up farming around the country, including the Texas Hill Country, at this time. The language was widely spoken until the United States entered World War I.

In the early twentieth century, German was the most widely studied foreign language in the United States, and prior to World War I, more than 6% of American schoolchildren received their primary education exclusively in German, though some of these Germans came from areas outside Germany. Currently, more than 49 million Americans claim German ancestry, the largest self-described ethnic group in the U.S., but less than 4% of them speak a language other than English at home, according to recent American Community Surveys. The Amish, concentrated in the State of Pennsylvania, speak a dialect of German known as Pennsylvania Dutch; it is widely spoken in Amish communities today.

Waves of colonial Palatines from the Rhenish Palatinate, one of the Holy Roman states, settled in the Province of New York and the Province of Pennsylvania. The first Palatines arrived in the late 1600s but the majority came throughout the 1700s; they were known collectively as the Palatine Dutch. The Pennsylvania Dutch settled other states, including Indiana and Ohio. For many years, the term &quot;Palatine&quot; meant German American.

There is a myth (known as the Muhlenberg Vote) that German was to be the official language of the U.S., but this is inaccurate and based on a failed early attempt to have government documents translated into German. The myth also extends to German being the second official language of Pennsylvania; however, Pennsylvania has no official language. Although more than 49 million Americans claim they have German ancestors, only 1.24 million Americans speak German at home. Many of these people are either Amish and Mennonites or Germans having newly immigrated (e.g. for professional reasons).

====Pennsylvania Dutch====
Pennsylvania Dutch or Pennsylvania German is a dialect of Palatine German that is traditionally spoken by the Pennsylvania Dutch, and has settled the Midwest, in places such as Ohio, Indiana, Iowa and other states, where many of the speakers live today. It evolved from the German dialect of the Palatinate brought over to America by Palatines from the Holy Roman Empire in the 1600s. They settled on land sold to them by William Penn. Germantown included not only Mennonites, but also Quakers. The Pennsylvania Dutch speak Pennsylvania Dutch, and adhere to different Christian denominations: Lutherans, German Reformed, Mennonites, Amish, German Baptist Brethren, Roman Catholics; today Pennsylvania Dutch is mainly spoken by Old Order Amish and Old Order Mennonites.

====Texas German====
Texas German is a group of High German dialects spoken by Texas Germans, descendants of German immigrants who settled in Texas in the mid-19th century.

====Yiddish====
Yiddish has a much longer history in the United States than Hebrew. It has been present since at least the late 19th century and continues to have roughly 148,000 speakers as of the 2009 American Community Survey. Though they came from varying geographic backgrounds and nuanced approaches to worship, immigrant Jews of Central Europe, Germany and Russia were often united under a common understanding of the Yiddish language once they settled in America, and at one point dozens of publications were available in most East Coast cities. Though it has declined by quite a bit since the end of WWII, it has by no means disappeared. Many Israeli immigrants and expatriates have at least some understanding of the language in addition to Hebrew, and many of the descendants of the great migration of Ashkenazi Jews of the past century pepper their mostly English vocabulary with some Yiddish loan words. Yiddish remains the lingua franca among American Haredi Jews (particularly Hasidic Jewry), whose communities are concentrated in Los Angeles, Miami, New York City, and the suburbs of New York. A significant diffusion of Yiddish loan words into the non-Jewish population continues to be a distinguishing feature of New York City English. Some of these words include &quot;glitch, chutzpah, mensch, kvetch, klutz&quot;, etc.

===Russian (1.04 million speakers)===

In the United States, the Russian language is spoken mostly in urban areas of the states of New York, California, Washington, New Jersey, Illinois, Massachusetts, and Pennsylvania. It is also spoken in isolated areas of Alaska originally settled in the 18th and 19th centuries by Russian &quot;promyshlenniki&quot;; these were largely Siberian fur hunters, river merchants, and mercenaries who later worked as sailors, carpenters, artisans, and craftsmen. In the 21st century, Russian is especially spoken in immigrant neighborhoods of larger U.S. cities: New York City, Boston, Los Angeles, San Francisco, Philadelphia, Chicago, Seattle, Sacramento, Spokane, Miami, Portland, Oregon, and two Portland suburbs, Vancouver, Washington and Woodburn, Oregon. 

From 1799 until 1867, the Russian-American Company owned most all of what became Alaska Territory. This changed with the formal sale of Alaska to the United States on March 30, 1867, after the final resolution of the Crimean War. The presence of Russian speakers in the United States has always been limited in numbers, and even more so after the assassination of the Romanov dynasty of tsars. However, beginning in the late 1970s and continuing until the mid-1990s, many Russian-speaking Jews from the Soviet Union (and later from its independent constituent republics of Russia, Moldova, Ukraine, Belarus, and Uzbekistan) have immigrated to the United States, increasing the use of Russian in the country.

The largest Russian-speaking neighborhoods in the United States are found in Brooklyn, Queens, and Staten Island in New York City (specifically the Brighton Beach area of Brooklyn and Forest Hills and Rego Park in Queens), parts of Los Angeles (especially West Los Angeles and West Hollywood), neighborhoods of Philadelphia (notably the Far Northeast), and parts of Miami (Sunny Isles Beach).

The Russian-language media group Slavic Voice of America, based in Dallas, Texas, serves Russian-speaking Americans.

====Alaskan Russian====
Alaskan Russian, known locally as Old Russian, is a dialect of Russian influenced by the Alutiiq language spoken by Alaskan Creoles. Most of its speakers live on Kodiak Island and in the Ninilchik (Kenai Peninsula). It has been isolated from other varieties of Russian for over a century.

Kodiak Russian was natively spoken along the Afognak Strait until the Great Alaskan earthquake and tsunami of 1964. It has become moribund, spoken by only a handful of elderly people, and is virtually undocumented.

Ninilchik Russian has been better studied and is more vibrant. It developed from the Russian colonial settlement of the village of Ninilchik in 1847.

Ninilchik Russian vocabulary is clearly Russian, with a few borrowings from English and Alaskan native languages.

In Nikolaevsk, Alaska, 66.57% of the population still spoke Russian at home as late as 2017.

===Dutch (142,000 speakers)===

In a 1990 demographic consensus, 3% of surveyed citizens claimed to be of Dutch descent. Modern estimates place the Dutch American population (with total or partial Dutch heritage) at 3.1 million, or 0.93%, lagging just a bit behind Norwegian Americans and Swedish Americans, while 885,000 Americans claimed total Dutch heritage.

An estimated 141,580 people, or 0.0486%, in the United States still speak the Dutch language, 
including its Flemish variant, at home as of 2013. This is in addition to the 23,010 and 510 speakers, respectively, of the Afrikaans and West-Frisian languages, both closely related to Dutch. Dutch speakers in the U.S. are concentrated mainly in California (23,500), Florida (10,900), Pennsylvania (9,900), Ohio (9,600), New York (8,700) and Michigan (6,600, residing almost entirely in the city of Holland). In 2021, 95.3% of the total Dutch-American population aged 5 years and over spoke only English at home.

====Low Dutch====

There has been a Dutch presence in North America since establishment of 17th-century colony of New Netherland (parts of New York, New Jersey and Delaware), where Dutch was spoken by the New Netherlander, the original settlers, and their descendants. It was still spoken in the region at the time of the American Revolution and thereafter. For example, Alexander Hamilton&#x27;s wife, Eliza Hamilton, attended a Dutch-language church during their marriage. African-American abolitionist and women&#x27;s rights activist Sojourner Truth (born &quot;Isabella Baumfree&quot;) was a native speaker of Dutch. Martin Van Buren, the first president born in the United States following its independence from Great Britain, spoke Dutch as his native language. He is the only U.S. president whose first language was not English.

Vernacular dialects of Dutch were spoken in northeastern New Jersey (Bergen, Hudson, Passaic county) and the Capital District of New York until they gradually declined throughout the 20th century.

==Indigenous languages==
===Native American languages===
Native American languages predate European settlement of the New World. In a few parts of the U.S. (mostly on Indian reservations), they continue to be spoken fluently. Most of these languages are endangered, although there are efforts to revive them. Normally the fewer the speakers of a language the greater the degree of endangerment, but there are many small Native American language communities in the Southwest (Arizona and New Mexico) which continue to thrive despite their small size.

In 1929, speaking of indigenous Native American languages, linguist Edward Sapir observed:

====Navajo====

According to the 2000 Census and other language surveys, the largest Native American language-speaking community by far is the Navajo. Navajo is an Athabaskan language of the Na-Dené family, with 178,000 speakers, primarily in the states of Arizona, New Mexico, and Utah. Altogether, Navajo speakers make up more than 50% of all Native American language speakers in the United States. Western Apache, with 12,500 speakers, also mostly in Arizona, is closely related to Navajo but not mutually intelligible with it. Navajo and other Athabaskan languages in the Southwest are relative outliers; most other Athabascan languages are spoken in the Pacific Northwest and Alaska. Navajo has struggled to keep a healthy speaker base, although this problem has been alleviated to some extent by extensive education programs on the Navajo Nation, including a Navajo language immersion school in Fort Defiance, Arizona.

====Cherokee====

Cherokee is the Iroquoian language spoken by the Cherokee people, and the official language of the Cherokee Nation. Significant numbers of Cherokee speakers of all ages still populate the Qualla Boundary in Cherokee, North Carolina and several counties within the Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma, significantly Cherokee, Sequoyah, Mayes, Adair, and Delaware. Increasing numbers of Cherokee youth are renewing interest in the traditions, history, and language of their ancestors. Cherokee-speaking communities stand at the forefront of language preservation, and at local schools, all lessons are taught in Cherokee and thus it serves as the medium of instruction from pre-school on up. Also, church services and traditional ceremonial stomp dances are held in the language in Oklahoma and on the Qualla Boundary in North Carolina.

Cherokee is one of the few, or perhaps the only, Native American language with an increasing population of speakers, and along with Navajo it is the only indigenous American language with more than 50,000 speakers, a figure most likely achieved through the tribe&#x27;s 10-year long language preservation plan involving growing new speakers through immersion schools for children, developing new words for modern phrases, teaching the language to non-Cherokees in schools and universities, fostering the language among young adults so their children can use that language at home, developing iPhone and iPad apps for language education, the development of Cherokee language radio stations including Cherokee Voices, Cherokee Sounds, and promoting the writing system through public signage, products like the Apple iPhone, internet use through Google including Gmail, and others so the language remains relevant in the 21st century.

====Other Native American languages====
Dakota is a Siouan language with 18,000 speakers in the US alone (22,000 including speakers in Canada), not counting 6,000 speakers of the closely related Lakota. Most speakers live in the states of North Dakota and South Dakota. Other Siouan languages include the closely related Winnebago, and the more distant Crow, among others.

Central Alaskan Yup&#x27;ik is an Eskimo–Aleut language with 16,000 speakers, most of whom live in Alaska. The term &quot;Yupik&quot; is applied to its relatives, which are not necessarily mutually intelligible with Central Alaskan, including Naukan and Central Siberian, among others.

The O&#x27;odham language, spoken by the Pima and the Tohono O&#x27;odham, is a Uto-Aztecan language with more than 12,000 speakers, most of whom live in central and southern Arizona and northern Sonora. Other Uto-Aztecan languages include Hopi, Shoshone, and the Pai-Ute languages.

Choctaw has 11,000 speakers. Choctaw is part of the Muskogean family, like Seminole and Alabama.

The Algonquian language family includes languages like Chippewa/Ojibwe, Cheyenne, and Cree.

Keres has 11,000 speakers in New Mexico and is a language isolate. The Keres pueblo people are the largest of the Pueblo nations. The Keres pueblo of Acoma is the oldest continually inhabited community in the United States. Zuni, another isolate, has around 10,000 speakers, most of whom reside within the Zuni pueblo.

Because of immigration from Mexico, there are Mexican native American languages speakers in the US. There are thousands of Nahuatl, Mixtec, Zapotec and Trique speakers in communities established mainly in the southern states.

Although the languages of the Americas have a history stretching back about 17,000 to 12,000 years, current knowledge of them is limited. There are doubtlessly a number of undocumented languages that were once spoken in the United States that are missing from historical record.

====List of Native American languages====
Below is an estimate of Native American languages &quot;spoken at home&quot; in the United States (American Community Survey 2006–2008). This is not an exhaustive list of Native American languages in the US. Because the distinction between dialect and language is not always clear, multiple dialects of varying mutual intelligibility may be classified as a single language, while a group of effectively identical dialects may be classified separately for historical or cultural reasons. Languages included here may be classified as &quot;extinct&quot; (having no living native speakers), but many extinct or moribund Native American languages are the subjects of ongoing language revitalization efforts; other extinct languages undergoing revitalization might not be listed here.

====Native American sign languages====
A sign-language trade pidgin, known as Plains Indian Sign Language, Plains Standard or Plains Sign Talk, arose among the Native Americans of the plains. Each signing nation had a separate signed version of their oral language, that was used by the hearing, and these were not mutually intelligible. Plains Standard was used to communicate between these nations. It seems to have started in Texas and then spread north, through the Great Plains, as far as British Columbia. There are still a few users today, especially among the Crow, Cheyenne, and Arapaho. Unlike other sign languages developed by hearing people, it shares the spatial grammar of deaf sign languages. Through intergenerational transmission, Plains Sign Talk became a working language still in use today in some Deaf First Nations or Native American communities.

As Plains Sign Talk was so widespread and was a spectrum of dialects and accents, it probably hosted several languages under its umbrella. One is potentially Navajo Sign Language which is in use by a sole Navajo clan.

Additionally, Plateau Sign Language existed alongside Plains Sign Talk as either a trade pidgin or another language around the Columbia Plateau and surrounding regions.

===Austronesian languages===

====Hawaiian====

Hawaiian is an official state language of Hawaii, as prescribed in the Constitution of Hawaii. Hawaiian has an estimated 1,000 native speakers. Although it is critically endangered, the Hawaiian language is showing signs of revitalization, particularly following the Hawaiian Renaissance. Growing public interest can also be attributed to language immersion programs available through the Hawaii State Department of Education and the University of Hawaii, as well as to efforts by the Hawaii State Legislature, Kamehameha Schools, county governments, and community organizations to preserve local place-based knowledge. In 1993, about 8,000 could speak and understand Hawaiian; today, since the intervention of the state government and that of private groups promoting the language, estimates range up to 27,000.

====Samoan====
Samoan is an official territorial language of American Samoa. Samoans make up 90% of the population, and most people are bilingual.

====Chamorro====
Chamorro is co-official in the Mariana Islands, both in the territory of Guam and in the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. In Guam, the indigenous Chamorro people make up about 60% of the population.

====Carolinian====
Carolinian is also co-official in the Northern Marianas, where only 14% of people speak English at home.

==Creole languages==
Several distinct natural languages and pidgins have developed on American soil, including full languages like creole and sign languages.

=== Angloromani ===

Angloromani is an English creole or mixed language spoken by Romani Americans.

=== Chinuk Wawa or Chinook Jargon ===

A pidgin of 700–800 words of French, English, Cree and other Native origins is the old trade language of the Pacific Northwest. It was used extensively among both European and Native peoples of the Oregon Territory, even used instead of English at home by many pioneer families. It is estimated that around 100,000 people spoke it at its peak, between 1858 and 1900, and it was last widely used in Seattle just before World War II.

=== Gullah ===

An English creole language with African influence spoken on the Sea Islands of South Carolina and Georgia retains strong influences of West African languages. The language is sometimes referred to as &quot;Geechee&quot;.

=== Hawaiian Pidgin ===

Hawaiian Pidgin is an English-based creole language used widely among locals in Hawaii.

=== Louisiana Creole French ===

A French Creole language spoken by the Louisiana Creole people of the state of Louisiana, close to Haitian Creole, Colonial French, and Cajun French (language of Acadians deported from New France after 1755 and the Grand Dérangement).
French Creole languages are spoken by millions of people worldwide, mainly in the United States, Caribbean, and Indian Ocean areas.

=== U.S. Virgin Islands Creole Dutch (extinct) ===
Negerhollands (&#x27;Negro-Dutch&#x27;) was a Dutch-based creole language that was spoken in the Danish West Indies, now known as the U.S. Virgin Islands. Dutch was its superstrate language with Danish, English, French, Spanish, and African elements incorporated. Notwithstanding its name, Negerhollands drew primarily from the Zeelandic rather than the Hollandic dialect of Dutch.

==Sign languages==

Alongside the numerous and varied oral languages, the United States also boasts several sign languages. Historically, the US was home to some six or more sign languages (that number rising with the probability that Plains Sign Talk is actually a language family with several languages under its umbrella) which has fallen with the death of several of these.

As with all sign languages around the world that developed organically, these are full languages distinct from any oral language. American Sign Language (unlike Signed English) is not a derivation of English. Some languages present here were trade pidgins which were used first as a system of communication across national and linguistic boundaries of the Native Americans, however, they have since developed into mature languages as children learned them as a first language.

=== American Sign Language ===
American Sign Language (ASL) is the native language of a number of deaf and hearing people in America (roughly 100,000 to 500,000). While some sources have stated that ASL is the third most frequently used language in the United States, after English and Spanish, recent scholarship has pointed out that most of these estimates are based on numbers conflating deafness with ASL use, and that the last actual study of this (in 1972) seems to indicate an upper bound of 500,000 ASL speakers at the time.

*Black American Sign Language (BASL) developed in the southeastern US, where separate residential schools were maintained for white and black deaf children. BASL shares much of the same vocabulary and grammatical structure as ASL and is generally considered one of its dialects.

=== Hawai&#x27;i Sign Language ===
Hawaii Sign Language is moribund with only a handful of speakers on O&#x27;ahu, Lana&#x27;i, Kaua&#x27;i and possibly Ni&#x27;ihau. Some of these speakers may actually be speaking a creolized version of HSL and ASL, however; research is slow-going. The language was once called Hawai&#x27;i Pidgin Sign Language, as many people thought it was a derivative of ASL, but it was discovered to be a separate language altogether.

=== Plains Sign Talk ===
Once a trade pidgin and the most far-reaching sign language in North America, Plains Sign Talk or Plains Sign Language is now critically endangered with an unknown number of speakers.

*Navajo Sign Language has been found to be in use in one clan of Navajo; however, whether it is a dialect of Plains Sign Talk or a separate language remains unknown.
*Plateau Sign Language is another trade pidgin that may have become a separate language, Plateau Sign Language replaced Plains Sign Talk in the Columbia Plateau and surrounding regions of British Columbia, Washington, Oregon, and Idaho. It is now extinct.

=== Martha&#x27;s Vineyard Sign Language ===
Martha&#x27;s Vineyard Sign Language is now extinct. Along with French Sign Language, it was one of several main contributors to American Sign Language.

=== Henniker Sign Language ===
Henniker Sign Language is now extinct but was once found around the Henniker region of New Hampshire and formed a basis for American Sign Language.

=== Sandy River Valley Sign Language ===
Sandy River Valley Sign Language is now extinct but once could be found around the Sandy River Valley in Maine. It was one of several main contributors to American Sign Language.

==Immigrant languages==

===Arabic===

The Arabic language is spoken by immigrants from the Middle East as well as many Muslim Americans. The highest concentrations of native Arabic speakers reside in heavily urban areas like Chicago, New York City, and Los Angeles. Detroit and the surrounding areas of Michigan boast a significant Arabic-speaking population including many Arab Christians of Lebanese, Syrian, and Palestinian descent.

Arabic is used for religious purposes by Muslim Americans and by some Arab Christians (notably Catholics of the Melkite and Maronite Churches as well as Rum Orthodox, i.e. Antiochian Orthodox Christians and Coptic churches.). A significant number of educated Arab professionals who immigrate often already know English quite well, as it is widely used in the Middle East. Lebanese immigrants also have a broader understanding of French as do many Arabic-speaking immigrants from North Africa.

===Czech===
====Texas Czech====
12,805 Texans can speak the Czech language.

Drawing on Boas&#x27;s model for interviewing speakers of the language and digitally cataloging the dialects, John Tomecek founded and Lida Cope of East Carolina University developed the Texas Czech Legacy Project at the University of Texas at Austin to document and preserve the dwindling language.
Because the majority of Texas immigrants came from Moravia, the Czech spoken in Texas is largely characterized by Moravian dialects (Lachian and Moravian Wallachian) which vary to some extent from the Bohemian dialects spoken by most Czech-Americans. Czech-language journalism has been very active in the state over the years. Thirty-three newspapers and periodicals have been published. As of 1993 one weekly newspaper, &quot;Našinec&quot;, published at Granger, and one monthly, &quot;Hospodář&quot;, published at West, were still being published entirely in Czech. Other periodicals such as &quot;Věstník&quot; and the &quot;Brethren Journal&quot; contained sections printed in Czech.

===Finnish===

The first Finnish settlers in America were amongst the settlers who came from Sweden and Finland to the New Sweden colony. Most colonists were Finnish. However, the Finnish language was not preserved as well among subsequent generations as Swedish.

Between the 1890s and the outbreak of the first World War, an estimated quarter million Finnish citizens immigrated to the United States, mainly in rural areas of the Midwest and more specifically in the mining regions of Northeastern Minnesota, Northern Wisconsin and Michigan&#x27;s Upper Peninsula. Hancock, Michigan, as of 2005, still incorporates bi-lingual street signs written in both English and Finnish. Americans of Finnish origin yield at 800,000 individuals, though only 26,000 speak the language at home. There is a distinctive dialect of English to be found in the Upper Peninsula, known as Yooper. Yooper often has a Finnish cadence and uses Finnish sentence structure with modified English, German, Swedish, Norwegian, and Finnish vocabulary.
Notable Finnish Americans include U.S. Communist Party leader Gus Hall, film director Renny Harlin, and the Canadian-born actress Pamela Anderson.

Northern Clark County, Washington (encompassing Yacolt, Amboy, Battle Ground and Chelatchie) contains a large exclave of Old Apostolic Lutherans who originally immigrated from Finland. Many families in this portion of the county speak fluent Finnish at home before learning English. Another noteworthy Finnish community in the United States is found in Lake Worth Beach, Florida, north of Miami.

===Hebrew===
Modern Hebrew is spoken by Israeli immigrants. Liturgical Hebrew is used as a religious or liturgical language by many of the United States&#x27; approximately 7 million Jews.

===Gaelic Languages===
About 40 million Americans have Irish ancestry, many of whose ancestors would have spoken Irish Gaelic. In 2013, around 20,600 Americans spoke Irish at home and it was the 76th most spoken language in the United States. An additional 1,600 spoke Scottish Gaelic.

===Italian, Sicilian and Neapolitan===
The Italian language and other Italo-Dalmatian languages have been widely spoken in the United States for more than one hundred years, primarily due to large-scale immigration from the late 19th century to the mid 20th century.

In addition to Italian learned by most people today, there has been a strong representation of the languages of Southern Italy amongst the immigrant population (Sicilian and Neapolitan in particular). As of 2009, though 15,638,348 American citizens report themselves as Italian-Americans, only 753,992 of these report speaking the Italian language at home (0.3264% of the US population).

===Khmer (Cambodian)===

Between 1981 and 1985 about 150,000 Cambodians resettled in the United States. Before 1975 very few Cambodians came to the United States. Those who did were children of upper-class families sent abroad to attend school. After the fall of Phnom Penh to the communist Khmer Rouge in 1975, some Cambodians managed to escape. In 2007 the American Community Survey reported that there were approximately 200,000 Cambodians living in the United States, making up about 2% percent of the Asian population. This population is, however, heavily concentrated in two areas: the Los Angeles metropolitan area in California, especially the city of Long Beach; and Greater Boston in New England, especially Lowell, Massachusetts. These two areas hold a majority of the Cambodians living in the US.

===Korean===

In 2011 over 1.1 million Americans spoke Korean at home. This number increased greatly at the end of the 20th century, increasing 327% from the 300,000 speakers in 1980. The greatest concentration of these speakers was in the Los Angeles, New York, and Washington D.C. metro areas. Speakers of Korean are found in the Koreatowns.

===Polish and Silesian===
As of 2013, around 580,000 Americans spoke Polish at home. The Polish language is very common in the Chicago metropolitan area. Chicago&#x27;s third largest white ethnic groups are those of Polish descent, after German and Irish. The Polish people and the Polish language in Chicago were very prevalent in the early years of the city, and today the 650,000 Poles in Chicago make up one of the largest ethnically Polish populations in the world, comparable to the city of Wrocław, the fourth largest city in Poland. That makes it one of the most important centers of Polonia and the Polish language in the United States, a fact that the city celebrates every Labor Day weekend at the Taste of Polonia Festival in Jefferson Park.

====Texas Silesian====

Texas Silesian, a dialect of the Silesian language (itself controversially considered a branch of Polish by some linguists), has been used by Texas Silesians in American settlements from 1852 to the present.

===Portuguese===
The first Portuguese speakers in America were Portuguese Jews who had fled the Portuguese Inquisition. They spoke Judeo-Portuguese and founded the earliest Jewish communities in the Thirteen Colonies, two of which still exist: Congregation Shearith Israel in New York and Congregation Mikveh Israel in Philadelphia. However, by the end of the 18th century, their use of Portuguese had been replaced by English.

In the late 19th century, many Portuguese, mainly Azoreans, Madeirans and Cape Verdeans (who prior to independence in 1975 were Portuguese citizens), immigrated to the United States, settling in cities like Providence, Rhode Island, New Bedford, Massachusetts, and Santa Cruz, California. There was also substantial Portuguese immigration to Hawaii to supplement plantation labor.

In the mid-late 20th century there was another wave of Portuguese immigration to the US, mainly the Northeast (New Jersey, New York, Connecticut, Massachusetts), and for a time Portuguese became a major language in Newark, New Jersey. Many Portuguese Americans may include descendants of Portuguese settlers born in Portuguese Africa (known as Portuguese Africans, or, in Portugal, as &quot;retornados&quot;) and Asia (mostly Macau). There were around 1 million Portuguese Americans in the United States by 2000. Portuguese (European Portuguese) has been spoken in the United States by small communities of immigrants, mainly in the metropolitan New York City area, like Newark, New Jersey.

The Portuguese language is also spoken widely by Brazilian Americans, concentrated in Miami, New York City, and Boston.

===Swedish===

There has been a Swedish presence in America since the New Sweden colony came into existence in March 1638.

Widespread diaspora of Swedish immigration did not occur until the latter half of the 19th century, bringing in a total of a million Swedes. No other country had a higher percentage of its people leave for the United States except Ireland and Norway. At the beginning of the 20th century, Minnesota had the highest ethnic Swedish population in the world after the city of Stockholm.

3.7% of US residents claim descent from Scandinavian ancestors, amounting to roughly 11–12 million people. According to SIL&#x27;s Ethnologue, over half a million ethnic Swedes still speak the language, though according to the 2007 American Community Survey only 56,715 speak it at home. Cultural assimilation has contributed to the gradual and steady decline of the language in the US. After the independence of the US from the Kingdom of Great Britain, the government encouraged colonists to adopt the English language as a common medium of communication, and in some cases, imposed it upon them. Subsequent generations of Swedish Americans received education in English and spoke it as their first language. Lutheran churches scattered across the Midwest started abandoning Swedish in favor of English as their language of worship. Swedish newspapers and publications alike slowly faded away.

There are sizable Swedish communities in Minnesota, Ohio, Maryland, Philadelphia, and Delaware, along with small isolated pockets in Pennsylvania, San Francisco, Fort Lauderdale, and New York. Chicago once contained a large Swedish enclave called Andersonville on the city&#x27;s north side.

John Morton, the person who cast the decisive vote leading to Pennsylvania&#x27;s support for the United States Declaration of Independence, was of Finnish descent. Finland was part of the Kingdom of Sweden in the 18th century.

===Walloon===
==== Wisconsin Walloon ====

Wisconsin Walloon is a dialect of the Walloon language brought to Wisconsin from Wallonia, Belgium&#x27;s largely French-speaking region. It is spoken in the Door Peninsula of Wisconsin, United States.

The speakers of Wisconsin Walloon are descendants of Belgian immigrants from a wave of immigration lasting from 1853 to 1857. It includes around 2,000 Belgians who immigrated to Wisconsin. Walloon is sometimes referred to by its speakers as &quot;Belgian&quot;. The descendants of native Walloon speakers have since switched to English, and as of 2021, Walloon has fewer than 50 speakers in the United States.

===Welsh===
Up to two million Americans are thought to have Welsh ancestry. However, there is very little Welsh being used commonly in the United States. According to the 2007 American Community Survey, 2,285 people speak Welsh at home; primarily spoken in California (415), Florida (225), New York (204), Ohio (135), and New Jersey (130). Some place names, such as Bryn Mawr in Chicago and Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania () are Welsh. Several towns in Pennsylvania, mostly in the Welsh Tract, have Welsh namesakes, including Uwchlan, Bala Cynwyd, Gwynedd, and Tredyffrin.

===Tagalog===

Tagalog speakers were already present in the United States as early as the late sixteenth century as sailors contracted by the Spanish colonial government. In the eighteenth century, they established settlements in Louisiana, such as Saint Malo. After the American annexation of the Philippines, the number of Tagalog speakers steadily increased, as Filipinos began to migrate to the U.S. as students or contract laborers. Their numbers, however, decreased upon Philippine independence, as some Filipinos were repatriated.

Today, Tagalog, together with its standardized form Filipino, is spoken by over a million and a half Filipino Americans and is promoted by Filipino American civic organizations and Philippine consulates. As Filipinos are the second largest Asian ethnic group in the United States, Tagalog is the second most spoken Asian language in the country, after Chinese. Taglish, a form of code-switching between Tagalog and English, is also spoken by a number of Filipino Americans.

Tagalog is also taught at some universities where a significant number of Filipinos exist. As it is the national and most spoken language of the Philippines, most Filipinos in the United States are proficient in Tagalog in addition to their local regional language.

===Vietnamese===
According to the 2010 Census, there are over 1.5 million Americans who identify themselves as Vietnamese in origin, ranking fourth among the Asian American groups and forming the largest Overseas Vietnamese population.

Orange County, California, is home to the largest concentration of ethnic Vietnamese outside Vietnam, especially in its Little Saigon area. Other significant Vietnamese communities are found in the metropolitan areas of San Jose, Houston, Dallas-Fort Worth, Seattle, Northern Virginia, and New Orleans. Similarly to other overseas Vietnamese communities in Western countries (except France), the Vietnamese population in the United States was established following the Fall of Saigon in 1975 and communist takeover of South Vietnam following the Vietnam War.

===South Asian languages===
There are many South Asians in the United States. These include Indians, Pakistanis, and Bangladeshis, who speak various South Asian languages. Major South Asian languages spoken in the US include Telugu (see &quot;Telugu&quot; below), Malayalam, Kannada, Tamil (see &quot;Tamil&quot; below), Gujarati, Hindi and Urdu (see &quot;Hindi-Urdu&quot; below), Bengali, Punjabi, Sinhala, Nepali (see &quot;Nepali&quot; below), and Marathi.

====Hindi and Urdu====

Hindi and Urdu are the two standard registers of the Hindustani language, an Indo-Aryan language native to North India, Central India, and Pakistan. While the formal registers draw vocabulary from Sanskrit and Arabic &amp; Persian respectively, the colloquial forms are indistinguishable. Hindi and Urdu are widely spoken among the Indian and Pakistani communities in the United States as a first or second language. Speakers are concentrated in states with large South Asian populations, including California, Illinois, New Jersey, New York, Texas, and Virginia.

Additionally, Hindi-Urdu (Hindustani) is a cultural language for many South Asians who have different mother tongues and dialects. Bollywood in particular, as well as film music, is an important cultural product that influences many South Asian youth. Some South Indians, Bangladeshis, and Indian Bengalis learn the language or its dialects through films.

====Nepali====

The first Nepalese to enter the United States were classified as &quot;other Asian&quot;. Immigration records show that between 1881 and 1890, 1,910 &quot;other Asians&quot; were admitted to the United States. However, Nepal did not open its borders until 1950, and most Nepalis who left the country during that time went primarily to India to study. Nepalese Americans were first classified as a separate ethnic group in 1974 when 56 Nepalese immigrated to the United States. New York City, Boston, Dallas-Fort Worth, Columbus, Los Angeles, Cincinnati, Erie, Harrisburg, Chicago, Denver, Gainesville, Portland, and Saint Paul have the largest number of Nepalese. There are some Nepalese community or cultural events in every American state, including Dashain, Tihar, Holi, Teej Special, and Nepali New Year.

====Tamil====
The Tamil community in the United States is largely bilingual. Tamil is taught in weekly classes in many Hindu temples and by associations such as the American Tamil Academy in South Brunswick, Tamil Jersey School in Jersey City, New Jersey,

The written form of the language is highly formal and quite distinct from the spoken form. A few universities, such as the University of Chicago and the University of California Berkeley, have graduate programs in the language.

In the second half of the 20th century, Tamils from India migrated as skilled professionals to the United States, Canada, Europe, and Southeast Asia. The Tamil American population numbers over 195,685 individuals, and the Federation of Tamil Sangams of North America functions as an umbrella organization for the growing community.

The New York City and Los Angeles metropolitan areas are home to the largest concentrations of Tamil-speaking Sri Lankan Americans. New York City&#x27;s Staten Island alone is estimated to be home to more than 5,000 Sri Lankan Americans, one of the largest Sri Lankan populations outside Sri Lanka itself, and a significant proportion of whom speak Tamil.

Central New Jersey is home to the largest population concentration of Tamils. New Jersey houses its own Tamil Sangam. Sizeable populations of Indian American Tamils have also settled in the New York City and Washington metropolitan areas, as well as on the West Coast in Silicon Valley, where there are Tamil associations such as the Bay Area Tamil Mandram.

==== Telugu ====
There were speakers of Telugu in 2006–2008.
In the second half of the 20th century, Telugu people from India (especially from Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu) migrated as professionals to the United States. Central New Jersey is home to the largest population concentration of Telugu people. Telugu people have also settled in New York City and the DC metropolitan area, as well as on the West Coast in Silicon Valley. The New York City and Los Angeles metropolitan areas are home to the largest concentrations of Telugu-speakers.

==See also==

* American English
* Language education in the United States
* Language Spoken at Home
* List of multilingual presidents of the United States
* Muhlenberg legend
* List of U.S. communities where English is not the majority language spoken at home
* Modern Language Association

General:
* Bilingual education
* Culture of the United States
* Languages of Canada

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* Campbell, Lyle. (1997). &quot;American Indian languages: The historical linguistics of Native America&quot;. New York: Oxford University Press.
* Campbell, Lyle; &amp; Mithun, Marianne (Eds.). (1979). &quot;The languages of native America: Historical and comparative assessment&quot;. Austin: University of Texas Press.
* Online edition: the world, accessed on December 7, 2004.
* Mithun, Marianne. (1999). &quot;The languages of native North America&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
* Zededa, Ofelia; Hill, Jane H. (1991). The condition of Native American Languages in the United States. In R. H. Robins &amp; E. M. Uhlenbeck (Eds.), &quot;Endangered languages&quot; (pp. 135–155). Oxford: Berg.

==Further reading==
* Blatt, Ben. &quot;Tagalog in California, Cherokee in Arkansas.&quot; &quot;Slate&quot;. May 13, 2014.

==External links==
* Bilingualism in the United States
* Detailed List of Languages Spoken at Home for the Population 5 Years and Over by State: U.S. Census 2000
* Foreign Languages in the U.S. About foreign languages and language learning in the United States
* How many indigenous American languages are spoken in the United States? By how many speakers? 
* Native Languages of the Americas
* Ethnologue report for USA
* Linguistic map of the United States of America
* Modern Language Association Language Map</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="39" end="52" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="56" end="63" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="76" end="92" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q319972" start="117" end="134" title="national language" label="national language"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="350" end="375" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="389" end="407" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="491" end="498" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="550" end="557" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="589" end="596" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="602" end="612" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q645304" start="656" end="676" title="Indigenous languages" label="Indigenous languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="680" end="696" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q848624" start="698" end="712" title="Alaska Natives" label="Alaska Natives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283606" start="714" end="730" title="Native Hawaiians" label="Native Hawaiians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352230" start="762" end="793" title="Territories of the United States" label="U.S. unincorporated territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="879" end="885" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="887" end="893" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="895" end="899" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="920" end="928" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="934" end="941" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384" start="977" end="985" title="dialects" label="dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q33395" start="995" end="1001" title="Gullah language" label="Gullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q33289" start="1004" end="1010" title="Creole language" label="creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185127" start="1030" end="1046" title="Louisiana Creole" label="Louisiana Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q33831" start="1053" end="1059" title="pidgin" label="pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14759" start="1071" end="1099" title="American Sign Language" label="American Sign Language (ASL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q35934" start="1104" end="1115" title="Interlingua" label="Interlingua"/>
<link wikidata="Q838296" start="1120" end="1152" title="international auxiliary language" label="international auxiliary language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486684" start="1774" end="1798" title="Language Spoken at Home" label="languages spoken at home"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="2330" end="2337" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="2395" end="2402" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="2419" end="2426" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="2438" end="2446" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="2448" end="2457" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624231" start="2459" end="2466" title="Hokkien" label="Hokkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="2507" end="2514" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q33298" start="2526" end="2534" title="Filipino language" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="2551" end="2561" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="2577" end="2583" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="2599" end="2605" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="2621" end="2627" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="2643" end="2650" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="2666" end="2676" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q33491" start="2687" end="2701" title="Haitian Creole language" label="Haitian Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="2712" end="2717" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q279350" start="2728" end="2734" title="Standard German" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="2745" end="2751" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="2762" end="2769" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="2780" end="2784" title="Urdu" label="Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="2795" end="2802" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178440" start="2821" end="2825" title="Dari" label="Dari"/>
<link wikidata="Q9260" start="2830" end="2835" title="Tajik language" label="Tajik"/>
<link wikidata="Q8097" start="2847" end="2853" title="Telugu language" label="Telugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="2864" end="2872" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137" start="2883" end="2891" title="Gujarati language" label="Gujarati"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="2902" end="2909" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="2920" end="2925" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q58635" start="2936" end="2943" title="Punjabi language" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10889250" start="2954" end="2959" title="Southwestern Tai languages" label="Thais"/>
<link wikidata="Q9217" start="2971" end="2983" title="Thai language" label="Central Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q9211" start="2988" end="2991" title="Lao language" label="Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="3003" end="3017" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9303" start="3029" end="3036" title="Bosnian language" label="Bosnian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="3038" end="3046" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8821" start="3048" end="3059" title="Montenegrin language" label="Montenegrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="3065" end="3072" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8785" start="3084" end="3092" title="Armenian language" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="3103" end="3108" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307894" start="3119" end="3124" title="Hmong language" label="Hmong"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="3135" end="3141" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q9205" start="3152" end="3157" title="Khmer language" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13310" start="3168" end="3174" title="Navajo language" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="3185" end="3214" title="Indo-European languages" label="other Indo-European languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="3225" end="3231" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q36850" start="3233" end="3236" title="Twi language" label="Twi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33578" start="3238" end="3242" title="Igbo language" label="Igbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33838" start="3247" end="3277" title="Niger–Congo languages" label="other languages of West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q28244" start="3288" end="3295" title="Amharic language" label="Amharic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13275" start="3297" end="3303" title="Somali language" label="Somali"/>
<link wikidata="Q25268" start="3309" end="3337" title="Afro-Asiatic languages" label="other Afro-Asiatic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="3348" end="3353" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="3355" end="3364" title="Afrikaans" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q25325" start="3366" end="3373" title="Frisian language" label="Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9051" start="3375" end="3388" title="Luxembourgish" label="Luxembourgish"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="3390" end="3395" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="3397" end="3404" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q22711" start="3406" end="3424" title="Pennsylvania Dutch language" label="Pennsylvania Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q25433" start="3426" end="3436" title="Low German" label="Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q26721" start="3442" end="3471" title="West Germanic languages" label="other West Germanic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q35936" start="3482" end="3489" title="Ilocano language" label="Ilocano"/>
<link wikidata="Q34011" start="3491" end="3497" title="Samoan language" label="Samoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33569" start="3499" end="3507" title="Hawaiian language" label="Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="3513" end="3541" title="Austronesian languages" label="other Austronesian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624777" start="3552" end="3575" title="Languages of Asia" label="Other languages of Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33823" start="3586" end="3592" title="Nepali language" label="Nepali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571" start="3594" end="3601" title="Marathi language" label="Marathi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33577" start="3607" end="3628" title="Indo-Aryan languages" label="other Indic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="3639" end="3648" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="3653" end="3675" title="Slavic languages" label="other Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838" start="3686" end="3693" title="Swahili language" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q207930" start="3704" end="3754" title="Languages of Africa" label="languages of Central, Eastern, and Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36236" start="3765" end="3774" title="Malayalam" label="Malayalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q33673" start="3776" end="3783" title="Kannada language" label="Kannada"/>
<link wikidata="Q33311" start="3789" end="3814" title="Dravidian languages" label="other Dravidian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217388" start="3825" end="3864" title="Languages of North America" label="Other Native languages of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q33898" start="3875" end="3906" title="List of language families" label="other and unspecified languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q14759" start="4827" end="4849" title="American Sign Language" label="American Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111004" start="5165" end="5196" title="Americans with Disabilities Act" label="Americans with Disabilities Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q16035842" start="5257" end="5273" title="hearing loss" label="hearing-impaired"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="5664" end="5670" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="5672" end="5680" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="5686" end="5695" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="5793" end="5819" title="Southwestern United States" label="Southwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="5824" end="5835" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q514022" start="5925" end="5937" title="Hispanophone" label="Hispanophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="6056" end="6085" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic and Latino Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="6171" end="6187" title="2000 U.S. Census" label="2000 U.S. Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="6199" end="6214" title="German American" label="German ancestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="6281" end="6296" title="German language" label="German language"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="6349" end="6356" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="6358" end="6364" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="6370" end="6376" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="6568" end="6575" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="6630" end="6640" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748296" start="6783" end="6803" title="varieties of Chinese" label="varieties of Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="6812" end="6821" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2208940" start="6823" end="6833" title="Taishanese" label="Taishanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="6839" end="6856" title="Standard Mandarin" label="Standard Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="6859" end="6867" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="6873" end="6879" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="6910" end="6916" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="6918" end="6928" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="6930" end="6936" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="6938" end="6946" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="6948" end="6956" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="6958" end="6963" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="6969" end="6979" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q13310" start="7200" end="7206" title="Navajo language" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8434" start="7382" end="7391" title="education" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q14759" start="7394" end="7416" title="American Sign Language" label="American Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34228" start="7436" end="7449" title="sign language" label="sign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629063" start="7685" end="7721" title="List of most commonly learned foreign languages in the United States" label="most widely taught foreign languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430192" start="7812" end="7835" title="undergraduate education" label="undergraduate education"/>
<link wikidata="Q315257" start="7862" end="7868" title="German language in the United States" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="7910" end="7915" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158804" start="7917" end="7925" title="Japanese language education in the United States" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q14759" start="7927" end="7949" title="American Sign Language" label="American Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6093340" start="7951" end="7958" title="Italian language in the United States" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100826" start="7964" end="7971" title="Chinese language in the United States" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719842" start="8666" end="8687" title="English-only movement" label="English-only movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q33569" start="8888" end="8896" title="Hawaiian language" label="Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="8939" end="8945" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q156418" start="8962" end="8978" title="Hawaiian Kingdom" label="Hawaiian Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q547795" start="9058" end="9089" title="Territory of Hawaii" label="annexation by the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708575" start="9120" end="9139" title="Alaska Native languages" label="20 native languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q27183" start="9221" end="9228" title="Iñupiaq language" label="Iñupiaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q21117" start="9230" end="9249" title="Central Alaskan Yup&amp;#x27;ik language" label="Central Yup&amp;#x27;ik"/>
<link wikidata="Q21057" start="9251" end="9264" title="Gwich&amp;#x27;in language" label="Gwich&amp;#x27;in"/>
<link wikidata="Q27993" start="9266" end="9280" title="Siberian Yupik language" label="Siberian Yupik"/>
<link wikidata="Q28304" start="9286" end="9293" title="Koyukon language" label="Koyukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q33537" start="9355" end="9361" title="Lakota language" label="Lakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q530384" start="9363" end="9369" title="Dakota language" label="Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248791" start="9375" end="9381" title="Nakota language" label="Nakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="9419" end="9431" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="9434" end="9440" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="9496" end="9501" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="9506" end="9515" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="9532" end="9542" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352230" start="9859" end="9875" title="U.S. territories" label="U.S. territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="9880" end="9891" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889788" start="10102" end="10162" title="United States District Court for the District of Puerto Rico" label="United States District Court for the District of Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="10223" end="10227" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q33262" start="10251" end="10259" title="Chamorro language" label="Chamorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703" start="10268" end="10287" title="U.S. Virgin Islands" label="U.S. Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q16641" start="10331" end="10345" title="American Samoa" label="American Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34011" start="10364" end="10370" title="Samoan language" label="Samoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16644" start="10480" end="10504" title="Northern Mariana Islands" label="Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q28427" start="10529" end="10539" title="Carolinian language" label="Carolinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="10558" end="10568" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q13310" start="10815" end="10821" title="Navajo language" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q852431" start="10834" end="10840" title="Puebloan peoples" label="Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982357" start="10872" end="10898" title="New Mexican Spanish" label="its own dialect of Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="10937" end="10950" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="10953" end="10963" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33388" start="10965" end="10973" title="Cherokee language" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q13268" start="10979" end="10984" title="Sioux language" label="Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q51739" start="11006" end="11031" title="Native American languages" label="Native American languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="11079" end="11097" title="Indian reservation" label="Indian reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q251749" start="11103" end="11109" title="Pueblo" label="Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="11115" end="11123" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q33388" start="11201" end="11209" title="Cherokee language" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q32979" start="11211" end="11218" title="Choctaw language" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q523014" start="11224" end="11232" title="Creek language" label="Muscogee"/>
<link wikidata="Q33388" start="11293" end="11301" title="Cherokee language" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708404" start="11334" end="11349" title="Cherokee Nation" label="Cherokee Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q223308" start="11423" end="11436" title="New Amsterdam" label="New Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5556538" start="11449" end="11461" title="Dutch colonization of the Americas" label="Dutch colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q769668" start="11519" end="11539" title="Province of New York" label="Province of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="11586" end="11591" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687911" start="11770" end="11782" title="Jersey Dutch" label="Jersey Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="11967" end="11974" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="11976" end="11983" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="11985" end="11991" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="12002" end="12009" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="12011" end="12018" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="12020" end="12030" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9217" start="12036" end="12040" title="Thai language" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q30081" start="12157" end="12172" title="multilingualism" label="multilingualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="12203" end="12210" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="12215" end="12220" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751449" start="12316" end="12323" title="United States general elections, 2006" label="in 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q13310" start="12489" end="12495" title="Navajo language" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393095" start="12497" end="12509" title="O&amp;#x27;odham language" label="O&amp;#x27;odham"/>
<link wikidata="Q56421" start="12514" end="12518" title="Hopi language" label="Hopi"/>
<link wikidata="Q189349" start="12566" end="12578" title="urban legend" label="urban legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q84054" start="12590" end="12607" title="Muhlenberg legend" label="Muhlenberg legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q724629" start="12835" end="12855" title="Frederick Muhlenberg" label="Frederick Muhlenberg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12918" end="12958" title="Bilingual education by country or region#United States" label="Bilingual education in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807178" start="13277" end="13298" title="medium of instruction" label="medium of instruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="13463" end="13474" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q16641" start="13562" end="13576" title="American Samoa" label="American Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34011" start="13609" end="13615" title="Samoan language" label="Samoan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13670" end="13688" title="Language immersion#United States" label="language immersion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13797" end="13805" title="Hawaiian language#Hawaiian in schools" label="Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13807" end="13815" title="Chamorro language#Revitalization efforts" label="Chamorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="13817" end="13823" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="13829" end="13845" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747841" start="13864" end="13896" title="Mandarin Immersion Magnet School" label="Mandarin Immersion Magnet School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="14069" end="14074" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="14076" end="14082" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="14084" end="14091" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="14097" end="14104" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="14438" end="14444" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="14446" end="14455" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="14457" end="14466" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="14468" end="14473" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="14475" end="14482" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="14484" end="14493" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="14495" end="14500" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="14502" end="14508" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="14510" end="14517" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="14519" end="14527" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="14529" end="14534" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="14536" end="14544" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="14546" end="14553" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="14555" end="14561" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q9083" start="14563" end="14573" title="Lithuanian language" label="Lithuanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="14575" end="14580" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="14582" end="14591" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="14593" end="14602" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="14604" end="14609" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="14611" end="14621" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="14623" end="14630" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="14632" end="14638" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926346" start="14940" end="14957" title="Meyer v. Nebraska" label="Meyer v. Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q27807497" start="15271" end="15286" title="Alaskan Russian" label="Alaskan Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083213" start="15288" end="15304" title="Louisiana French" label="Louisiana French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982357" start="15306" end="15325" title="New Mexican Spanish" label="New Mexican Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q22711" start="15327" end="15345" title="Pennsylvania Dutch language" label="Pennsylvania Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258609" start="15351" end="15371" title="Puerto Rican Spanish" label="Puerto Rican Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="15415" end="15422" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q918254" start="15442" end="15462" title="British colonization of the Americas" label="British colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="15712" end="15720" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="15991" end="16007" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="16026" end="16041" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="16273" end="16289" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="16340" end="16350" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q205647" start="16672" end="16693" title="driver&amp;#x27;s license" label="driver&amp;#x27;s license"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="16786" end="16793" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="16884" end="16895" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q125421" start="17092" end="17107" title="second language" label="second language"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="17176" end="17202" title="Southwestern United States" label="Southwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="17247" end="17254" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="17265" end="17275" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="17281" end="17301" title="District of Columbia" label="District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="17303" end="17311" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="17313" end="17323" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="17329" end="17337" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370292" start="17499" end="17517" title="Washington Heights, Manhattan" label="Washington Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="17521" end="17534" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q665413" start="17538" end="17551" title="Little Havana" label="Little Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="17555" end="17560" title="Miami, Florida" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="18048" end="18075" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="18263" end="18269" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="18271" end="18279" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="18281" end="18286" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="18292" end="18301" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058786" start="18441" end="18460" title="northern New Mexico" label="northern New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="18474" end="18482" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="18550" end="18557" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rockies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982357" start="18624" end="18643" title="New Mexican Spanish" label="New Mexican Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="18675" end="18684" title="Castilian language" label="Castilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9307" start="18686" end="18694" title="Galician language" label="Galician"/>
<link wikidata="Q616620" start="18715" end="18730" title="Mexican Spanish" label="Mexican Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q251749" start="18743" end="18749" title="Pueblo" label="Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191886" start="18944" end="18975" title="Nuevomexicanos" label="Speakers of New Mexican Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="19627" end="19638" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q56418" start="19751" end="19760" title="Spanglish" label="Spanglish"/>
<link wikidata="Q255615" start="19766" end="19780" title="code-switching" label="code-switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057263" start="19919" end="19946" title="Mexico–United States border" label="Mexico–United States border"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="19948" end="19958" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="19960" end="19967" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="19969" end="19979" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="19985" end="19990" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="19993" end="20000" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="20006" end="20019" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748296" start="20286" end="20304" title="Varieties of Chinese" label="variety of Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033959" start="20434" end="20446" title="Yue dialects" label="Yue dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="20458" end="20467" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2208940" start="20472" end="20482" title="Taishanese" label="Taishanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="20580" end="20590" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="20617" end="20648" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="20650" end="20658" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="20697" end="20714" title="Taiwan" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="20872" end="20885" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="21017" end="21030" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q115819384" start="21056" end="21101" title="Chinese-Americans in the California Gold Rush" label="Chinese-Americans in the California Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="21147" end="21165" title="Cantonese language" label="Cantonese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q108077" start="21360" end="21385" title="Alpine County, California" label="Alpine County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186710" start="21436" end="21447" title="Dollar coin (United States)" label="Gold dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="21543" end="21555" title="Qing Dynasty" label="Qing Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="21718" end="21724" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q33491" start="21841" end="21855" title="Haitian Creole" label="Haitian Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386404" start="22161" end="22177" title="Louisiana Creole people" label="Louisiana Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="22186" end="22192" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q686949" start="22194" end="22199" title="Cajuns" label="Cajun"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="22205" end="22220" title="French Canadians" label="French-Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="22303" end="22308" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="22310" end="22323" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="22325" end="22332" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="22341" end="22350" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q115273" start="22389" end="22415" title="St. Clair County, Michigan" label="St. Clair County, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271661" start="22477" end="22508" title="North Bay (San Francisco Bay Area)" label="northern San Francisco Bay area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994219" start="22574" end="22624" title="Council for the Development of French in Louisiana" label="Council for the Development of French in Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q134102" start="22797" end="22843" title="Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie" label="Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083213" start="22947" end="22963" title="Louisiana French" label="Louisiana French"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083210" start="22965" end="22980" title="Missouri French" label="Missouri French"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007251" start="22986" end="23004" title="New England French" label="New England French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450506" start="23031" end="23046" title="Canadian French" label="Canadian French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="23108" end="23117" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="23200" end="23215" title="Maine" label="Northeast Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q234453" start="23217" end="23226" title="Hollywood, Florida" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="23231" end="23236" title="Miami, Florida" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="23238" end="23245" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="23247" end="23260" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="23279" end="23294" title="Louisiana" label="rural Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554836" start="23784" end="23816" title="varieties of French" label="varieties of the French language"/>
<link wikidata="Q658054" start="23850" end="23865" title="Lower Louisiana" label="Lower Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="23921" end="23931" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="23935" end="23944" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976993" start="23975" end="23983" title="Parish (administrative division)" label="parishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q115681851" start="24037" end="24060" title="Louisiana French people" label="Louisiana French people"/>
<link wikidata="Q686949" start="24081" end="24087" title="Cajuns" label="Cajuns"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386404" start="24091" end="24098" title="Louisiana Creole people" label="Creoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q56188" start="24110" end="24120" title="Chitimacha" label="Chitimacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q51716" start="24122" end="24127" title="Houma people" label="Houma"/>
<link wikidata="Q16823244" start="24129" end="24135" title="Biloxi people" label="Biloxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063138" start="24137" end="24143" title="Tunica people" label="Tunica"/>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="24145" end="24152" title="Choctaw people" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q415054" start="24154" end="24161" title="Acadian" label="Acadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q262457" start="24168" end="24181" title="Métis" label="French Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q415109" start="24257" end="24271" title="Acadian French" label="Acadian French"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="24466" end="24475" title="Linguistics" label="linguists"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="24480" end="24495" title="Anthropology" label="anthropologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q15407657" start="24551" end="24554" title="Laity" label="lay"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="24727" end="24733" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="25209" end="25220" title="Protestantism" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576201" start="25704" end="25722" title="Texas Hill Country" label="Texas Hill Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="25801" end="25812" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="25934" end="25945" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="26153" end="26168" title="German American" label="German ancestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="26313" end="26338" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q104444" start="26345" end="26350" title="Amish" label="Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="26381" end="26393" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q22711" start="26430" end="26448" title="Pennsylvania Dutch language" label="Pennsylvania Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q769668" start="26601" end="26621" title="Province of New York" label="Province of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475732" start="26630" end="26654" title="Province of Pennsylvania" label="Province of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q113758442" start="26782" end="26796" title="Palatine Dutch" label="Palatine Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q702220" start="26802" end="26820" title="Pennsylvania Dutch" label="Pennsylvania Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="26923" end="26938" title="German American" label="German American"/>
<link wikidata="Q84054" start="26971" end="26986" title="Muhlenberg legend" label="Muhlenberg Vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q22711" start="27562" end="27580" title="Pennsylvania Dutch language" label="Pennsylvania Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q23014" start="27620" end="27635" title="Palatine German language" label="Palatine German"/>
<link wikidata="Q702220" start="27672" end="27690" title="Pennsylvania Dutch" label="Pennsylvania Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306552" start="27836" end="27850" title="German dialects" label="German dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q326359" start="27858" end="27868" title="Palatinate (region)" label="Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q113758442" start="27896" end="27905" title="Palatines" label="Palatines"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="27915" end="27932" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q209152" start="27984" end="27996" title="William Penn" label="William Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="28155" end="28164" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutherans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415769" start="28166" end="28181" title="German Reformed" label="German Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="28183" end="28192" title="Mennonite" label="Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q104444" start="28195" end="28200" title="Amish" label="Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q833158" start="28202" end="28225" title="Schwarzenau Brethren" label="German Baptist Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="28227" end="28242" title="Catholicism" label="Roman Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q104444" start="28289" end="28304" title="Old Order Amish" label="Old Order Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368013" start="28309" end="28328" title="Old Order Mennonite" label="Old Order Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="28522" end="28529" title="Yiddish language" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="29319" end="29333" title="Ashkenazi Jews" label="Ashkenazi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q212912" start="29472" end="29483" title="Haredi Jews" label="Haredi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q171201" start="29498" end="29505" title="Hasidic" label="Hasidic"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="29572" end="29585" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147874" start="29643" end="29661" title="List of English words of Yiddish origin" label="Yiddish loan words"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="29912" end="29928" title="Russian language" label="Russian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="29978" end="29986" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="29988" end="29998" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="30000" end="30010" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="30012" end="30022" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="30024" end="30032" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="30034" end="30047" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="30053" end="30065" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="30106" end="30112" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508239" start="30180" end="30194" title="promyshlenniki" label="promyshlenniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q4418370" start="30221" end="30229" title="Siberians" label="Siberian"/>
<link wikidata="Q45199" start="30296" end="30302" title="sailor" label="sailor"/>
<link wikidata="Q203605" start="30305" end="30314" title="carpenter" label="carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294787" start="30317" end="30324" title="artisan" label="artisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="30442" end="30455" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="30457" end="30463" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="30465" end="30476" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="30478" end="30491" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="30493" end="30505" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="30507" end="30514" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="30516" end="30523" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="30525" end="30535" title="Sacramento" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q187805" start="30537" end="30544" title="Spokane, Washington" label="Spokane"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="30546" end="30551" title="Miami, Florida" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="30553" end="30569" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q234053" start="30597" end="30618" title="Vancouver, Washington" label="Vancouver, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762847" start="30623" end="30639" title="Woodburn, Oregon" label="Woodburn, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q753193" start="30669" end="30693" title="Russian-American Company" label="Russian-American Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811372" start="30724" end="30740" title="Alaska Territory" label="Alaska Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q309029" start="30771" end="30806" title="Alaska Purchase" label="sale of Alaska to the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="30860" end="30871" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q112707" start="31011" end="31026" title="House of Romanov" label="Romanov dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="31030" end="31034" title="tsar" label="tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299188" start="31115" end="31158" title="Soviet Jews in America" label="Russian-speaking Jews from the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="31216" end="31222" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="31224" end="31231" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="31233" end="31240" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="31242" end="31249" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="31255" end="31265" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="31429" end="31437" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="31439" end="31445" title="Queens" label="Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q18432" start="31451" end="31464" title="Staten Island" label="Staten Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="31468" end="31481" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q915813" start="31500" end="31514" title="Brighton Beach, Brooklyn" label="Brighton Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202211" start="31536" end="31548" title="Forest Hills, New York" label="Forest Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q391577" start="31553" end="31562" title="Rego Park, New York" label="Rego Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="31584" end="31595" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543669" start="31608" end="31624" title="West Los Angeles" label="West Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q846421" start="31629" end="31643" title="West Hollywood" label="West Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="31663" end="31675" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344194" start="31689" end="31702" title="Far Northeast Philadelphia" label="Far Northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="31718" end="31723" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151584" start="31725" end="31742" title="Sunny Isles Beach" label="Sunny Isles Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539353" start="31779" end="31802" title="Slavic Voice of America" label="Slavic Voice of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="31813" end="31826" title="Dallas, Texas" label="Dallas, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="31951" end="31958" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q27992" start="31977" end="31984" title="Alutiiq language" label="Alutiiq"/>
<link wikidata="Q116882463" start="32004" end="32019" title="Alaskan Creole people" label="Alaskan Creoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q204387" start="32050" end="32063" title="Kodiak Island" label="Kodiak Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493148" start="32075" end="32084" title="Ninilchik" label="Ninilchik"/>
<link wikidata="Q60010" start="32086" end="32101" title="Kenai Peninsula" label="Kenai Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q749610" start="32248" end="32272" title="Great Alaskan earthquake" label="Great Alaskan earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345070" start="32479" end="32506" title="Russian colonization of the Americas" label="Russian colonial settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="32585" end="32592" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="32621" end="32628" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708575" start="32633" end="32657" title="Alaska Native languages" label="Alaskan native languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849796" start="32663" end="32681" title="Nikolaevsk, Alaska" label="Nikolaevsk, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058496" start="32902" end="32916" title="Dutch American" label="Dutch American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193808" start="33019" end="33038" title="Norwegian Americans" label="Norwegian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q115026" start="33043" end="33060" title="Swedish Americans" label="Swedish Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q34147" start="33226" end="33241" title="Flemish dialects" label="Flemish variant"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="33336" end="33345" title="Afrikaans" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q27175" start="33350" end="33362" title="West Frisian language" label="West-Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="33459" end="33469" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="33480" end="33487" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="33498" end="33510" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="33520" end="33524" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="33555" end="33563" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001742" start="33612" end="33619" title="Holland, Michigan" label="Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q382593" start="33841" end="33855" title="New Netherland" label="New Netherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010600" start="33932" end="33948" title="New Netherlander" label="New Netherlander"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="34098" end="34116" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363475" start="34130" end="34144" title="Elizabeth Schuyler Hamilton" label="Eliza Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q105180" start="34265" end="34280" title="Sojourner Truth" label="Sojourner Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11820" start="34349" end="34365" title="Martin Van Buren" label="Martin Van Buren"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="34479" end="34494" title="native language" label="native language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="34532" end="34546" title="first language" label="first language"/>
<link wikidata="Q51739" start="34820" end="34845" title="Native American languages" label="Native American languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="34881" end="34890" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="34930" end="34948" title="Indian reservation" label="Indian reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q335214" start="35017" end="35027" title="Endangered languages" label="endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q56312313" start="35134" end="35156" title="degree of endangerment" label="degree of endangerment"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="35238" end="35245" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="35250" end="35260" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q191095" start="35382" end="35394" title="Edward Sapir" label="Edward Sapir"/>
<link wikidata="Q13310" start="35557" end="35563" title="Navajo language" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q27475" start="35570" end="35580" title="Athabaskan languages" label="Athabaskan"/>
<link wikidata="Q26986" start="35597" end="35611" title="Na-Dene languages" label="Na-Dené family"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="35663" end="35670" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="35672" end="35682" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="35688" end="35692" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q28060" start="35807" end="35821" title="Western Apache language" label="Western Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q12603" start="36065" end="36082" title="Pacific Northwest" label="Pacific Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="36087" end="36093" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783171" start="36244" end="36257" title="Navajo Nation" label="Navajo Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026027" start="36307" end="36329" title="Fort Defiance, Arizona" label="Fort Defiance, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q33623" start="36366" end="36384" title="Iroquoian languages" label="Iroquoian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="36399" end="36407" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708404" start="36449" end="36464" title="Cherokee Nation" label="Cherokee Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330573" start="36538" end="36553" title="Qualla Boundary" label="Qualla Boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q471385" start="36557" end="36581" title="Cherokee, North Carolina" label="Cherokee, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="36633" end="36641" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q491633" start="36657" end="36665" title="Cherokee County, Oklahoma" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q495845" start="36667" end="36675" title="Sequoyah County, Oklahoma" label="Sequoyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q495937" start="36677" end="36682" title="Mayes County" label="Mayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q346959" start="36684" end="36689" title="Adair County, Oklahoma" label="Adair"/>
<link wikidata="Q484752" start="36695" end="36703" title="Delaware County, Oklahoma" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q2183272" start="37081" end="37092" title="stomp dance" label="stomp dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q13310" start="37310" end="37316" title="Navajo language" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766" start="37770" end="37776" title="iPhone" label="iPhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796" start="37781" end="37785" title="iPad" label="iPad"/>
<link wikidata="Q19864325" start="37877" end="37909" title="Cherokee Voices, Cherokee Sounds" label="Cherokee Voices, Cherokee Sounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="37986" end="37991" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766" start="37992" end="37998" title="iPhone" label="iPhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="38000" end="38008" title="internet" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="38021" end="38027" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q9334" start="38038" end="38043" title="Gmail" label="Gmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q530384" start="38151" end="38157" title="Dakota language" label="Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q34181" start="38163" end="38178" title="Siouan languages" label="Siouan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33537" start="38306" end="38312" title="Lakota language" label="Lakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="38350" end="38362" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="38367" end="38379" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957108" start="38432" end="38441" title="Winnebago language" label="Winnebago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207611" start="38464" end="38468" title="Crow language" label="Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q27970" start="38485" end="38512" title="Yupik languages" label="Central Alaskan Yup&amp;#x27;ik"/>
<link wikidata="Q25946" start="38519" end="38540" title="Eskimo–Aleut languages" label="Eskimo–Aleut language"/>
<link wikidata="Q27963" start="38728" end="38734" title="Naukan Yupik language" label="Naukan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27993" start="38739" end="38755" title="Central Siberian Yupik language" label="Central Siberian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393095" start="38776" end="38797" title="O&amp;#x27;odham language" label="O&amp;#x27;odham language"/>
<link wikidata="Q209148" start="38813" end="38817" title="Pima people" label="Pima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937531" start="38826" end="38845" title="Tohono O&amp;#x27;odham" label="Tohono O&amp;#x27;odham"/>
<link wikidata="Q34073" start="38852" end="38872" title="Uto-Aztecan languages" label="Uto-Aztecan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="38947" end="38954" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q46422" start="38968" end="38974" title="Sonora" label="Sonora"/>
<link wikidata="Q56421" start="39012" end="39016" title="Hopi language" label="Hopi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33811" start="39018" end="39026" title="Shoshoni language" label="Shoshone"/>
<link wikidata="Q13260" start="39036" end="39043" title="Colorado River Numic language" label="Pai-Ute"/>
<link wikidata="Q32979" start="39056" end="39063" title="Choctaw language" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q902978" start="39108" end="39124" title="Muskogean languages" label="Muskogean family"/>
<link wikidata="Q523014" start="39131" end="39139" title="Muscogee language" label="Seminole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815020" start="39144" end="39151" title="Alabama language" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q721612" start="39158" end="39184" title="Algic languages" label="Algonquian language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q33875" start="39209" end="39224" title="Ojibwe language" label="Chippewa/Ojibwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q33265" start="39226" end="39234" title="Cheyenne language" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q33390" start="39240" end="39244" title="Cree language" label="Cree"/>
<link wikidata="Q35878" start="39247" end="39252" title="Keresan languages" label="Keres"/>
<link wikidata="Q33648" start="39296" end="39312" title="language isolate" label="language isolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q342057" start="39397" end="39402" title="Acoma Pueblo" label="Acoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q10188" start="39471" end="39475" title="Zuni language" label="Zuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2241166" start="39553" end="39564" title="Zuni Pueblo, New Mexico" label="Zuni pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="39595" end="39601" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q105622654" start="39690" end="39697" title="Nahuatl language in the United States" label="Nahuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q36363" start="39699" end="39705" title="Mixtec language" label="Mixtec"/>
<link wikidata="Q13214" start="39707" end="39714" title="Zapotec language" label="Zapotec"/>
<link wikidata="Q780200" start="39719" end="39725" title="Trique languages" label="Trique"/>
<link wikidata="Q829257" start="40427" end="40449" title="mutually intelligible" label="mutual intelligibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q844244" start="40787" end="40810" title="language revitalization" label="language revitalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q601401" start="40952" end="40957" title="trade" label="trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q33831" start="40958" end="40964" title="pidgin" label="pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380124" start="40975" end="41002" title="Plains Indian Sign Language" label="Plains Indian Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q907924" start="41057" end="41087" title="Plains Indians" label="Native Americans of the plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="41367" end="41379" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="41391" end="41407" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q331789" start="41465" end="41469" title="Crow Indians" label="Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q322951" start="41471" end="41479" title="Cheyenne Indians" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q626136" start="41485" end="41492" title="Arapaho" label="Arapaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202222" start="42000" end="42021" title="Plateau Sign Language" label="Plateau Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q401815" start="42113" end="42129" title="Columbia Plateau" label="Columbia Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q33569" start="42204" end="42212" title="Hawaiian language" label="Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="42246" end="42252" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164196" start="42275" end="42297" title="Constitution of Hawaii" label="Constitution of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684569" start="42471" end="42491" title="Hawaiian Renaissance" label="Hawaiian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q597671" start="42593" end="42629" title="Hawaii State Department of Education" label="Hawaii State Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q217439" start="42638" end="42658" title="University of Hawaii" label="University of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684411" start="42689" end="42713" title="Hawaii State Legislature" label="Hawaii State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6356550" start="42715" end="42733" title="Kamehameha Schools" label="Kamehameha Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q34011" start="43033" end="43039" title="Samoan language" label="Samoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16641" start="43079" end="43093" title="American Samoa" label="American Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33262" start="43183" end="43191" title="Chamorro language" label="Chamorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q153732" start="43214" end="43229" title="Mariana Islands" label="Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="43256" end="43260" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q609591" start="43272" end="43284" title="Commonwealth (U.S. insular area)" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16644" start="43292" end="43316" title="Northern Mariana Islands" label="Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060991" start="43342" end="43357" title="Chamorro people" label="Chamorro people"/>
<link wikidata="Q28427" start="43415" end="43425" title="Carolinian language" label="Carolinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33742" start="43559" end="43575" title="natural language" label="natural language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33831" start="43581" end="43588" title="pidgins" label="pidgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q33289" start="43652" end="43658" title="creole language" label="creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q34228" start="43663" end="43676" title="sign language" label="sign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q541279" start="43701" end="43712" title="Angloromani language" label="Angloromani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361511" start="43762" end="43778" title="Romani Americans" label="Romani Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q33831" start="43822" end="43828" title="pidgin" label="pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12603" start="43929" end="43946" title="Pacific Northwest" label="Pacific Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420228" start="44018" end="44034" title="Oregon Territory" label="Oregon Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981922" start="44081" end="44097" title="American pioneers" label="pioneer families"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="44218" end="44225" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="44238" end="44250" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535683" start="44333" end="44344" title="Sea Islands" label="Sea Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="44348" end="44362" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="44367" end="44374" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33260" start="44640" end="44653" title="French-based creole languages" label="French Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386404" start="44677" end="44700" title="Louisiana Creole people" label="Louisiana Creole people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="44717" end="44726" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q33491" start="44737" end="44751" title="Haitian Creole" label="Haitian Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083213" start="44753" end="44768" title="Colonial French" label="Colonial French"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083213" start="44774" end="44786" title="Cajun French" label="Cajun French"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="44823" end="44833" title="Nouvelle France" label="New France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723587" start="44853" end="44870" title="Expulsion of the Acadians" label="Grand Dérangement"/>
<link wikidata="Q33260" start="44873" end="44886" title="French-based creole languages" label="French Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="44955" end="44968" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="44985" end="44997" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q10302194" start="45980" end="45994" title="Signed English" label="Signed English"/>
<link wikidata="Q601401" start="46061" end="46066" title="trade" label="trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q33831" start="46067" end="46073" title="pidgin" label="pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14759" start="46328" end="46350" title="American Sign Language" label="American Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q12133" start="46395" end="46399" title="deaf" label="deaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q19864441" start="46832" end="46860" title="Black American Sign Language" label="Black American Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33358" start="47146" end="47166" title="Hawaii Sign Language" label="Hawaii Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q131347" start="47214" end="47224" title="O&amp;#x27;ahu" label="O&amp;#x27;ahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q187063" start="47226" end="47237" title="Lana&amp;#x27;i" label="Lana&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q201026" start="47239" end="47250" title="Kaua&amp;#x27;i" label="Kaua&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q239743" start="47264" end="47276" title="Ni&amp;#x27;ihau" label="Ni&amp;#x27;ihau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380124" start="47674" end="47690" title="Plains Indian Sign Language" label="Plains Sign Talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q108266" start="47846" end="47852" title="Navajo people" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202222" start="48036" end="48057" title="Plateau Sign Language" label="Plateau Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q401815" start="48091" end="48107" title="Columbia Plateau" label="Columbia Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q33494" start="48249" end="48285" title="Martha&amp;#x27;s Vineyard Sign Language" label="Martha&amp;#x27;s Vineyard Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33302" start="48313" end="48333" title="French Sign Language" label="French Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5714943" start="48434" end="48456" title="Henniker Sign Language" label="Henniker Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q598615" start="48502" end="48510" title="Henniker, New Hampshire" label="Henniker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417449" start="48624" end="48656" title="Sandy River Valley Sign Language" label="Sandy River Valley Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="48896" end="48907" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735001" start="48924" end="48940" title="Islam in the United States" label="Muslim Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="49030" end="49037" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="49039" end="49052" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="49058" end="49069" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="49071" end="49078" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q431164" start="49179" end="49194" title="Arab Christians" label="Arab Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606511" start="49198" end="49206" title="Lebanese people" label="Lebanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q878607" start="49208" end="49214" title="Syrian" label="Syrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q201190" start="49220" end="49231" title="Palestinian people" label="Palestinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="49337" end="49346" title="Catholics" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q64885" start="49354" end="49361" title="Melkite Greek Catholic Church" label="Melkite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4988656" start="49366" end="49374" title="Maronite" label="Maronite"/>
<link wikidata="Q323301" start="49414" end="49444" title="Greek Orthodox Church of Antioch" label="Antiochian Orthodox Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q198998" start="49449" end="49455" title="Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria" label="Coptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="49721" end="49733" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044413" start="49775" end="49781" title="Demographics of Texas" label="Texans"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="49796" end="49810" title="Czech language" label="Czech language"/>
<link wikidata="Q35743" start="50246" end="50253" title="Lach dialects" label="Lachian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50258" end="50277" title="Moravian dialects#Eastern Moravian" label="Moravian Wallachian"/>
<link wikidata="Q981677" start="50568" end="50575" title="Granger, Texas" label="Granger"/>
<link wikidata="Q982230" start="50629" end="50633" title="West, Texas" label="West"/>
<link wikidata="Q322187" start="50921" end="50931" title="New Sweden" label="New Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q8095230" start="51155" end="51170" title="Finnish citizen" label="Finnish citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="51234" end="51241" title="Midwest" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="51302" end="51311" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="51336" end="51344" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338" start="51352" end="51367" title="Upper Peninsula" label="Upper Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q12435" start="51369" end="51386" title="Hancock, Michigan" label="Hancock, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072663" start="51480" end="51507" title="Finnish American" label="Americans of Finnish origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060510" start="51672" end="51678" title="Yooper dialect" label="Yooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q534128" start="51888" end="51896" title="Gus Hall" label="Gus Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q318712" start="51912" end="51924" title="Renny Harlin" label="Renny Harlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q83325" start="51956" end="51971" title="Pamela Anderson" label="Pamela Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051549" start="52095" end="52118" title="Old Apostolic Lutheran Church" label="Old Apostolic Lutherans"/>
<link wikidata="Q984358" start="52327" end="52352" title="Lake Worth Beach, Florida" label="Lake Worth Beach, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="52674" end="52686" title="Irish language" label="Irish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="52891" end="52907" title="Italian language" label="Italian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313381" start="52918" end="52943" title="Italo-Dalmatian languages" label="Italo-Dalmatian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33973" start="53277" end="53285" title="Sicilian language" label="Sicilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33845" start="53290" end="53300" title="Neapolitan language" label="Neapolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q85760415" start="53760" end="53778" title="fall of Phnom Penh" label="fall of Phnom Penh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050826" start="54097" end="54126" title="Los Angeles metropolitan area" label="Los Angeles metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="54130" end="54140" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739" start="54165" end="54175" title="Long Beach, California" label="Long Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190137" start="54181" end="54195" title="Greater Boston" label="Greater Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="54199" end="54210" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q49162" start="54223" end="54244" title="Lowell, Massachusetts" label="Lowell, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="54370" end="54376" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050826" start="54555" end="54566" title="Los Angeles metropolitan area" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q683705" start="54568" end="54576" title="New York metropolitan area" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367175" start="54582" end="54597" title="Washington metropolitan area" label="Washington D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q904319" start="54647" end="54656" title="Koreatown" label="Koreatown"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="54749" end="54764" title="Polish language" label="Polish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754965" start="54787" end="54812" title="Chicago metropolitan area" label="Chicago metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995606" start="54843" end="54855" title="white ethnic" label="white ethnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189552" start="54867" end="54890" title="Polish American" label="those of Polish descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="54898" end="54904" title="German Americans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="54909" end="54914" title="Irish Americans" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="54920" end="54933" title="Polish people" label="Polish people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="55052" end="55059" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q28671976" start="55098" end="55129" title="Polish diaspora" label="Polish populations in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799" start="55157" end="55164" title="Wrocław" label="Wrocław"/>
<link wikidata="Q28671976" start="55252" end="55259" title="Polish diaspora" label="Polonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176660" start="55398" end="55412" title="Jefferson Park, Chicago" label="Jefferson Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q161596" start="55439" end="55453" title="Texas Silesian" label="Texas Silesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q30319" start="55472" end="55489" title="Silesian language" label="Silesian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q140472" start="55587" end="55596" title="Silesians" label="Silesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q18707533" start="55711" end="55726" title="Portuguese Jews" label="Portuguese Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q965842" start="55744" end="55766" title="Portuguese Inquisition" label="Portuguese Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q56982" start="55779" end="55795" title="Judeo-Portuguese" label="Judeo-Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="55847" end="55864" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435187" start="55892" end="55920" title="Congregation Shearith Israel" label="Congregation Shearith Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160655" start="55937" end="55963" title="Congregation Mikveh Israel" label="Congregation Mikveh Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="56127" end="56134" title="Azorean" label="Azorean"/>
<link wikidata="Q26253" start="56137" end="56145" title="Madeiran" label="Madeiran"/>
<link wikidata="Q19903733" start="56151" end="56164" title="Cape Verdeans" label="Cape Verdeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q18383" start="56284" end="56308" title="Providence, Rhode Island" label="Providence, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q49147" start="56310" end="56336" title="New Bedford, Massachusetts" label="New Bedford, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q159232" start="56342" end="56364" title="Santa Cruz, California" label="Santa Cruz, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091067" start="56393" end="56425" title="Portuguese immigration to Hawaii" label="Portuguese immigration to Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995571" start="56636" end="56692" title="History of the Lusophone Americans in Newark, New Jersey" label="Portuguese became a major language in Newark, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360686" start="56775" end="56792" title="Portuguese-speaking African countries" label="Portuguese Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087991" start="56803" end="56822" title="Portuguese Africans" label="Portuguese Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130521" start="56850" end="56860" title="retornados" label="retornados"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="56872" end="56876" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="56885" end="56890" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267812" start="56921" end="56940" title="Portuguese American" label="Portuguese American"/>
<link wikidata="Q922399" start="56984" end="57003" title="European Portuguese" label="European Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="57105" end="57118" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="57130" end="57148" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958704" start="57200" end="57219" title="Brazilian Americans" label="Brazilian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="57237" end="57242" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="57244" end="57257" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="57263" end="57269" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q322187" start="57342" end="57352" title="New Sweden" label="New Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="57685" end="57694" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="57768" end="57777" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="58068" end="58089" title="Cultural assimilation" label="Cultural assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="58209" end="58233" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047557" start="58924" end="58937" title="Andersonville, Chicago" label="Andersonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230175" start="58970" end="58981" title="John Morton (American politician)" label="John Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="59068" end="59109" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="United States Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q108141016" start="59242" end="59259" title="Wisconsin Walloon" label="Wisconsin Walloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q34219" start="59280" end="59296" title="Walloon language" label="Walloon language"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="59323" end="59331" title="Wallonia" label="Wallonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q681471" start="59400" end="59414" title="Door Peninsula" label="Door Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="59418" end="59427" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="59429" end="59442" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894388" start="59498" end="59516" title="Belgian Americans" label="Belgian immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="59962" end="59967" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="60113" end="60123" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="60131" end="60138" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="60146" end="60154" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="60162" end="60166" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="60178" end="60188" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980896" start="60222" end="60242" title="Bryn Mawr Historic District" label="Bryn Mawr in Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q995267" start="60247" end="60270" title="Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania" label="Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="60302" end="60314" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982000" start="60330" end="60341" title="Welsh Tract" label="Welsh Tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903817" start="60375" end="60382" title="Uwchlan Township, Pennsylvania" label="Uwchlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q804572" start="60384" end="60395" title="Bala Cynwyd, Pennsylvania" label="Bala Cynwyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693510" start="60397" end="60404" title="Lower Gwynedd Township, Pennsylvania" label="Gwynedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837498" start="60410" end="60420" title="Tredyffrin Township, Pennsylvania" label="Tredyffrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="60565" end="60592" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish colonial government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="60653" end="60662" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3463967" start="60672" end="60682" title="Saint Malo, Louisiana" label="Saint Malo"/>
<link wikidata="Q214456" start="60694" end="60732" title="Philippine–American War" label="American annexation of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545509" start="60900" end="60923" title="Republic Day (Philippines)" label="Philippine independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448604" start="60948" end="60959" title="Filipino Repatriation Act of 1935" label="repatriated"/>
<link wikidata="Q33298" start="61014" end="61022" title="Filipino language" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413685" start="61063" end="61080" title="Filipino American" label="Filipino American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413685" start="61169" end="61178" title="Filipino American" label="Filipinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4058325" start="61202" end="61207" title="Asian people" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624777" start="61277" end="61291" title="Asian language" label="Asian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="61314" end="61321" title="chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530387" start="61323" end="61330" title="Taglish" label="Taglish"/>
<link wikidata="Q255615" start="61342" end="61356" title="code-switching" label="code-switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="61738" end="61749" title="United States 2010 Census" label="2010 Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233666" start="61908" end="61927" title="Overseas Vietnamese" label="Overseas Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925" start="61941" end="61966" title="Orange County, California" label="Orange County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113369" start="62061" end="62074" title="Little Saigon" label="Little Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="62161" end="62169" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="62171" end="62178" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q179295" start="62180" end="62197" title="Dallas-Fort Worth" label="Dallas-Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="62199" end="62206" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q596021" start="62208" end="62225" title="Northern Virginia" label="Northern Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="62231" end="62242" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q482456" start="62410" end="62424" title="Fall of Saigon" label="Fall of Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="62459" end="62472" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="62487" end="62498" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643509" start="62593" end="62600" title="Indian American" label="Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7125803" start="62602" end="62612" title="Pakistani American" label="Pakistanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855425" start="62618" end="62630" title="Bangladeshi American" label="Bangladeshis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15609389" start="62679" end="62700" title="Languages of South Asia" label="South Asian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q8097" start="62726" end="62732" title="Telugu language" label="Telugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q36236" start="62765" end="62774" title="Malayalam language" label="Malayalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q33673" start="62776" end="62783" title="Kannada language" label="Kannada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="62785" end="62790" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137" start="62822" end="62830" title="Gujarati language" label="Gujarati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="62832" end="62837" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="62842" end="62846" title="Urdu" label="Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="62883" end="62890" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q58635" start="62892" end="62899" title="Punjabi language" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13267" start="62901" end="62908" title="Sinhala language" label="Sinhala"/>
<link wikidata="Q33823" start="62910" end="62916" title="Nepali language" label="Nepali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571" start="62953" end="62960" title="Marathi language" label="Marathi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="62987" end="62992" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="62997" end="63001" title="Urdu" label="Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q33577" start="63064" end="63074" title="Indo-Aryan languages" label="Indo-Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522980" start="63094" end="63105" title="Hindi Belt" label="North India"/>
<link wikidata="Q169966" start="63107" end="63120" title="Deccan Plateau" label="Central India"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="63126" end="63134" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643509" start="63319" end="63325" title="Indian Americans" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7125803" start="63330" end="63339" title="Pakistani Americans" label="Pakistani"/>
<link wikidata="Q487999" start="64514" end="64525" title="Gainesville, Florida" label="Gainesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q10379695" start="64677" end="64684" title="Dashain" label="Dashain"/>
<link wikidata="Q15128500" start="64686" end="64691" title="Tihar (festival)" label="Tihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q10259" start="64693" end="64697" title="Holi" label="Holi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630226" start="64699" end="64703" title="Teej" label="Teej"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268741" start="64717" end="64732" title="Nepali New Year" label="Nepali New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q702269" start="65299" end="65311" title="professional" label="professional"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="65335" end="65341" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="65343" end="65349" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="65355" end="65369" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12988663" start="65443" end="65487" title="Federation of Tamil Sangams of North America" label="Federation of Tamil Sangams of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156831" start="65504" end="65525" title="umbrella organization" label="umbrella organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="65558" end="65571" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="65576" end="65587" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586018" start="65664" end="65683" title="Sri Lankan American" label="Sri Lankan American"/>
<link wikidata="Q18432" start="65707" end="65720" title="Staten Island" label="Staten Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="65842" end="65851" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945571" start="65911" end="65929" title="Central Jersey" label="Central New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="65989" end="65999" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154693" start="66015" end="66027" title="Tamil Sangam" label="Tamil Sangam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643509" start="66053" end="66068" title="Indian American" label="Indian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q683705" start="66101" end="66114" title="New York metropolitan area" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367175" start="66119" end="66129" title="Washington metropolitan area" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q8097" start="66310" end="66316" title="Telugu language" label="Telugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="66413" end="66427" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q677037" start="66429" end="66438" title="Telangana" label="Telangana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="66440" end="66449" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="66454" end="66464" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945571" start="66514" end="66532" title="Central Jersey" label="Central New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="66634" end="66647" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367175" start="66656" end="66676" title="DC metropolitan area" label="DC metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="66730" end="66743" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="66748" end="66759" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="66855" end="66871" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486725" start="66874" end="66913" title="Language education in the United States" label="Language education in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486684" start="66916" end="66939" title="Language Spoken at Home (U.S. census)" label="Language Spoken at Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q4002712" start="66942" end="66994" title="List of multilingual presidents of the United States" label="List of multilingual presidents of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q84054" start="66997" end="67014" title="Muhlenberg legend" label="Muhlenberg legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q42880535" start="67017" end="67099" title="List of U.S. communities where English is not the majority language spoken at home" label="List of U.S. communities where English is not the majority language spoken at home"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506059" start="67102" end="67129" title="Modern Language Association" label="Modern Language Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q233107" start="67142" end="67161" title="Bilingual education" label="Bilingual education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044835" start="67164" end="67192" title="Culture of the United States" label="Culture of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334407" start="67195" end="67214" title="Languages of Canada" label="Languages of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q60497" start="68068" end="68073" title="Slate (magazine)" label="Slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="68241" end="68252" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="63884" wikidata="Q317936" url="?curid=63884" title="List of counties in California">
<text>The U.S. state of California is divided into 58 counties. The state was first divided into 27 counties on February 18, 1850. These were further sub-divided to form sixteen additional counties by 1860. Another fourteen counties were formed through further subdivision from 1861 to 1893. The most recent county to form was Imperial County, in 1907. California is home to San Bernardino County, the largest county in the contiguous United States, as well as Los Angeles County, the most populous county in the United States.

The counties of California are local arms of the State of California, described by the Supreme Court of California as agents (&quot;the county is merely a political subdivision of state government, exercising only the powers of the state, granted by the state…&#x27;&quot;) and the property they hold is held on behalf of all the people of the state. As such, the State Legislature may delegate any of the functions of the State to the counties but likewise can reassume any delegated duties.

California counties are general law counties by default. Still, they may be chartered as provided in Article XI, Section 3 of the California Constitution. A charter county is granted limited home rule powers. Of the 58 counties in California, 14 are governed under a charter. They are Alameda, Butte, El Dorado, Fresno, Los Angeles, Orange, Placer, Sacramento, San Bernardino, San Diego, San Francisco, San Mateo, Santa Clara, and Tehama.

Nine counties in California are named for saints, tied with Louisiana for the largest number. This count omits Santa Cruz (&quot;Holy Cross&quot;) County, not named for a saint; Merced County and Los Angeles County, both of whose names refer to Saint Mary (Our Lady of Mercy (Merced) and Our Lady Queen of The Angels (Los Angeles)); and Ventura County, whose name is a shortening of the name of St. Bonaventure, the namesake of the local mission.

== List ==






































|}

== Defunct counties ==
* Branciforte County was the original name of Santa Cruz County in 1850. The reference was to the 1797 town of Branciforte. 
* Klamath County was created in 1851 from the northern half of Trinity County. Part of the county&#x27;s territory went to Del Norte County in 1857, and in 1874 the remainder was divided between Humboldt and Siskiyou counties.
* Pautah County, California was created in 1852 out of territory which, the state of California assumed, was to be ceded to it by the United States Congress from territory in what is now the state of Nevada. When the cession never occurred, the California State Legislature officially abolished the never-organized county in 1859.
* Buena Vista County was created in 1855 by the California State Legislature out of the southeastern territory of Tulare County on the west of the Sierra Nevada but was never officially organized. The south of Tulare County was later organized as Kern County in 1866, with additions from Los Angeles and San Bernardino counties.
* Coso County was created in 1864 by the California State Legislature out of territory of Mono County and Tulare County on the east slope of the Sierra Nevada but was never officially organized. The region was later organized in 1866 as Inyo County with additions from Los Angeles and San Bernardino counties.
* Roop County, Nevada encompassed much of Lassen County, including the Honey Lake Valley and the community of Susanville, California; ambiguous organic legislation of Nevada Territory led to confusion about the geographic extent of Nevada&#x27;s western border. This was later clarified, with the portions of Roop County in California being assigned to Lassen County; the remaining, sparsely portions of Roop County were eventually combined with Washoe County, Nevada.

== Proposed counties ==
*Mojave County, proposed in 1988 that would have split the northern and eastern 90% of San Bernardino County
*Cahuilla County, proposed in the 1980s by the residents of eastern Riverside County
*Corona County, proposed in 2002 by residents of Corona and surrounding communities in Riverside County
*High Desert County, proposed in the 1970s, 80s, and 90s to split from portions of Los Angeles, Kern and San Bernardino counties
*Los Padres County, proposed in 1978 to split the northern portion of Santa Barbara County
*Mission County, proposed in 2006 to split the northern portion of Santa Barbara County
*Sequoia County, proposed in the 1990s, split from parts of southern Humboldt and Northern Mendocino counties

== References ==
== Further reading ==

==External links==
* California State Association of Counties
* State map showing the county names and linking to county data
* California State Association of Counties- The Creation of Our 58 Counties, with Maps of the 58 Counties Each Decade ca.1850–1900
* California State Association of Counties, Map of California Counties: c. 1907–Present</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="4" end="14" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="18" end="28" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="48" end="56" title="County (United States)" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q169952" start="321" end="336" title="Imperial County, California" label="Imperial County"/>
<link wikidata="Q108053" start="369" end="390" title="San Bernardino County, California" label="San Bernardino County"/>
<link wikidata="Q104994" start="455" end="473" title="Los Angeles County, California" label="Los Angeles County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589189" start="572" end="591" title="Government of California" label="State of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629503" start="610" end="637" title="Supreme Court of California" label="Supreme Court of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q835173" start="641" end="647" title="Law of agency" label="agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084210" start="887" end="904" title="California State Legislature" label="State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q196195" start="1147" end="1170" title="Constitution of California" label="California Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="1517" end="1526" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="1702" end="1712" title="Saint Mary" label="Saint Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q43746" start="1852" end="1867" title="St. Bonaventure" label="St. Bonaventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q108122" start="1983" end="2001" title="Branciforte County, California" label="Branciforte County"/>
<link wikidata="Q108122" start="2027" end="2044" title="Santa Cruz County, California" label="Santa Cruz County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956458" start="2092" end="2103" title="Branciforte" label="Branciforte"/>
<link wikidata="Q6419631" start="2108" end="2122" title="Klamath County, California" label="Klamath County"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="2467" end="2489" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="2533" end="2539" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084210" start="2578" end="2606" title="California State Legislature" label="California State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848690" start="2666" end="2684" title="Buena Vista County, California" label="Buena Vista County"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="2811" end="2824" title="Sierra Nevada (U.S.)" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q108047" start="2911" end="2922" title="Kern County, California" label="Kern County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174660" start="2995" end="3006" title="Coso County" label="Coso County"/>
<link wikidata="Q109670" start="3230" end="3241" title="Inyo County, California" label="Inyo County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366350" start="3305" end="3324" title="Roop County, Nevada" label="Roop County, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q156340" start="3345" end="3358" title="Lassen County" label="Lassen County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216459" start="3374" end="3384" title="Honey Lake" label="Honey Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q629584" start="3413" end="3435" title="Susanville" label="Susanville, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580241" start="3470" end="3486" title="Nevada Territory" label="Nevada Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q484340" start="3749" end="3770" title="Washoe County, Nevada" label="Washoe County, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6894995" start="3798" end="3811" title="Mojave County, California" label="Mojave County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017467" start="3907" end="3922" title="Cahuilla County, California" label="Cahuilla County"/>
<link wikidata="Q494707" start="3992" end="4005" title="Corona County, California" label="Corona County"/>
<link wikidata="Q23016943" start="4096" end="4114" title="High Desert County, California" label="High Desert County"/>
<link wikidata="Q108106" start="4225" end="4242" title="Los Padres County, California" label="Los Padres County"/>
<link wikidata="Q108106" start="4316" end="4330" title="Mission County, California" label="Mission County"/>
<link wikidata="Q111949079" start="4404" end="4418" title="Sequoia County, California" label="Sequoia County"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="63889" wikidata="Q7989" url="?curid=63889" title="Australian Mist">
<text>The Australian Mist (formerly known as Spotted Mist) is a breed of cat developed in Australia. It is a cross between the Abyssinian cat, the Burmese cat, and the Australian Tabby cat. The Australian Mist has a distinct and unique coat pattern hence the name.

==History==

This breed was developed in Australia in 1977 by Dr. Truda Straede with a gene-pool of approximately 30 foundation cats. Dr. Straede submitted a plan to the Royal Agricultural Society of New South Wales Cat Club (RASCC) for a breed with blue, brown, chocolate, and lilac colourings by using Burmese; and for a spotted tabby pattern by using the ticking gene of Abyssinian to go with a spotted tabby coat. The first generation of the breed was accepted into the RASCC experimental category in May 1980 and in April of 1986 the fourth generation was accepted as the &#x27;Spotted Mist&#x27;. In June 1997 the marbled variety of the breed was accepted by the RASCC and Waratah State Cat Alliance. Due to the newly accepted marbled variety it was decided by the Co-ordinating Cat Council of Australia and the Australian Cat Fancy to rename the breed — in a unanimous decision the name &#x27;Australian Mist&#x27; was chosen.
=== Breed recognition ===

On 1 January 1999 the breed received championship status with the New Zealand Cat Fancy. The breed was accepted for championship status by the World Cat Federation in August 2004. The first Australian Mists were imported into the United Kingdom in 2007. The breed was given preliminary recognition by the Governing Council of the Cat Fancy in October 2011. It was accepted at championship status in The International Cat Association on 1 May 2014. It gained championship status with the Governing Council of the Cat Fancy in February 2017. The breed is not yet recognised by the Fédération Internationale Féline.

==Appearance==

The Australian Mist is a medium-sized short-haired cat, with a round and medium-sized head, a broad nose, and large green eyes. Eye colour can range from chartreuse to aquamarine. Ears are moderately large with a rounded tip to them. The coat is short to medium in length and feels smooth and silky. 
=== Coat ===
====Coat patterns==== 
The coat pattern has three aspects: the ground colour, which is paler than the pattern; the pattern; and the appearance of wearing a misted veil, caused by random ticking in solid colour areas. The legs and tail are ringed or barred, and the face and neck also have lines of colour.

There are two types of coat patterns in the Australian Mist: the original spotted coat which has distinctive spots that are symmetrical and the marbled coat which has swirled patches and streaks on the coat. Both varieties should have the tabby M-shaped marking on the forehead and a ringed tail with a dark tip.
==== Coat colours ====

Australian Mists have a paler coat on the under-parts of the body which give it the distinctive mist appearance. Colour may not fully develop until the adult is at least two years old. Australian Mists do not have a solid colour as the agouti ground gives them their distinctive look but the base colours in the cat include blue, brown, caramel, chocolate, cinnamon (gold), fawn (peach), and lilac.

==Distribution==

Due to the novel status of the breed outside Australia most Australian Mist catteries are located in Australia; however, there are a few in the UK and USA. Breeding cats have also been sent to Norway.

==Health==
Conditions commonly screened for in breeding Australian Mist cats include pyruvate kinase deficiency, feline hypokalaemic polymyopathy, neonatal isoerythrolysis, and progressive retinal atrophy.

==Gallery==
==References==
==External links==
*Australian Mist Nintu Cattery (Dr Truda Straede&#x27;s personal website)
*Australian Mist from Breed Founder&#x27;s Nintu Cattery 
*Australian Mists International. TICA Australian Mist breeder alliance. Info, advice, kitten/stud/breeder list 
*Australian Mists in TICA (The International Cat Association)
*Australian Mist Cat Society 
*Cat Breeds with Pictures Directory: Australian Mist
*UK - The Governing Council of the Cat Fancy Abyssinian Experimental domestic </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7989" start="4" end="19" title="Australian Mist" label="Australian Mist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989" start="39" end="51" title="Australian Mist" label="Spotted Mist"/>
<link wikidata="Q42707" start="58" end="63" title="cat breeds" label="breed"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="67" end="70" title="cat" label="cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="84" end="93" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955" start="121" end="135" title="Abyssinian cat" label="Abyssinian cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q42573" start="141" end="152" title="Burmese cat" label="Burmese cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474329" start="173" end="182" title="Tabby cat" label="Tabby cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404066" start="230" end="242" title="Cat coat genetics" label="coat pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="301" end="310" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373590" start="430" end="484" title="Royal Agricultural Society of New South Wales" label="Royal Agricultural Society of New South Wales Cat Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q42573" start="564" end="571" title="Burmese (cat)" label="Burmese"/>
<link wikidata="Q96371553" start="618" end="630" title="Agouti coloration genetics" label="ticking gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955" start="634" end="644" title="Abyssinian (cat)" label="Abyssinian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="658" end="676" title="Tabby cat#Spotted tabby" label="spotted tabby coat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="880" end="887" title="Bengal cat#Marble" label="marbled"/>
<link wikidata="Q25384789" start="1287" end="1308" title="New Zealand Cat Fancy" label="New Zealand Cat Fancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42713" start="1364" end="1384" title="World Cat Federation" label="World Cat Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1451" end="1465" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q42543" start="1526" end="1560" title="Governing Council of the Cat Fancy" label="Governing Council of the Cat Fancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42709" start="1620" end="1653" title="The International Cat Association" label="The International Cat Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q42584" start="1800" end="1832" title="Fédération Internationale Féline" label="Fédération Internationale Féline"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043149" start="3514" end="3540" title="Pyruvate Kinase Deficiency" label="pyruvate kinase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3542" end="3574" title="Hypokalaemic Polymyopathy" label="feline hypokalaemic polymyopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q302876" start="3576" end="3600" title="Neonatal Isoerythrolysis" label="neonatal isoerythrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q680974" start="3606" end="3633" title="Progressive Retinal Atrophy" label="progressive retinal atrophy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="63890" wikidata="Q1245019" url="?curid=63890" title="Doric dialect (Scotland)">
<text>Doric, the popular name for Mid Northern Scots or Northeast Scots, refers to the Scots language as spoken in the northeast of Scotland. There is an extensive body of literature, mostly poetry, ballads, and songs, written in Doric. In some literary works, Doric is used as the language of conversation while the rest of the work is in Lallans Scots or British English. A number of 20th and 21st century poets have written poetry in the Doric dialect.

==Nomenclature==
The term &quot;Doric&quot; was formerly used to refer to all dialects of Lowland Scots, but during the twentieth century it became increasingly associated with Mid Northern Scots.

The name possibly originated as a jocular reference to the Doric dialect of the Ancient Greek language. Greek Dorians lived in Laconia, including Sparta, and other more rural areas, and were alleged by the ancient Greeks to have spoken laconically and in a language thought harsher in tone and more phonetically conservative than the Attic spoken in Athens. Doric Greek was used for some of the verses spoken by the chorus in Greek tragedy.

According to &quot;The Oxford Companion to English Literature&quot;:

:Since the Dorians were regarded as uncivilised by the Athenians, “Doric&quot; came to mean “rustic&quot; in English, and was applied particularly to &quot;the language of Northumbria and the Lowlands of Scotland&quot; and also to the simplest of the three orders in architecture.

18th-century Scots writers such as Allan Ramsay justified their use of Scots (instead of English) by comparing it to the use of Ancient Greek Doric by Theocritus. English became associated with Attic.

==Phonology==
Most consonants are usually pronounced much as in other Modern Scots dialects but:

*In Buchan the cluster cht, also ght, may be realised in some words, rather than as in other dialects, for example: &quot;dochter&quot; (daughter), (might) and &quot;nocht&quot; (nought), often written &quot;dother&quot;, &quot;mith&quot; and &quot;noth&quot; in dialect writing.
* The clusters gn and kn are realised and , for example &quot;gnaw&quot;, &quot;gnap&quot;, &quot;knee&quot;, &quot;knife&quot;, &quot;knock&quot; (a clock) and &quot;knowe&quot; (knoll).
*In Buchan, towards the coast, th followed by &quot;er&quot; may be realised , rather than as in other dialects, for example: &quot;brither&quot; (brother), &quot;faither&quot; (father), &quot;gaither&quot; (gather) and &quot;mither&quot; (mother), often written &quot;bridder&quot;, &quot;fadder&quot;, &quot;gaider&quot;~&quot;gedder&quot; and &quot;midder&quot; in dialect writing.
* wh is realised , rather than as in Central Scots dialects, for example &quot;whit&quot; (what) and &quot;wha&quot; (who), often written &quot;fit&quot; and () in dialect writing.
*The cluster wr may be realised , rather than as in Central Scots dialects, for example &quot;wratch&quot; (wretch), &quot;wrath&quot;, (wright) and (wrought~worked), often written , , and in dialect writing.

Some vowel realisations differ markedly from those of Central Scots dialects. The vowel numbers are from Aitken. See also Cardinal vowels.

* a (vowel 17) before , , and may be or rather than .
* aw and au (vowel 12), sometimes a or a″ representing L-vocalisation, are realised , rather than or as in Central Scots dialects, for example &quot;aw&quot; (all), &quot;cauld&quot; (cold), &quot;braw&quot; (brave, handsome, fine, splendid), &quot;faw&quot; (fall) and &quot;snaw&quot; (snow), often written &quot;aa&quot;, (), , and in dialect writing. In Buchan, in some words the stem final &quot;w&quot; may be realised , often with a glide before the preceding vowel, for example &quot;awe&quot; (awe), &quot;blaw&quot; (blow), &quot;gnaw&quot; , &quot;law&quot; , &quot;snaw&quot; (snow) and &quot;taw&quot; ~ often written &quot;yaave&quot;, &quot;blyaave&quot;, , &quot;snyaave&quot; and &quot;tyauve&quot;~&quot;tyaave&quot;~&quot;chaave&quot; in dialect writing.
*In some areas ai or a (consonant) e (vowel 4 or 8) may be realised after , dark and occasionally after other consonants, for example &quot;claes&quot; (clothes), &quot;coal&quot;, &quot;coat&quot;, &quot;gape&quot;, &quot;wade&quot;, &quot;waik&quot; (weak), &quot;wait&quot;, &quot;wale&quot; (choose) and &quot;wame&quot; (belly), often written &quot;clyes&quot;, &quot;kwile&quot;, , &quot;gype&quot;, &quot;wyde&quot;, &quot;wyke&quot;, &quot;wyte&quot;, &quot;wyle&quot; and &quot;wyme&quot; in dialect writing. A preceding or may produce a glide, with the vowel realised , for example &quot;caird&quot; (card), &quot;cake&quot; , &quot;naig&quot; (nag) and &quot;nakit&quot; (naked). The cluster ane is realised in Moray and Nairn but is usually in other areas, for example, &quot;ane&quot; (one) &quot;ance&quot; (once), &quot;bane&quot; (bone) and &quot;stane&quot; (stone), often written &quot;een&quot;, &quot;eence&quot;, &quot;been&quot; and &quot;steen&quot; in dialect writing.
*ea, ei (vowel 3) is usually , though the realisation may be along the coast and in Moray and Nairn. The realisation may also be in, for example, &quot;great&quot;, &quot;quean&quot; (girl), (seven), (sweat), &quot;weave&quot; and &quot;wheat&quot;, and before in, for example, &quot;speak&quot;, often written &quot;gryte&quot;, &quot;quine&quot;, &quot;syven&quot;, , &quot;wyve&quot;, &quot;fyte&quot; and () in dialect writing. Before and the realisation may be in, for example, &quot;heiven&quot; (heaven), &quot;reason&quot;, &quot;season&quot; and (seven), often written , , and in dialect writing.
*ee (vowels 2 and 11), e(Consonant)e (vowel 2). Occasionally ei and ie with &quot;ei&quot; generally before &quot;ch&quot; (), but also in a few other words, and &quot;ie&quot; generally occurring before &quot;l&quot; and &quot;v&quot;. The realisation is generally but may be after , dark and occasionally after other consonants in, for example, &quot;cheenge&quot; (change), &quot;heeze&quot; (lift) and &quot;swee&quot; (sway), often written , and in dialect writing.
*eu (vowel 7 before and see &quot;ui&quot;), sometimes ui and oo after Standard English also occur, is generally in for example, &quot;beuk&quot; (book), &quot;eneuch&quot; (enough), &quot;ceuk&quot; (cook), &quot;leuk&quot; (look) and &quot;teuk&quot; (took).
* Stem final ew (vowel 14) may be realised in, for example, &quot;few&quot;, &quot;new&quot; and also in &quot;beauty and duty&quot;, often written (), (), &quot;byowty&quot; and in dialect writing. Before the realisation may be in, for example, &quot;week&quot;, often written &quot;wyke&quot; in dialect writing.
* ui (vowel 7) is realised and after and . Also u (consonant) e, especially before nasals, and oo from the spelling of Standard English cognates, in for example, &quot;abuin&quot; (above), &quot;cuit&quot; (ankle) and &quot;guid&quot; (good), often written &quot;abeen&quot;, &quot;queet&quot; and &quot;gweed&quot; in dialect writing. In Moray and Nairn the realisation is usually before in, for example, &quot;buird&quot; (board), &quot;fluir&quot; (floor) and &quot;fuird&quot; (ford), often written &quot;boord&quot;, &quot;floor&quot; and &quot;foord&quot; in dialect writing. The realisation also occurs in &quot;adae&quot; (ado), &quot;dae&quot; (do), &quot;shae&quot; (shoe) and &quot;tae&quot; (to~too).

==Literature==

North East Scots has an extensive body of literature, mostly poetry, ballads and songs. During the Middle Scots period writing from the North East of Scotland adhered to the literary conventions of the time; indications of particular &quot;Doric&quot; pronunciations were very rare. The 18th-century literary revival also brought forth writers from the North East but, again, local dialect features were rare, the extant literary Scots conventions being preferred. In later times, a more deliberately regional literature began to emerge.

In contemporary prose writing, Doric occurs usually as quoted speech, although this is less and less often the case. As is usually the case with marginalised languages, local loyalties prevail in the written form, showing how the variety &quot;deviates&quot; from standard (&quot;British&quot;) English as opposed to a general literary Scots &quot;norm&quot;. This shows itself in the local media presentation of the language, e.g., Grampian Television &amp; The Aberdeen Press and Journal. These local loyalties, waning knowledge of the older literary tradition and relative distance from the Central Lowlands ensure that the Doric scene has a degree of semi-autonomy.

Doric dialogue was used in a lot of so-called Kailyard literature, a genre that paints a sentimental, melodramatic picture of the old rural life, and is currently unfashionable. This negative association still plagues Doric literature to a degree, as well as Scottish literature in general.

Poets who wrote in the Doric dialect include John M. Caie of Banffshire (1879–1949), Helen B. Cruickshank of Angus (1886–1975), Alexander Fenton (1929–2012), Flora Garry (1900–2000), Sir Alexander Gray (1882–1968), Violet Jacob of Angus (1863–1946), Charles Murray (1864–1941) and J. C. Milne (1897–1962).

George MacDonald from Huntly used Doric in his novels. A friend of Mark Twain, he is commonly considered one of the fathers of the fantasy genre and an influence on C. S. Lewis and J. R. R. Tolkien.

Lewis Grassic Gibbon&#x27;s &quot;Scots Quair&quot; trilogy is set in the Mearns and has been the basis of a successful play and television series. It is very popular throughout Scotland and tells the story of Chris, an independent-minded woman, mainly in a form of English strongly influenced by the rhythms of local speech.

A version of Aesop&#x27;s Fables has been published in Doric, as well as some sections of the Bible.

The North East has been claimed as the &quot;real home of the ballad&quot; and, according to Les Wheeler, &quot;91 out of a grand total of (Child&#x27;s) 305 ballads came from the North East – in fact from Aberdeenshire&quot;, which makes the usual name of &quot;Border Ballad&quot; a misnomer put about by Sir Walter Scott.

Contemporary writers in Doric include Sheena Blackhall, a poet who writes in Doric, and Mo Simpson, who writes in the &quot;Aberdeen Evening Express&quot; and peppers her humour column with &quot;Doricisms&quot; and Doric words. Doric has also featured in stage, radio and television, notably in the sketches and songs of the Aberdeen-based comedy groups Scotland the What? and the Flying Pigs.

===Sample text===
&quot;Gin I was God&quot; by Charles Murray (1864–1941) 
Doric
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:

Translation
:IF I were God, sitting up there above,
:Wearied no doubt, now all my work was done,
:Deafened by the harps and hymns unending ringing,
:Tired of the flocking angels hoarse with singing,
:To some cloud edge I&#x27;d saunter forth and, faith,
:Look over and watch how things were going beneath.
:Then if I saw how men I&#x27;d made myself
:Had started out to poison, shoot and kill [fell],
:To steal and rape and fairly make a hell
:Of my fine spinning Earth—a whole week&#x27;s work—
:I&#x27;d drop my coat again, roll up my shirt,
:And, ere they&#x27;d time to launch a second ark,
:Take back my word and send another flood [spate],
:Drown out the whole shebang, wipe the slate,
:Admit my mistake, and once I&#x27;d cleared the board,
:Start everything [&quot;all-thing&quot;] over again, if I were God.
==Recent developments==
In 2006 an Aberdeen hotel decided to use a Doric voice for their lift. Phrases said by the lift include &quot;Gyaun Up&quot; (Going up), &quot;Gyaun Doun&quot; (Going down), &quot;atween fleers een an fower&quot; (between floors one and four).&lt;ref name=&quot;urlBBC NEWS | UK | Scotland | North East/N Isles | Hotel lands uplifting Doric voice&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

Also in 2006, Maureen Watt of the SNP took her Scottish Parliamentary oath in Doric. She said &quot;I want to advance the cause of Doric and show there&#x27;s a strong and important culture in the North East.&quot; She was required to take an oath in English beforehand. There was some debate as to whether the oath was &quot;gweed Doric&quot; () or not, and notably it is, to a certain extent, written phonetically and contains certain anglicised forms such as &quot;I&quot; rather than &quot;A&quot;, and &quot;and&quot; instead of &quot;an&quot;:

:&quot;I depone aat I wull be leal and bear ae full alleadgance tae her majesty Queen Elizabeth her airs an ony fa come aifter her anent the law. Sae help me God.&quot;

In Disney/Pixar&#x27;s &quot;Brave&quot;, the character Young MacGuffin speaks the Doric dialect, and a running joke involves no one else understanding him. This was a choice by the voice actor, Kevin McKidd, a native of Elgin.

In autumn 2020, the University of Aberdeen launched a term-long Doric course, offering it to all its undergraduate students.

In August 2012, Gordon Hay, an Aberdeenshire author, successfully completed what is believed to be the first translation of the New Testament into Doric. The project took him six years.

==See also==
* Modern Scots
*Shetland dialect
* Ulster Scots
* Norn language

==References==
==Sources==
* Harper, Norman, &quot;Spik O The Place&quot; (Canongate Books, 1998)
* Harper, Norman (2009) &quot;Spikkin Doric&quot;. Edinburgh. Birlinn.

==External links==

* Doric A-Z words and phrases
* Technical description of Doric pronunciation
* Aw Ae Wey—Written Scots in Scotland and Ulster 
* North East page at Scots Language Centre
* &#x27;Hover &amp; Hear&#x27; Doric pronunciations, and compare with other accents from the UK and around the World.
* Hear Doric spoken aloud
* The Doric Festival
* Scottish MSP takes oath in Doric
* Anglic Language Varieties of Northern Scotland (from the Internet Archive - original link down).
* List of Doric Words and English Translations
* Doric set to dae the business
* Hotel lands uplifting Doric voice
* &#x27;Fit Like, Yer Majesty?&#x27; a book of Doric poems published in 2008
* Doric language and area stories from the North East of Scotland
* David Jack reads Doric passages from the works of George MacDonald, with some annotated texts: Spikin&#x27; Scots wi&#x27; Dawvid Jack, YouTube channel
* Scotland&#x27;s little-known fourth &quot;language&quot; (BBC)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1245019" start="0" end="5" title="Doric dialect (Scotland)" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245019" start="28" end="46" title="Doric dialect (Scotland)" label="Mid Northern Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245019" start="50" end="65" title="Doric dialect (Scotland)" label="Northeast Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="81" end="95" title="Scots language" label="Scots language"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="126" end="134" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197377" start="334" end="347" title="Lallans" label="Lallans Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="541" end="554" title="Scots language" label="Lowland Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q131138" start="683" end="690" title="Joke" label="jocular"/>
<link wikidata="Q285494" start="708" end="713" title="Doric Greek" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="729" end="742" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="753" end="758" title="Greeks" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q203711" start="759" end="766" title="Dorians" label="Dorians"/>
<link wikidata="Q11723836" start="776" end="783" title="Laconia (ancient region)" label="Laconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="795" end="801" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q506588" start="983" end="988" title="Attic Greek" label="Attic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="999" end="1005" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q770974" start="1065" end="1071" title="Greek chorus" label="chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q80930" start="1081" end="1088" title="tragedy" label="tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755789" start="1110" end="1152" title="The Oxford Companion to English Literature" label="The Oxford Companion to English Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q203711" start="1172" end="1179" title="Dorians" label="Dorians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="1216" end="1225" title="Athens" label="Athenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299" start="1333" end="1344" title="Northumbria" label="Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q654252" start="1353" end="1373" title="Scottish Lowlands" label="Lowlands of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q192664" start="1396" end="1404" title="Doric order" label="simplest"/>
<link wikidata="Q217175" start="1412" end="1424" title="classical order" label="three orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="1428" end="1440" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q654775" start="1478" end="1490" title="Allan Ramsay (poet)" label="Allan Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q219484" start="1594" end="1604" title="Theocritus" label="Theocritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q38035" start="1664" end="1674" title="consonants" label="consonants"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888858" start="1715" end="1727" title="Modern Scots" label="Modern Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q4101354" start="1747" end="1753" title="Buchan" label="Buchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q957073" start="1758" end="1765" title="Consonant cluster" label="cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061810" start="2633" end="2646" title="Central Scots" label="Central Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q36244" start="2992" end="2997" title="vowel" label="vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061810" start="3041" end="3054" title="Central Scots" label="Central Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q893304" start="3109" end="3124" title="Cardinal vowels" label="Cardinal vowels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437088" start="3236" end="3250" title="L-vocalisation" label="L-vocalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q210523" start="3565" end="3569" title="Word stem" label="stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q815439" start="4031" end="4035" title="Velarized alveolar lateral approximant" label="dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327000" start="7430" end="7442" title="Middle Scots" label="Middle Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113389" start="8303" end="8322" title="Grampian Television" label="Grampian Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758095" start="8329" end="8359" title="Press and Journal (Scotland)" label="The Aberdeen Press and Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326476" start="8587" end="8606" title="Kailyard school" label="Kailyard literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6245733" start="8878" end="8890" title="John M. Caie" label="John M. Caie"/>
<link wikidata="Q13511888" start="8918" end="8938" title="Helen B. Cruickshank" label="Helen B. Cruickshank"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8961" end="8977" title="Alexander Fenton" label="Alexander Fenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460299" start="8991" end="9002" title="Flora Garry" label="Flora Garry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544299" start="9016" end="9034" title="Sir Alexander Gray" label="Sir Alexander Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q543788" start="9048" end="9060" title="Violet Jacob" label="Violet Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081168" start="9083" end="9097" title="Charles Murray (poet)" label="Charles Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226201" start="9114" end="9125" title="J. C. Milne" label="J. C. Milne"/>
<link wikidata="Q368519" start="9140" end="9156" title="George MacDonald" label="George MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016931" start="9162" end="9168" title="Huntly" label="Huntly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="9207" end="9217" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="9271" end="9278" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9204" start="9305" end="9316" title="C. S. Lewis" label="C. S. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="9321" end="9337" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q650800" start="9340" end="9360" title="Lewis Grassic Gibbon" label="Lewis Grassic Gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q376914" start="9414" end="9420" title="Kincardineshire" label="Mearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q865902" start="9680" end="9699" title="Aesop&amp;#x27;s Fables" label="Aesop&amp;#x27;s Fables"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517093" start="9923" end="9934" title="Child Ballads" label="305 ballads"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="10076" end="10092" title="Sir Walter Scott" label="Sir Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492372" start="10133" end="10149" title="Sheena Blackhall" label="Sheena Blackhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435705" start="10450" end="10468" title="Scotland the What?" label="Scotland the What?"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734614" start="10477" end="10488" title="Flying Pig Productions" label="Flying Pigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081168" start="10538" end="10552" title="Charles Murray (poet)" label="Charles Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="11441" end="11449" title="Aberdeen" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q132911" start="11495" end="11499" title="elevator" label="lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q540381" start="11814" end="11826" title="Maureen Watt" label="Maureen Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="11834" end="11837" title="Scottish National Party" label="SNP"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="11847" end="11866" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074471" start="11870" end="11874" title="Oath of Allegiance (United Kingdom)" label="oath"/>
<link wikidata="Q126796" start="12550" end="12555" title="Brave (2012 film)" label="Brave"/>
<link wikidata="Q312133" start="12716" end="12728" title="Kevin McKidd" label="Kevin McKidd"/>
<link wikidata="Q841074" start="12742" end="12747" title="Elgin, Scotland" label="Elgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q270532" start="12770" end="12792" title="University of Aberdeen" label="University of Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="13004" end="13017" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888858" start="13078" end="13090" title="Modern Scots" label="Modern Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069598" start="13092" end="13108" title="Shetland dialect" label="Shetland dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q201966" start="13111" end="13123" title="Ulster Scots dialects" label="Ulster Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q36708" start="13126" end="13139" title="Norn language" label="Norn language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052328" start="13170" end="13184" title="Norman Harper" label="Harper, Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033341" start="13216" end="13231" title="Canongate Books" label="Canongate Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052328" start="13241" end="13255" title="Norman Harper" label="Harper, Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="13760" end="13776" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q368519" start="14110" end="14126" title="George MacDonald" label="George MacDonald"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="63892" wikidata="Q14549" url="?curid=63892" title="Scots language">
<text>Scots is a language variety descended from Early Middle English in the West Germanic language family. Most commonly spoken in the Scottish Lowlands, the Northern Isles of Scotland, and northern Ulster in Ireland (where the local dialect is known as Ulster Scots), it is sometimes called: Lowland Scots, to distinguish it from Scottish Gaelic, the Celtic language that was historically restricted to most of the Scottish Highlands, the Hebrides, and Galloway after the sixteenth century; or Broad Scots, to distinguish it from Scottish Standard English. Modern Scots is a sister language of Modern English, as the two diverged from the same medieval form of English.

Scots is recognised as an indigenous language of Scotland by the Scottish government, a regional or minority language of Europe, and a vulnerable language by UNESCO. In a Scottish census from 2022, over 1.5 million people in Scotland reported being able to speak Scots.

Given that there are no universally accepted criteria for distinguishing a language from a dialect, scholars and other interested parties often disagree about the linguistic, historical and social status of Scots, particularly its relationship to English. Although a number of paradigms for distinguishing between languages and dialects exist, they often render contradictory results. Broad Scots is at one end of a bipolar linguistic continuum, with Scottish Standard English at the other. Scots is sometimes regarded as a variety of English, though it has its own distinct dialects; other scholars treat Scots as a distinct Germanic language, in the way that Norwegian is closely linked to but distinct from Danish.

==Nomenclature==
Native speakers sometimes refer to their vernacular as (or &quot;broad Scots&quot; in English) or use a dialect name such as the &quot;Doric&quot; or the &quot;&quot;. The old-fashioned &quot;Scotch&quot;, an English loan, occurs occasionally, especially in Ulster. The term &quot;Lallans&quot;, a variant of the Modern Scots word , is also used, though this is more often taken to mean the Lallans literary form. Scots in Ireland is known in official circles as Ulster-Scots ( in revivalist Ulster-Scots) or &quot;Ullans&quot;, a recent neologism merging Ulster and Lallans.

===Etymology===
&quot;Scots&quot; is a contraction of , the Older Scots and northern version of late (modern English &quot;Scottish&quot;), which replaced the earlier i-mutated version . Before the end of the fifteenth century, English speech in Scotland was known as &quot;English&quot; (written or at the time), whereas &quot;Scottish&quot; () referred to Gaelic. By the beginning of the fifteenth century, the English language used in Scotland had arguably become a distinct language, albeit one lacking a name which clearly distinguished it from all the other English variants and dialects spoken in Britain. From 1495, the term was increasingly used to refer to the Lowland vernacular and , meaning &quot;Irish&quot;, was used as a name for Gaelic. For example, towards the end of the fifteenth century, William Dunbar was using to refer to Gaelic and, in the early sixteenth century, Gavin Douglas was using as a name for the Lowland vernacular. The Gaelic of Scotland is now usually called Scottish Gaelic.

==History==

Northumbrian Old English had been established in what is now southeastern Scotland as far as the River Forth by the seventh century, as the region was part of the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of Northumbria. Some historians have traditionally argued that the regions later known as Lothian and the Scottish Borders became attached to the Kingdom of Scotland in the tenth and early eleventh centuries, but this is no longer accepted and the takeover that does take place is not fully evident until the twelfth century and probably incomplete until at least the 1070s. The common use of English remained largely confined to Lothian and the Borders until the thirteenth century, where the local varieties were reshaped in response to migration from the Scandinavian-influenced North and Midlands of England that came with the foundation of the first burghs in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. The Scots language scholar Robert McCall Millar framed Early Scots as a &quot;koine&quot; of the varieties of English spoken in Bernicia and the Danelaw that had been brought to the new burghs.

Later influences on the development of Scots came from the Romance languages via ecclesiastical and legal Latin, Norman French, and later Parisian French, due to the Auld Alliance. Additionally, there were Dutch and Middle Low German influences due to trade with and immigration from the Low Countries. Scots also includes loan words in the legal and administrative fields resulting from contact with Middle Irish, and reflected in early medieval legal documents. Contemporary Scottish Gaelic loans are mainly for geographical and cultural features, such as &quot;cèilidh&quot;, &quot;loch&quot;, &quot;whisky&quot;, &quot;glen&quot; and &quot;clan&quot;. Cumbric and Pictish, the medieval Brittonic languages of Northern England and Scotland, are the suspected source of a small number of Scots words, such as &quot;lum&quot; (derived from Cumbric) meaning &quot;chimney&quot;. From the thirteenth century, the Early Scots language spread further into Scotland via the burghs, which were proto-urban institutions first established by King David I. In fourteenth-century Scotland, the growth in prestige of Early Scots and the complementary decline of French made Scots the prestige dialect of most of eastern Scotland. By the sixteenth century, Middle Scots had established orthographic and literary norms largely independent of those developing in England.

From 1610 to the 1690s during the Plantation of Ulster, some 200,000 Scots-speaking Lowlanders settled as colonists in Ulster in Ireland. In the core areas of Scots settlement, Scots outnumbered English settlers by five or six to one.

The name Modern Scots is used to describe the Scots language after 1700.

A seminal study of Scots was undertaken by JAH Murray and published as &quot;Dialect of the Southern Counties of Scotland&quot;. Murray&#x27;s results were given further publicity by being included in Alexander John Ellis&#x27;s book On Early English Pronunciation, Part V alongside results from Orkney and Shetland, as well as the whole of England. Murray and Ellis differed slightly on the border between English and Scots dialects.

Scots was studied alongside English and Scots Gaelic in the &quot;Linguistic Survey of Scotland&quot; at the University of Edinburgh, which began in 1949 and began to publish results in the 1970s. Also beginning in the 1970s, the &quot;Atlas Linguarum Europae&quot; studied the Scots language used at 15 sites in Scotland, each with its own dialect.

===Language shift===
From the mid-sixteenth century, written Scots was increasingly influenced by the developing Standard English of Southern England due to developments in royal and political interactions with England. When William Flower, an English herald, spoke with Mary of Guise and her councillors in 1560, they first used the . As he found this hard to understand, they switched into her native French. King James VI, who in 1603 became James I of England, observed in his work &quot;Some Reulis and Cautelis to Be Observit and Eschewit in Scottis Poesie&quot; that (&quot;For though several have written of &quot;(the subject)&quot; in English, which is the language most similar to ours...&quot;). However, with the increasing influence and availability of books printed in England, most writing in Scotland came to be done in the English fashion. In his first speech to the English Parliament in March 1603, King James VI and I declared, . Following James VI&#x27;s move to London, the Protestant Church of Scotland adopted the 1611 Authorized King James Version of the Bible; subsequently, the Acts of Union 1707 led to Scotland joining England to form the Kingdom of Great Britain, having a single Parliament of Great Britain based in London. After the Union and the shift of political power to England, the use of Scots was discouraged by many in authority and education, as was the notion of &quot;Scottishness&quot; itself. Many leading Scots of the period, such as David Hume, defined themselves as Northern British rather than Scottish. They attempted to rid themselves of their Scots in a bid to establish standard English as the official language of the newly formed union. Nevertheless, Scots was still spoken across a wide range of domains until the end of the eighteenth century. Frederick Pottle, the twentieth-century biographer of James Boswell (1740–1795), described James&#x27;s view of the use of Scots by his father Alexander Boswell (1706–1782) in the eighteenth century while serving as a judge of the Supreme Courts of Scotland:

However, others did scorn Scots, such as Scottish Enlightenment intellectuals David Hume and Adam Smith, who went to great lengths to get rid of every Scotticism from their writings. Following such examples, many well-off Scots took to learning English through the activities of those such as Thomas Sheridan, who in 1761 gave a series of lectures on English elocution. Charging a guinea at a time (about £ in today&#x27;s money), they were attended by over 300 men, and he was made a freeman of the City of Edinburgh. Following this, some of the city&#x27;s intellectuals formed the Select Society for Promoting the Reading and Speaking of the English Language in Scotland. These eighteenth-century activities would lead to the creation of Scottish Standard English. Scots remained the vernacular of many rural communities and the growing number of urban working-class Scots.
In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the use of Scots as a literary language was revived by several prominent Scotsmen such as Robert Burns. Such writers established a new cross-dialect literary norm.

Scots terms were included in the English Dialect Dictionary, edited by Joseph Wright. Wright had great difficulty in recruiting volunteers from Scotland, as many refused to cooperate with a venture that regarded Scots as a dialect of English, and he obtained enough help only through the assistance from a Professor Shearer in Scotland. Wright himself rejected the argument that Scots was a separate language, saying that this was a &quot;quite modern mistake&quot;.

During the first half of the twentieth century, knowledge of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century literary norms waned, and , there is no institutionalised standard literary form. By the 1940s, the Scottish Education Department&#x27;s language policy was that Scots had no value: &quot;it is not the language of &#x27;educated&#x27; people anywhere, and could not be described as a suitable medium of education or culture&quot;. Students reverted to Scots outside the classroom, but the reversion was not complete. What occurred, and has been occurring ever since, is a process of language attrition, whereby successive generations have adopted more and more features from Standard English. This process has accelerated rapidly since widespread access to mass media in English and increased population mobility became available after the Second World War. It has recently taken on the nature of wholesale language shift, sometimes also termed language change, convergence or merger. By the end of the twentieth century, Scots was at an advanced stage of language death over much of Lowland Scotland. Residual features of Scots are often regarded as slang. A 2010 Scottish Government study of &quot;public attitudes towards the Scots language&quot; found that 64% of respondents (around 1,000 individuals in a representative sample of Scotland&#x27;s adult population) &quot;don&#x27;t really think of Scots as a language&quot;, also finding &quot;the most frequent speakers are least likely to agree that it is not a language (58%) and those never speaking Scots most likely to do so (72%)&quot;.

===Decline in status===
Before the Treaty of Union 1707, when Scotland and England joined to form the Kingdom of Great Britain, there is ample evidence that Scots was widely held to be an independent sister language forming a pluricentric diasystem with English.

German linguist considered Modern Scots a (&#x27;half language&#x27;) in terms of an and languages framework, although today in Scotland most people&#x27;s speech is somewhere on a continuum ranging from traditional broad Scots to Scottish Standard English. Many speakers are diglossic and may be able to code-switch along the continuum depending on the situation. Where on this continuum English-influenced Scots becomes Scots-influenced English is difficult to determine. Because standard English now generally has the role of a (&#x27;roofing language&#x27;), disputes often arise as to whether the varieties of Scots are dialects of Scottish English or constitute a separate language in their own right.

The UK government now accepts Scots as a regional language and has recognised it as such under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages.

Evidence for its existence as a separate language lies in the extensive body of Scots literature, its independent – if somewhat fluid – orthographic conventions, and in its former use as the language of the original Parliament of Scotland. Because Scotland retained distinct political, legal, and religious systems after the Union, many Scots terms passed into Scottish English.

==Language revitalisation==

During the 2010s, increased interest was expressed in the language.

===Education===

The status of the language was raised in Scottish schools, with Scots being included in the new national school curriculum. Previously in Scotland&#x27;s schools there had been little education taking place through the medium of Scots, although it may have been covered superficially in English lessons, which could entail reading some Scots literature and observing the local dialect. Much of the material used was often Standard English disguised as Scots, which caused upset among proponents of Standard English and proponents of Scots alike. One example of the educational establishment&#x27;s approach to Scots is, &quot;Write a poem in Scots. (It is important not to be worried about spelling in this – write as you hear the sounds in your head.)&quot;, whereas guidelines for English require teaching pupils to be &quot;writing fluently and legibly with accurate spelling and punctuation&quot;.

A course in Scots language and culture delivered through the medium of Standard English and produced by the Open University (OU) in Scotland, the Open University&#x27;s School of Languages and Applied Linguistics as well as Education Scotland became available online for the first time in December 2019.

===Government===
In the 2011 Scottish census, a question on Scots language ability was featured In the 2022 census conducted by the Scottish Government, a question in relation to the Scots language was also featured. It was found that 1,508,540 people reported that they could speak Scots, with 2,444,659 reporting that they could speak, read, write or understand Scots, approximately 45% of Scotland&#x27;s 2022 population. The Scottish Government set its first Scots Language Policy in 2015, in which it pledged to support its preservation and encourage respect, recognition and use of Scots. The Scottish Parliament website also offers some information on the language in Scots.

In September 2024, experts of the Council of Europe called on the UK Government to &quot;boost support for regional and minority languages&quot;, including the Scots Language.

===Media===
The serious use of the Scots language for news, encyclopaediae, documentaries, etc., remains rare. It is reportedly reserved for niches where it is deemed acceptable, e.g. comedy, Burns Night or traditions&#x27; representations.

Since 2016, the newspaper &quot;The National&quot; has regularly published articles in the language. The 2010s also saw an increasing number of English books translated in Scots and becoming widely available, particularly those in popular children&#x27;s fiction series such as &quot;The Gruffalo&quot;, &quot;Harry Potter&quot;, &quot;Diary of a Wimpy Kid&quot;, and several by Roald Dahl and David Walliams. In 2021, the music streaming service Spotify created a Scots language listing.

The Ferret, a UK-based fact-checking service, wrote an exploratory article in December 2022 to address misconceptions about the Scots language to improve public awareness of its endangered status.

==Geographic distribution==
In Scotland, Scots is spoken in the Scottish Lowlands, the Northern Isles, Caithness, Arran and Campbeltown. In Ulster, the northern province in Ireland, its area is usually defined through the works of Robert John Gregg to include the counties of Down, Antrim, Londonderry and Donegal (especially in East Donegal and Inishowen). More recently, the Fintona-born linguist Warren Maguire has argued that some of the criteria that Gregg used as distinctive of Ulster-Scots are common in south-west Tyrone and were found in other sites across Northern Ireland investigated by the Linguistic Survey of Scotland. Dialects of Scots include Insular Scots, Northern Scots, Central Scots, Southern Scots and Ulster Scots.

It has been difficult to determine the number of speakers of Scots via census, because many respondents might interpret the question &quot;Do you speak Scots?&quot; in different ways. Campaigners for Scots pressed for this question to be included in the 2001 UK National Census. The results from a 1996 trial before the Census, by the General Register Office for Scotland (GRO), suggested that there were around 1.5 million speakers of Scots, with 30% of Scots responding &quot;Yes&quot; to the question &quot;Can you speak the Scots language?&quot;, but only 17% responding &quot;Aye&quot; to the question &quot;Can you speak Scots?&quot;. It was also found that older, working-class people were more likely to answer in the affirmative. The University of Aberdeen Scots Leid Quorum performed its own research in 1995, cautiously suggesting that there were 2.7 million speakers, though with clarification as to why these figures required context.

The GRO questions, as freely acknowledged by those who set them, were not as detailed and systematic as those of the University of Aberdeen, and only included reared speakers (people raised speaking Scots), not those who had learned the language. Part of the difference resulted from the central question posed by surveys: &quot;Do you speak Scots?&quot;. In the Aberdeen University study, the question was augmented with the further clause &quot;... or a dialect of Scots such as Border etc.&quot;, which resulted in greater recognition from respondents. The GRO concluded that there simply was not enough linguistic self-awareness amongst the Scottish populace, with people still thinking of themselves as speaking badly pronounced, grammatically inferior English rather than Scots, for an accurate census to be taken. The GRO research concluded that &quot;[a] more precise estimate of genuine Scots language ability would require a more in-depth interview survey and may involve asking various questions about the language used in different situations. Such an approach would be inappropriate for a Census.&quot; Thus, although it was acknowledged that the &quot;inclusion of such a Census question would undoubtedly raise the profile of Scots&quot;, no question about Scots was, in the end, included in the 2001 Census. The Scottish Government&#x27;s &quot;Pupils in Scotland Census 2008&quot; found that 306 pupils spoke Scots as their main home language. A Scottish Government study in 2010 found that 85% of around 1000 respondents (being a representative sample of Scotland&#x27;s adult population) claim to speak Scots to varying degrees.

The 2011 UK census was the first to ask residents of Scotland about Scots. A campaign called &quot;Aye Can&quot; was set up to help individuals answer the question. The specific wording used was &quot;Which of these can you do? Tick all that apply&quot; with options for &quot;Understand&quot;, &quot;Speak&quot;, &quot;Read&quot; and &quot;Write&quot; in three columns: English, Scottish Gaelic and Scots. Of approximately 5.1 million respondents, about 1.2 million (24%) could speak, read and write Scots, 3.2 million (62%) had no skills in Scots and the remainder had some degree of skill, such as understanding Scots (0.27 million, 5.2%) or being able to speak it but not read or write it (0.18 million, 3.5%). There were also small numbers of Scots speakers recorded in England and Wales on the 2011 Census, with the largest numbers being either in bordering areas (e.g. Carlisle) or in areas that had recruited large numbers of Scottish workers in the past (e.g. Corby or the former mining areas of Kent). In the 2022 census conducted by the Scottish Government, it was found that 1,508,540 people reported that they could speak Scots, with 2,444,659 reporting that they could speak, read, write or understand Scots, approximately 45% of Scotland&#x27;s 2022 population.

==Literature==

Among the earliest Scots literature is John Barbour&#x27;s &quot;Brus&quot; (fourteenth century), Wyntoun&#x27;s &quot;Cronykil&quot; and Blind Harry&#x27;s &quot;The Wallace&quot; (fifteenth century). From the fifteenth century, much literature based on the Royal Court in Edinburgh and the University of St Andrews was produced by writers such as Robert Henryson, William Dunbar, Gavin Douglas and David Lyndsay. &quot;The Complaynt of Scotland&quot; was an early printed work in Scots. The &quot;Eneados&quot; is a Middle Scots translation of Virgil&#x27;s &quot;Aeneid&quot;, completed by Gavin Douglas in 1513.

After the seventeenth century, anglicisation increased. At the time, many of the oral ballads from the borders and the North East were written down. Writers of the period were Robert Sempill, Robert Sempill the younger, Francis Sempill, Lady Wardlaw and Lady Grizel Baillie.

In the eighteenth century, writers such as Allan Ramsay, Robert Burns, James Orr, Robert Fergusson and Walter Scott continued to use Scots – Burns&#x27;s &quot;Auld Lang Syne&quot; is in Scots, for example. Scott introduced vernacular dialogue to his novels. Other well-known authors like Robert Louis Stevenson, William Alexander, George MacDonald, J. M. Barrie and other members of the Kailyard school like Ian Maclaren also wrote in Scots or used it in dialogue.

In the Victorian era popular Scottish newspapers regularly included articles and commentary in the vernacular, often of unprecedented proportions.

In the early twentieth century, a renaissance in the use of Scots occurred, its most vocal figure being Hugh MacDiarmid whose benchmark poem &quot;A Drunk Man Looks at the Thistle&quot; (1926) did much to demonstrate the power of Scots as a modern idiom. Other contemporaries were Douglas Young, John Buchan, Sydney Goodsir Smith, Robert Garioch, Edith Anne Robertson and Robert McLellan. The revival extended to verse and other literature.

In 1955, three Ayrshire men – Sandy MacMillan, an English teacher at Ayr Academy; Thomas Limond, noted town chamberlain of Ayr; and A. L. &quot;Ross&quot; Taylor, rector of Cumnock Academy – collaborated to write (&quot;Child Songs&quot;), a collection of children&#x27;s nursery rhymes and poems in Scots. The book contains a five-page glossary of contemporary Scots words and their pronunciations.

Alexander Gray&#x27;s translations into Scots constitute the greater part of his work, and are the main basis for his reputation.

In 1983, William Laughton Lorimer&#x27;s translation of the New Testament from the original Greek was published.

Scots is sometimes used in contemporary fiction, such as the Edinburgh dialect of Scots in &quot;Trainspotting&quot; by Irvine Welsh (later made into a motion picture of the same name).

&quot;But&#x27;n&#x27;Ben A-Go-Go&quot; by Matthew Fitt is a cyberpunk novel written entirely in what (&quot;Our Own Language&quot;) calls &quot;General Scots&quot;. Like all cyberpunk work, it contains imaginative neologisms.

The &quot;Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam&quot; was translated into Scots by Rab Wilson and published in 2004. Alexander Hutchison has translated the poetry of Catullus into Scots, and in the 1980s, Liz Lochhead produced a Scots translation of &quot;Tartuffe&quot; by Molière. J. K. Annand translated poetry and fiction from German and Medieval Latin into Scots.

The strip cartoons &quot;Oor Wullie&quot; and &quot;The Broons&quot; in the &quot;Sunday Post&quot; use some Scots. In 2018, &quot;Harry Potter and the Philosopher&#x27;s Stane&quot;, a Scots translation of the first Harry Potter book, &quot;Harry Potter and the Philosopher&#x27;s Stone&quot;, was published by Matthew Fitt.

==Phonology==

===Vowels===
The vowel system of Modern Scots:

Vowel length is usually conditioned by the Scottish vowel length rule.

===Consonants===

==Orthography==

The orthography of Early Scots had become more or less standardised by the middle to late sixteenth century. After the Union of the Crowns in 1603, the Standard English of England came to have an increasing influence on the spelling of Scots through the increasing influence and availability of books printed in England. After the Acts of Union in 1707 the emerging Scottish form of Standard English replaced Scots for most formal writing in Scotland.
The eighteenth-century Scots revival saw the introduction of a new literary language descended from the old court Scots, but with an orthography that had abandoned some of the more distinctive old Scots spellings and adopted many standard English spellings. Despite the updated spelling, however, the rhymes make it clear that a Scots pronunciation was intended. These writings also introduced what came to be known as the apologetic apostrophe, generally occurring where a consonant exists in the Standard English cognate. This Written Scots drew not only on the vernacular, but also on the King James Bible, and was heavily influenced by the norms and conventions of Augustan English poetry. Consequently, this written Scots looked very similar to contemporary Standard English, suggesting a somewhat modified version of that, rather than a distinct speech form with a phonological system which had been developing independently for many centuries. This modern literary dialect, &quot;Scots of the book&quot; or Standard Scots, once again gave Scots an orthography of its own, lacking neither &quot;authority nor author&quot;. This literary language used throughout Lowland Scotland and Ulster, embodied by writers such as Allan Ramsay, Robert Fergusson, Robert Burns, Sir Walter Scott, Charles Murray, David Herbison, James Orr, James Hogg and William Laidlaw among others, is well described in the 1921 &quot;Manual of Modern Scots&quot;.

Other authors developed dialect writing, preferring to represent their own speech in a more phonological manner rather than following the pan-dialect conventions of modern literary Scots, especially for the northern and insular dialects of Scots.

During the twentieth century, a number of proposals for spelling reform were presented. Commenting on this, John Corbett (2003: 260) writes that &quot;devising a normative orthography for Scots has been one of the greatest linguistic hobbies of the past century&quot;. Most proposals entailed regularising the use of established eighteenth- and nineteenth-century conventions, in particular, the avoidance of the apologetic apostrophe, which represented letters that were perceived to be missing when compared to the corresponding English cognates but were never actually present in the Scots word. For example, in the fourteenth century, Barbour spelt the Scots cognate of &quot;taken&quot; as . It is argued that, because there has been no &quot;k&quot; in the word for over 700 years, representing its omission with an apostrophe is of little value. The current spelling is usually .

Through the twentieth century, with the decline of spoken Scots and knowledge of the literary tradition, phonetic (often humorous) representations became more common.

==Grammar==

Modern Scots follows the subject–verb–object sentence structure like Standard English. However, the word order (&quot;Give us it&quot;) vs. &quot;Give it to me&quot; may be preferred.
The indefinite article &quot;a&quot; may be used before both consonants and vowels. The definite article &quot;the&quot; is used before the names of seasons, days of the week, many nouns, diseases, trades and occupations, sciences and academic subjects. It is also often used in place of the indefinite article and instead of a possessive pronoun.
Scots includes some irregular plurals such as (&quot;eye/eyes&quot;), (&quot;calf/calves&quot;), (&quot;horse/horses&quot;), (&quot;cow/cows&quot;) and (&quot;shoe/shoes&quot;) that survived from Old English into Modern Scots, but have become regularised plurals in Standard Modern English – &quot;ox&quot;/&quot;oxen&quot; and &quot;child&quot;/&quot;children&quot; being exceptions. Nouns of measure and quantity remain unchanged in the plural.
The relative pronoun is &quot;that&quot; for all persons and numbers, but may be elided. Modern Scots also has a third adjective/adverb &quot;this&quot;-&quot;that&quot;-&quot;yon&quot;/&quot;yonder&quot; () indicating something at some distance. and are the plurals of &quot;this&quot; and &quot;that&quot; respectively.
The present tense of verbs adheres to the Northern subject rule whereby verbs end in -&quot;s&quot; in all persons and numbers except when a single personal pronoun is next to the verb. Certain verbs are often used progressively and verbs of motion may be dropped before an adverb or adverbial phrase of motion.
Many verbs have strong or irregular forms which are distinctive from Standard English.
The regular past form of the weak or regular verbs is &quot;-it&quot;, &quot;-t&quot; or &quot;-ed&quot;, according to the preceding consonant or vowel.
The present participle and gerund &quot;in&quot; are now usually but may still be differentiated and in Southern Scots, and and in Northern Scots.
The negative particle is , sometimes spelled , e.g. (&quot;can&#x27;t&quot;), (&quot;daren&#x27;t&quot;), (&quot;mightn&#x27;t&quot;).

Adverbs usually take the same form as the verb root or adjective, especially after verbs. Examples include (&quot;Having a really good day&quot;) and (&quot;She&#x27;s awfully tired&quot;).

==Sample text of Modern Scots==
From &quot;The Four Gospels in Braid Scots&quot; (William Wye Smith):
From &quot;The New Testament in Scots&quot; (William Laughton Lorimer, 1885–1967)
== See also ==
* Bungi Creole of the Canadian Metis people of Scottish/British descent
* Doric dialect (Scotland)
* Glasgow patter
* Billy Kay
* Languages of the United Kingdom
* Phonological history of Scots
* Scotticism
* Scottish Corpus of Texts and Speech
* Scottish literature
* Scots Wikipedia
==Notes==
==References==
==External links==


* Scots-online
* The Scots Language Society
* Scots Language Centre
* Scots at Omniglot
* a phonetic description of Scottish Language and Dialects at Dictionary of the Scots Language
* &quot;Words Without Borders&quot; Peter Constantine: Scots: The Auld an Nobill Tung
* Scots in Schools

===Dictionaries and linguistic information===
* The Dictionary of the Scots Language
* Scottish Language Dictionaries Ltd.
* Scottish words – illustrated

===Collections of texts===
* – books, poems and texts in Scots
* Scots Threap
* Scottish Corpus of Texts &amp; Speech – Multimedia corpus of Scots and Scottish English
* BBC Voices, Scots section – The BBC Voices Project is a major, though informal, look at UK language and speech
* Scots Syntax Atlas</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="0" end="5" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329375" start="11" end="27" title="Variety (linguistics)" label="language variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329170" start="28" end="42" title="Anglic languages" label="descended from"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="43" end="63" title="Early Middle English" label="Early Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q26721" start="71" end="100" title="West Germanic language" label="West Germanic language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q654252" start="130" end="147" title="Scottish Lowlands" label="Scottish Lowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058774" start="153" end="167" title="Northern Isles" label="Northern Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="171" end="179" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="194" end="200" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="204" end="211" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384" start="229" end="236" title="dialect" label="dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q201966" start="249" end="261" title="Ulster Scots dialect" label="Ulster Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="288" end="301" title="Scots language" label="Lowland Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="326" end="341" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="347" end="362" title="Celtic language" label="Celtic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="411" end="429" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Scottish Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q123377" start="435" end="443" title="Hebrides" label="Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342092" start="449" end="457" title="Galloway" label="Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="490" end="501" title="Scots language" label="Broad Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553250" start="526" end="551" title="Scottish Standard English" label="Scottish Standard English"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888858" start="553" end="565" title="Modern Scots" label="Modern Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722642" start="571" end="586" title="sister language" label="sister language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649537" start="590" end="604" title="Modern English" label="Modern English"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="716" end="724" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="825" end="831" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384" start="983" end="1010" title="Language or dialect" label="criteria for distinguishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384" start="1029" end="1036" title="dialect" label="dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="1185" end="1192" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q215844" start="1362" end="1382" title="Dialect continuum" label="linguistic continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553250" start="1389" end="1414" title="Scottish English" label="Scottish Standard English"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="1599" end="1608" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="1648" end="1654" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036511" start="1715" end="1725" title="vernacular" label="vernacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245019" start="1809" end="1814" title="Doric dialect (Scotland)" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435497" start="1866" end="1872" title="Scotch (adjective)" label="Scotch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197377" start="1955" end="1962" title="Lallans" label="Lallans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888858" start="1987" end="1999" title="Modern Scots" label="Modern Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097949" start="2073" end="2086" title="Literary language" label="literary form"/>
<link wikidata="Q201966" start="2137" end="2149" title="Ulster Scots dialects" label="Ulster-Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q130989" start="2212" end="2221" title="neologism" label="neologism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326738" start="2311" end="2322" title="Early Scots" label="Older Scots"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2418" end="2427" title="Germanic umlaut#I-mutation in Old English" label="i-mutated"/>
<link wikidata="Q56433" start="2609" end="2615" title="Gaelic language" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q647150" start="3060" end="3074" title="William Dunbar" label="William Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q389096" start="3141" end="3154" title="Gavin Douglas" label="Gavin Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="3248" end="3263" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798915" start="3279" end="3303" title="Northumbrian Old English" label="Northumbrian Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421" start="3376" end="3387" title="River Forth" label="River Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="3442" end="3453" title="Anglo-Saxon" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299" start="3465" end="3476" title="Northumbria" label="Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q642024" start="3552" end="3559" title="Lothian" label="Lothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q211113" start="3568" end="3584" title="Scottish Borders" label="Scottish Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="3608" end="3627" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Kingdom of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q339271" start="4020" end="4043" title="Danelaw" label="Scandinavian-influenced"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788657" start="4044" end="4049" title="Northern England" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q850235" start="4054" end="4062" title="Midlands" label="Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="4066" end="4073" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q254978" start="4117" end="4122" title="burgh" label="burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q778873" start="4243" end="4248" title="Koiné language" label="koine"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="4419" end="4435" title="Romance language" label="Romance language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247932" start="4441" end="4455" title="Ecclesiastical Latin" label="ecclesiastical"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="4466" end="4471" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33850" start="4473" end="4486" title="Norman French" label="Norman French"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083196" start="4498" end="4513" title="Parisian French" label="Parisian French"/>
<link wikidata="Q771662" start="4526" end="4539" title="Auld Alliance" label="Auld Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="4566" end="4571" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q505674" start="4576" end="4593" title="Middle Low German" label="Middle Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="4648" end="4661" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q36116" start="4761" end="4773" title="Middle Irish" label="Middle Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="4837" end="4852" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150334" start="4924" end="4931" title="cèilidh" label="cèilidh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172903" start="4945" end="4949" title="loch" label="loch"/>
<link wikidata="Q281" start="4963" end="4969" title="whisky" label="whisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976531" start="4983" end="4987" title="glen" label="glen"/>
<link wikidata="Q499247" start="5004" end="5008" title="Scottish clan" label="clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35965" start="5016" end="5023" title="Cumbric" label="Cumbric"/>
<link wikidata="Q856383" start="5028" end="5035" title="Pictish" label="Pictish"/>
<link wikidata="Q156877" start="5050" end="5069" title="Brittonic languages" label="Brittonic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326738" start="5272" end="5283" title="Early Scots" label="Early Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q254978" start="5330" end="5335" title="burgh" label="burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q216787" start="5400" end="5407" title="David I of Scotland" label="David I"/>
<link wikidata="Q919978" start="5534" end="5550" title="prestige dialect" label="prestige dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327000" start="5606" end="5618" title="Middle Scots" label="Middle Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q393046" start="5754" end="5774" title="Plantation of Ulster" label="Plantation of Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888858" start="5965" end="5977" title="Modern Scots" label="Modern Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q960207" start="6073" end="6083" title="JAH Murray" label="JAH Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q621776" start="6231" end="6251" title="Alexander John Ellis" label="Alexander John Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q116457341" start="6264" end="6302" title="On Early English Pronunciation, Part V" label="On Early English Pronunciation, Part V"/>
<link wikidata="Q85776767" start="6532" end="6561" title="Linguistic Survey of Scotland" label="Linguistic Survey of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q160302" start="6575" end="6598" title="University of Edinburgh" label="University of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869438" start="6702" end="6725" title="Atlas Linguarum Europae" label="Atlas Linguarum Europae"/>
<link wikidata="Q14437894" start="6930" end="6946" title="Standard English" label="Standard English"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009175" start="7042" end="7056" title="William Flower (officer of arms)" label="William Flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093592" start="7061" end="7075" title="Chester Herald" label="English herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q229846" start="7088" end="7101" title="Mary of Guise" label="Mary of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="7233" end="7241" title="James VI and I" label="James VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="7262" end="7280" title="James I of England" label="James I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559483" start="7309" end="7379" title="Some Reulis and Cautelis to Be Observit and Eschewit in Scottis Poesie" label="Some Reulis and Cautelis to Be Observit and Eschewit in Scottis Poesie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="7702" end="7720" title="Parliament of England" label="English Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532351" start="7814" end="7824" title="Protestantism in Scotland" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="7825" end="7843" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q623398" start="7861" end="7890" title="Authorized King James Version" label="Authorized King James Version"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="7923" end="7941" title="Acts of Union 1707" label="Acts of Union 1707"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="7986" end="8010" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="8028" end="8055" title="Parliament of Great Britain" label="Parliament of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="8299" end="8309" title="David Hume" label="David Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054286" start="8333" end="8349" title="North Britain" label="Northern British"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8620" end="8636" title="Frederick Albert Pottle" label="Frederick Pottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q335060" start="8674" end="8687" title="James Boswell" label="James Boswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718398" start="8763" end="8780" title="Alexander Boswell (judge)" label="Alexander Boswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146745" start="8851" end="8877" title="College of Justice" label="Supreme Courts of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063038" start="8921" end="8943" title="Scottish Enlightenment" label="Scottish Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="8973" end="8983" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525567" start="9173" end="9188" title="Thomas Sheridan (actor)" label="Thomas Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255221" start="9239" end="9248" title="elocution" label="elocution"/>
<link wikidata="Q918094" start="9261" end="9267" title="Guinea (British coin)" label="guinea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9365" end="9372" title=":wikt:freeman" label="freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="9388" end="9397" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553250" start="9621" end="9646" title="Scottish English" label="Scottish Standard English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097949" start="9823" end="9840" title="literary language" label="literary language"/>
<link wikidata="Q81960" start="9891" end="9903" title="Robert Burns" label="Robert Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378230" start="9999" end="10025" title="English Dialect Dictionary" label="English Dialect Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q329817" start="10037" end="10050" title="Joseph Wright (linguist)" label="Joseph Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340891" start="10630" end="10659" title="Scottish Education Department" label="Scottish Education Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q334451" start="10667" end="10682" title="language policy" label="language policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q387080" start="11013" end="11031" title="language attrition" label="language attrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="11270" end="11286" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q266961" start="11337" end="11351" title="language shift" label="language shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q524648" start="11384" end="11390" title="Language change" label="change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774741" start="11392" end="11403" title="Language convergence" label="convergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q33694" start="11407" end="11413" title="Language merger" label="merger"/>
<link wikidata="Q253756" start="11486" end="11500" title="language death" label="language death"/>
<link wikidata="Q654252" start="11514" end="11530" title="Scottish Lowlands" label="Lowland Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="11595" end="11614" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q49908" start="11741" end="11762" title="representative sample" label="representative sample"/>
<link wikidata="Q682403" start="12065" end="12085" title="Treaty of Union 1707" label="Treaty of Union 1707"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722642" start="12230" end="12245" title="sister language" label="sister language"/>
<link wikidata="Q250858" start="12256" end="12268" title="pluricentric language" label="pluricentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q641404" start="12269" end="12278" title="diasystem" label="diasystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q27902" start="12379" end="12392" title="abstand and ausbau languages" label="and languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553250" start="12525" end="12550" title="Scottish English" label="Scottish Standard English"/>
<link wikidata="Q59203" start="12570" end="12579" title="diglossia" label="diglossic"/>
<link wikidata="Q255615" start="12599" end="12610" title="code-switching" label="code-switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q770220" start="13044" end="13061" title="regional language" label="regional language"/>
<link wikidata="Q106308" start="13102" end="13153" title="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages" label="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q43091" start="13292" end="13316" title="orthography" label="orthographic conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650523" start="13372" end="13394" title="Parliament of Scotland" label="Parliament of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195140" start="13763" end="13773" title="Curriculum for Excellence" label="curriculum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807178" start="13870" end="13876" title="Medium of instruction" label="medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413375" start="14662" end="14682" title="Open University" label="Open University (OU)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340921" start="14778" end="14796" title="Education Scotland" label="Education Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14883" end="14903" title="United Kingdom Census 2011#2011 Census for Scotland" label="2011 Scottish census"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="14991" end="15010" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="15288" end="15307" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="15576" end="15593" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="15608" end="15621" title="UK Government" label="UK Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016833" start="15911" end="15922" title="Burns supper" label="Burns Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q131539" start="16200" end="16223" title="children&amp;#x27;s fiction" label="children&amp;#x27;s fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q775917" start="16245" end="16257" title="The Gruffalo" label="The Gruffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8337" start="16271" end="16283" title="Harry Potter" label="Harry Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339580" start="16297" end="16317" title="Diary of a Wimpy Kid" label="Diary of a Wimpy Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161" start="16340" end="16350" title="Roald Dahl" label="Roald Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q359665" start="16355" end="16369" title="David Walliams" label="David Walliams"/>
<link wikidata="Q689141" start="16408" end="16415" title="Spotify" label="Spotify"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="16465" end="16467" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q654252" start="16713" end="16730" title="Scottish Lowlands" label="Scottish Lowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058774" start="16736" end="16750" title="Northern Isles" label="Northern Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q864668" start="16752" end="16761" title="Caithness" label="Caithness"/>
<link wikidata="Q211873" start="16763" end="16768" title="Isle of Arran" label="Arran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012490" start="16773" end="16784" title="Campbeltown" label="Campbeltown"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="16789" end="16795" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q202156" start="16810" end="16818" title="Provinces of Ireland" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="16822" end="16829" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q96402201" start="16880" end="16897" title="Robert John Gregg" label="Robert John Gregg"/>
<link wikidata="Q179872" start="16913" end="16921" title="Counties of Ireland" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q190684" start="16925" end="16929" title="County Down" label="Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q189592" start="16931" end="16937" title="County Antrim" label="Antrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q192208" start="16939" end="16950" title="County Londonderry" label="Londonderry"/>
<link wikidata="Q179424" start="16955" end="16962" title="County Donegal" label="Donegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432599" start="16995" end="17004" title="Inishowen" label="Inishowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022710" start="17026" end="17033" title="Fintona" label="Fintona"/>
<link wikidata="Q85776767" start="17253" end="17282" title="Linguistic Survey of Scotland" label="Linguistic Survey of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919205" start="17310" end="17323" title="Insular Scots" label="Insular Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q16928150" start="17325" end="17339" title="Northern Scots" label="Northern Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061810" start="17341" end="17354" title="Central Scots" label="Central Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570457" start="17356" end="17370" title="Southern Scots" label="Southern Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q201966" start="17375" end="17387" title="Ulster Scots dialects" label="Ulster Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q609443" start="17644" end="17667" title="United Kingdom Census 2001" label="2001 UK National Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532146" start="17725" end="17761" title="General Register Office for Scotland" label="General Register Office for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q270532" start="18133" end="18155" title="University of Aberdeen" label="University of Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q270532" start="18456" end="18478" title="University of Aberdeen" label="University of Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="19802" end="19821" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="19992" end="20006" title="2011 UK census" label="2011 UK census"/>
<link wikidata="Q192896" start="20864" end="20872" title="Carlisle, Cumbria" label="Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q994925" start="20957" end="20962" title="Corby" label="Corby"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="20993" end="20997" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="21036" end="21055" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699264" start="21321" end="21340" title="John Barbour (poet)" label="John Barbour&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538072" start="21380" end="21387" title="Wyntoun" label="Wyntoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984048" start="21420" end="21431" title="Blind Harry" label="Blind Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712294" start="21445" end="21456" title="The Actes and Deidis of the Illustre and Vallyeant Campioun Schir William Wallace" label="The Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="21574" end="21598" title="University of St Andrews" label="University of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q428771" start="21631" end="21646" title="Robert Henryson" label="Robert Henryson"/>
<link wikidata="Q647150" start="21648" end="21662" title="William Dunbar" label="William Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q389096" start="21664" end="21677" title="Gavin Douglas" label="Gavin Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q723850" start="21682" end="21695" title="David Lyndsay" label="David Lyndsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727088" start="21703" end="21728" title="The Complaynt of Scotland" label="The Complaynt of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376714" start="21781" end="21788" title="Eneados" label="Eneados"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327000" start="21800" end="21812" title="Middle Scots" label="Middle Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="21828" end="21834" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="21848" end="21854" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q182659" start="21985" end="21991" title="ballad" label="ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910735" start="22002" end="22009" title="Border ballads" label="borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349681" start="22075" end="22089" title="Robert Sempill the elder" label="Robert Sempill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349683" start="22091" end="22117" title="Robert Sempill the younger" label="Robert Sempill the younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482433" start="22119" end="22134" title="Francis Sempill" label="Francis Sempill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362226" start="22136" end="22148" title="Lady Wardlaw" label="Lady Wardlaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470210" start="22153" end="22172" title="Lady Grizel Baillie" label="Lady Grizel Baillie"/>
<link wikidata="Q654775" start="22218" end="22230" title="Allan Ramsay (poet)" label="Allan Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q81960" start="22232" end="22244" title="Robert Burns" label="Robert Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q6140657" start="22246" end="22255" title="James Orr (poet)" label="James Orr"/>
<link wikidata="Q981990" start="22257" end="22273" title="Robert Fergusson" label="Robert Fergusson"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="22278" end="22290" title="Walter Scott" label="Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q211939" start="22335" end="22349" title="Auld Lang Syne" label="Auld Lang Syne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512" start="22464" end="22486" title="Robert Louis Stevenson" label="Robert Louis Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q368519" start="22507" end="22523" title="George MacDonald" label="George MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q81796" start="22525" end="22537" title="J. M. Barrie" label="J. M. Barrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326476" start="22563" end="22578" title="Kailyard school" label="Kailyard school"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982168" start="22584" end="22596" title="Ian Maclaren" label="Ian Maclaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="22649" end="22662" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783150" start="22824" end="22835" title="Scottish Renaissance" label="renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q981981" start="22894" end="22909" title="Hugh MacDiarmid" label="Hugh MacDiarmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656606" start="22937" end="22969" title="A Drunk Man Looks at the Thistle" label="A Drunk Man Looks at the Thistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302141" start="23071" end="23084" title="Douglas Young (classicist)" label="Douglas Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q333004" start="23086" end="23097" title="John Buchan, 1st Baron Tweedsmuir" label="John Buchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659945" start="23099" end="23119" title="Sydney Goodsir Smith" label="Sydney Goodsir Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157241" start="23121" end="23135" title="Robert Garioch" label="Robert Garioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338491" start="23137" end="23157" title="Edith Anne Robertson" label="Edith Anne Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347569" start="23162" end="23177" title="Robert McLellan" label="Robert McLellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q793283" start="23247" end="23255" title="Ayrshire" label="Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4831611" start="23301" end="23312" title="Ayr Academy" label="Ayr Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q654216" start="23355" end="23358" title="Ayr" label="Ayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123037" start="23504" end="23517" title="nursery rhyme" label="nursery rhyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544299" start="23633" end="23647" title="Alexander Gray (poet)" label="Alexander Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014702" start="23773" end="23797" title="William Laughton Lorimer" label="William Laughton Lorimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="23824" end="23837" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q11279562" start="23975" end="23988" title="Trainspotting (novel)" label="Trainspotting"/>
<link wikidata="Q178403" start="23998" end="24010" title="Irvine Welsh" label="Irvine Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q109135" start="24030" end="24061" title="Trainspotting (film)" label="motion picture of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002301" start="24071" end="24098" title="But&amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27;Ben A-Go-Go" label="But&amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27;Ben A-Go-Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790498" start="24108" end="24120" title="Matthew Fitt" label="Matthew Fitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q174526" start="24126" end="24135" title="cyberpunk" label="cyberpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q130989" start="24280" end="24289" title="neologism" label="neologism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059358" start="24303" end="24327" title="Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam" label="Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q16193931" start="24363" end="24373" title="Rab Wilson" label="Rab Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q163079" start="24446" end="24454" title="Catullus" label="Catullus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6660222" start="24485" end="24497" title="Liz Lochhead" label="Liz Lochhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q205875" start="24536" end="24544" title="Tartuffe" label="Tartuffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q687" start="24554" end="24561" title="Molière" label="Molière"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106185" start="24563" end="24575" title="J. K. Annand" label="J. K. Annand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="24622" end="24636" title="Medieval Latin" label="Medieval Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095403" start="24675" end="24685" title="Oor Wullie" label="Oor Wullie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309475" start="24702" end="24712" title="The Broons" label="The Broons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767384" start="24732" end="24743" title="Sunday Post" label="Sunday Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q8337" start="24867" end="24879" title="Harry Potter" label="Harry Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q43361" start="24892" end="24937" title="Harry Potter and the Philosopher&amp;#x27;s Stone" label="Harry Potter and the Philosopher&amp;#x27;s Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790498" start="24962" end="24974" title="Matthew Fitt" label="Matthew Fitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110362" start="25040" end="25052" title="Vowel length" label="Vowel length"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746246" start="25083" end="25109" title="Scottish vowel length rule" label="Scottish vowel length rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q43091" start="25151" end="25162" title="orthography" label="orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326738" start="25166" end="25177" title="Early Scots" label="Early Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732400" start="25266" end="25285" title="Union of the Crowns" label="Union of the Crowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q14437894" start="25299" end="25315" title="Standard English" label="Standard English"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="25478" end="25491" title="Acts of Union 1707" label="Acts of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553250" start="25513" end="25546" title="Scottish English" label="Scottish form of Standard English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097949" start="25666" end="25683" title="literary language" label="literary language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780424" start="26022" end="26043" title="apologetic apostrophe" label="apologetic apostrophe"/>
<link wikidata="Q38035" start="26073" end="26082" title="consonant" label="consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="26114" end="26121" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q623398" start="26191" end="26207" title="Authorized King James Version" label="King James Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821020" start="26268" end="26291" title="Augustan literature" label="Augustan English poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081168" start="26888" end="26902" title="Charles Murray (poet)" label="Charles Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q18527552" start="26904" end="26918" title="David Herbison" label="David Herbison"/>
<link wikidata="Q941810" start="26931" end="26941" title="James Hogg" label="James Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014247" start="26946" end="26961" title="William Laidlaw (poet)" label="William Laidlaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699662" start="27399" end="27411" title="John Corbett (writer)" label="John Corbett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780424" start="27704" end="27725" title="apologetic apostrophe" label="apologetic apostrophe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699264" start="27930" end="27937" title="John Barbour (poet)" label="Barbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="27954" end="27961" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q651641" start="28385" end="28404" title="subject–verb–object" label="subject–verb–object"/>
<link wikidata="Q14437894" start="28429" end="28445" title="Standard English" label="Standard English"/>
<link wikidata="Q103184" start="28548" end="28566" title="indefinite article" label="indefinite article"/>
<link wikidata="Q103184" start="28632" end="28648" title="definite article" label="definite article"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105891" start="28872" end="28890" title="possessive pronoun" label="possessive pronoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q146786" start="28922" end="28928" title="plural" label="plural"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="29088" end="29099" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="29277" end="29281" title="Noun" label="Noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050744" start="29343" end="29359" title="relative pronoun" label="relative pronoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q650250" start="29420" end="29426" title="elided" label="elided"/>
<link wikidata="Q192613" start="29665" end="29678" title="present tense" label="present tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905" start="29682" end="29686" title="verb" label="verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059292" start="29703" end="29724" title="Northern subject rule" label="Northern subject rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q113627710" start="29876" end="29889" title="Progressive tense" label="progressively"/>
<link wikidata="Q3734650" start="29945" end="29961" title="adverbial phrase" label="adverbial phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q4129241" start="29989" end="29995" title="Germanic strong verb" label="strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q55955536" start="29999" end="30008" title="Irregular verb" label="irregular"/>
<link wikidata="Q60655" start="30089" end="30093" title="Germanic weak verb" label="weak"/>
<link wikidata="Q55955536" start="30097" end="30104" title="Regular verb" label="regular"/>
<link wikidata="Q814722" start="30217" end="30235" title="present participle" label="present participle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923028" start="30240" end="30246" title="gerund" label="gerund"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745428" start="30364" end="30381" title="Negation (linguistics)" label="negative particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q380057" start="30496" end="30502" title="Adverb" label="Adverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q34698" start="30551" end="30560" title="adjective" label="adjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q35114" start="30888" end="30900" title="Bungi Creole" label="Bungi Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q262457" start="30917" end="30929" title="Metis people" label="Metis people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245019" start="30960" end="30984" title="Doric dialect (Scotland)" label="Doric dialect (Scotland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566979" start="30987" end="31001" title="Glasgow patter" label="Glasgow patter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912822" start="31004" end="31013" title="Billy Kay (writer)" label="Billy Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217446" start="31016" end="31047" title="Languages of the United Kingdom" label="Languages of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187301" start="31050" end="31079" title="Phonological history of Scots" label="Phonological history of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437588" start="31082" end="31092" title="Scotticism" label="Scotticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437675" start="31095" end="31130" title="Scottish Corpus of Texts and Speech" label="Scottish Corpus of Texts and Speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180995" start="31133" end="31152" title="Scottish literature" label="Scottish literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444686" start="31155" end="31170" title="Scots Wikipedia" label="Scots Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481891" start="31367" end="31399" title="Dictionary of the Scots Language" label="Dictionary of the Scots Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q131765" start="31781" end="31791" title="Multimedia" label="Multimedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q461183" start="31792" end="31798" title="text corpus" label="corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553250" start="31812" end="31828" title="Scottish English" label="Scottish English"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="63893" wikidata="Q6744828" url="?curid=63893" title="Maltese cat">
<text>A Maltese () cat is any whose fur is completely or primarily gray (often called &quot;blue&quot; by cat fanciers) and regardless of breed. &quot;Maltese&quot; is a coat-colour term, not a breed name.

==Description==
There is some evidence of a historical breed with such colouration that existed in Malta, which may have given rise to the use of the adjective in this context.

There are several cat breeds that always produce &quot;blue&quot; or gray fur, of whom the adjective may be used. These are the Russian Blue, the Chartreux and the Korat, none of which are associated with Malta. There are several other breeds that often produce blues such as the British Shorthair. The blue variant of this breed was so common that some thought it was its own breed called the &quot;British Blue&quot;.

Regardless of breed, any cat with solid gray coloration has two pairs of double-recessive genes for the non-agouti and color-dilution traits, and so an exclusive mating between two solid gray cats should always produce solid gray kittens.

==Cultural references==
In literature, &quot;The Maltese Cat&quot; is the title of a 1895 short story (in the collection &quot;The Day&#x27;s Work&quot;) by Rudyard Kipling. The story is about a polo match set in British colonial India, told from the point of view of one of the ponies, a gray named the Maltese Cat.

Patrick Leigh Fermor alludes to this usage in 1986&#x27;s &quot;Between the Woods and the Water&quot; where, after a game of bicycle polo at a country house on the Great Hungarian Plain, he refers to the bicycles as &quot;Maltese Cats&quot;: &quot;The other side won but we scored four goals, and when the iron Maltese Cats were back in their stands, we limped back to the steps, where Countess Denise and ... had been leaning on the balustrade like ladies gazing down into the lists.&quot;

O. Henry alludes to a Maltese cat in his 1908 story A Lickpenny Lover as being &quot;secretive and wary&quot; when he compares the protagonist - an 18 year old girl Masie - to it.

A Maltese cat comes into the kitchen where main character Jim Burden is taking a bath on his first day at his grandparents&#x27; Nebraska farm in Willa Cather&#x27;s 1918 novel &quot;My Ántonia&quot;.

==See also==
* Cat coat genetics

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6744828" start="2" end="9" title="Maltese cat" label="Maltese"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="13" end="16" title="cat" label="cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q197204" start="30" end="33" title="fur" label="fur"/>
<link wikidata="Q60793147" start="100" end="112" title="Cat fancy" label="cat fanciers"/>
<link wikidata="Q42707" start="132" end="137" title="cat breed" label="breed"/>
<link wikidata="Q193896" start="300" end="305" title="Malta Island" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q42654" start="507" end="519" title="Russian Blue" label="Russian Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q42588" start="525" end="534" title="Chartreux" label="Chartreux"/>
<link wikidata="Q42691" start="543" end="548" title="Korat" label="Korat"/>
<link wikidata="Q29273" start="659" end="676" title="British Shorthair" label="British Shorthair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404066" start="860" end="895" title="cat coat genetics" label="two pairs of double-recessive genes"/>
<link wikidata="Q49084" start="1130" end="1141" title="short story" label="short story"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729141" start="1167" end="1186" title="The Day&amp;#x27;s Work" label="The Day&amp;#x27;s Work"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="1197" end="1212" title="Rudyard Kipling" label="Rudyard Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q134211" start="1235" end="1239" title="polo" label="polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="1253" end="1275" title="British Raj" label="British colonial India"/>
<link wikidata="Q700616" start="1358" end="1378" title="Patrick Leigh Fermor" label="Patrick Leigh Fermor"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002281" start="1422" end="1453" title="Between the Woods and the Water" label="Between the Woods and the Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q83857" start="1522" end="1543" title="Great Hungarian Plain" label="Great Hungarian Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q172788" start="1850" end="1858" title="O. Henry" label="O. Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q114000146" start="1902" end="1919" title="A Lickpenny Lover" label="A Lickpenny Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q229480" start="2177" end="2189" title="Willa Cather" label="Willa Cather"/>
<link wikidata="Q2776448" start="2214" end="2224" title="My Ántonia" label="My Ántonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404066" start="2248" end="2265" title="Cat coat genetics" label="Cat coat genetics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="63895" wikidata="Q2166017" url="?curid=63895" title="York Chocolate">
<text>The York Chocolate (or simply York) is an uncommon American breed of show cat, with a long, fluffy coat and a tapered tail and most of them were mostly or entirely chocolate-brown or the dilute form of brown, known as lavender. The breed was named after New York state, where it was established in 1983. This breed was created by color-selecting domestic long-haired cats of mixed ancestry. The breed is not widely recognized by cat registries. It is not recognized by the major organizations such as The International Cat Association (TICA), the Cat Fanciers&#x27; Association (CFA – North America) or Fédération Internationale Féline (FIFe - Europe). 

As “Il Gatto Cioccolato” it found favour in Italy and the International York Chocolate Federation (IYCF) was founded there in 2003. The IYCF claimed affiliation with the German Feline Federation Europe (FFE)/Bavarian Cat Fanciers&#x27; Association (BCFA), which published a standard (minus colour information) in 2004. It also claimed affiliation with the Russian World Felinological Federation (WFF), although the latter does not recognize the York Chocolate as breed.

==History==
The breed was created by Janet Chiefari in 1983. The father was a black longhaired cat and the mother was a longhaired black and white cat. Their Siamese ancestors created the brown coloring in one kitten: Brownie. Brownie had a litter that subsequent summer with a black longhaired tom. There were two kittens in the litter: a chocolate male and a white and chocolate female. Upon noticing similarities in coat and body types, Chiefari began her own breeding program.

The breed is recognized, under the shorter name York, by the recently founded World Cat Federation based in Germany, and with some differences from previously published standards, most of which seem to be lost. The breed is not recognized by any major, long-established international cat fancier organizations, such as The International Cat Association (TICA), the Cat Fanciers&#x27; Association (CFA) or Fédération Internationale Féline (FIFe), nor even US national groups such as the American Cat Fanciers Association (ACFA). In March 1990, the Cat Fanciers&#x27; Federation of the New England area of the US recognized York Chocolates as an &quot;experimental&quot; cat breed, and allegedly gave it championship status within the group in March 1992, but publishes no breed standard or any other information about the breed today. It was supposedly granted champion status by the Canadian Cat Association in March 1995, as well, but while the CCA published a breed standard in 1995, , the organization no longer advertises it, and it includes outdated wording.

A small breed club, the International York Chocolate Federation (IYCF) was founded in Italy, but seems to have been dormant since 2004. It claims affiliation with Feline Federation Europe (FFE), which since 2004 publishes a York Chocolate standard (missing the color information) and the World Felinological Federation (WFF), a Russian group, which does not recognize this breed.

==References==

==External links==
*YorkChocolate.org, a website devoted to the breed
*York Chocolate with early pedigree and history.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2166017" start="4" end="18" title="York Chocolate" label="York Chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166017" start="30" end="34" title="York Chocolate" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="51" end="59" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q42707" start="60" end="65" title="Cat breeds" label="breed"/>
<link wikidata="Q16321439" start="69" end="77" title="show cat" label="show cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="254" end="262" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q126478118" start="346" end="370" title="domestic long-haired cat" label="domestic long-haired cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051107" start="429" end="443" title="Cat registry" label="cat registries"/>
<link wikidata="Q42604" start="1284" end="1291" title="Siamese (cat)" label="Siamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q42713" start="1686" end="1706" title="World Cat Federation" label="World Cat Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q60793147" start="1892" end="1903" title="Cat fancy" label="cat fancier"/>
<link wikidata="Q42709" start="1927" end="1960" title="The International Cat Association" label="The International Cat Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050099" start="1973" end="2003" title="Cat Fanciers&amp;#x27; Association" label="Cat Fanciers&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q42584" start="2013" end="2045" title="Fédération Internationale Féline" label="Fédération Internationale Féline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842862" start="2094" end="2127" title="American Cat Fanciers Association" label="American Cat Fanciers Association"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2155" end="2184" title="Cat Fanciers&amp;#x27; Federation" label="Cat Fanciers&amp;#x27; Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="2192" end="2203" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867786" start="2491" end="2515" title="Canadian Cat Association" label="Canadian Cat Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000059" start="2681" end="2691" title="breed club" label="breed club"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2836" end="2860" title="Feline Federation Europe" label="Feline Federation Europe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2961" end="2991" title="World Felinological Federation" label="World Felinological Federation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="63896" wikidata="Q2901647" url="?curid=63896" title="Bicolor cat">
<text>A bicolor cat (also bi-color cat or Tuxedo Cat) is a cat with white fur combined with fur of some other color, for example, solid black, tabby, or colorpointed. There are various patterns of a bicolor cat. The coat patterns range from the Van-patterned, which has color on the tail and crown of the head, to a solid color with a throat locket or medallion. Bicolor coats are found in many cat breeds and are in domestic longhair and domestic shorthair cats.

Tuxedo cats have a low-to-medium grade white spotting limited to the face, paws, throat, and chest of an otherwise black cat. This nickname is used in the United States. Van-patterned cats have high-grade bicolor, which is typical for the Turkish Van breed. There are many patterns, such as &quot;cap-and-saddle&quot;, &quot;mask-and-mantle&quot; and &quot;harlequin&quot; (also known as &quot;magpie&quot;).

Solid-color bicolor cats occur because there is a white spotting gene present with a recessive allele of the agouti gene. The agouti gene evens out the striped pattern within coat colors. In contrast, &quot;tabby&quot; cats have an agouti gene that produces striping of the coat. The Abyssinian has agouti (ticked tabby) fur, giving the appearance of even color with color-banded hairs.

==Bicolor patterns==

Bicoloration in cats is graded from one to ten; with one being completely colored, and ten being completely white. There are also several patterns with their own names.

=== Van pattern ===

Van-patterned cats are bicolor cats, they are mostly white (generally more than 75% white). They have color around their ears and tail, separated by white coloring. They may have small (roughly coin sized) colored spots on and around their spine. The term &quot;Van pattern&quot; comes from the Turkish Van (named after Lake Van), which is a Van-patterned bicolor breed. The Van pattern is known to animal geneticists as the Seychelles (Seychellois) pattern and is classified into three variants:
* &quot;Seychellois Neuvieme&quot; is white with colored tail and head splashes (classic Turkish Van pattern)
* &quot;Seychellois Huitieme&quot; is white with colored tail and head splashes plus additional splashes of color on the legs
* &quot;Seychellois Septieme&quot; is white with splashes of color on the legs and body in addition to those on the head and the colored tail

This pattern type has high-grade white spotting. The coat pattern ranges from seven to nine on the Bicolor grade chart.

=== Harlequin patterned ===
Another type of color-and-white cat is the harlequin patterned bicolor cat. This coat pattern is sometimes referred to as a &quot;cow cat,&quot; &quot;moo cat,&quot; or &quot;magpie&quot; and includes the &quot;cap-and-saddle&quot; and &quot;mask-and-mantle&quot; patterns. The harlequin patterned coat is predominantly white (generally 50%-75% white) combined with colored markings on the cat’s body, including its head and tail. The coat does not have the solid colored &quot;jacket&quot; like the tuxedo coat. Harlequin patterns have multiple, conjoined, or larger spots on the body and/or an extended head spot that reaches the face. Harlequin coats have large colored patches over a white body, with a colored mask over the head. Harlequin cats can be called &quot;Black-mask cats&quot; because they look like they are wearing a black mask over their heads.

=== True bicolor pattern ===

The cat labelled &quot;bicolor&quot; or &quot;true bicolor&quot; is the preferred pattern in show-quality bicolor purebred cats. Bicolor patterned cats have medium grade white spotting (generally approximately 50%-25% white). The cat registry Fédération Internationale Féline (FIFe) states that for a &quot;standard&quot; bicolor coat to compete in shows, &quot;the color patches must be separated from each other, even in color and harmoniously distributed.&quot; They also state &quot;at least should be colored, but not more than ; the rest is white.&quot; The World Cat Federation (WFC) allows an amount of color between up to for bicolor patterned cats. The Cat Fanciers&#x27; Association (CFA) says that &quot;cats with no more than a locket and/or button [patch on chest] do not qualify for this color class.&quot;

=== Tuxedo pattern ===

A tuxedo cat, Felix cat or Julius cat is a bicolor cat with low-grade white spotting (generally close to 25% white) in the coat. The term &quot;tuxedo cats&quot; is typically used for black-and-white colored cats, but tuxedo patterned cats come in all cat colors. They are called tuxedo cats due to the resemblance to black tie formal wear, commonly known in the United States and Canada as a tuxedo. 

To be considered a true tuxedo cat, the feline&#x27;s coloring should consist of a colored coat, with white fur limited to the paws, belly, chest, throat, and often the chin - sometimes the tail. Tuxedo cats can appear to have goatees due to the black coloration of their mandible, lower jaw, and chin. White muzzles or a white coloring on their faces are a common attribute of tuxedo cats. Most tuxedo cats are also &quot;black-mask cats&quot; with a complete white blaze, a common name for felines who, due to their facial coloration, look as if they are wearing a black mask over their eyes, and often over their entire head. The ideal color distribution is symmetric, and the white areas are of modest size and limited to the desirable areas.

In most cat registries, the tuxedo pattern is not an official term used to categorise white spotting patterns in show cats. The standard or code used to indicate the white markings in the Snowshoe cat breed is equal to the white spotting pattern known as &quot;tuxedo&quot; among tuxedo cat enthusiasts.

==Genetics of coat patterns==
The basic colors and patterns of cat fur are defined by fewer than ten genes. Cats with white color in their coats are thought to have a mutant &quot;white-spotting&quot; gene that prevents the formation of coat color in patches over the cat&#x27;s body. This gene has been investigated in several species, particularly mice, and is co-dominant to normal coat color as it prevents the migration of melanocytes into the developing hair follicles. The genetics of this pattern are not as well understood in cats but at least some of the genes involved in melanocyte migration and survival may play a role similar as in other animals.

Three genotypes possible with the &quot;S&quot; (white spotting) gene, with capital &quot;S&quot; standing for a wild-type copy and lower-case &quot;s&quot; standing for the mutant.

* SS (two dominant alleles) results in high grades of white spotting (sometimes resulting in a solid-looking white cat or a white cat with just a few color hairs)
* Ss (one dominant, one recessive allele) results in medium grades of white spotting
* ss (two recessive alleles) results in solid color or low grades of white spotting (sometimes as little as a few white hairs)

The lack of tabby striping in bicolor cats is controlled by the agouti protein, which inhibits the production of melanin and thus prevents the formation of dark hair colors. In agouti cats the gene is turned on and off as the hair grows, producing hairs with alternating stripes yellow and black. In domestic cats, inactivation of the agouti gene by a deletion mutation causes all-black coat color.

=== Bicolored cat breeds ===
The bicolor coat coloration is not restricted to a specific breed of cat, as it can be found in many different types of pure-breed as well as mixed-breed domestic cats. However, some breeds have bicolor coats in their breed standards. These include the Ragdoll, American Shorthair, Manx, British Shorthair, and Turkish Angora. The Turkish Van and Snowshoe cat breed are restricted to cats with bicolored coats.

In contrast, other common breeds of cat have specific coat patterns specified in their breed standards. Cats with such specific coat patterns include the Russian Blue, which has a coat of one solid color.

=== Possible bicolor colorations ===

White spotting is not limited to solid color-and-white combinations, and can also occur with any of the tabby patterns, resulting in tabby-and-white bicolor coats. colorpoint cats can have bicolor points (colorpoint-and-white), although this variation is not recognized for showing in some cat breeds. An example of a bicolor colorpoint cat breed is the tuxedo patterned colorpoint-and-white Snowshoe cat. The body markings of bicolor colorpoints become clearer with age, as the body fur of colorpoint cats darkens as the cats grow older and the white patches become more distinctively visible.

White spotting can also occur in combination with tortoiseshell coats, these are known as tricolor cats, tortoiseshell-and-white cats, or calico cats (US English). Tortoiseshell-and-white cats can also be found in combination with a tabby or colorpoint pattern.

Bicolor cats that are black and white are sometimes called &quot;magpies&quot;. The cream and white bicolor cat is the rarest of the bicolors, while the black and white or &quot;blue&quot; (grey) and white are the most common.
=== Skin coloration ===
Bicolor may also appear in the skin color. This feature may be seen in bicolored hairless cats. Paw pad coloration may be black, pink, or a mixture of both. Paw pad coloration may match the pattern of a cat&#x27;s coat that is nearby the paw. If the color boundary crosses the underside of the paw, the pads on either side may be different colors or even bicolored.

==In popular culture==

&quot;Jellicle cat&quot; is a tuxedo cat in the fictional tribe of nocturnal black and white cats described by T. S. Eliot in &quot;Old Possum&#x27;s Book of Practical Cats&quot;, which was first published in 1939. In the musical &quot;Cats&quot;, the character Mr. Mistoffelees is a tuxedo cat. Mr. Mistoffelees is a stage magician wearing a lacy ruff and bow tie. The character Bustopher Jones outfit consists of a tuxedo and spats. The musical differed from the book in that the characters included cats with many different coat colors, rather than just bicolor cats, but it retains the repeated assertion that &quot;Jellicle cats are black and white.&quot; Cats with these markings also played a starring role in the drawings illustrating &quot;The Unadulterated Cat&quot;, a book written by Terry Pratchett, with cartoons by Gray Jolliffe.
Other cartoon bicolor cats include Sylvester the Cat, Felix the Cat, Tom Cat from &quot;Tom and Jerry&quot;, Oggy from &quot;Oggy and the Cockroaches&quot;, Blackie the Cat from &quot;The Cat that Hated People&quot;, &quot;Ventriloquist Cat&quot;, Krazy Kat, Jess from &quot;Postman Pat&quot;, Kitty Softpaws from the &quot;Shrek&quot; spin-off &quot;Puss in Boots&quot; and its sequel, Disney&#x27;s Figaro, the Cat in the Hat from the Dr. Seuss book of the same name, Beans from Looney Tunes, Penelope Pussycat, Sebastian the cat from &quot;Josie and the Pussycats&quot;, and Chao from Osamu Tezuka&#x27;s Unico series. A bicolor cat named Mittens is one of the main characters in the 2008 Disney animated film &quot;Bolt&quot;. Aldwyn from &quot;The Familiars&quot; is a tuxedo cat, while Meowrice (voiced by Paul Frees) from &quot;Gay Purr-ee&quot; is a bicolor.

A tuxedo cat is also the protagonist of the popular children&#x27;s book &quot;Tip-Top Cat&quot;, and another is the giant Kat Kong in the children&#x27;s book of the same name. Bo, a character from the TV series &quot;Abby Hatcher&quot;, is a &quot;Fuzzly&quot; who resembles a tuxedo cat. Tuxedos are one of the ten breeds of cats in the video game &quot;Minecraft&quot;. Morgana, a playable character in the JRPG &quot;Persona 5&quot;, is a bicolor cat. Klonoa, the main character of the titular &quot;Klonoa&quot; games, closely resembles a tuxedo cat. Cait Sith, a playable character from the video game &quot;Final Fantasy VII&quot; is a tuxedo cat. Shade, one of the Cat Pack members and a character from &quot;Paw Patrol&quot;, is a tuxedo Turkish Van.

=== Notable bicolor cats ===

*Félicette, the first cat in space
*Palmerston, a black-and-white bicolor who was Chief Mouser of the U.K. Foreign &amp; Commonwealth Office, Whitehall, London, 2016–2020* 
*Socks Clinton (1989–2009), the pet cat of the family of former US President Bill Clinton

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2901647" start="2" end="13" title="Bicolor cat" label="bicolor cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901647" start="20" end="32" title="Bicolor cat" label="bi-color cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901647" start="36" end="46" title="Bicolor cat" label="Tuxedo Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="53" end="56" title="cat" label="cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q197204" start="68" end="71" title="fur" label="fur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474329" start="137" end="142" title="tabby" label="tabby"/>
<link wikidata="Q42643" start="147" end="159" title="Point coloration" label="colorpointed"/>
<link wikidata="Q42707" start="389" end="398" title="cat breed" label="cat breed"/>
<link wikidata="Q126478118" start="411" end="428" title="Domestic longhair cat" label="domestic longhair"/>
<link wikidata="Q126478118" start="433" end="455" title="domestic shorthair cat" label="domestic shorthair cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901647" start="459" end="470" title="Bicolor cat" label="Tuxedo cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q42724" start="698" end="709" title="Turkish Van" label="Turkish Van"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495957" start="853" end="859" title="magpie" label="magpie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404066" start="919" end="938" title="white spotting gene" label="white spotting gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q21102066" start="978" end="989" title="agouti gene" label="agouti gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955" start="1153" end="1163" title="Abyssinian (cat)" label="Abyssinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42724" start="1765" end="1776" title="Turkish Van" label="Turkish Van"/>
<link wikidata="Q126307" start="1790" end="1798" title="Lake Van" label="Lake Van"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042" start="1895" end="1905" title="Seychelles" label="Seychelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q161524" start="3210" end="3214" title="mask" label="mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q42584" start="3632" end="3664" title="Fédération Internationale Féline" label="Fédération Internationale Féline"/>
<link wikidata="Q42713" start="3953" end="3973" title="World Cat Federation" label="World Cat Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050099" start="4052" end="4082" title="Cat Fanciers&amp;#x27; Association" label="Cat Fanciers&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q692603" start="4250" end="4255" title="Felix the Cat" label="Felix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189833" start="4263" end="4269" title="Julius the Cat" label="Julius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668625" start="4554" end="4563" title="black tie" label="black tie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151364" start="4564" end="4575" title="formal wear" label="formal wear"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="4617" end="4623" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014570" start="4866" end="4872" title="goatee" label="goatee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16370" start="4911" end="4919" title="mandible" label="mandible"/>
<link wikidata="Q180284" start="4927" end="4930" title="jaw" label="jaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q82714" start="4936" end="4940" title="chin" label="chin"/>
<link wikidata="Q579565" start="5515" end="5523" title="Breed standard" label="standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q42633" start="5575" end="5583" title="Snowshoe cat" label="Snowshoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="6055" end="6066" title="Dominance relationship" label="co-dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q247101" start="6120" end="6130" title="melanocyte" label="melanocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q21102066" start="6978" end="6992" title="Agouti signalling peptide" label="agouti protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q187526" start="7027" end="7034" title="melanin" label="melanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q656732" start="7266" end="7283" title="Deletion (genetics)" label="deletion mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q42688" start="7596" end="7603" title="Ragdoll" label="Ragdoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962" start="7605" end="7623" title="American Shorthair" label="American Shorthair"/>
<link wikidata="Q42675" start="7625" end="7629" title="Manx (cat)" label="Manx"/>
<link wikidata="Q29273" start="7631" end="7648" title="British Shorthair" label="British Shorthair"/>
<link wikidata="Q42720" start="7654" end="7668" title="Turkish Angora" label="Turkish Angora"/>
<link wikidata="Q42724" start="7674" end="7685" title="Turkish Van" label="Turkish Van"/>
<link wikidata="Q42633" start="7690" end="7698" title="Snowshoe cat" label="Snowshoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q42654" start="7909" end="7921" title="Russian Blue" label="Russian Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474329" start="8103" end="8108" title="Tabby cat" label="tabby"/>
<link wikidata="Q42643" start="8163" end="8173" title="Point coloration" label="colorpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q42633" start="8391" end="8403" title="Snowshoe cat" label="Snowshoe cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305997" start="8685" end="8698" title="Tricolor cat" label="tricolor cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305997" start="8733" end="8744" title="Calico cat" label="calico cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q219588" start="9205" end="9208" title="Paw" label="Paw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3807845" start="9506" end="9518" title="Jellicle" label="Jellicle cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="9611" end="9622" title="T. S. Eliot" label="T. S. Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q671859" start="9632" end="9672" title="Old Possum&amp;#x27;s Book of Practical Cats" label="Old Possum&amp;#x27;s Book of Practical Cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q337097" start="9736" end="9740" title="Cats (musical)" label="Cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647969" start="9762" end="9778" title="Mr. Mistoffelees" label="Mr. Mistoffelees"/>
<link wikidata="Q148442" start="9818" end="9832" title="stage magician" label="stage magician"/>
<link wikidata="Q653053" start="9848" end="9852" title="Ruff (clothing)" label="ruff"/>
<link wikidata="Q14125" start="9857" end="9864" title="bow tie" label="bow tie"/>
<link wikidata="Q671859" start="9880" end="9895" title="Bustopher Jones" label="Bustopher Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q15249085" start="9928" end="9933" title="Spats (footwear)" label="spats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068643" start="10249" end="10270" title="The Unadulterated Cat" label="The Unadulterated Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q46248" start="10296" end="10311" title="Terry Pratchett" label="Terry Pratchett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598193" start="10330" end="10343" title="Gray Jolliffe" label="Gray Jolliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q10990037" start="10380" end="10397" title="Sylvester the Cat" label="Sylvester the Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q692603" start="10399" end="10412" title="Felix the Cat" label="Felix the Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839152" start="10414" end="10421" title="Tom Cat" label="Tom Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q131144" start="10433" end="10446" title="Tom and Jerry" label="Tom and Jerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q216843" start="10470" end="10494" title="Oggy and the Cockroaches" label="Oggy and the Cockroaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721637" start="10529" end="10554" title="The Cat that Hated People" label="The Cat that Hated People"/>
<link wikidata="Q4052642" start="10568" end="10585" title="Ventriloquist Cat" label="Ventriloquist Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q726731" start="10593" end="10602" title="Krazy Kat" label="Krazy Kat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143800" start="10620" end="10631" title="Postman Pat" label="Postman Pat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10639" end="10653" title="List of Shrek characters#Kitty Softpaws" label="Kitty Softpaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q483815" start="10669" end="10674" title="Shrek" label="Shrek"/>
<link wikidata="Q324262" start="10696" end="10709" title="Puss in Boots (2011 film)" label="Puss in Boots"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10720" end="10730" title="Puss in Boots: The Last Wish" label="its sequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4341553" start="10746" end="10752" title="Figaro (Disney)" label="Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q973053" start="10782" end="10813" title="The Cat in the Hat" label="Dr. Seuss book of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q3637169" start="10815" end="10820" title="Beans (Looney Tunes)" label="Beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162581" start="10840" end="10857" title="Penelope Pussycat" label="Penelope Pussycat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284299" start="10888" end="10911" title="Josie and the Pussycats (TV series)" label="Josie and the Pussycats"/>
<link wikidata="Q193300" start="10933" end="10945" title="Osamu Tezuka" label="Osamu Tezuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504585" start="10953" end="10965" title="Unico" label="Unico series"/>
<link wikidata="Q212792" start="11064" end="11068" title="Bolt (2008 film)" label="Bolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3986989" start="11094" end="11107" title="The Familiars (novel)" label="The Familiars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090544" start="11157" end="11167" title="Paul Frees" label="Paul Frees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962098" start="11180" end="11191" title="Gay Purr-ee" label="Gay Purr-ee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6374963" start="11336" end="11344" title="Kat Kong" label="Kat Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q39046819" start="11432" end="11444" title="Abby Hatcher" label="Abby Hatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q49740" start="11570" end="11579" title="Minecraft" label="Minecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q15225985" start="11635" end="11644" title="Persona 5" label="Persona 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367130" start="11718" end="11724" title="Klonoa" label="Klonoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q214232" start="11828" end="11845" title="Final Fantasy VII" label="Final Fantasy VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q15106029" start="11931" end="11941" title="Paw Patrol" label="Paw Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q42724" start="11961" end="11972" title="Turkish Van" label="Turkish Van"/>
<link wikidata="Q12165555" start="12006" end="12015" title="Félicette" label="Félicette"/>
<link wikidata="Q25171691" start="12041" end="12051" title="Palmerston (cat)" label="Palmerston"/>
<link wikidata="Q358834" start="12112" end="12145" title="Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office" label="Foreign &amp;amp; Commonwealth Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q214820" start="12147" end="12156" title="Whitehall" label="Whitehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371145" start="12179" end="12192" title="Socks (cat)" label="Socks Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q21026250" start="12225" end="12267" title="Clinton family" label="family of former US President Bill Clinton"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="63899" wikidata="Q184402" url="?curid=63899" title="Ayatollah">
<text>Ayatollah (, ; ; ) is an honorific title for high-ranking Twelver Shia clergy. it came into widespread usage in the 20th century. 

Originally used as a title bestowed by popular/clerical acclaim for a small number of the most distinguished &quot;marja&#x27; at-taqlid&quot; &quot;mujtahid&quot;, it suffered from &quot;inflation&quot; following the 1979 Iranian Revolution when it came to be used for &quot;any established mujtahid&quot;. By 2015 it was further expanded to include any student who had passed their Mujtahid final exam, leading to &quot;thousands&quot; of Ayatollahs.

The title is not used by the Sunni community of Iran.

In the Western world – especially after the Iranian Revolution – it was associated with Ruhollah Khomeini, who was so well known as to often be referred to as &quot;The Ayatollah&quot;.

==Etymology==
The title is originally derived from Arabic word pre-modified with the definite article and post-modified with the word &quot;Allah&quot;, making (). The combination has been translated to English as &#x27;Sign of God&#x27;, &#x27;Divine Sign&#x27; or &#x27;Reflection of God&#x27;. It is a frequently-used term in Quran, but its usage in this context is presumably a particular reference to the verse &quot;We shall show them Our signs on the horizons and in their own selves&quot;, while it has been also used to refer to The Twelve Imams by Shias.

Variants used are (), (, dual form) or (, plural form) and ().

==Qualifications==

Though no formal hierarchical structure exists among Shia clerics, a &quot;hierarchy of difference&quot; can be elaborated to describe the situation. Traditionally, the title Ayatollah was awarded by popular usage only to the very few highest ranking, prominent &quot;Mujtahid&quot;. Qualifications included 
*being a definite &quot;Mujtahid&quot;, 
*being regarded among peers as superior in &quot;aʿlamīyat&quot; () and 
*being superior in &#x27;riyāsat&quot; (), which is determined by popular acclamation, as well as collecting a huge amount of &quot;Khums&quot; (religious taxes). 
Consequently, by the 1960s a cleric addressed as an Ayatollah was expected to be a &quot;Marja&#x27;&quot;.

===Devaluation trend===
The title of Ayatollah (and other Iranian Shi&#x27;i titles) has been &quot;cheapened&quot; since then.

Roy Mottahedeh describes how the title of ayatollah was determined in the mid to late 20th century.

According to Michael M. J. Fischer, the Iranian Revolution led to &quot;rapid inflation of religious titles&quot;, so that almost every senior cleric began to be called an Ayatollah. raising the number of individuals who call themselves an Ayatollah dramatically.&lt;ref name=&quot;Momen205/206&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

An unwritten rule of addressing for Shia clerics has been developed after the 1980s as a result of Iranian Revolution, despite the fact no official institutional way of conferring titles is available. At first the title that had been reserved for a Marja&#x27;, was gradually applied to an established Mujtahid. With the post-revolutionary bureaucratization of Shia seminaries under the Islamic Republic, four levels of studies were introduced and those clerics who end the fourth level, also known as &quot;Dars-e-Kharej&quot; () and pass the final exam, were called Ayatollahs. Moojan Momen wrote in 2015 that every cleric who finished his training calls himself an Ayatollah and this trend has led to emergence of &quot;thousands of Ayatollahs&quot;.

This inflation led to invention of a new title, &quot;Ayatollah al-Uzma&quot; (). Originally, about half a dozen people were addressed as al-Uzma, but as of 2015, the number of people who claimed that title was reportedly over 50.

===Political connotations===

Another post-revolutionary change in what makes an ayatollah has been the falling away (at least in many important situations), of purely religious credentials and informal acclamation, and its replacement by political criteria.

Ali Khamenei—who was addressed with mid-level title of &quot;Hujjat al-Islam&quot; when he was in office as President of Iran—was bestowed the title Ayatollah immediately after he was elected Supreme Leader of Iran in 1989, without meeting regular unwritten criteria (such as authoring a &quot;Risalah&quot;). Since the 2010s, sources under government control tend to give him more distinguished titles like &quot;Grand Ayatollah&quot; and &quot;Imam&quot;.

Certain clerics, such as Mohammad Kazem Shariatmadari and Hussein-Ali Montazeri, who had fallen out of favor with the rulers were downgraded by not being addressed as an Ayatollah.

==Usage==
===Origins, early 20th century===
The earliest known address of this title is for Ibn Mutahhar Al-Hilli (died 1374), however it was not in use as a title for those qualifying until the 20th century. Glassé states that following domination of Twelver branch by followers of school and demise of school, the title was popularized by s as an attempt to promote their status. Mirza Ali Aqa Tabrizi was the first one to use the term for the sources of emulation in Najaf, especially Akhund Khurasani (1839–1911), to distinguish them from the clerics of lower rank in Tehran, during the 1905-1911 Persian Constitutional Revolution. (Mirza Sayyed Mohammad Tabatabai and Seyyed Abdollah Behbahani were also given that honorific by constitutionalists according to &quot;Loghatnameh Dehkhoda&quot;.)

Hamid Algar maintains that this title entered general usage possibly because it was an &quot;indirect result of the reform and strengthening of the religious institution in Qom&quot;. Abdul-Karim Haeri Yazdi (1859–1937) who founded Qom Seminary, may be the first to bear the title according to Algar.

While the title Ayatollah was sporadically used during the 1930s, it became widespread in the 1940s.

===Stages of contemporary titles for Shia clerics in Iran===
== Grand Ayatollah ==
Only a few of the most important ayatollahs are accorded the rank of Grand Ayatollah (&quot;Ayatollah Uzma&quot;, &quot;Great Sign of God&quot;). When an ayatollah gains a significant following and they are recognized for religiously correct views, they are considered a &quot;Marja&#x27;-e-Taqlid&quot;, which in common parlance is &quot;grand ayatollah&quot;. Usually as a prelude to such status, a &quot;mujtahid&quot; is asked to publish a juristic treatise in which he answers questions about the application of Islam to present-time daily affairs. &quot;Risalah&quot; is the word for treatise, and such a juristic work is called a &quot;risalah-yi&#x27;amaliyyah&quot; or &quot;practical law treatise&quot;, . A Grand Ayatollah is often seen as a spiritual guide and mentor to millions of Shia Muslims. Their influence extends beyond the mosque and into the social and political arenas. Unlike many religious leaders of other religions, a grand ayatollah is often involved in state affairs, especially in countries with large Shia populations such as Iran, Iraq, and Lebanon.

== Use of the term as a pejorative ==
In the West, particularly the United States, the term &quot;Ayatollah&quot; may be used as a pejorative to describe religious fundamentalism. Sam Miller of &quot;London Review of Books&quot; states that following the Iranian Revolution, &quot;ayatollah&quot; became common use; Miller described the pejorative version of the term as &quot;[evoking] evokes an old, turbaned, bearded man, sitting in judgment, looking like a crow and ordering the execution of the impure.&quot;

However, the term is generally used to describe any kind of fundamentalism, not just Islamism. For example, in the United States, former jurist and lawyer Roy Moore has been called the &quot;Ayatollah of Alabama&quot; by his critics due to espousing Christian nationalism, opposition to secularism, and far-right politics.

== See also ==

* &quot;Ulama&quot;
* &quot;Faqīh&quot;
* &quot;Allamah&quot;
* &quot;Mullah&quot;
* &quot;Akhoond&quot;
* &quot;Sheikh&quot;
* Clericalism in Iran
* List of current maraji
* &quot;Seghatoleslam&quot;
* Twelver Shia holy days

== Explanatory notes ==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== General and cited sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q184402" start="0" end="9" title="Ayatollah" label="Ayatollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320743" start="25" end="40" title="Title of honor" label="honorific title"/>
<link wikidata="Q269785" start="58" end="65" title="Twelver" label="Twelver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495966" start="66" end="77" title="Shia clergy" label="Shia clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19641" start="247" end="258" title="marja&amp;#x27;" label="marja&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q73599" start="281" end="289" title="mujtahid" label="mujtahid"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="355" end="373" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Iranian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="615" end="620" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="648" end="661" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="685" end="703" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Iranian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q38823" start="729" end="746" title="Ruhollah Khomeini" label="Ruhollah Khomeini"/>
<link wikidata="Q103184" start="913" end="929" title="definite article" label="definite article"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="934" end="947" title="Grammatical modifier#Premodifiers and postmodifiers" label="post-modified"/>
<link wikidata="Q234801" start="968" end="973" title="Allah" label="Allah"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="1157" end="1162" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q57560" start="1366" end="1382" title="The Twelve Imams" label="The Twelve Imams"/>
<link wikidata="Q110022" start="1419" end="1428" title="Dual (grammatical number)" label="dual form"/>
<link wikidata="Q146786" start="1436" end="1447" title="Plural" label="plural form"/>
<link wikidata="Q73599" start="1746" end="1754" title="Mujtahid" label="Mujtahid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020670" start="2033" end="2038" title="Khums" label="Khums"/>
<link wikidata="Q19641" start="2154" end="2165" title="Marja&amp;#x27;" label="Marja&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119043" start="2303" end="2317" title="Roy Mottahedeh" label="Roy Mottahedeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832391" start="2417" end="2438" title="Michael M. J. Fischer" label="Michael M. J. Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="2444" end="2462" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Iranian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5767753" start="2743" end="2753" title="Style (form of address)" label="addressing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385497" start="3083" end="3098" title="Hawza" label="Shia seminaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q16052369" start="3109" end="3125" title="Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran" label="Islamic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28407263" start="3302" end="3314" title="Moojan Momen" label="Moojan Momen"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="3752" end="3765" title="Iranian Revolution" label="revolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q57336" start="3969" end="3981" title="Ali Khamenei" label="Ali Khamenei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622758" start="4030" end="4045" title="Hujjat al-Islam" label="Hujjat al-Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q838380" start="4077" end="4094" title="President of Iran" label="President of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q16052990" start="4149" end="4160" title="1989 Iranian Supreme Leader election" label="was elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q332486" start="4161" end="4183" title="Supreme Leader of Iran" label="Supreme Leader of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335816" start="4263" end="4270" title="Risalah (fiqh)" label="Risalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q775760" start="4453" end="4481" title="Mohammad Kazem Shariatmadari" label="Mohammad Kazem Shariatmadari"/>
<link wikidata="Q311160" start="4486" end="4507" title="Hussein-Ali Montazeri" label="Hussein-Ali Montazeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q290506" start="4702" end="4723" title="Allamah Al-Hilli" label="Ibn Mutahhar Al-Hilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q269785" start="4862" end="4869" title="Twelver" label="Twelver"/>
<link wikidata="Q8215989" start="4992" end="5013" title="Mirza Ali Aqa Tabrizi" label="Mirza Ali Aqa Tabrizi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774922" start="5098" end="5114" title="Muhammad Kazim Khurasani" label="Akhund Khurasani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368440" start="5211" end="5244" title="Persian Constitutional Revolution" label="Persian Constitutional Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6874922" start="5247" end="5278" title="Mirza Sayyed Mohammad Tabatabai" label="Mirza Sayyed Mohammad Tabatabai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116707" start="5283" end="5308" title="Seyyed Abdollah Behbahani" label="Seyyed Abdollah Behbahani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182988" start="5381" end="5401" title="Loghatnameh Dehkhoda" label="Loghatnameh Dehkhoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644567" start="5411" end="5422" title="Hamid Algar" label="Hamid Algar"/>
<link wikidata="Q170573" start="5584" end="5587" title="Qom" label="Qom"/>
<link wikidata="Q308257" start="5595" end="5618" title="Abdul-Karim Haeri Yazdi" label="Abdul-Karim Haeri Yazdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119319" start="5643" end="5655" title="Qom Seminary" label="Qom Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="7049" end="7062" title="United States of America" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869064" start="7181" end="7203" title="London Review of Books" label="London Review of Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302905" start="7651" end="7660" title="Roy Moore" label="Roy Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905525" start="7746" end="7767" title="Christian nationalism" label="Christian nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q216920" start="7783" end="7793" title="secularism" label="secularism"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="7799" end="7808" title="far-right" label="far-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q189459" start="7844" end="7849" title="Ulama" label="Ulama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999841" start="7864" end="7869" title="Faqīh" label="Faqīh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918390" start="7884" end="7891" title="Allamah" label="Allamah"/>
<link wikidata="Q188942" start="7906" end="7912" title="Mullah" label="Mullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632248" start="7927" end="7934" title="Akhoond" label="Akhoond"/>
<link wikidata="Q185166" start="7949" end="7955" title="Sheikh" label="Sheikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131848" start="7964" end="7983" title="Clericalism in Iran" label="Clericalism in Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008413" start="7986" end="8008" title="List of current maraji" label="List of current maraji"/>
<link wikidata="Q200835" start="8017" end="8030" title="Seghatoleslam" label="Seghatoleslam"/>
<link wikidata="Q12181330" start="8039" end="8061" title="Twelver Shia holy days" label="Twelver Shia holy days"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="63903" wikidata="Q723632" url="?curid=63903" title="Martin Strel">
<text>Martin Strel (; born 1 October 1954), is a Slovenian long-distance swimmer, one of the most elite endurance athletes best known for swimming the entire length of various rivers. Strel holds successive Guinness World Records for swimming the Danube river, the Mississippi River, the Yangtze River, and the Amazon River. His motto is &quot;swimming for peace, friendship and clean waters.&quot;

== Swimming history ==
Strel was born in the town of Mokronog, in the Slovenian region of Lower Carniola, then part of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. 
Strel&#x27;s first two river swims were the Krka river (105 kilometres) in his homeland, in 28 hours in 1992, and the boundary Kolpa river (), in 16 hours in 1993. In 2000, he swam the Danube River () and achieved the world long distance swimming record () in 58 days. In July 2001, he achieved one more world record — of non-stop swimming in Danube within 84 hours and 10 minutes. He lost 40 pounds of weight.

In 2002, he swam the entire Mississippi River () in 68 days. In 2003, he swam the Argentine Paraná River (). On 10 June 2004, Martin started swimming down the Yangtze River (, the longest river in Asia, the third longest in the world) in China. He reached Shanghai in 40 days on 30 July 2004, one day before planned.

Strel swam the Amazon River, commencing on 1 February 2007, finishing 66 days later on 7 April 2007. This was a record-breaking distance of , longer than the width of the Atlantic Ocean. He had escort boats that were prepared to pour blood into the river to distract meat-eating fish such as piranhas.

In 2007, the Nile had been proposed as his next river, but Strel said, &quot;I am not going to do the Nile. It&#x27;s long but not challenging enough, it is just a small creek. The Amazon is much more mighty.&quot;

He plans to swim across Lake Arenal on 29 September 2010 as part of his visit to an environmentalist international film festival in Costa Rica. He plans to swim about 6 kilometres from shore and then back to his starting point.

In June 2011 Strel completed his Colorado River Swim challenge for the documentary &quot;Stan Lee&#x27;s Superhumans&quot; More about the swim can be found at: Colorado Swim 2011.

Achievements by year:
*2008: Sognefjord, Norway; Loch Ness, UK
*2009: Doha, Qatar; River Thames, UK; River Cam, UK
*2010: Grand Canyon, Arizona, US; Lake Mead, Nevada/Arizona, US
*2011: Lake Ontario, Canada; Lake Simcoe, Canada; Lake Arenal, Costa Rica; San Juan River, Costa Rica
*2012: Saguaro Lake, Arizona, US; Canyon Lake, Arizona, US; Apache Lake, Arizona, US Theodore Roosevelt Lake, Arizona, US
*2013: Lake Powell, Arizona/Utah, US; Robben Island, South Africa
*2014: Bondi Beach, Australia; Shelly Beach, Australia
*2015: Lake Pleasant, Arizona, US; Tennessee River, Tennessee, US
*2016: Rocky Point, Mexico; Alkhobar (Saudi Arabia) – Manamma (Bahrain)
*2017: Manhattan, New York, US; Lake Wörth, Austria
*2018: Alcatraz – Golden Gate Bridge, US
*2019: Farallon Islands, California, US
*2020: San Diego River, California, US
*2021: Mura River, Slovenia

== &quot;Big River Man&quot; ==
Strel was the subject and star of a feature documentary entitled &quot;Big River Man&quot; directed by the acclaimed art-house director John Maringouin. The film, which won the &quot;World Cinema Cinematography Award: Documentary&quot; at the 2009 Sundance Film Festival, was critically praised for its blend of comedy and drama. The film chronicled Strel&#x27;s 3,300 mile historic swim of the Amazon River.

== &quot;Strel Swimming Adventures&quot; ==
In 2010, Martin Strel and his son Borut Strel founded a company that offers swimming adventure holidays in the Mediterranean and at Lake Powell, Arizona. They currently offer swimming adventure holiday tours at Lake Powell, Arizona, in Slovenia (Lake Bled, Lake Bohinj, and the Soča River), on Croatia&#x27;s Dalmatian coast swimming from island to island, in Montenegro exploring Adriatic fjords and coves, and cruising Mediterranean Turkey. Strel takes part in some trips.

== Global Center for Advanced Studies ==
In 2013, Martin Strel joined the faculty of The Global Center for Advanced Studies in its newly formed Institute of Adventure Studies.

==References==
==External links==
*Strel&#x27;s official site
*The Amazon Swim Project site
*Strel Swimming Adventure Holidays site
*Diary of Amazon swim at BBC news</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q723632" start="0" end="12" title="Martin Strel" label="Martin Strel"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="43" end="51" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500260" start="53" end="74" title="long-distance swimming" label="long-distance swimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="201" end="223" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="241" end="247" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="259" end="276" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="282" end="295" title="Yangtze River" label="Yangtze River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783" start="305" end="317" title="Amazon River" label="Amazon River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027078" start="447" end="455" title="Mokronog-Trebelno" label="Mokronog"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="464" end="472" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q861573" start="484" end="498" title="Lower Carniola" label="Lower Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="517" end="557" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126509" start="604" end="608" title="Krka (Slovenia)" label="Krka"/>
<link wikidata="Q211046" start="687" end="692" title="Kupa (river)" label="Kolpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="745" end="757" title="Danube River" label="Danube River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="1000" end="1017" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q127892" start="1064" end="1076" title="Paraná River" label="Paraná River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="1131" end="1144" title="Yangtze River" label="Yangtze River"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1210" end="1215" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="1228" end="1236" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783" start="1305" end="1317" title="Amazon River" label="Amazon River"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="1461" end="1475" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q185215" start="1582" end="1589" title="piranha" label="piranha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="1606" end="1610" title="Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q31938" start="1833" end="1844" title="Lake Arenal" label="Lake Arenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="1941" end="1951" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q152711" start="2127" end="2154" title="Stan Lee&amp;#x27;s Superhumans" label="Stan Lee&amp;#x27;s Superhumans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906216" start="3185" end="3198" title="Big River Man" label="Big River Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246732" start="3250" end="3265" title="John Maringouin" label="John Maringouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189887" start="3362" end="3384" title="Sundance Film Festival" label="Sundance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783" start="3509" end="3521" title="Amazon River" label="Amazon River"/>
<link wikidata="Q667507" start="3779" end="3790" title="Lake Powell" label="Lake Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q648902" start="3814" end="3823" title="Lake Bled" label="Lake Bled"/>
<link wikidata="Q831903" start="3825" end="3836" title="Lake Bohinj" label="Lake Bohinj"/>
<link wikidata="Q202760" start="3846" end="3850" title="Soča" label="Soča"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="3862" end="3869" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="3877" end="3892" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatian coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="3928" end="3938" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="3949" end="3957" title="Adriatic" label="Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="3989" end="4002" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="4003" end="4009" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="63904" wikidata="Q37507" url="?curid=63904" title="Match">
<text>A match is a tool for starting a fire. Typically, matches are made of small wooden sticks or stiff paper. One end is coated with a material that can be ignited by friction generated by striking the match against a suitable surface. Wooden matches are packaged in matchboxes, and paper matches are partially cut into rows and stapled into matchbooks. The coated end of a match, known as the match &quot;head&quot;, consists of a bead of active ingredients and binder, often colored for easier inspection. There are two main types of matches: safety matches, which can be struck only against a specially prepared surface, and strike-anywhere matches, for which any suitably frictional surface can be used.

==Etymology==
The word &quot;match&quot; derives from Old French &quot;mèche&quot;, referring to the wick of a candle.
Historically, the term &quot;match&quot; referred to lengths of cord (later cambric) impregnated with chemicals, and allowed to burn continuously. These were used to light fires and fire guns (see matchlock) and cannons (see linstock) and to detonate explosive devices such as dynamite sticks. Such matches were characterised by their burning speed i.e. &quot;quick match&quot; and &quot;slow match&quot;. Depending on its formulation, a slow match burns at a rate of around 30 cm (1 ft) per hour and a quick match at per minute.

The modern equivalent of a match (in the sense of a burnable cord) is the simple fuse such as a visco fuse, still used in pyrotechnics to obtain a controlled time delay before ignition. The original meaning of the word still persists in some pyrotechnics terms, such as &quot;black match&quot; (a black-powder-impregnated fuse) and &quot;Bengal match&quot; (a firework akin to sparklers producing a relatively long-burning, colored flame). However, when friction matches became commonplace, the term &quot;match&quot; came to refer mainly to these.

==History==

===Early matches===

A note in the text &quot;Cho Keng Lu&quot;, written in 1366, describes a sulfur match, small sticks of pinewood impregnated with sulfur, used in China by &quot;impoverished court ladies&quot; in AD 577 during the conquest of Northern Qi. During the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms (AD 907–960), a book called the &quot;Records of the Unworldly and the Strange&quot; written by Chinese author Tao Gu in about 950 stated:
If there occurs an emergency at night it may take some time to make a light to light a lamp. But an ingenious man devised the system of impregnating little sticks of pinewood with sulfur and storing them ready for use. At the slightest touch of fire, they burst into flame. One gets a little flame like an ear of corn. This marvelous thing was formerly called a &quot;light-bringing slave&quot;, but afterward when it became an article of commerce its name was changed to &#x27;fire inch-stick&#x27;.
Another text, &quot;Wu Lin Chiu Shih&quot;, dated from 1270 AD, lists sulfur matches as something that was sold in the markets of Hangzhou, around the time of Marco Polo&#x27;s visit. The matches were known as &quot;fa chu&quot; or &quot;tshui erh&quot;.

===Chemical matches===
Before the use of matches, fires were sometimes lit using a burning glass (a lens) to focus the sun on tinder, a method that could only work on sunny days. Another more common method was igniting tinder with sparks produced by striking flint and steel, or by sharply increasing air pressure in a fire piston. Early work had been done by alchemist Hennig Brand, who discovered the flammable nature of phosphorus in 1669. Others, including Robert Boyle and his assistant, Ambrose Godfrey, continued these experiments in the 1680s with phosphorus and sulfur, but their efforts did not produce practical and inexpensive methods for generating fires.

A number of different ways were employed in order to light smoking tobacco: One was the use of a spill – a thin object something like a thin candle, a rolled paper or a straw, which would be lit from a nearby, already existing flame and then used to light the cigar or pipe – most often kept near the fireplace in a spill vase. Another method saw the use of a striker, a tool that looked like scissors, but with flint on one &quot;blade&quot; and steel on the other. These would then be rubbed together, ultimately producing sparks. If neither of these two was available, one could also use ember tongs to pick up a coal from a fire and light the tobacco directly.

The first modern, self-igniting match was invented in 1805 by Jean Chancel, assistant to Professor Louis Jacques Thénard of Paris. The head of the match consisted of a mixture of potassium chlorate, sulfur, gum arabic and sugar. The match was ignited by dipping its tip in a small asbestos bottle filled with sulfuric acid. This kind of match was quite expensive, however, and its use was also relatively dangerous, so Chancel&#x27;s matches never really became widely adopted or in commonplace use.

This approach to match making was further refined in the following decades, culminating with the &#x27;Promethean match&#x27; that was patented by Samuel Jones of London in 1828. His match consisted of a small glass capsule containing a chemical composition of sulfuric acid colored with indigo and coated on the exterior with potassium chlorate, all of which was wrapped up in rolls of paper. The immediate ignition of this particular form of a match was achieved by crushing the capsule with a pair of pliers, mixing and releasing the ingredients in order for it to become alight.

In London, similar matches meant for lighting cigars were introduced in 1849 by Heurtner who had a shop called the Lighthouse in the Strand. One version that he sold was called &quot;Euperion&quot; (sometimes &quot;Empyrion&quot;) which was popular for kitchen use and nicknamed as &quot;Hugh Perry&quot;, while another meant for outdoor use was called a &quot;Vesuvian&quot; or &quot;flamer&quot;. The head was large and contained niter, charcoal and wood dust, and had a phosphorus tip. The handle was large and made of hardwood so as to burn vigorously and last for a while. Some even had glass stems. Both Vesuvians and Prometheans had a bulb of sulfuric acid at the tip which had to be broken to start the reaction.

Samuel Jones introduced fuzees for lighting cigars and pipes in 1832. A similar invention was patented in 1839 by John Hucks Stevens in America.

In 1832, William Newton patented the &quot;wax vesta&quot; in England. It consisted of a wax stem that embedded cotton threads and had a tip of phosphorus. Variants known as &quot;candle matches&quot; were made by Savaresse and Merckel in 1836. John Hucks Stevens also patented a safety version of the friction match in 1839.

===Friction matches===
Chemical matches were unable to make the leap into mass production, due to the expense, their cumbersome nature, and the inherent danger of using them. An alternative method was to produce the ignition through friction produced by rubbing two rough surfaces together. An early example was made by François Derosne in 1816. His crude match was called a &quot;briquet phosphorique&quot; and it used a sulfur-tipped match to scrape inside a tube coated internally with phosphorus. It was both inconvenient and unsafe.

The first successful friction match was invented in 1826 by John Walker, an English chemist and druggist from Stockton-on-Tees, County Durham. He developed a keen interest in trying to find a means of obtaining fire easily. Several chemical mixtures were already known that would ignite by a sudden explosion, but it had not been found possible to transmit the flame to a slow-burning substance like wood. While Walker was preparing a lighting mixture on one occasion, a match that had been dipped in it took fire by an accidental friction upon the hearth. He at once appreciated the practical value of the discovery, and started making friction matches. They consisted of wooden splints or sticks of cardboard coated with sulfur and tipped with a mixture of sulfide of antimony, chlorate of potash, and gum. The treatment with sulfur helped the splints to catch fire, and the odor was improved by the addition of camphor. The price of a box of 50 matches was one shilling. With each box was supplied a piece of sandpaper, folded double, through which the match had to be drawn to ignite it. Walker did not name the matches &quot;Congreves&quot; in honour of the inventor and rocket pioneer Sir William Congreve, as it is sometimes stated. The &quot;congreves&quot; were the invention of Charles Sauria, a French chemistry student at the time. Walker did not divulge the exact composition of his matches. Between 1827 and 1829, Walker made about 168 sales of his matches. It was, however, dangerous and flaming balls sometimes fell to the floor, burning carpets and dresses, leading to their ban in France and Germany. Walker either refused or neglected to patent his invention.

In 1829, Scots inventor Sir Isaac Holden invented an improved version of Walker&#x27;s match and demonstrated it to his class at Castle Academy in Reading, Berkshire. Holden did not patent his invention and claimed that one of his pupils wrote to his father Samuel Jones, a chemist in London who commercialised his process. A version of Holden&#x27;s match was patented by Samuel Jones, and these were sold as &quot;lucifer matches&quot;. These early matches had a number of problems an initial violent reaction, an unsteady flame, and unpleasant odor and fumes. Lucifers could ignite explosively, sometimes throwing sparks a considerable distance. Lucifers were manufactured in the United States by Ezekial Byam. 

The term &quot;lucifer&quot; persisted as slang for a match into the 20th century. For example, the song &quot;Pack Up Your Troubles&quot; includes the line &quot;while you’ve a lucifer to light your fag&quot;. Matches are still called &quot;lucifers&quot; in Dutch.

Lucifers were quickly replaced after 1830 by matches made according to the process devised by Frenchman Charles Sauria, who substituted white phosphorus for the antimony sulfide. These new phosphorus matches had to be kept in airtight metal boxes but became popular and went by the name of &quot;loco foco&quot; (&quot;crazy fire&quot;) in the United States, from which was derived the name of a political party. The earliest American patent for the phosphorus friction match was granted in 1836 to Alonzo Dwight Phillips of Springfield, Massachusetts.

From 1830 to 1890, the composition of these matches remained largely unchanged, although some improvements were made. In 1843 William Ashgard replaced the sulfur with beeswax, reducing the pungency of the fumes. This was replaced by paraffin in 1862 by Charles W. Smith, resulting in what were called &quot;parlor matches&quot;. From 1870 the end of the splint was fireproofed by impregnation with fire-retardant chemicals such as alum, sodium silicate, and other salts resulting in what was commonly called a &quot;drunkard&#x27;s match&quot; that prevented the accidental burning of the user&#x27;s fingers. Other advances were made for the mass manufacture of matches. Early matches were made from blocks of woods with cuts separating the splints but leaving their bases attached. Later versions were made in the form of thin combs. The splints would be broken away from the comb when required.

A noiseless match was invented in 1836 by the Hungarian János Irinyi, who was a student of chemistry. An unsuccessful experiment by his professor, Meissner, gave Irinyi the idea to replace potassium chlorate with lead dioxide in the head of the phosphorus match. He liquefied phosphorus in warm water and shook it in a glass vial, until the two liquids emulsified. He mixed the phosphorus with lead dioxide and gum arabic, poured the paste-like mass into a jar, and dipped the pine sticks into the mixture and let them dry. When he tried them that evening, all of them lit evenly. He sold the invention and production rights for these &quot;noiseless matches&quot; to István Rómer, a Hungarian pharmacist living in Vienna, for 60 florins (about 22.5 oz t of silver). As a match manufacturer, Rómer became rich, and Irinyi went on to publish articles and a textbook on chemistry, and founded several match factories.

===Replacement of white phosphorus===
Those involved in the manufacture of the new phosphorus matches were afflicted with &quot;phossy jaw&quot; and other bone disorders, and there was enough white phosphorus in one pack to kill a person. Deaths and suicides from eating the heads of matches became frequent. The earliest report of phosphorus necrosis was made in 1845 by Lorinser in Vienna, and a New York surgeon published a pamphlet with notes on nine cases.

The conditions of working-class women at the Bryant &amp; May factories led to the London matchgirls strike of 1888. The strike was focused on the severe health complications of working with white phosphorus, such as phossy jaw. Social activist Annie Besant published an article in her halfpenny weekly paper &quot;The Link&quot; on 23 June 1888. A strike fund was set up and some newspapers collected donations from readers. The women and girls also solicited contributions. Members of the Fabian Society, including George Bernard Shaw, Sidney Webb, and Graham Wallas, were involved in the distribution of the cash collected. The strike and negative publicity led to changes being made to limit the health effects of the inhalation of white phosphorus.

Attempts were made to reduce the ill-effects on workers through the introduction of inspections and regulations. Anton Schrötter von Kristelli discovered in 1850 that heating white phosphorus at 250 °C in an inert atmosphere produced a red allotropic form, which did not fume in contact with air. It was suggested that this would make a suitable substitute in match manufacture although it was slightly more expensive. Two French chemists, Henri Savene and Emile David Cahen, proved in 1898 that the addition of phosphorus sesquisulfide meant that the substance was not poisonous, that it could be used in a &quot;strike-anywhere&quot; match, and that the match heads were not explosive.

British company Albright and Wilson was the first company to produce phosphorus sesquisulfide matches commercially. The company developed a safe means of making commercial quantities of phosphorus sesquisulfide in 1899 and started selling it to match manufacturers. However, white phosphorus continued to be used, and its serious effects led many countries to ban its use. Finland prohibited the use of white phosphorus in 1872, followed by Denmark in 1874, France in 1897, Switzerland in 1898, and the Netherlands in 1901. An agreement, the &quot;Berne Convention,&quot; was reached at Bern, Switzerland, in September 1906, which banned the use of white phosphorus in matches. This required each country to pass laws prohibiting the use of white phosphorus in matches. The United Kingdom passed a law in 1908 prohibiting its use in matches after 31 December 1910. The United States did not pass a law, but instead placed a &quot;punitive tax&quot; in 1913 on white phosphorus–based matches, one so high as to render their manufacture financially impractical, and Canada banned them in 1914. India and Japan banned them in 1919; China followed, banning them in 1925.

In 1901 Albright and Wilson started making phosphorus sesquisulfide at their Niagara Falls, New York plant for the US market, but American manufacturers continued to use white phosphorus matches. The Niagara Falls plant made them until 1910, when the United States Congress forbade the shipment of white phosphorus matches in interstate commerce.

===Safety matches===
The dangers of white phosphorus in the manufacture of matches led to the development of the &quot;hygienic&quot; or &quot;safety match&quot;. The major innovation in its development was the use of red phosphorus, not on the head of the match but instead on a specially designed striking surface.

Arthur Albright developed the industrial process for large-scale manufacture of red phosphorus after Schrötter&#x27;s discoveries became known. By 1851, his company was producing the substance by heating white phosphorus in a sealed pot at a specific temperature. He exhibited his red phosphorus in 1851, at The Great Exhibition held at The Crystal Palace in London.

The idea of creating a specially designed striking surface was developed in 1844 by the Swede Gustaf Erik Pasch. Pasch patented the use of red phosphorus in the striking surface. He found that this could ignite heads that did not need to contain white phosphorus. Johan Edvard Lundström and his younger brother Carl Frans Lundström (1823–1917) started a large-scale match industry in Jönköping, Sweden around 1847, but the improved safety match was not introduced until around 1850–55. The Lundström brothers had obtained a sample of red phosphorus matches from Albright at The Great Exhibition, but had misplaced it and therefore they did not try the matches until just before the Paris Exhibition of 1855 when they found that the matches were still usable. In 1858 their company produced around 12 million matchboxes.
The safety of &quot;true&quot; &quot;safety matches&quot; is derived from the separation of the reactive ingredients between a match head on the end of a paraffin-impregnated splint and the special striking surface (in addition to the safety aspect of replacing the white phosphorus with red phosphorus). The idea for separating the chemicals had been introduced in 1859 in the form of two-headed matches known in France as &quot;Allumettes Androgynes&quot;. These were sticks with one end made of potassium chlorate and the other of red phosphorus. They had to be broken and the heads rubbed together. There was, however, a risk of the heads rubbing each other accidentally in their box. Such dangers were removed when the striking surface was moved to the outside of the box. The development of a specialized matchbook with both matches and a striking surface occurred in the 1890s with the American Joshua Pusey, who sold his patent to the Diamond Match Company.
The striking surface on modern matchboxes is typically composed of 25% powdered glass or other abrasive material, 50% red phosphorus, 5% neutralizer, 4% carbon black, and 16% binder; and the match head is typically composed of 45–55% potassium chlorate, with a little sulfur and starch, a neutralizer (ZnO or ), 20–40% of siliceous filler, diatomite, and glue. Safety matches ignite due to the extreme reactivity of phosphorus with the potassium chlorate in the match head. When the match is struck, the phosphorus and chlorate mix in a small amount and form something akin to the explosive Armstrong&#x27;s mixture, which ignites due to the friction. The red color of the matchhead is due to addition of red dyes, not the red phosphorus content.

The Swedes long held a virtual worldwide monopoly on safety matches, with the industry mainly situated in Jönköping, by 1903 called &quot;Jönköpings &amp; Vulcans Tändsticksfabriks AB&quot; today Swedish Match&quot;.&quot; In France, they sold the rights to their safety match patent to Coigent Père &amp; Fils of Lyon, but Coigent contested the payment in the French courts, on the basis that the invention was known in Vienna before the Lundström brothers patented it. The British match manufacturer Bryant and May visited Jönköping in 1858 to try to obtain a supply of safety matches, but was unsuccessful. In 1862 it established its own factory and bought the rights for the British safety match patent from the Lundström brothers.

==Varieties of matches today==

Friction matches made with white phosphorus as well as those made from phosphorus sesquisulfide can be struck on any suitable surface. They have remained particularly popular in the United States, even when safety matches had become common in Europe, and are still widely used today around the world, including in many developing countries, for such uses as camping, outdoor activities, emergency/survival situations, and stocking homemade survival kits. However, strike-anywhere matches are banned on all kinds of aircraft under the &quot;dangerous goods&quot; classification &quot;U.N. 1331, Matches, strike-anywhere&quot;.

Safety matches are classified as dangerous goods, &quot;U.N. 1944, Matches, safety&quot;. They are not universally forbidden on aircraft; however, they must be declared as dangerous goods and individual airlines or countries may impose tighter restrictions.

Storm matches, also known as lifeboat matches or flare matches, are often included in survival kits. They have a strikeable tip similar to a normal match, but the combustible compound – including an oxidiser – continues down the length of the stick, coating half or more of the entire matchstick. The match also has a waterproof coating (which often makes the match more difficult to light), and often storm matches are longer than standard matches. As a result of the combustible coating, storm matches burn strongly even in strong winds, and can even spontaneously re-ignite after being briefly immersed in water.

== Hobbyist collection ==

The hobby of collecting match-related items, such as matchcovers and matchbox labels, is known as &quot;phillumeny&quot;.

== See also ==
* Firelighting
* Ivar Kreuger
* Lighter
* London matchgirls strike of 1888
* Permanent match
* Swedish Match
*&quot;The Little Match Girl&quot;, a fairy tale
* &quot;The Safety Matches&quot;, a 1969 novel
* Vesta case
* White phosphorus munitions
==References==
== Bibliography ==
* Threlfall, Richard E. (1951). The Story of 100 Years of Phosphorus Making: 1851–1951. Oldbury: Albright &amp; Wilson Ltd.

== Further reading ==
* Beaver, Patrick (1985). The Match Makers: The Story of Bryant &amp; May. London: Henry Melland Limited. ISBN 0-907929-11-7
* Emsley, John (2000). The Shocking History of Phosphorus: A Biography of the Devil&#x27;s Element. Basingstoke: Macmillan Publishing. ISBN 0-333-76638-5
* Steele, H. Thomas (1987). Close Cover Before Striking: The Golden Age of Matchbook Art. Abeville Press

==External links==
*
*&quot;Making 125,000 Matches An Hour&quot;, August 1946, Popular Science article on the modern mass production of wooden stem matches
*library.thinkquest.org/23062/match.htm
*&quot;Lighting a Match&quot;, Royal Institution video on the ignition process
*Chemistry of Matches, Graphics and Video</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37507" start="2" end="7" title="Match" label="match"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196" start="33" end="37" title="fire" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11472" start="99" end="104" title="paper" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q82580" start="163" end="171" title="friction" label="friction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11681907" start="263" end="271" title="matchbox" label="matchbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q42926502" start="338" end="347" title="matchbook" label="matchbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q863583" start="459" end="465" title="binder (material)" label="binder"/>
<link wikidata="Q849004" start="806" end="810" title="Candle wick" label="wick"/>
<link wikidata="Q31029" start="888" end="892" title="rope" label="cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103193" start="900" end="907" title="cambric" label="cambric"/>
<link wikidata="Q110155210" start="1011" end="1014" title="gun" label="gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243678" start="1021" end="1030" title="matchlock" label="matchlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="1036" end="1042" title="cannon" label="cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q953721" start="1049" end="1057" title="linstock" label="linstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054261" start="1075" end="1092" title="explosive devices" label="explosive devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q80728" start="1101" end="1109" title="dynamite" label="dynamite"/>
<link wikidata="Q16820533" start="1184" end="1195" title="quick match" label="quick match"/>
<link wikidata="Q988463" start="1212" end="1222" title="slow match" label="slow match"/>
<link wikidata="Q664571" start="1436" end="1440" title="fuse (explosives)" label="fuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935660" start="1451" end="1461" title="visco fuse" label="visco fuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q474100" start="1477" end="1489" title="pyrotechnics" label="pyrotechnics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16820533" start="1631" end="1642" title="black match" label="black match"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="1652" end="1664" title="black powder" label="black-powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q127933" start="1715" end="1723" title="firework" label="firework"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149078" start="1732" end="1740" title="sparkler" label="sparkler"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="2012" end="2018" title="sulfur" label="sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143524" start="2164" end="2175" title="Northern Qi" label="Northern Qi"/>
<link wikidata="Q242115" start="2188" end="2219" title="Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms" label="Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970" start="2990" end="2998" title="Hangzhou" label="Hangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101" start="3019" end="3029" title="Marco Polo" label="Marco Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q368027" start="3199" end="3212" title="burning glass" label="burning glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q143518" start="3242" end="3248" title="tinder" label="tinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q83087" start="3375" end="3380" title="flint" label="flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409634" start="3435" end="3446" title="fire piston" label="fire piston"/>
<link wikidata="Q77306" start="3486" end="3498" title="Hennig Brand" label="Hennig Brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q43393" start="3577" end="3589" title="Robert Boyle" label="Robert Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741788" start="3609" end="3624" title="Ambrose Godfrey" label="Ambrose Godfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577271" start="4102" end="4112" title="spill vase" label="spill vase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409712" start="4146" end="4153" title="fire striker" label="striker"/>
<link wikidata="Q40847" start="4179" end="4187" title="scissors" label="scissors"/>
<link wikidata="Q83087" start="4198" end="4203" title="flint" label="flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="4233" end="4238" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q327722" start="4551" end="4572" title="Louis Jacques Thénard" label="Louis Jacques Thénard"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="4576" end="4581" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q309328" start="4631" end="4649" title="potassium chlorate" label="potassium chlorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="4651" end="4657" title="sulfur" label="sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q535814" start="4659" end="4669" title="gum arabic" label="gum arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="4674" end="4679" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q104085" start="4733" end="4741" title="asbestos" label="asbestos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="4761" end="4774" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q49614" start="5806" end="5814" title="nickname" label="nickname"/>
<link wikidata="Q11183742" start="5969" end="5974" title="niter" label="niter"/>
<link wikidata="Q177463" start="5976" end="5984" title="charcoal" label="charcoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q628261" start="6283" end="6289" title="Flare" label="fuzees"/>
<link wikidata="Q497429" start="7331" end="7342" title="John Walker (inventor)" label="John Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q989418" start="7381" end="7397" title="Stockton-on-Tees" label="Stockton-on-Tees"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="7994" end="8000" title="sulfur" label="sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q409041" start="8030" end="8049" title="antimony trisulfide" label="sulfide of antimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q309328" start="8051" end="8069" title="Potassium chlorate" label="chlorate of potash"/>
<link wikidata="Q903081" start="8075" end="8078" title="Natural gum" label="gum"/>
<link wikidata="Q736526" start="8235" end="8243" title="Shilling (British coin)" label="shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344031" start="8447" end="8453" title="Congreve rocket" label="rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142083" start="8462" end="8482" title="Sir William Congreve, 2nd Baronet" label="Sir William Congreve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154745" start="8975" end="8991" title="Sir Isaac Holden" label="Sir Isaac Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q161491" start="9098" end="9116" title="Reading, Berkshire" label="Reading, Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q185498" start="9367" end="9374" title="lucifer" label="lucifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8102" start="9709" end="9714" title="slang" label="slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122871" start="9778" end="9799" title="Pack Up Your Troubles in Your Old Kit-Bag" label="Pack Up Your Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="9927" end="9932" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q717756" start="10039" end="10053" title="Charles Sauria" label="Charles Sauria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10071" end="10087" title="Phosphorus#Allotropes" label="white phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665952" start="10331" end="10346" title="Locofocos" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="10460" end="10486" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q177540" start="10722" end="10730" title="Paraffin wax" label="paraffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q854150" start="11444" end="11456" title="János Irinyi" label="János Irinyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q410749" start="11601" end="11613" title="lead dioxide" label="lead dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q187634" start="11741" end="11751" title="emulsion" label="emulsified"/>
<link wikidata="Q535814" start="11799" end="11809" title="gum arabic" label="gum arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="12103" end="12109" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q306306" start="12118" end="12124" title="Austro-Hungarian florin" label="florin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974806" start="12138" end="12142" title="troy ounce" label="oz t"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814753" start="12433" end="12443" title="phossy jaw" label="phossy jaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980627" start="12813" end="12829" title="Bryant &amp;amp; May" label="Bryant &amp;amp; May"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804029" start="12851" end="12883" title="London matchgirls strike of 1888" label="London matchgirls strike of 1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q457515" start="12959" end="12975" title="Yellow phosphorus" label="white phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814753" start="12985" end="12995" title="phossy jaw" label="phossy jaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q464318" start="13013" end="13025" title="Annie Besant" label="Annie Besant"/>
<link wikidata="Q192186" start="13259" end="13273" title="Fabian Society" label="Fabian Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="13285" end="13304" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="George Bernard Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q332442" start="13306" end="13317" title="Sidney Webb" label="Sidney Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551919" start="13323" end="13336" title="Graham Wallas" label="Graham Wallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q86275" start="13636" end="13665" title="Anton Schrötter von Kristelli" label="Anton Schrötter von Kristelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454591" start="14035" end="14059" title="phosphorus sesquisulfide" label="phosphorus sesquisulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831957" start="14228" end="14247" title="Albright and Wilson" label="Albright and Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444682" start="14760" end="14776" title="Berne Convention (1906)" label="Berne Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q128133" start="15457" end="15470" title="Niagara Falls, New York" label="Niagara Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="15631" end="15653" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15946" end="15960" title="Allotropes of phosphorus#Red phosphorus" label="red phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831957" start="16046" end="16061" title="Albright and Wilson" label="Arthur Albright"/>
<link wikidata="Q273095" start="16354" end="16374" title="The Great Exhibition" label="The Great Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q202902" start="16383" end="16401" title="The Crystal Palace" label="The Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="16502" end="16507" title="Sweden" label="Swede"/>
<link wikidata="Q899564" start="16508" end="16525" title="Gustaf Erik Pasch" label="Gustaf Erik Pasch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444662" start="16678" end="16700" title="Johan Edvard Lundström" label="Johan Edvard Lundström"/>
<link wikidata="Q25415" start="16798" end="16815" title="Jönköping" label="Jönköping, Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="17096" end="17101" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q76904" start="17388" end="17396" title="kerosene" label="paraffin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17522" end="17536" title="Phosphorus#Allotropes" label="red phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42926502" start="18045" end="18054" title="matchbook" label="matchbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q6290138" start="18136" end="18148" title="Joshua Pusey" label="Joshua Pusey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270866" start="18177" end="18198" title="Diamond Match Company" label="Diamond Match Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="18280" end="18285" title="glass" label="glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q457556" start="18318" end="18332" title="red phosphorus" label="red phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q764245" start="18353" end="18365" title="carbon black" label="carbon black"/>
<link wikidata="Q309328" start="18434" end="18452" title="potassium chlorate" label="potassium chlorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="18522" end="18531" title="Silicon dioxide" label="siliceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q193414" start="18540" end="18549" title="Diatomaceous earth" label="diatomite"/>
<link wikidata="Q689464" start="18791" end="18815" title="Armstrong&amp;#x27;s mixture" label="Armstrong&amp;#x27;s mixture"/>
<link wikidata="Q189720" start="18905" end="18912" title="Dye" label="red dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q43637" start="18989" end="18997" title="monopoly" label="monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q52855" start="19144" end="19157" title="Swedish Match" label="Swedish Match"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="19225" end="19231" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="19262" end="19266" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="19369" end="19375" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980627" start="19450" end="19464" title="Bryant and May" label="Bryant and May"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950648" start="19581" end="19596" title="Bryant and May Factory, Bow" label="its own factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q457515" start="19744" end="19760" title="white phosphorus" label="white phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454591" start="19788" end="19812" title="phosphorus sesquisulfide" label="phosphorus sesquisulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="20036" end="20056" title="Developing country" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594376" start="20157" end="20169" title="survival kit" label="survival kit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601224" start="20300" end="20335" title="List of UN numbers 1301 to 1400" label="U.N. 1331, Matches, strike-anywhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q757138" start="20377" end="20392" title="dangerous goods" label="dangerous goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="20472" end="20480" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746393" start="20632" end="20640" title="lifeboat (shipboard)" label="lifeboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594376" start="20689" end="20701" title="survival kit" label="survival kit"/>
<link wikidata="Q42926502" start="21300" end="21310" title="matchcover" label="matchcover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478303" start="21351" end="21361" title="phillumeny" label="phillumeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192478" start="21387" end="21399" title="Firelighting" label="Firelighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q703091" start="21402" end="21414" title="Ivar Kreuger" label="Ivar Kreuger"/>
<link wikidata="Q20459" start="21417" end="21424" title="Lighter" label="Lighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804029" start="21427" end="21459" title="London matchgirls strike of 1888" label="London matchgirls strike of 1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q20459" start="21462" end="21477" title="Permanent match" label="Permanent match"/>
<link wikidata="Q52855" start="21480" end="21493" title="Swedish Match" label="Swedish Match"/>
<link wikidata="Q11876" start="21501" end="21522" title="The Little Match Girl" label="The Little Match Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230444" start="21551" end="21569" title="The Safety Matches" label="The Safety Matches"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923379" start="21592" end="21602" title="Vesta case" label="Vesta case"/>
<link wikidata="Q24629374" start="21605" end="21631" title="White phosphorus munitions" label="White phosphorus munitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171086" start="22425" end="22442" title="Royal Institution" label="Royal Institution"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="63912" wikidata="Q229196" url="?curid=63912" title="Pareto">
<text>Pareto may refer to:

==People==
* Vilfredo Pareto (1848–1923), Italian economist, political scientist, and philosopher, works named for him include:
** Pareto analysis, a statistical analysis tool in problem solving
**Pareto distribution, a power-law probability distribution
**Pareto efficiency
**Pareto front, the set of all Pareto efficient solutions
**Pareto principle, or the 80-20 rule
* Bartolomeo Pareto, medieval priest and cartographer from Genoa
* Graziella Pareto (1889–1973), Catalan soprano 
* Lorenzo Pareto (1800–1865), Italian geologist and statesman
* Paula Pareto (born 1986), Argentine judoka
* Benedetto Pareto, builder of the Shrine of Nostra Signora della Guardia in Liguria, Italy

==Other uses==
* Pareto, Piedmont, a town in Italy
* Pareto Group, a Norwegian finance company

== See also ==
* Paret, a surname
* Pereto, a town in Italy
* Perito, a town in Italy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q229196" start="0" end="6" title="Pareto" label="Pareto"/>
<link wikidata="Q11031" start="35" end="50" title="Vilfredo Pareto" label="Vilfredo Pareto"/>
<link wikidata="Q182667" start="153" end="168" title="Pareto analysis" label="Pareto analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q837683" start="219" end="238" title="Pareto distribution" label="Pareto distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q36829" start="279" end="296" title="Pareto efficiency" label="Pareto efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q55362336" start="299" end="311" title="Pareto front" label="Pareto front"/>
<link wikidata="Q182667" start="357" end="373" title="Pareto principle" label="Pareto principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q30693218" start="395" end="412" title="Bartolomeo Pareto" label="Bartolomeo Pareto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115895" start="460" end="476" title="Graziella Pareto" label="Graziella Pareto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259491" start="509" end="523" title="Lorenzo Pareto" label="Lorenzo Pareto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002088" start="571" end="583" title="Paula Pareto" label="Paula Pareto"/>
<link wikidata="Q827848" start="649" end="687" title="Shrine of Nostra Signora della Guardia" label="Shrine of Nostra Signora della Guardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17633" start="724" end="740" title="Pareto, Piedmont" label="Pareto, Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q7136867" start="760" end="772" title="Pareto Group" label="Pareto Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q21492597" start="820" end="825" title="Paret" label="Paret"/>
<link wikidata="Q50120" start="839" end="845" title="Pereto" label="Pereto"/>
<link wikidata="Q81290" start="865" end="871" title="Perito" label="Perito"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="63914" wikidata="Q560735" url="?curid=63914" title="Chaim Potok">
<text>Chaim Potok (February 17, 1929 – July 23, 2002) was an American author, novelist, playwright, editor and rabbi. Of the more than a dozen novels he authored, his first book &quot;The Chosen&quot; (1967) was listed on &quot;The New York Times&quot; Best Seller list for 39 weeks and sold more than 3.4 million copies, and was adapted into a well-received 1981 feature film by the same title.

==Biography==
Herman Harold Potok was born in the Bronx, New York City, to Benjamin Max Potok (died 1958) and Mollie (; died 1985), Jewish immigrants from Poland. He was the oldest of four children, all of whom either became or married rabbis. His Hebrew name was Chaim Tzvi (חיים צבי). He received an Orthodox Jewish education. After reading Evelyn Waugh&#x27;s novel &quot;Brideshead Revisited&quot; (1945) as a teenager, Potok decided to become a writer (he often said that &quot;Brideshead Revisited&quot; was what inspired his work and writing). He started writing fiction at the age of 16. At age 17, he made his first submission to the magazine &quot;The Atlantic Monthly&quot;. Although it was not published, he received a note from the editor complimenting his work. He attended high school at Marsha Stern Talmudical Academy, Yeshiva University&#x27;s boys high school.

In 1949, at the age of twenty, Potok&#x27;s stories were published in the literary magazine of Yeshiva University, which he also helped edit. In 1950, he graduated &quot;summa cum laude&quot; with a BA in English Literature.
After four years of study at the Jewish Theological Seminary of America, Potok was ordained as a Conservative rabbi. He was appointed director of the Leaders Training Fellowship (LTF), a youth organization affiliated with Conservative Judaism.

After receiving a master&#x27;s degree in English literature, Potok enlisted with the U.S. Army as a chaplain. He served in South Korea from 1955 to 1957. He described his time in South Korea as a transformative experience. Brought up to believe that the Jewish people were central to history and God&#x27;s plans, he experienced a region where there were almost no Jews and no anti-Semitism, yet whose religious believers prayed with the same fervor that he saw in Orthodox synagogues at home.

Upon his return to the U.S., he joined the faculty of the University of Judaism in Los Angeles. Potok met Adena Sara Mosevitzsky, a psychiatric social worker, at Camp Ramah in Ojai, California, where he served as camp director from 1957 to 1959. They were married on June 8, 1958. In 1959, he began his graduate studies at the University of Pennsylvania and was appointed scholar-in-residence at Har Zion Synagogue in Philadelphia. In 1963, the Potoks were instructors at Camp Ramah in Nyack. Also in 1963, he began a year in Israel, where he wrote his doctoral dissertation on Solomon Maimon and began to write a novel.

In 1964, the Potoks moved to Brooklyn, where Chaim became the managing editor of the magazine &quot;Conservative Judaism&quot; and joined the faculty of the Teachers’ Institute of the Jewish Theological Seminary. The following year, he was appointed editor-in-chief of the Jewish Publication Society in Philadelphia and later, chairman of the publication committee. During this time, Potok received a doctorate in philosophy from the University of Pennsylvania. In 1970, the Potoks relocated to Jerusalem and then returned to Philadelphia in 1977.

After the publication of &quot;Old Men at Midnight&quot; (2001), Potok was diagnosed with brain cancer. He died at his home in Merion, Pennsylvania on July 23, 2002, aged 73.

==Literary career==

In 1967, Potok published &quot;The Chosen&quot;, which won the Edward Lewis Wallant Award and was nominated for the National Book Award. Potok wrote a sequel to &quot;The Chosen&quot; in 1969, entitled &quot;The Promise&quot;, which details the issues of the value and identity between Orthodox and Hasidic Jews. This book won the Athenaeum Literary Award the same year of its publication. Not long afterward the Jewish Publication Society appointed him as its special projects editor. In 1972, he published &quot;My Name is Asher Lev&quot;, the story of a boy struggling with his relationship with his parents, religion and his desire to be an artist. In 1975, he published &quot;In the Beginning&quot;. From 1974 until his death, Potok served as a special projects editor for the Jewish Publication Society. During this time, Potok began translating the Hebrew Bible into English. In 1978, he published his non-fiction work, &quot;Wanderings: Chaim Potok’s Story of the Jews&quot;, a historical account of the Jews. Between 1978 and 1989, Potok contributed articles to &quot;Moment Magazine&quot;. Potok described his 1981 novel &quot;The Book of Lights&quot; as an account of his experiences in Asia during the war. He said “it reshaped the neat, coherent model of myself and my place in the world.”

His novel &quot;The Chosen&quot; was made into a film released in 1981, which won the most prestigious award at the World Film Festival, Montreal. Potok had a cameo role as a professor. The film featured Rod Steiger, Barry Miller, Maximilian Schell and Robby Benson. It also became an Off-Broadway musical and was adapted as a stage play by Aaron Posner in collaboration with Potok, which premiered at the Arden Theatre Company in Philadelphia in 1999.

Potok&#x27;s 1985 novel &quot;Davita&#x27;s Harp&quot; is his only book featuring a female protagonist. In 1990, he published a sequel to &quot;My Name is Asher Lev&quot; titled &quot;The Gift of Asher Lev&quot;. It won the National Jewish Book Award for Fiction. Potok wrote many plays, among them &quot;Sins of the Father&quot; and &quot;Out of the Depths&quot;. In 1992, Potok completed another novel, &quot;I Am the Clay&quot;, about the courageous struggle of a war-ravaged family. His 1993 young adult literature &quot;The Tree of Here&quot; was followed by &quot;The Sky of Now&quot; (1995) and &quot;Zebra and Other Stories&quot; (1998).

==Literary influences==
Potok&#x27;s parents discouraged his writing and reading of non-Jewish subjects. Nevertheless, he spent many hours in the public library reading secular novels. Potok cited James Joyce, Thomas Mann, Fyodor Dostoyevsky, Ernest Hemingway, and S. Y. Agnon as his chief literary influences. Many of his novels are set in the urban environments in New York in which he himself grew up. While not Hasidic, Potok was raised in an Orthodox home. In the book &quot;My Name is Asher Lev&quot;, Asher Lev wants to be a painter, which causes much conflict with his father who wants him to do something else, much as Potok did during his childhood. Asher decides to become a painter, which upsets his family. Potok went into writing and painted in his free time. Potok said he related to Asher Lev more than any of his other characters.

==Legacy==
Potok has had a considerable influence on Jewish American authors. His work was significant for discussing the conflict between the traditional aspects of Jewish thought and culture and modernity to a wider, non-Jewish culture. He taught a highly regarded graduate seminar on Postmodernism at the University of Pennsylvania from 1993 through 2001.

He bequeathed his papers to the University of Pennsylvania. The university houses a collection of Potok correspondence, writings, lectures, sermons, article clippings, memorabilia and fan mail. One of his admirers was Elie Wiesel, who wrote to Potok saying he had read all his books &quot;with fervor and friendship&quot;.

==Published works==

* &quot;Jewish Ethics&quot; (1964–69, 14 volumes)
* &quot;The Chosen&quot; (1967)
* &quot;The Promise&quot; (1969)
* &quot;My Name Is Asher Lev&quot; (1972)
* &quot;In the Beginning&quot; (1975)
* &quot;The Jew Confronts Himself in American Literature&quot; (1975)
* &quot;&quot; (1978)
* &quot;The Book of Lights&quot; (1981)
* &quot;Davita&#x27;s Harp&quot; (1985)
* &quot;Theo Tobiasse&quot; (1986)
* &quot;The Gift of Asher Lev&quot; (1990)
* &quot;I Am the Clay&quot; (1992)
* &quot;The Tree of Here&quot; (1993)
* &quot;The Trope Teacher&quot; (1994)
* &quot;The Sky of Now&quot; (1994)
* &quot;The Gates of November&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Zebra and Other Stories&quot; (1998)
* &quot;Isaac Stern: My First 79 Years&quot; (with Isaac Stern; 1999)
* &quot;Old Men at Midnight&quot; (2001)

==See also==

*List of brain tumor patients

==References==
==External links==

* Finding aid to the Chaim Potok papers Ms. Coll. 730 at the University of Pennsylvania Libraries
*Chaim Potok resource site created by William M. Allen, PhD, La Sierra University
*Interview with Quiara Alegría Hudes in Guernica, July 2012</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q560735" start="0" end="11" title="Chaim Potok" label="Chaim Potok"/>
<link wikidata="Q482980" start="64" end="70" title="author" label="author"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625963" start="72" end="80" title="novelist" label="novelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q214917" start="82" end="92" title="playwright" label="playwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q194105" start="94" end="100" title="editor" label="editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="105" end="110" title="rabbi" label="rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2752989" start="178" end="188" title="The Chosen (Potok novel)" label="The Chosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q578913" start="216" end="263" title="The New York Times Best Seller list" label="&amp;quot;The New York Times&amp;quot; Best Seller list"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198355" start="353" end="388" title="The Chosen (1981 film)" label="1981 feature film by the same title"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="437" end="446" title="the Bronx" label="the Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="448" end="461" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="523" end="529" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="546" end="552" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="639" end="645" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="693" end="701" title="Orthodox Judaism" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q107002" start="734" end="746" title="Evelyn Waugh" label="Evelyn Waugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6992413" start="766" end="786" title="Brideshead Revisited" label="Brideshead Revisited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="1049" end="1069" title="The Atlantic Monthly" label="The Atlantic Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773401" start="1194" end="1225" title="Marsha Stern Talmudical Academy" label="Marsha Stern Talmudical Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048851" start="1367" end="1385" title="Yeshiva University" label="Yeshiva University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581478" start="1442" end="1457" title="summa cum laude" label="summa cum laude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688743" start="1530" end="1568" title="Jewish Theological Seminary of America" label="Jewish Theological Seminary of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="1607" end="1612" title="rabbi" label="rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q205644" start="1719" end="1739" title="Conservative Judaism" label="Conservative Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q186579" start="1784" end="1802" title="English literature" label="English literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="1828" end="1837" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="1866" end="1877" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="2120" end="2133" title="anti-Semitism" label="anti-Semitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563835" start="2296" end="2317" title="University of Judaism" label="University of Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="2321" end="2332" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="2370" end="2381" title="psychiatric" label="psychiatric"/>
<link wikidata="Q205398" start="2382" end="2395" title="social worker" label="social worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027519" start="2400" end="2430" title="Camp Ramah in California" label="Camp Ramah in Ojai, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="2565" end="2591" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2634" end="2652" title="Har Zion Synagogue" label="Har Zion Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="2656" end="2668" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q465763" start="2816" end="2830" title="Solomon Maimon" label="Solomon Maimon"/>
<link wikidata="Q205644" start="2960" end="2980" title="Conservative Judaism" label="Conservative Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296939" start="3133" end="3159" title="Jewish Publication Society" label="Jewish Publication Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="3355" end="3364" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819482" start="3536" end="3556" title="Merion, Pennsylvania" label="Merion, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2752989" start="3637" end="3647" title="The Chosen (Potok novel)" label="The Chosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344136" start="3669" end="3695" title="Edward Lewis Wallant Award" label="Edward Lewis Wallant Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q572316" start="3722" end="3741" title="National Book Award" label="National Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630405" start="3814" end="3825" title="The Promise (Potok novel)" label="The Promise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869315" start="3937" end="3961" title="Athenaeum Literary Award" label="Athenaeum Literary Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296939" start="4019" end="4045" title="Jewish Publication Society" label="Jewish Publication Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845625" start="4120" end="4140" title="My Name is Asher Lev" label="My Name is Asher Lev"/>
<link wikidata="Q3797411" start="4287" end="4303" title="In the Beginning (novel)" label="In the Beginning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897107" start="4683" end="4698" title="Moment Magazine" label="Moment Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198355" start="4959" end="4963" title="The Chosen (1981 film)" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q326220" start="5026" end="5045" title="Montreal World Film Festival" label="World Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="5047" end="5055" title="Montreal, Canada" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="5069" end="5079" title="cameo role" label="cameo role"/>
<link wikidata="Q504160" start="5127" end="5139" title="Barry Miller (actor)" label="Barry Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q153018" start="5141" end="5158" title="Maximilian Schell" label="Maximilian Schell"/>
<link wikidata="Q777128" start="5163" end="5175" title="Robby Benson" label="Robby Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="5195" end="5207" title="Off-Broadway" label="Off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787942" start="5316" end="5337" title="Arden Theatre Company (Philadelphia)" label="Arden Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="5341" end="5353" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242048" start="5394" end="5412" title="Davita&amp;#x27;s Harp" label="Davita&amp;#x27;s Harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736408" start="5548" end="5569" title="The Gift of Asher Lev" label="The Gift of Asher Lev"/>
<link wikidata="Q6189737" start="5588" end="5614" title="National Jewish Book Award" label="National Jewish Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="6208" end="6219" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q37030" start="6221" end="6232" title="Thomas Mann" label="Thomas Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q991" start="6234" end="6252" title="Fyodor Dostoyevsky" label="Fyodor Dostoyevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="6254" end="6270" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Ernest Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q133042" start="6276" end="6287" title="Shmuel Yosef Agnon" label="S. Y. Agnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q171201" start="6426" end="6433" title="Hasidic Jew" label="Hasidic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845625" start="6491" end="6511" title="My Name is Asher Lev" label="My Name is Asher Lev"/>
<link wikidata="Q18391" start="7438" end="7449" title="Elie Wiesel" label="Elie Wiesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2752989" start="7623" end="7633" title="The Chosen (Potok novel)" label="The Chosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630405" start="7655" end="7666" title="The Promise (Potok novel)" label="The Promise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845625" start="7688" end="7708" title="My Name Is Asher Lev" label="My Name Is Asher Lev"/>
<link wikidata="Q3797411" start="7730" end="7746" title="In the Beginning (novel)" label="In the Beginning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719263" start="7860" end="7878" title="The Book of Lights" label="The Book of Lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242048" start="7900" end="7918" title="Davita&amp;#x27;s Harp" label="Davita&amp;#x27;s Harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736408" start="7975" end="7996" title="The Gift of Asher Lev" label="The Gift of Asher Lev"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608132" start="8373" end="8401" title="List of brain tumor patients" label="List of brain tumor patients"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465284" start="8597" end="8617" title="La Sierra University" label="La Sierra University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="63915" wikidata="Q267416" url="?curid=63915" title="Static random-access memory">
<text>Static random-access memory (static RAM or SRAM) is a type of random-access memory (RAM) that uses latching circuitry (flip-flop) to store each bit. SRAM is volatile memory; data is lost when power is removed.

The &quot;static&quot; qualifier differentiates SRAM from &quot;dynamic&quot; random-access memory (DRAM):
* SRAM will hold its data permanently in the presence of power, while data in DRAM decays in seconds and thus must be periodically refreshed. 
* SRAM is faster than DRAM but it is more expensive in terms of silicon area and cost.
* Typically, SRAM is used for the cache and internal registers of a CPU while DRAM is used for a computer&#x27;s main memory.

==History==
Semiconductor bipolar SRAM was invented in 1963 by Robert Norman at Fairchild Semiconductor. Metal–oxide–semiconductor SRAM (MOS-SRAM) was invented in 1964 by John Schmidt at Fairchild Semiconductor. The first device was a 64-bit MOS p-channel SRAM.

SRAM was the main driver behind any new CMOS-based technology fabrication process since the 1960s, when CMOS was invented.

In 1964, Arnold Farber and Eugene Schlig, working for IBM, created a hard-wired memory cell, using a transistor gate and tunnel diode latch. They replaced the latch with two transistors and two resistors, a configuration that became known as the Farber-Schlig cell. That year they submitted an invention disclosure, but it was initially rejected. In 1965, Benjamin Agusta and his team at IBM created a 16-bit silicon memory chip based on the Farber-Schlig cell, with 84 transistors, 64 resistors, and 4 diodes.

In April 1969, Intel Inc. introduced its first product, Intel 3101, a SRAM memory chip intended to replace bulky magnetic-core memory modules; Its capacity was 64 bits and was based on bipolar junction transistors. It was designed by using rubylith.

==Characteristics==
Though it can be characterized as volatile memory, SRAM exhibits data remanence.

SRAM offers a simple data access model and does not require a refresh circuit. Performance and reliability are good and power consumption is low when idle. Since SRAM requires more transistors per bit to implement, it is less dense and more expensive than DRAM and also has a higher power consumption during read or write access. The power consumption of SRAM varies widely depending on how frequently it is accessed.

==Applications==

===Embedded use===
Many categories of industrial and scientific subsystems, automotive electronics, and similar embedded systems, contain SRAM which, in this context, may be referred to as ESRAM. Some amount (kilobytes or less) is also embedded in practically all modern appliances, toys, etc. that implement an electronic user interface.

SRAM in its dual-ported form is sometimes used for real-time digital signal processing circuits.

===In computers===
SRAM is also used in personal computers, workstations, routers and peripheral equipment: CPU register files, internal CPU caches, internal GPU caches and external burst mode SRAM caches, hard disk buffers, router buffers, etc. LCD screens and printers also normally employ SRAM to hold the image displayed (or to be printed). LCDs can have SRAM in their LCD controllers. SRAM was used for the main memory of many early personal computers such as the ZX80, TRS-80 Model 100, and VIC-20.

Some early memory cards in the late 1980s to early 1990s used SRAM as a storage medium, which required a lithium battery to keep the contents of the SRAM.

=== Integrated on chip ===
SRAM may be integrated on chip for:

* the RAM in microcontrollers (usually from around 32 bytes to a megabyte),
* the on-chip caches in more powerful CPUs, such as the x86 family, and many others (from 8 KB, up to many megabytes),
* the registers and parts of the state-machines used in some microprocessors (see register file),
* scratchpad memory,
* application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs) (usually in the order of kilobytes),
* and in field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) and complex programmable logic devices (CPLDs).

===Hobbyists===
Hobbyists, specifically home-built processor enthusiasts, often prefer SRAM due to the ease of interfacing. It is much easier to work with than DRAM as there are no refresh cycles and the address and data buses are often directly accessible. In addition to buses and power connections, SRAM usually requires only three controls: Chip Enable (CE), Write Enable (WE) and Output Enable (OE). In synchronous SRAM, Clock (CLK) is also included.

==Types of SRAM==

===Non-volatile SRAM===
Non-volatile SRAM (nvSRAM) has standard SRAM functionality, but they save the data when the power supply is lost, ensuring preservation of critical information. nvSRAMs are used in a wide range of situationsnetworking, aerospace, and medical, among many otherswhere the preservation of data is critical and where batteries are impractical.

===Pseudostatic RAM===
Pseudostatic RAM (PSRAM) is DRAM combined with a self-refresh circuit. It appears externally as slower SRAM, albeit with a density and cost advantage over true SRAM, and without the access complexity of DRAM.

===By transistor type===
* Bipolar junction transistor (used in TTL and ECL) very fast but with high power consumption
* MOSFET (used in CMOS) low power

=== By numeral system ===

* Binary
* Ternary

===By function===
* Asynchronous independent of clock frequency; data in and data out are controlled by address transition. Examples include the ubiquitous 28-pin 8K × 8 and 32K × 8 chips (often but not always named something along the lines of 6264 and 62C256 respectively), as well as similar products up to 16 Mbit per chip.
* Synchronous all timings are initiated by the clock edges. Address, data in and other control signals are associated with the clock signals.
In the 1990s, asynchronous SRAM used to be employed for fast access time. Asynchronous SRAM was used as main memory for small cache-less embedded processors used in everything from industrial electronics and measurement systems to hard disks and networking equipment, among many other applications. Nowadays, synchronous SRAM (e.g. DDR SRAM) is rather employed similarly to synchronous DRAMDDR SDRAM memory is rather used than asynchronous DRAM. Synchronous memory interface is much faster as access time can be significantly reduced by employing pipeline architecture. Furthermore, as DRAM is much cheaper than SRAM, SRAM is often replaced by DRAM, especially in the case when a large volume of data is required. SRAM memory is, however, much faster for random (not block / burst) access. Therefore, SRAM memory is mainly used for CPU cache, small on-chip memory, FIFOs or other small buffers.

===By feature===
* Zero bus turnaround (ZBT) the turnaround is the number of clock cycles it takes to change access to SRAM from &quot;write&quot; to &quot;read&quot; and vice versa. The turnaround for ZBT SRAMs or the latency between read and write cycle is zero.
* syncBurst (syncBurst SRAM or synchronous-burst SRAM) features synchronous burst write access to SRAM to increase write operation to SRAM.
* DDR SRAM synchronous, single read/write port, double data rate I/O.
* Quad Data Rate SRAM synchronous, separate read and write ports, quadruple data rate I/O.

==Design==

A typical SRAM cell is made up of six MOSFETs, and is often called a SRAM cell. Each bit in the cell is stored on four transistors (M1, M2, M3, M4) that form two cross-coupled inverters. This storage cell has two stable states which are used to denote 0 and 1. Two additional &quot;access&quot; transistors serve to control the access to a storage cell during read and write operations. 6T SRAM is the most common kind of SRAM. In addition to 6T SRAM, other kinds of SRAM use 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10 (4T, 5T, 7T 8T, 9T, 10T SRAM), or more transistors per bit. Four-transistor SRAM is quite common in stand-alone SRAM devices (as opposed to SRAM used for CPU caches), implemented in special processes with an extra layer of polysilicon, allowing for very high-resistance pull-up resistors. The principal drawback of using 4T SRAM is increased static power due to the constant current flow through one of the pull-down transistors (M1 or M2).

This is sometimes used to implement more than one (read and/or write) port, which may be useful in certain types of video memory and register files implemented with multi-ported SRAM circuitry.

Generally, the fewer transistors needed per cell, the smaller each cell can be. Since the cost of processing a silicon wafer is relatively fixed, using smaller cells and so packing more bits on one wafer reduces the cost per bit of memory.

Memory cells that use fewer than four transistors are possible; however, such 3T or 1T cells are DRAM, not SRAM (even the so-called 1T-SRAM).

Access to the cell is enabled by the word line (WL in figure) which controls the two &quot;access&quot; transistors M5 and M6 in 6T SRAM figure (or M3 and M4 in 4T SRAM figure) which, in turn, control whether the cell should be connected to the bit lines: BL and BL. They are used to transfer data for both read and write operations. Although it is not strictly necessary to have two bit lines, both the signal and its inverse are typically provided in order to improve noise margins and speed.

During read accesses, the bit lines are actively driven high and low by the inverters in the SRAM cell. This improves SRAM bandwidth compared to DRAMs in a DRAM, the bit line is connected to storage capacitors and charge sharing causes the bit line to swing upwards or downwards. The symmetric structure of SRAMs also allows for differential signaling, which makes small voltage swings more easily detectable. Another difference with DRAM that contributes to making SRAM faster is that commercial chips accept all address bits at a time. By comparison, commodity DRAMs have the address multiplexed in two halves, i.e. higher bits followed by lower bits, over the same package pins in order to keep their size and cost down.

The size of an SRAM with address lines and data lines is words, or bits. The most common word size is 8 bits, meaning that a single byte can be read or written to each of different words within the SRAM chip. Several common SRAM chips have 11 address lines (thus a capacity of 2k words) and an 8-bit word, so they are referred to as &quot;2k × 8 SRAM&quot;.

The dimensions of an SRAM cell on an IC is determined by the minimum feature size of the process used to make the IC.
==SRAM operation==

An SRAM cell has three states:

* Standby: The circuit is idle.
* Reading: The data has been requested.
* Writing: Updating the contents.

SRAM operating in read and write modes should have &quot;readability&quot; and &quot;write stability&quot;, respectively. The three different states work as follows:

===Standby===
If the word line is not asserted, the &quot;access&quot; transistors M5 and M6 disconnect the cell from the bit lines. The two cross-coupled inverters formed by M1M4 will continue to reinforce each other as long as they are connected to the supply.

===Reading===
In theory, reading only requires asserting the word line WL and reading the SRAM cell state by a single access transistor and bit line, e.g. M6, BL. However, bit lines are relatively long and have large parasitic capacitance. To speed up reading, a more complex process is used in practice: The read cycle is started by precharging both bit lines BL and BL, to high (logic 1) voltage. Then asserting the word line WL enables both the access transistors M5 and M6, which causes one bit line BL voltage to slightly drop. Then the BL and BL lines will have a small voltage difference between them. A sense amplifier will sense which line has the higher voltage and thus determine whether there was 1 or 0 stored. The higher the sensitivity of the sense amplifier, the faster the read operation. As the NMOS is more powerful, the pull-down is easier. Therefore, bit lines are traditionally precharged to high voltage. Many researchers are also trying to precharge at a slightly low voltage to reduce the power consumption.

===Writing===
The write cycle begins by applying the value to be written to the bit lines. To write a 0, a 0 is applied to the bit lines, such as setting BL to 1 and BL to 0. This is similar to applying a reset pulse to an SR-latch, which causes the flip flop to change state. A 1 is written by inverting the values of the bit lines. WL is then asserted and the value that is to be stored is latched in. This works because the bit line input-drivers are designed to be much stronger than the relatively weak transistors in the cell itself so they can easily override the previous state of the cross-coupled inverters. In practice, access NMOS transistors M5 and M6 have to be stronger than either bottom NMOS (M1, M3) or top PMOS (M2, M4) transistors. This is easily obtained as PMOS transistors are much weaker than NMOS when same sized. Consequently, when one transistor pair (e.g. M3 and M4) is only slightly overridden by the write process, the opposite transistors pair (M1 and M2) gate voltage is also changed. This means that the M1 and M2 transistors can be easier overridden, and so on. Thus, cross-coupled inverters magnify the writing process.

===Bus behavior===
RAM with an access time of 70 ns will output valid data within 70 ns from the time that the address lines are valid. Some SRAM cells have a &quot;page mode&quot;, where words of a page (256, 512, or 1024 words) can be read sequentially with a significantly shorter access time (typically approximately 30 ns). The page is selected by setting the upper address lines and then words are sequentially read by stepping through the lower address lines.

== Production challenges ==
Over 30 years (from 1987 to 2017), with a steadily decreasing transistor size (node size), the footprint-shrinking of the SRAM cell topology itself slowed down, making it harder to pack the cells more densely. One of the reasons is that scaling down transistor size leads to SRAM reliability issues. Careful cells designs are necessary to achieve SRAM cells that do not suffer from stability problems especially when they are being read. With the introduction of the FinFET transistor implementation of SRAM cells, they started to suffer from increasing inefficiencies in cell sizes.

Besides issues with size a significant challenge of modern SRAM cells is a static current leakage. The current, that flows from positive supply (Vdd), through the cell, and to the ground, increases exponentially when the cell&#x27;s temperature rises. The cell power drain occurs in both active and idle states, thus wasting useful energy without any useful work done. Even though in the last 20 years the issue was partially addressed by the Data Retention Voltage technique (DRV) with reduction rates ranging from 5 to 10, the decrease in node size caused reduction rates to fall to about 2.

With these two issues it became more challenging to develop energy-efficient and dense SRAM memories, prompting semiconductor industry to look for alternatives such as STT-MRAM and F-RAM.

=== Research ===
In 2019 a French institute reported on a research of an IoT-purposed 28nm fabricated IC. It was based on fully depleted silicon on insulator-transistors (FD-SOI), had two-ported SRAM memory rail for synchronous/asynchronous accesses, and selective virtual ground (SVGND). The study claimed reaching an ultra-low SVGND current in a &quot;sleep&quot; and read modes by finely tuning its voltage.

==See also==

* Flash memory
* Miniature Card, a discontinued SRAM memory card standard
* In-memory processing

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q267416" start="0" end="27" title="Static random-access memory" label="Static random-access memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q267416" start="29" end="39" title="Static random-access memory" label="static RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q267416" start="43" end="47" title="Static random-access memory" label="SRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="62" end="82" title="random-access memory" label="random-access memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q183406" start="99" end="129" title="Flip-flop (electronics)" label="latching circuitry (flip-flop)"/>
<link wikidata="Q496533" start="157" end="172" title="volatile memory" label="volatile memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q189396" start="269" end="309" title="Dynamic random-access memory" label="&amp;quot;dynamic&amp;quot; random-access memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815755" start="449" end="458" title="memory refresh" label="refreshed"/>
<link wikidata="Q352090" start="582" end="587" title="CPU cache" label="cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q187466" start="601" end="610" title="CPU register" label="registers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="616" end="619" title="CPU" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q66221" start="661" end="672" title="main memory" label="main memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096013" start="755" end="778" title="Fairchild Semiconductor" label="Fairchild Semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q210793" start="780" end="805" title="Metal–oxide–semiconductor" label="Metal–oxide–semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q173431" start="978" end="982" title="CMOS" label="CMOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="1163" end="1173" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q176235" start="1183" end="1195" title="tunnel diode" label="tunnel diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q183406" start="1196" end="1201" title="Flip-flop (electronics)" label="latch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321" start="1256" end="1264" title="resistor" label="resistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q839647" start="1687" end="1707" title="magnetic-core memory" label="magnetic-core memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q188946" start="1759" end="1786" title="bipolar junction transistor" label="bipolar junction transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376429" start="1814" end="1822" title="rubylith" label="rubylith"/>
<link wikidata="Q496533" start="1879" end="1894" title="volatile memory" label="volatile memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q651324" start="1910" end="1924" title="data remanence" label="data remanence"/>
<link wikidata="Q29954" start="2210" end="2227" title="power consumption" label="power consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="2476" end="2491" title="embedded system" label="embedded system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065347" start="2716" end="2727" title="dual-ported RAM" label="dual-ported"/>
<link wikidata="Q173142" start="2765" end="2790" title="digital signal processing" label="digital signal processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q180944" start="2914" end="2927" title="register file" label="register file"/>
<link wikidata="Q352090" start="2939" end="2948" title="CPU cache" label="CPU cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q165596" start="2960" end="2969" title="GPU cache" label="GPU cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017053" start="2984" end="2994" title="Burst mode (computing)" label="burst mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="3008" end="3017" title="hard disk" label="hard disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318" start="3027" end="3033" title="router (computing)" label="router"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="3048" end="3058" title="LCD screen" label="LCD screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q82" start="3064" end="3071" title="Computer printer" label="printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q602406" start="3271" end="3275" title="ZX80" label="ZX80"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759510" start="3277" end="3293" title="TRS-80 Model 100" label="TRS-80 Model 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q918232" start="3299" end="3305" title="VIC-20" label="VIC-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q183731" start="3319" end="3330" title="memory card" label="memory card"/>
<link wikidata="Q165678" start="3541" end="3557" title="microcontrollers" label="microcontrollers"/>
<link wikidata="Q79735" start="3593" end="3601" title="megabyte" label="megabyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q352090" start="3618" end="3624" title="CPU cache" label="caches"/>
<link wikidata="Q182933" start="3660" end="3663" title="x86" label="x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q79726" start="3696" end="3698" title="kilobyte" label="KB"/>
<link wikidata="Q180944" start="3805" end="3818" title="register file" label="register file"/>
<link wikidata="Q3928159" start="3823" end="3840" title="scratchpad memory" label="scratchpad memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q217302" start="3844" end="3883" title="application-specific integrated circuit" label="application-specific integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q190411" start="3939" end="3968" title="field-programmable gate array" label="field-programmable gate array"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063858" start="3982" end="4015" title="complex programmable logic device" label="complex programmable logic device"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070717" start="4527" end="4544" title="Non-volatile SRAM" label="Non-volatile SRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q189396" start="4891" end="4907" title="Pseudostatic RAM" label="Pseudostatic RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q188946" start="5128" end="5155" title="Bipolar junction transistor" label="Bipolar junction transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q173451" start="5165" end="5168" title="transistor-transistor logic" label="TTL"/>
<link wikidata="Q173552" start="5173" end="5176" title="emitter coupled logic" label="ECL"/>
<link wikidata="Q210793" start="5222" end="5228" title="MOSFET" label="MOSFET"/>
<link wikidata="Q173431" start="5238" end="5242" title="CMOS" label="CMOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056486" start="5293" end="5300" title="Ternary numeral system" label="Ternary"/>
<link wikidata="Q629971" start="5322" end="5334" title="Asynchronous circuit" label="Asynchronous"/>
<link wikidata="Q249926" start="5547" end="5551" title="6264" label="6264"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058791" start="5632" end="5643" title="Synchronous" label="Synchronous"/>
<link wikidata="Q66221" start="5876" end="5887" title="main memory" label="main memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q593143" start="5953" end="5975" title="industrial electronics" label="industrial electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q932268" start="5980" end="5998" title="measurement system" label="measurement system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="6003" end="6012" title="hard disk" label="hard disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q333914" start="6162" end="6171" title="DDR SDRAM" label="DDR SDRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q189396" start="6199" end="6216" title="asynchronous DRAM" label="asynchronous DRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192422" start="6319" end="6327" title="pipeline (computing)" label="pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q352090" start="6604" end="6613" title="CPU cache" label="CPU cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q515636" start="6637" end="6641" title="FIFO (computing and electronics)" label="FIFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268276" start="7145" end="7164" title="Quad Data Rate SRAM" label="Quad Data Rate SRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q210793" start="7285" end="7291" title="MOSFET" label="MOSFET"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="7332" end="7335" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="7366" end="7376" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q737038" start="7964" end="7975" title="polysilicon" label="polysilicon"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8083" end="8095" title="CMOS#Power: switching and leakage" label="static power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541597" start="8299" end="8311" title="video memory" label="video memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q180944" start="8316" end="8329" title="register file" label="register file"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813491" start="8751" end="8758" title="1T-SRAM" label="1T-SRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324892" start="9232" end="9244" title="noise margin" label="noise margin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074272" start="9472" end="9486" title="charge sharing" label="charge sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928527" start="9587" end="9609" title="differential signaling" label="differential signaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583973" start="10261" end="10262" title="kibi (binary prefix)" label="k"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570432" start="10403" end="10423" title="minimum feature size" label="minimum feature size"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157249" start="11267" end="11288" title="parasitic capacitance" label="parasitic capacitance"/>
<link wikidata="Q183406" start="12307" end="12315" title="Latch (electronic)" label="SR-latch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="13259" end="13262" title="RAM" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570432" start="13798" end="13813" title="Semiconductor device fabrication" label="transistor size"/>
<link wikidata="Q33114556" start="14203" end="14209" title="FinFET" label="FinFET"/>
<link wikidata="Q844840" start="15084" end="15092" title="STT-MRAM" label="STT-MRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q703656" start="15097" end="15102" title="F-RAM" label="F-RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q251212" start="15178" end="15181" title="IoT" label="IoT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570432" start="15191" end="15195" title="Semiconductor device fabrication" label="28nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="15207" end="15209" title="Integrated circuit" label="IC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478788" start="15227" end="15262" title="Silicon on insulator" label="fully depleted silicon on insulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423137" start="15370" end="15384" title="virtual ground" label="virtual ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="15533" end="15545" title="Flash memory" label="Flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858398" start="15548" end="15562" title="Miniature Card" label="Miniature Card"/>
<link wikidata="Q6008583" start="15607" end="15627" title="In-memory processing" label="In-memory processing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="63919" wikidata="Q202852" url="?curid=63919" title="Bled">
<text>Bled (; , in older sources also &quot;Feldes&quot;) is a town on Lake Bled in the Upper Carniolan region of northwestern Slovenia. It is one of Slovenia&#x27;s most visited tourist destinations. The town is the administrative seat of the Municipality of Bled.

==Name==
The town was first attested in written sources as &quot;Ueldes&quot; in 1004 (and as &quot;Veldes&quot; in 1011). The etymology of the name is unknown and it is believed to be of pre-Slavic origin. The German name of the town, &quot;Veldes&quot;, was either borrowed from Old Slovene &quot;*Beldъ&quot; before AD 800 or is derived from the same pre-Slavic source as the Slovene name.

==Geography==

Bled is located on the southern foot of the Karawanks mountain range near the border with Austria, about northwest of the national capital of Ljubljana. South of Lake Bled are the densely forested Pokljuka and Jelovica plateaus and the easternmost parts of the Julian Alps, where the Sava Bohinjka river and the parallel Bohinj Railway lead to the Bohinj basin, Lake Bohinj, and the Triglav massif.

A number of rises (Grad 599 m, Straža 646 m, Kozarca 558 m, Osojnica 756 m, and Ravnica 729 m) separate the localities of Bled around the lake, the former villages of Grad, Mlino, Rečica, Zagorice, and Želeče.

The lake is long and wide. In summer, the surface water reaches and retains a temperature up to until autumn. As such, it is suitable for swimming. During colder winters, the entire lake freezes and can be used for ice skating; the island can then be reached on foot.

There is a thermal spring () near the lake, next to the Bled Fault. Its water is used in indoor pools in two hotels.

==History==
===Early medieval history===


A settlement area since Mesolithic times, the present-day locality probably arose about 600 during the Slavic settlement of the Eastern Alps. After the Slavic principality of Carantania was conquered by Frankish forces in 788, the area came under Bavarian influence.

===Feudal estate===
German King Henry II ceded ownership of the area in 1004 to Albuin, Bishop of Brixen as a sign of gratitude for the assistance the Church was giving to the king in his attempt to strengthen imperial rule in that part of northern Italy. In 1011, Henry II signed another deed of donation that added the castle and an area of land the size of thirty king&#x27;s farms. That area, between the Sava Bohinjka and the Sava Dolinka, became known as the Lordship of Veldes (German: &quot;Herrschaft Veldes&quot;). These donations marked a turning point in the history of Bled and, for the following 800 years, the area remained under the sovereignty of the prince-bishops of Brixen.

The bishops very seldom visited their remote possession 300 km away. Initially, the lordship was administered by &quot;ministeriales&quot; (bonded knights), castellans, and castle staff in accordance with feudal practices, but in the middle of the 14th century the prince-bishops decided instead to lease the estate. Under one of the 16th-century lessees, Bled Castle became a Protestant stronghold for a time. When the leasehold era came to an end, the prince-bishops began to appoint governors to manage their distant lordship. Until the middle of the 18th century, those administrators were exclusively aristocratic, but later they included non-nobles.

In 1803, Brixen&#x27;s rule came to an end when the prince-bishopric was secularized in the course of the German Mediatization. Bled then came under Austrian sovereignty but in 1808, along with Carniola, it was included in the Napoleonic Illyrian Provinces. It returned under Austrian sovereignty in 1813, and in 1838 the Austrian Emperor returned Bled to the bishops of Brixen as a private estate. With the abolition of the feudal system in 1848, Bled ceased to have the characteristics of a feudal economy and from then on it experienced several changes in ownership, including industrialists and a bank.

After the dissolution of Austria-Hungary in 1918, Bled and the rest of Carniola came under the rule of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia and became a summer domicile of the ruling House of Karađorđević, a tradition that Yugoslav leader Josip Broz Tito continued when he built his residence here in 1947.

===Modern settlement===
Today&#x27;s town began to form in the mid-19th century from the villages of Grad, Mlino, Rečica, Zagorice, and Želeče, which encircled the lake. At that time, farmers started to sell the land along the eastern lakeshore to wealthy individuals for their villas, and the villages of Grad, Zagorice, and Želeče began to merge. Bled was officially made a town in 1960.

==Tourism==

Bled is known for the glacial Lake Bled, which makes it a major tourist attraction. Perched on a rock overlooking the lake is the iconic Bled Castle. The town is also known in Slovenia for its vanilla and cream pastry ().

Naturopath Arnold Rikli (1823–1906) from Switzerland contributed significantly to the development of Bled as a health resort in the second half of the 19th century. Due to its mild climate, Bled has been visited by aristocratic guests from all across the world. Today it is an important convention centre and tourist resort, offering a wide range of sports activities (golf, fishing, and horseback riding). It is a starting point for mountain treks and hikes, especially within nearby Triglav National Park.

A small island in the middle of the lake is home to the Assumption of Mary Pilgrimage Church; visitors frequently ring its bell, due to an old legend claiming it provides good luck.

Human traces from prehistory have been found on the island. Before the church was built, there was a temple consecrated to Živa, the Slavic goddess of love and fertility. One can get to the island on a traditional flat-bottomed wooden boat (), part of a fixed fleet of 23 boats to protect the lake&#x27;s cleanliness, run by a family-owned business since the 18th century. The island on Lake Bled has 99 steps. A local tradition at weddings is for the husband to carry his new bride up these steps, during which the bride must remain silent.

==Transport==
The town is served by two railway stations: Lesce-Bled (located in nearby Lesce) on the main line between Ljubljana and Villach Hauptbahnhof, and Bled Jezero (located above the western shore of Lake Bled) on the Bohinj Railway. Slovenia&#x27;s main international airport, Ljubljana Jože Pučnik Airport, is 34 km away by road; Lesce-Bled Airport caters to general aviation.

==Events==
Bled has hosted the World Rowing Championships four times, in 1966, 1979, 1989, and most recently in 2011.

In 1961 the Grand Hotel Toplice in Bled was the site of one of the most important international tournaments in chess history. In 2002, the 35th Chess Olympiad was held in the city.

Bled hosts one of the largest Lindy Hop events, known as &quot;Swing Bled&quot;.

In 1959 the first 14 rounds of the 4th Chess Candidates Tournament were held in this city, the rest were played in Zagreb and in Belgrade.

==Notable people==
Notable people that were born or lived in Bled include:
* Prince Andrew of Yugoslavia was born in 1929 in Bled.
* Iztok Čop (born 1972), rower, multiple Olympic medalist
* Peter Florjančič (1919–2020), inventor and Olympic athlete
* Janez Klemenčič (born 1971), rower, Olympic bronze medalist. Now a restaurateur in Bled.
* Karel Mauser (1918–1977), poet and author
* Valentin Plemel (1820–1875), botanist
* Josip Plemelj (1873–1967), Slovene mathematician
* Špela Pretnar (born 1973), skier, Olympic athlete

==International relations==
===Twin towns / sister cities===
Bled is twinned with:
* Brixen (Bressanone), Italy
* Henley on Thames, United Kingdom
* Velden am Wörther See, Austria

==See also==
* St. Martin&#x27;s Parish Church, Bled

==References==
==External links==
* Bled on Geopedia
* Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q202852" start="0" end="4" title="Bled" label="Bled"/>
<link wikidata="Q648902" start="65" end="74" title="Lake Bled" label="Lake Bled"/>
<link wikidata="Q909928" start="82" end="96" title="Upper Carniola" label="Upper Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="121" end="129" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="144" end="159" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q317548" start="173" end="193" title="Resort town" label="tourist destinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q647572" start="238" end="258" title="Municipality of Bled" label="Municipality of Bled"/>
<link wikidata="Q198007" start="714" end="723" title="Karawanks" label="Karawanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="760" end="767" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q437" start="812" end="821" title="Ljubljana" label="Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q843444" start="867" end="875" title="Pokljuka" label="Pokljuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666468" start="880" end="888" title="Jelovica" label="Jelovica"/>
<link wikidata="Q119206" start="931" end="942" title="Julian Alps" label="Julian Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465149" start="954" end="967" title="Sava Bohinjka" label="Sava Bohinjka"/>
<link wikidata="Q362743" start="991" end="1005" title="Bohinj Railway" label="Bohinj Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q833595" start="1018" end="1024" title="Bohinj" label="Bohinj"/>
<link wikidata="Q831903" start="1032" end="1043" title="Lake Bohinj" label="Lake Bohinj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024" start="1053" end="1060" title="Triglav" label="Triglav"/>
<link wikidata="Q60458258" start="1258" end="1266" title="Zagorice, Bled" label="Zagorice"/>
<link wikidata="Q125710841" start="1272" end="1278" title="Želeče" label="Želeče"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="1735" end="1745" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4423052" start="1814" end="1851" title="Slavic settlement of the Eastern Alps" label="Slavic settlement of the Eastern Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q501754" start="1886" end="1896" title="Carantania" label="Carantania"/>
<link wikidata="Q146246" start="1914" end="1922" title="Francia" label="Frankish"/>
<link wikidata="Q47261" start="1958" end="1966" title="Duchy of Bavaria" label="Bavarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q103556" start="2011" end="2019" title="Henry II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q13496558" start="2067" end="2083" title="Bishopric of Brixen" label="Bishop of Brixen"/>
<link wikidata="Q314739" start="3437" end="3457" title="German Mediatization" label="German Mediatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q699923" start="3569" end="3587" title="Illyrian Provinces" label="Illyrian Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="3964" end="3979" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="4046" end="4067" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q220641" start="4111" end="4132" title="House of Karađorđević" label="House of Karađorđević"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="4167" end="4182" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Josip Broz Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="4662" end="4669" title="glacier" label="glacial"/>
<link wikidata="Q648902" start="4670" end="4679" title="Lake Bled" label="Lake Bled"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049047" start="4777" end="4788" title="Bled Castle" label="Bled Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436724" start="4833" end="4857" title="Kremna rezina" label="vanilla and cream pastry"/>
<link wikidata="Q213403" start="4863" end="4873" title="Naturopathic medicine" label="Naturopath"/>
<link wikidata="Q124423" start="4874" end="4886" title="Arnold Rikli" label="Arnold Rikli"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="4904" end="4915" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528116" start="4974" end="4987" title="health resort" label="health resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="5232" end="5236" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="5238" end="5245" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q179226" start="5251" end="5267" title="Equestrianism" label="horseback riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014173" start="5297" end="5311" title="Backpacking (wilderness)" label="mountain treks"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014035" start="5316" end="5321" title="Hiking" label="hikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163005" start="5348" end="5369" title="Triglav National Park" label="Triglav National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q162691" start="5428" end="5446" title="Assumption of Mary" label="Assumption of Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="5447" end="5457" title="Pilgrimage" label="Pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="5573" end="5583" title="prehistory" label="prehistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q650625" start="5678" end="5682" title="Živa (goddess)" label="Živa"/>
<link wikidata="Q648902" start="5942" end="5951" title="Lake Bled" label="Lake Bled"/>
<link wikidata="Q11198952" start="6156" end="6166" title="Lesce-Bled railway station" label="Lesce-Bled"/>
<link wikidata="Q923869" start="6186" end="6191" title="Lesce" label="Lesce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817806" start="6218" end="6227" title="Ljubljana railway station" label="Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q699533" start="6232" end="6252" title="Villach Hauptbahnhof" label="Villach Hauptbahnhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925834" start="6258" end="6269" title="Bled Jezero railway station" label="Bled Jezero"/>
<link wikidata="Q362743" start="6324" end="6338" title="Bohinj Railway" label="Bohinj Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109558" start="6384" end="6413" title="Ljubljana Jože Pučnik Airport" label="Ljubljana Jože Pučnik Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433716" start="6438" end="6456" title="Lesce-Bled Airport" label="Lesce-Bled Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413606" start="6517" end="6543" title="World Rowing Championships" label="World Rowing Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932022" start="6559" end="6563" title="1966 World Rowing Championships" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q3167888" start="6565" end="6569" title="1979 World Rowing Championships" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q972814" start="6571" end="6575" title="1989 World Rowing Championships" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q80626" start="6598" end="6602" title="2011 World Rowing Championships" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594645" start="6617" end="6636" title="Grand Hotel Toplice" label="Grand Hotel Toplice"/>
<link wikidata="Q335275" start="6744" end="6763" title="35th Chess Olympiad" label="35th Chess Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134329" start="6817" end="6826" title="Lindy Hop" label="Lindy Hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q501446" start="7086" end="7113" title="Prince Andrew of Yugoslavia" label="Prince Andrew of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230878" start="7142" end="7151" title="Iztok Čop" label="Iztok Čop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074921" start="7200" end="7216" title="Peter Florjančič" label="Peter Florjančič"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161938" start="7261" end="7276" title="Janez Klemenčič" label="Janez Klemenčič"/>
<link wikidata="Q17417187" start="7352" end="7364" title="Karel Mauser" label="Karel Mauser"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7396" end="7411" title="Valentin Plemel" label="Valentin Plemel"/>
<link wikidata="Q554492" start="7436" end="7449" title="Josip Plemelj" label="Josip Plemelj"/>
<link wikidata="Q271378" start="7487" end="7500" title="Špela Pretnar" label="Špela Pretnar"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="7607" end="7614" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q185541" start="7623" end="7642" title="Brixen" label="Brixen (Bressanone)"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="7644" end="7649" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q990253" start="7652" end="7668" title="Henley on Thames" label="Henley on Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="7670" end="7684" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q660687" start="7687" end="7708" title="Velden am Wörther See" label="Velden am Wörther See"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="7710" end="7717" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q21124085" start="7734" end="7771" title="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Parish Church, Bled" label="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Parish Church, Bled"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="63927" wikidata="Q657461" url="?curid=63927" title="Cartagena, Colombia">
<text>Cartagena ( ), known since the colonial era as Cartagena de Indias (), is a city and one of the major ports on the northern coast of Colombia in the Caribbean Coast Region, along the Caribbean Sea. Cartagena&#x27;s past role as a link in the route to the West Indies provides it with important historical value for world exploration and preservation of heritage from the great commercial maritime routes. As a former Spanish colony, it was a key port for the export of Bolivian silver to Spain and for the import of enslaved Africans under the asiento system. It was defensible against pirate attacks in the Caribbean. The city&#x27;s strategic location between the Magdalena and Sinú rivers also gave it easy access to the interior of New Granada and made it a main port for trade between Spain and its overseas empire, establishing its importance by the early 1540s.

Modern Cartagena is the capital of the Bolívar Department, and had a population of 876,885 according to the 2018 census, making it the second-largest city in the Caribbean region, after Barranquilla, and the fifth-largest city in Colombia. The metropolitan area of Cartagena is the sixth-largest urban area in the country, after metropolitan area of Bucaramanga. Economic activities include the maritime and petrochemical industries, as well as tourism.

The present citynamed after Cartagena, Spain and by extension, the historic city of Carthagewas founded on 1 June 1533, making it one of South America&#x27;s oldest colonial cities; but settlement by various indigenous people in the region around Cartagena Bay dates from 4000 BC. During the Spanish colonial period Cartagena had a key role in administration and expansion of the Spanish Empire. It was a center of political, ecclesiastical, and economic activity. In 1984, Cartagena&#x27;s colonial walled city and fortress were designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

It was also the site of the Battle of Cartagena de Indias in 1741 during the War of Jenkins&#x27; Ear between Spain and Britain.

==History==

===Pre-Columbian era: 4000 BC – AD 1500===

The Puerto Hormiga Culture, founded in the Arjona Municipality of the Bolívar Department in the Caribbean coast region, particularly in the area from the Sinú River Delta to the Cartagena Bay, appears to be the first documented human community in what is now Colombia. Archeologists estimate that around 4000 BC, the formative culture was located near the boundary between the current departments of Bolívar and Sucre. In this area, archeologists have found the most ancient ceramic objects of the Americas, dating from around 4000 BC. The primary reason for the proliferation of primitive societies in this area is thought to have been the relatively mild climate and the abundance of wildlife, which allowed the hunting inhabitants a comfortable life.

Archeological investigations date the decline of the Puerto Hormiga culture and its related settlements to be ~3000 BC. The rise of a much more developed culture, the Monsú, who lived at the end of the Dique Canal near today&#x27;s Cartagena neighborhoods Pasacaballos and Ciénaga Honda at the northernmost part of Barú Island, has been hypothesized. The Monsú culture appears to have inherited the Puerto Hormiga culture&#x27;s use of the art of pottery and also to have developed a mixed economy of agriculture and basic manufacture. The Monsú people&#x27;s diet was based mostly on shellfish and fresh and salt-water fish.

The development of the Sinú society in what is today the departments of Córdoba and Sucre, eclipsed these first developments around the Cartagena Bay area. Until the Spanish colonization, many cultures derived from the Karib, Malibu and Arawak language families lived along the Colombian Caribbean coast. In the late pre-Columbian era, the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta was home to the Tayrona people, whose language was closely related to the Chibcha language family.

Around AD 1500, the area was inhabited by different tribes of the Carib language family, more precisely the Mocanae sub-family.

Mocana villages of the Carib people around the Bay of Cartagena included:
:*on a sandy island facing the ocean in what is present-day downtown: Kalamarí (Calamari)
:*on the island of Tierrabomba: Carex
:*on Isla Barú, then a peninsula: Bahaire
:*on present-day Mamonal, the eastern coast of the exterior bay: Cospique
:*in the suburban area of Turbaco: Yurbaco Tribe

Heredia found these settlements &quot;...largely surrounded with the heads of dead men placed on stakes.&quot;

Some subsidiary tribes of the Kalamari lived in today&#x27;s neighborhood of Pie de la Popa, and other subsidiaries from the Cospique lived in the Membrillal and Pasacaballos areas. Among these, according to the earliest documents available, the Kalamari had preeminence. These tribes, though physically and administratively separated, shared a common architecture, such as hut structures consisting of circular rooms with tall roofs, which were surrounded by defensive wooden palisades.

===First sightings by Europeans: 1500–1533===

Rodrigo de Bastidas traveled to the Pearl Coast and the Gulf of Uraba in 1500–01. On 14 February 1504, Ferdinand V contracted Juan de la Cosa&#x27;s voyage to Uraba. However, Juan de la Cosa died in 1510 along with 300 of Alonso de Ojeda&#x27;s men, after an armed confrontation with indigenous people, and before Juan de la Cosa could get possession of the Gulf of Urabá area. Similar contracts were signed in 1508 with Diego de Nicuesa for the settlement of Veragua and with Alonso de Ojeda for the settlement of Uraba, &quot;where gold had already been obtained on earlier voyages,&quot; according to Floyd.

After the failed effort to found Antigua del Darién in 1506 by Alonso de Ojeda and the subsequent unsuccessful founding of San Sebastián de Urabá in 1510 by Diego de Nicuesa, the southern Caribbean coast became unattractive to colonizers. They preferred the better known Hispaniola and Cuba.

Although the royal control point for trade, the Casa de Contratación gave permission to Rodrigo de Bastidas (1460–1527) to again conduct an expedition as adelantado to this area, Bastidas explored the coast and sighted the Magdalena River Delta in his first journey from Guajira to the south in 1527, a trip that ended in the Gulf of Urabá, the location of the failed first settlements. De Nicuesa and De Ojeda noted the existence of a big bay on the way from Santo Domingo to Urabá and the Panama isthmus, and that encouraged Bastidas to investigate.

===Colonial era: 1533–1717===

Under contract to Queen Joanna of Castile, Pedro de Heredia entered the Bay of Cartagena with three ships, a lighter, 150 men, and 22 horses, on 14 January 1533. He soon found the village of Calamari abandoned. Proceeding onwards to Turbaco, where Juan de la Cosa had been mortally wounded 13 years earlier, Heredia fought an all-day battle before claiming victory. Using India Catalina as a guide, Heredia embarked on a three-month exploration expedition. He returned to Calamari in April 1533 with gold pieces, including a solid gold porcupine weighing 132 pounds. In later expeditions, Heredia raided the Sinú tombs and temples of gold. His rule as governor of Cartagena lasted 22 years, before perishing on his return to Spain in 1544.

Cartagena was founded on 1 June 1533 by the Spanish commander, Pedro de Heredia, in the former location of the indigenous Caribbean Calamarí village. The town was named after the port city of Cartagena, in Murcia in southeast Spain, where most of Heredia&#x27;s sailors had resided. King Philip II gave Cartagena the title of &quot;city&quot; (&quot;ciudad&quot;) in 1574, adding &quot;most noble and loyal&quot; in 1575.

The city&#x27;s increasing importance as a port for the export of Bolivian silver from Potosí to Spain, made it an obvious target for pirates and corsairs, encouraged by France, England, and Holland. In 1544, the city was pillaged by 5 ships and 1,000 men under the command of the French pirate Jean-François Roberval, who took advantage of the city still without walls. Heredia was forced to retreat to Turbaco until a ransom was paid. A defensive tower, &quot;San Felipe del Boqueron&quot;, was built in 1566 by Governor Anton Davalos. It was supposed to protect the anchorage and the Bahia de las Animas, a water lane into Plaza de lar Mar (current day Plaze de la Aduana), but the fort&#x27;s battery had limited range. Then the French pirate Martin Cote struck in 1569 with 1,000 men, ransacking the city.

A few months after the disaster of the invasion of Cote, a fire destroyed the city and forced the creation of a firefighting squad, the first in the Americas.

In 1568, Sir John Hawkins tried to persuade Governor Martín de las Alas to open a trade fair in the city which would allow his men to sell foreign goods. This was a violation of Spanish law, which forbade trade with foreigners. Many in the settlement suspected this would have allowed Hawkins to sack the port afterwards; and as such the governor declined. Hawkins bombarded the city for 8 days, but failed to make any significant impacts and withdrew. Then Francis Drake attacked in April 1586 with 23 ships and 3,000 men. Drake burned 200 houses and the cathedral, departing only after a ransom was paid a month later.

Spain then commissioned Bautista Antonelli in 1586 to design a master scheme for defending its Caribbean ports. This included a second visit to Cartagena in 1594 when he drew up plans for a walled city.

In 1610, the Holy Office of the Inquisition was established in Cartagena and The Palace of Inquisition was completed in 1770. Sentences were pronounced in the main city plaza, today&#x27;s Plaza de Bolivar, during the &quot;Autos de Fe&quot; ceremonies. Crimes under its jurisdiction included those of heresy, blasphemy, bigamy and witchcraft. A total of 767 people were punished, which ranged from fines, wearing a Sanbenito, life imprisonment, or even the death of five. The Inquisition was abolished with independence in 1811.

The first slaves were brought by Pedro de Heredia to work as &quot;macheteros&quot;, clearing the underbrush. By the 17th century, Cartagena had become an important slave market in the New World, centered around the Plaza de los Coches. European slave traders began to bring enslaved peoples from Africa during this period. Spain was the only European power that did not establish factories in Africa to purchase slaves and therefore the Spanish Empire relied on the asiento system, awarding merchants from other European nations the license to trade enslaved people to their overseas territories.

Gov. Francisco de Murga made the Inner Bay an &quot;impregnable lagoon&quot;, according to Segovia, which included the forts &quot;El Boquerón&quot;, &quot;Castillo Grande&quot;, &quot;Manzanillo&quot;, and &quot;Manga&quot;. Besides the walls built to defend the historic district of Calamari, Francisco de Murga enclosed Getsemani with protective walls starting in 1631. This included the battery of Media Luna of San Antonio, located between the bastions of Santa Teresa and Santa Barbara, which protected the only gate and causeway to the mainland.

The practice of &quot;Situado&quot; is exemplified in the magnitude of the city&#x27;s subsidy between 1751 and 1810, when the city received the sum of 20,912,677 Spanish reales.

The Raid on Cartagena, in April 1697 during the Nine Years&#x27; War, by Sir Bernard Desjean, Baron de Pointis and Jean Baptiste Ducasse was a severe blow to Cartagena. The Baron&#x27;s forces included 22 large ships, 500 cannon, and 4,000 troops, while Ducasse&#x27;s forces consisted of 7 ships and 1,200 buccaneers. They quickly overwhelmed Sancho Jimeno de Orozco&#x27;s force of 30 men in the &quot;San Luis de Bocachica&quot; fortification. Then, &quot;San Felipe de Barajas&quot; also fell and the city came under bombardment. When the Half Moon Gate was breached and Getsemani island occupied, Governor Diego de los Rios capitulated. The Baron left after a month of plunder (roughly 2 million livres) and Ducasse followed a week later.

When King Philip II employed the Italian engineer Juan Bautista Antonelli to design a master plan of fortifications for Cartagena, construction would actually continue for the next two hundred years. On 17 March 1640, three Portuguese ships under the command of Rodrigo Lobo da Silva, ran aground in the Bocagrande Channel. This accelerated the formation of a sand bar, which soon connected the Bocagrande Peninsula to the island of Tierrabomba. The defense of the bay then shifted to two forts on either side of Bocachica, &quot;San Jose&quot; and &quot;San Luis de Bocachica&quot;. &quot;San Luis&quot; was replaced by &quot;San Fernando&quot; after the 1741 English raid. The next narrow passage was formed by the Island of Manzanillo, where &quot;San Juan del Manzanillo&quot; was constructed and &quot;Santa Cruz O Castillo Grande&quot; opposite on Cruz Grande at Punta Judio, both connected by a floating chain. Finally, there was &quot;San Felipe del Boquerón&quot;, later &quot;San Sebastián del Pastelillo&quot;. The city itself was circled with a ring of bastions connected by curtains. The island of Getsemani was also fortified. Protecting the city on the landward side, atop San Lázaro hill, was the Castillo San Felipe de Barajas named in honor of Spain&#x27;s King Philip IV and Governor Pedro Zapata de Mendoza, Marquis of Barajas&#x27; father, the Count of Barajas. Completed in 1654, the fort was expanded in the 18th century, and included underground corridors and galleries.

===Viceregal era: 1717–1811===
The 18th century began poorly for the city economically, as the Bourbon dynasty discontinued the &quot;Carrera de Indias&quot; convoys. However, with the establishment of the Viceroyalty of New Granada and the constant Anglo-Spanish conflicts, Cartagena took on the stronghold as the &quot;gateway to the Indies of Peru&quot;. By 1777, the city included 13,700 inhabitants with a garrison of 1300. The population reached 17,600 in 1809.

In 1731, Juan de Herrera y Sotomayor founded the Military Academy of Mathematics and Practice of Fortifications in Cartagena. He is also known for designing the Puerta del Reloj starting in 1704.

====1741 attack====
Starting in mid-April 1741, the city endured a siege by a large British armada under the command of Admiral Edward Vernon. The engagement, known as Battle of Cartagena de Indias, was part of the larger War of Jenkins&#x27; Ear. The British armada included 50 warships, 130 transport ships, and 25,600 men, including 2,000 North American colonial infantry. The Spanish defense was under the command of Sebastián de Eslava and Don Blas de Lezo. The British were able to take the Castillo de San Luis at Bocachica and land marines on the island of Tierrabomba and Manzanillo. The North Americans then took La Popa hill.

Following a failed attack on San Felipe Barajas on 20 April 1741, which left 800 British dead and another 1,000 taken prisoner, Vernon lifted the siege. By that time he had many sick men from tropical diseases. An interesting footnote to the battle was the inclusion of George Washington&#x27;s half brother, Lawrence Washington, among the North American colonial troops. Lawrence later named his Mount Vernon estate in honor of his commander.

During this era, José Ignacio de Pombo thrived as merchant.

====Silver Age (1750–1808)====

In 1762, Antonio de Arebalo published his Defense Plan, the Report on the estate of defense on the avenues of Cartagena de Indias. This engineer continued the work to make Cartagena impregnable, including the construction from 1771 to 1778, of a 3400 yards long underwater jetty across the Bocagrande called the &quot;Escollera&quot;. Arebalo had earlier completed &quot;San Fernando&quot;, and the fort-battery of &quot;San Jose&quot; in 1759, then added &quot;El Angel San Rafael&quot; on El Horno hill as added protection across the Bocachica.

Among the censuses of the 18th century was the special census of 1778, imposed by the governor of the time, D. Juan de Torrezar Diaz Pimienta – later Viceroy of New Granada – by order of the Marquis of Ensenada, Minister of Finance – so that he would be provided numbers for his Catastro tax project, which imposed a universal property tax he believed would contribute to the economy while at the same time increasing royal revenues dramatically. The census of 1778, besides having significance for economic history, required each house to be described in detail and its occupants enumerated, making the census an important tool The census revealed what Ensenada had hoped. However, his enemies in the court convinced King Charles III to oppose the tax plan. 

===1811 to the 21st century===

For more than 275 years, Cartagena was under Spanish rule. With Napoleon&#x27;s imprisonment of Charles IV and Ferdinand VII, and the start of the Peninsular War, the Latin American wars of independence soon followed. In Cartagena, on 4 June 1810, Royal Commissioner Antonio Villavicencio and the Cartagena City Council banished the Spanish Governor Francisco de Montes on suspicions of sympathy for the French emperor and the French occupation forces which overthrew the king. A Supreme Junta was formed, along with two political parties, one led by Jose Maria Garcia de Toledo representing the aristocrats, and a second led by Gabriel and German Piñeres representing the common people of Getsemani. Finally, on 11 November, a Declaration of Independence was signed proclaiming &quot;a free state, sovereign and independent of all domination and servitude to any power on Earth&quot;. The support for a declaration of independence by working class leader and artisan Pedro Romero was key in pushing the Junta to adopting it.

Spain&#x27;s reaction was to send a &quot;pacifying expedition&quot; under the command of Pablo Morillo, The Pacifier, and Pascual de Enrile, which included 59 ships, and 10,612 men. The city was placed under siege on 22 August 1815. The city was defended by 3000 men, 360 cannons, and 8 ships plus ancillary small watercraft, under the command of Manuel del Castillo y Rada and Juan N. Enslava. However, by that time, the city was under the rule of the Garcia de Toledo Party, having exiled German and Gabriel Piñeres, and Simon Bolivar. By 5 December, about 300 people per day died from hunger or disease, forcing 2000 to flee on vessels provided by the French mercenary Louis Aury. By that time, 6000 had died. Morillo, in retaliation after entering the city, shot nine of the rebel leaders on 24 February 1816, at what is now known as the Camellon de los Martires. These included José María García de Toledo and Manuel del Castillo y Rada.

Finally, a patriot army led by General Mariano Montilla, supported by Admiral José Prudencio Padilla, laid siege to the city from August 1820 until October 1821. A key engagement was the destruction of almost all of the royalist ships anchored on Getsemani Island on 24 June 1821. After Governor Gabriel Torres surrendered, Simon Bolivar the Liberator, bestowed the title &quot;Heroic City&quot; onto Cartagena. The Liberator spent 18 days in the city from 20 to 28 July 1827, staying in the Government Palace in Proclamation Square and the guest of a banquet hosted by Jose Padilla at his residence on Calle Larga.

Unfortunately, the toll of war, in particular from Morillo&#x27;s siege long affected the city. With the loss of the funds it had received as the main colonial military outpost, and the loss of population, the city deteriorated. It suffered a long decline in the aftermath of independence, and was largely neglected by the central government in Bogotá. In fact, its population did not reach pre-1811 numbers until the start of the 20th century.

These declines were also due to disease, including a devastating cholera epidemic in 1849. The Canal del Dique that connected it to the Magdalena River also filled with silt, leading to a drastic reduction in the amount of international trade. The rise of the port of Barranquilla only compounded the decline in trade. During the presidency of Rafael Nuñez, who was a Cartagena native, the central government finally invested in a railroad and other infrastructure improvements and modernization that helped the city to recover.

Cartagena is the capital of the Bolívar department.

==Geography==
===Location===
Cartagena is located to the north of Colombia, at 10°25&#x27;N 75°32&#x27;W.
It faces the Caribbean Sea to the west. To the south is the Cartagena Bay, which has two entrances: Bocachica (Small Mouth) in the south, and Bocagrande (Big Mouth) in the north. Its coastal line is characterized morphologically by dissipative beaches.

Cartagena bay is an estuary with an area of approximately 84 km2.

===Neighborhoods===

====Northern area====
In this area is the Rafael Núñez International Airport, located in the neighborhood of Crespo, ten minutes&#x27; drive from downtown or the old part of the city and fifteen minutes away from the modern area. Zona Norte, the area located immediately north of the airport, contains hotels, the urban development office of Barcelona de Indias, and several educational institutions. The old city walls, which enclose the &quot;centro&quot; or downtown area and the neighborhood of San Diego, are located to the southwest of Crespo. On the Caribbean shore between Crespo and the old city lie the neighborhoods of Marbella and El Cabrero.

====Downtown====
The Downtown area of Cartagena has varied architecture, mainly a colonial style, but republican and Italian style buildings, such as the cathedral&#x27;s bell tower, can be seen.

The main entrance to downtown is the &quot;Puerta del Reloj&quot; (Clock Gate), which exits onto the &quot;Plaza de los Coches&quot; (Square of the Carriages). A few steps farther is the &quot;Plaza de la Aduana&quot; (Customs Square), next to the mayor&#x27;s office. Nearby is San Pedro Claver Square and the church also named for Saint Peter Claver, where the body of the Jesuit saint (&#x27;Saint of the African slaves&#x27;) is kept in a casket, as well as the Museum of Modern Art.

Nearby is the Plaza de Bolívar (Bolívar&#x27;s Square) and the Palace of Inquisition. Plaza de Bolívar (formerly known as Plaza de La Inquisicion) is essentially a small park with a statue of Simón Bolívar in the center. This plaza is surrounded by balconied colonial buildings. Shaded outdoor cafes line the street.

The Office of Historical Archives devoted to Cartagena&#x27;s history is not far away. Next to the archives is the Government Palace, the office building of the Governor of the Department of Bolivar. Across from the palace is the Cathedral of Cartagena, which dates back to the 16th century.

Another religious building of significance is the Iglesia de Santo Domingo in front of Plaza Santo Domingo (Santo Domingo Square). In the square is the sculpture &quot;Mujer Reclinada&quot; (&quot;Reclining Woman&quot;), a gift from the notable Colombian artist Fernando Botero. Nearby is the Tcherassi Hotel, a 250-year-old colonial mansion renovated by designer Silvia Tcherassi.

In the city is the Augustinian Fathers Convent and the University of Cartagena. This university is a center of higher education opened to the public in the late 19th century. The &quot;Claustro de Santa Teresa&quot; (Saint Theresa Cloister), which has been remodeled and has become a hotel operated by Charleston Hotels. It has its own square, protected by the San Francisco Bastion.

A 20-minute walk from downtown is the Castillo de San Felipe de Barajas, located in el Pie de la Popa (another neighborhood), one of the greatest fortresses built by the Spaniards in their colonies. The tunnels were all constructed in such a way as to make it possible to hear footsteps of an approaching enemy. Some of the tunnels are open for viewing today.

Cartagena&#x27;s walled Old City is known in part for its lush plazas, and sherbet-hued Spanish colonial buildings.

====San Diego====
San Diego was named after the local San Diego Convent, now known as the Beaux Arts University Building. In front of it is the Convent of the Nuns of the Order of Saint Clare, now the Hotel Santa Clara. In the surrounding area is Santo Toribio Church, the last church built in the Walled City. Next to it is Fernández de Madrid Square, honoring Cartagena&#x27;s hero, José Fernández de Madrid, whose statue can be seen nearby.

Inside the Old City is found Las Bóvedas (The Vaults), a construction attached to the walls of the Santa Catalina Fortress. From the top of this construction the Caribbean Sea is visible.

====Getsemaní====
Once a district characterized by crime, Getsemaní, just south of the ancient walled fortress, has become &quot;Cartagena&#x27;s hippest neighborhood and one of Latin America&#x27;s newest hotspots&quot;, with plazas that were once the scene of drug dealing being reclaimed and old buildings being turned into boutique hotels.

Getsemaní has become a &quot;Ciudad Mural&quot; to rescue the values, customs, traditions and anecdotes of the people.

====Bocagrande====
The Bocagrande (Big Mouth) is an area known for its skyscrapers. The area contains the bulk of the city&#x27;s tourist facilities, such as hotels, shops, restaurants, nightclubs and art galleries. It is located between Cartagena Bay to the east and the Caribbean Sea to the west, and includes the two neighborhoods of El Laguito (The Little Lake) and Castillogrande (Big Castle). Bocagrande has long beaches and much commercial activity is found along Avenida San Martín (Saint Martin Avenue).

The beaches of Bocagrande, lying along the northern shore, are made of volcanic sand, which is slightly grayish in color. This makes the water appear muddy, though it is not. There are breakwaters about every .

On the bay side of the peninsula of Bocagrande is a seawalk. In the center of the bay is a statue of the Virgin Mary. The Naval Base is also located in Bocagrande, looking at the Bay.


===Climate===
Cartagena features a tropical wet and dry climate (Köppen: &quot;Aw&quot;). Humidity averages around 80%, with the rainy season typically lasting in May–November. The climate tends to be hot and windy.

The Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) is one of the coastal ocean factors having a bearing on the regional climate.

==Demographics==


=== Ethnic composition ===
According to the figures presented by DANE from the 2005 census, the ethnographic composition of the city is:

* Whites and Mestizos: 63.2%
* Black, mulatto, Afro-Colombian or Afro-descendant: 36.1%
* Palenquero: 0.3%
* Indigenous: 0.2%
* ROM: 0.1%
* Raizal: 0.1%

==Economy==
The main economic activities in Cartagena are industry, tourism, and commerce. The port of Cartagena is one of the largest of South America.

=== Industry ===
Other prominent companies include Cementos Argos, Miss Colombia, Kola Román, Indufrial, Amazon Pepper, Vikings SA, Distribuidora Ltda Refrigeration, Central Ingenio Colombia, Perfumery Lemaitre, Cartagena Refinery Cellux Colombiana SA, Flour Three Castles, Polyban International SA, SABMiller, Dow Chemical, Cemex, Dole, and Abocol..

=== Miss Colombia ===
In 1934, Miss Colombia was founded in Cartagena de Indias. Known as &quot;Concurso Nacional de Belleza de Colombia&quot; (National Beauty Contest of Colombia), it is a national beauty pageant in Colombia. The winner, &quot;Señorita Colombia&quot;, is sent to Miss Supranational and the first runner-up, &quot;Señorita Colombia Internacional&quot; or &quot;Virreina&quot;, to Miss International.

There is also a local beauty contest held with many of the city&#x27;s neighbourhoods nominating young women to be named Miss Independence.

=== Free zones ===
Free zones are areas within the local territory which enjoy special customs and tax rules. They are intended to promote the industrialization of goods and provision of services aimed primarily at foreign markets and also the domestic market.
* &quot;Parque Central Zona Franca&quot;: Opened in 2012 the zone is located in the municipality of Turbaco, within the District of Cartagena de Indias. It covers an area of . It has a permamente Zone (Phase 1 – Phase 2) and a Logistics and Commercial Zone for SMEs.
* &quot;Zona Franca Industrial Goods and Services ZOFRANCA Cartagena SA&quot;: located from the city center, at the end of the industrial sector and has Mamonal private dock.
* &quot;Zona Franca Turística en Isla De Barú&quot;: located on the island of Baru, within the swamp Portonaito. Approved in 1993 the tourist zone offers waterways, marine tourism and urban development.

===Tourism===

Tourism is a mainstay of the economy. The following are tourist sites that are within the walled city of Cartagena:
* Colonial architecture with Andalusian style roots. Many of the houses in Cartagena have balconies with tropical flowers.
* Convent, cloister and chapel of Nuestra Señora de la Candelaria de la Popa, located at the top of Mount Popa
* Cathedral of Santa Catalina de Alejandría
* Church and cloister of San Pedro Claver
* Convent and church of Santo Domingo
* Palace of Inquisition
* Teatro Heredia
* Cartagena Gold Museum
* Las Bóvedas
* Clock Tower
* Fortresses in Cartagena de Indias: Of the twenty fortresses comprising the walls in the district of Getsemaní, today 16 are still standing, preserved in good condition. In 1586, it was commissioned to the most famous military engineer of the Crown of Spain in that time, the Italian Battista Antonelli, the fortification of the city. The works of the project finally ended in the 17th century. Cartagena became an impregnable bastion, which successfully resisted the attacks of Baron Pontis to 1697. In the 18th century, new additions gave the fortified complex its current amplitude by engineer . The initial fortification system includes only the urban recint, the bastion port of San Matías at the entrance to the passage of Bocagrande, and the Tower of San Felipe del Boquerón that controlled the Bay of las Ánimas. Gradually, all passages were dominated by fortresses: fortress of San Luis, fortress of San José and fortress of San Fernando in Bocachica, fortress of San Rafaél and fortress of Santa Bárbara in Pochachica (the passage at southwest), fortress of Santa Cruz, fortress of San Juan de Manzanillo and fortress of San Sebasi de Pastellilo around the interior of Bahía, castle of San Felipe de Barajas, in the rock that dominates the city from the east and access to protected the Isthmus del Cerebro. The fortifications of San Felipe de Barajas in Cartagena, protected the city during numerous sieges, giving its character and reputation unassailable. These are described as a masterpiece of Spanish military engineering in the Americas.

The city has a budding hotel industry with small boutique hotels being primarily concentrated in the Walled City and larger hotels in the beach front neighborhood of Bocagrande. The area of Getsemaní just outside the wall is also a popular place for small hotels and hostels.

The following are tourist sites that are outside the city of Cartagena:
* Las Islas del Rosario: These islands are one of Colombia&#x27;s most important national parks. Most of the islands can be reached in an hour or less from the city docks.

==Infrastructure==

===Transportation===
As the commercial and touristic hub of the country, the city has many transportation facilities, particularly in the seaport, air, and fluvial areas.

In 2003, the city started building Transcaribe, a mass transit system. In 2015 the system began operating in the city. Taxis are also a prevalent form of public transportation and there is a bus terminal connecting the city to other cities along the coast and in Colombia.

Cartagena has problems of traffic congestion.

====Roads====
The city is linked to the northern part of the Caribbean Region through roads 90 and 90A, more commonly called Central Caribbean Road. This road passes through Barranquilla, Santa Marta and Riohacha ending in Paraguachón, Venezuela and continues with Venezuelan numeration all the way to Caracas. Taxis in the city perimeter do not have fare meters.

The following roads are in the southeast portion of the city:
Road 25: Going through Turbaco and Arjona, and through the Montes de María when a fork divides it continuing to Sincelejo as National 25 and finally ending in Medellín, and to the east to Valledupar as number 80.

Road 25 A: Going also to Sincelejo, but avoiding the mountains, connects with Road 25 in the forementioned city.

====Air====
The Rafael Núñez International Airport is the busiest airport in Colombia&#x27;s Caribbean region and the fourth in passenger traffic in the country. The code of the airport is CTG, having flights to almost all airports in Colombia including Bogota&#x27;s El Dorado International Airport. Excessive operational costs and easier connection travel and better prices had led to the shifting of the Rafael Núñez&#x27;s international connection passengers away from Bogota to the nearer Tocumen International Airport in Panama and Queen Beatrix International Airport in Aruba. Also, more companies prefer to serve the Colombian market from Cartagena, due to better geographical and atmospheric conditions.

====Sea====


Cartagena is the most important port of Colombia in the Caribbean.

The open ports of the city are:
* Port Society of Cartagena - Specializing in container management, this port is first of its class in the country, the third busiest port on the Caribbean Sea, and ranked 99th among ports of the world.
* Muelles El Bosque (El Bosque Docks) – specialized in grain storage, expanding to the container market
* Container Terminal of Cartagena – container management

Private ports of the city:
* The port of the Cartagena Oil Refinery (REFICAR S.A.)
* SABMiller brewery port
* Argos cement port
* Dow Chemical raw materials embarkment port
* BASF Colombia raw materials embarkment port
* Du Pont private embarkment port
* Cemex cement port
* Dole packing house
* Colombian Navy steelworks port

====Canals====
Since the 17th century the bay has been connected to the Magdalena River by the Dique Canal, built by Governor Pedro Zapata de Mendoza. After Colombian independence, the canal was abandoned. Increasing centralization left the city without resources to maintain it. The last important maintenance work was done in the 1950s during Laureano Gómez&#x27;s administration. Some improvements were made by local authorities in the 1980s. This was discontinued because of legal objections from the central government that decreed that the &quot;maintenance&quot; of the canal did not fall under the jurisdiction of the local government. From then on, maintenance of the canal has been delayed, though it is still functional.

Cartagenian political leaders have argued that this state of affairs might change with a return to pre-independence funding and tax system. Under such systems the canal would be maintained properly and even expanded, benefiting the national economy.

===Waste disposal===
Cartagena is one of the few cities in the world with a marine outfall, inaugurated in 2013, whose -long underwater section is the third longest in the world.

==Education==
===Colleges and universities===
* University of Cartagena
* Universidad Tecnológica de Bolívar

===Primary and secondary schools===
International schools include:
* Corporacion Educativa Colegio Britanico de Cartagena (British)
* Gimnasio Cartagena de Indias (International)
* Colegio Jorge Washington (American)

===Libraries===
The city has many public and private libraries:
* The Universidad de Cartagena José Fernández Madrid Library: Started in 1821 when the university opened as the &quot;University of Magdalena and Isthmus&quot;. Serves mainly the students and faculty of this university but anyone can use its services.
:Divided in buildings across the city being assigned to the Faculties it serves accordingly each area. The main building is in C. de la Universidad 64 and the second biggest section is located in Av. Jose Vicente Mogollón 2839.
* The Bartolomé Calvo Library: Founded in 1843 and established in its current place in 1900, it is one of the main libraries on the Caribbean Coast and the largest in the city. Its address is Calle de la Inquisición, 23.
* The History Academy of Cartagena de Indias Library: Opened in 1903, many of its books date from more than a century before from donations of members and benefactors. Its entrance is more restricted due to secure handling procedure reasons as ancient books require, but it can be requested in the academy office in Plaza de Bolivar 112.
* The Technological University of Bolívar Library: Opened in 1985 Although small in general size, its sections on engineering and electronics are immense and its demand is mostly on this area, being located in Camino de Arroyohondo 1829.
* The American Hispanic Culture Library: Opened in 1999, it already existed a smaller version without Spanish funding in the Casa de España since the early 1940s but in 1999 was enlarged to serve Latin America and the Caribbean in the old convent of Santo Domingo. It specializes in Hispanic Culture and History and is a continental epicenter of seminaries on history and restoration of buildings. The restoration of the convent and the enlargement of the library was and still is a personal project of Juan Carlos I of Spain who visits it regularly. It is located in Plaza Santo Domingo 30, but its entrance is in C. Gastelbondo 52.
* Jorge Artel Library: Opened in 1997, serves the area of the southwest districts of the city, it is mostly for children. It is located in Camino del Socorro 222
* Balbino Carreazo Library: Located in Pasacaballos, a suburban neighborhood of the southeastern part of the city, serves mostly the suburbs of Pasacaballos, Ararca, Leticia del Dique and Matunilla. It is located in Plaza de Pasacaballos 321
* District Libraries: Although small, this system goes grassroots to neighborhoods circulating books, generally each district library has around 5000 books.

==Culture==
===Theaters and concert halls===
The first carnivals and western theaters that served in New Granada operated on, what is today, Calle del Coliseo. This was an activity patronized by the Viceroy Manuel de Guirior and Antonio Caballero y Góngora, who, like their predecessors, spent most of the time of their mandates ruling in Cartagena.
* Teatro Adolfo Mejía: former Teatro Heredia, opened in 1911, inspired by the Teatro Tacón of Havana, was designed by Jose Enrique Jaspe. After years of abandonment, it was rebuilt in the 1990s and continues to be a cultural center. It is located in Plazuela de La Merced 5.

===Sport===
Tigres de Cartagena represent the city in the Colombian Professional Baseball League, playing at Estadio Once de Noviembre. Other historical baseball teams that once represented Cartagena include Indios, Águilas, and Torices.

The main football club in the city is Real Cartagena.

In August 2024, Cartagena co-hosted the 2024 U-15 Baseball World Cup with Barranquilla.

===Museums and galleries===
* City Museum Palace of the Inquisition, opened in the 1970s 
* Sanctuary and Museum of St. Maria Bernarda Bütler (foundress of the Franciscan Missionary Sisters of Our Lady of Perpetual Help)

===World Heritage site===
The port, the fortresses and the group of monuments of Cartagena were selected in 1984 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) as significant to the heritage of the world, having the most extensive fortifications in South America. They are significant, too, for being located in a bay that is part of the Caribbean Sea. A system of zones divides the city into three neighborhoods: San Sebastian and Santa Catalina with the cathedral and many palaces where the wealthy lived and the main government buildings functioned; San Diego or Santo Toribio, where merchants and the middle class lived; and Getsemani, the suburban popular quarters.

===Festivities===
* January: The &quot;Cartagena International Music Festival&quot; (Cartagena Festival Internacional de Música), Classical music event that has become one of the most important festivals in the country. It is done in the Walled City for 10 days, during which are held classes, conferences and counted with the presence of national and international artists.
** &quot;Fiesta Taurina del Caribe&quot; (Caribbean Bullfight festival) (ultimately canceled, for maintenance of the scenario)
** &quot;SummerLand Festival&quot;: Electronic music festival most important of the country
* February: &quot;Fiestas de Nuestra Señora de la Candelaria&quot; (Feasts of Our Lady of Candelaria),
** &quot;Festival del Frito&quot;
* March: &quot;International Film Festival of Cartagena&quot; (Festival Internacional de Cine de Cartagena)
** &quot; Miss Colombia&quot;
** &quot;Feria Nautica&quot;
* April: &quot;Festival del Dulce&quot; (Festival of the Sweets)
* June–July: &quot;Festival de Verano&quot; (Summer Festival)
** &quot;Sail Cartagena&quot;
* November: &quot;Fiestas del 11 de noviembre&quot; (Feasts of 11 November or of the Independence)
* December: &quot;Jazz Festival under the Moon&quot; (Festival de Jazz bajo la Luna)
** &quot;Cartagena Rock&quot;

== Media appearances ==

=== Film ===
* &quot;Burn!&quot; (1969), with Marlon Brando, was filmed in Cartagena.
* In the movie &quot;Romancing the Stone&quot; (1984), romance novelist Joan Wilder (Kathleen Turner) travels to Cartagena to deliver a treasure map, in an effort to ransom her kidnapped sister. The Cartagena scenes were actually filmed in Mexico. In the movie, Michael Douglas&#x27; character refers to it as Cartage(ny)a. This has largely been adopted by tourists and is an irritant to the locals. The &quot;N&quot; in Cartagena is hard.
* The film &quot;The Mission&quot; (1986), with Robert De Niro, was filmed in Cartagena and Brazil
* The film &quot;Love in the Time of Cholera&quot; (2007) was filmed in Cartagena.
* Scenes of &quot;Gemini Man&quot; (2019), with Will Smith, were filmed in Cartagena.
* Scenes of the (2023) film Sound of Freedom

=== Television ===
* In the &quot;Family Guy&quot; episode &quot;Barely Legal&quot;, the mayor, thinking the events of &quot;Romancing the Stone&quot; (see above) are real, sends all the city&#x27;s police officers to Cartagena
* Cartagena figured prominently in the &quot;Smuggler&#x27;s Blues&quot; (1985) episode of &quot;Miami Vice&quot;, featuring guest star Glenn Frey and his song &quot;Smuggler&#x27;s Blues&quot;
* Cartagena is featured as the backdrop for the &quot;NCIS&quot; episodes &quot;Agent Afloat&quot; and &quot;The Missionary Position&quot;.
* The 30th installment of MTV&#x27;s reality competition series, titled &quot;The Challenge XXX: Dirty 30&quot;, was filmed in Cartagena.
* In the &quot;Orphan Black&quot; episode &quot;To Right the Wrongs of Many&quot;, Delphine and Cosima are in Cartagena, where Delphine is giving the cure to the Leda clone found there.
* The Colombian Netflix show &quot;Siempre Bruja&quot; (Always a Witch) is set in Cartagena.
* In &quot;The Amazing Race 28&quot;, the second and third legs were set in Cartagena and required teams to visit various locations throughout the city.
* In Season 10 of &quot;The Real Housewives of New York City&quot;, the annual cast vacation takes place in Cartagena.

=== Literature ===

* A fictionalized version of the 1697 raid on Cartagena is chronicled in the novel &quot;Captain Blood&quot; (1922).
* Gabriel García Márquez&#x27;s novel &quot;Love in the Time of Cholera&quot; is set in an unnamed city based on Cartagena. García Márquez has also said that Cartagena influenced the setting of &quot;The Autumn of the Patriarch&quot;. His novel &quot;Of Love and Other Demons&quot; takes place in Cartagena in the 1600s.
* The first chapter of Brian Jacques&#x27; novel &quot;The Angel&#x27;s Command&quot; (2003) takes place in Cartagena in 1628.{{citation needed|date=October 2015}}
* The poem &quot;Románc&quot; (1983) by Sándor Kányádi talks about the beauty of Cartagena.{{citation needed|date=October 2015}}
* The second story in Nam Le&#x27;s award-winning book of short fiction, &quot;The Boat&quot; (2008) is called &quot;Cartagena&quot; and set in Colombia. Cartagena in the story is more an idea than a place.{{citation needed|date=October 2015}}
* A portion of the 2014 novel &quot;The Bone Clocks&quot; by David Mitchell (author) is set in the city.
* A 2015 novel by Claudia Amengual is named &quot;Cartagena&quot;.
* The poem &quot;A mi ciudad nativa&quot; is in honor of Cartagena

=== Video games ===
* The city is the scene of two levels in the video game &quot;Uncharted 3: Drake&#x27;s Deception&quot;.

=== Music ===
Champeta is a musical genre whose main variants are rooted in Cartagena and Barranquilla.

* On the album &quot;Corazón Profundo&quot;, Carlos Vives honored the city of Cartagena, calling it &quot;The Fantastic City&quot; (in Spanish: La fantástica).
* The 2016 song &quot;Otra Vez&quot; by Zion &amp; Lennox mentions Cartagena.
* The song &quot;1741 (The Battle of Cartagena)&quot; by Alestorm off their 2014 Album &quot;Sunset on the Golden Age&quot; is about the 1741 siege of Cartagena.

==Notable people==

* Joe Arroyo, salsa music composer and singer
* Miguel Avila, indoor/outdoor footballer and referee
* Valeria Ayos, Miss Universe Colombia 2021
* Alvaro Barrios, conceptual artist
* Bartolomé Calvo, politician, journalist, Governor of Panama (1856–58), President of the Granadine Confederation in 1861
* Bernardo Caraballo, boxer
* Alfonso Múnera Cavadía, diplomat and historian
* Antonio Cervantes, boxer
* Saint Peter Claver SJ, Jesuit priest, pastor and missionary to the slaves brought to Cartagena (&quot;Slave of the slaves forever&quot;), human rights advocate. Beatified 1850 by Pope Pius IX, canonized 1888 by Pope Leo XIII. 1985, the Colombian Congress declared 9 September, his feast day, as Human Rights national day in his honor.
* William Dau, former Mayor of Cartagena
* Germán Espinosa, writer, author of &quot;La Tejedora de Coronas&quot; (The weaver of crowns) and 40 other works
* José María García de Toledo, politician, early &quot;juntismo&quot; movement member, later independentist; President of the Supreme Junta of Cartagena (1810–11)
* Laura González, Miss Colombia 2017
* Enrique Grau, painter, born in Panama but raised in the city where most of his work was done and inspired
* Dilson Herrera, professional baseball player
* Zharick León, actress
* Nereo Lopez, documentary photographer
* Manuel Medrano, singer
* Andrea Nocetti, Miss Colombia 2001
* Rafael Núñez, politician, journalist, diplomat, writer, lawyer and judge. Dominant political figure in Colombia in the 19th century, and the first to did so by civil means: In 1848 just after another civil war entered in local politics. Then became MP for Cartagena in the Colombian Congress, also was Governor of Bolívar (1854), then briefly Minister of War in 1855–57. President of the Sovereign State of Bolivar twice, (1876–77) (1879–80) was finally elected 4 times President of Colombia. During this time the country stabilized and the economy grew after decades of civil war and established the foundations for civil-led government with the Colombian Constitution of 1886 that lasted 105 years. Also wrote the country&#x27;s national anthem.
* Laura Olascuaga, Miss Universe Colombia 2020
* Alfonso Pérez, boxer
* Carlos Pizarro Leongómez, guerrilla fighter for the 19th of April Movement
* Sabas Pretelt de la Vega, politician and ambassador, Minister of Interior (2003–06)
* Frey Ramos, footballer
* Ramses Ramos, actor
* Hugo Soto, footballer
* Julio Teherán, professional baseball player
* Gio Urshela, professional baseball player
* Rodrigo Valdez, boxer
* Kevin Flórez, singer
* Karoll Márquez, singer
* Teresa Román Vélez, writer
* Orlando Cabrera, baseball player
* Jeymmy Vargas, beauty queen and model
* Vanessa Rosales Altamar, author
* Laura De León Céspedes, actress
* Angie Cepeda, actress
* Lorna Cepeda, actress
* Eduardo Lemaitre, historian
* Salomón Bustamante Sanmiguel, TV host
* Patricia Teherán Romero, singer
* Rafael Vergara Navarro, lawyer

==See also==
* San Basilio de Palenque, according to UNESCO, the first free African town in the Americas, located 50 kilometres (31 mi) from Cartagena de Indias
* Rosario Islands, an archipelago located 20 kilometres from Cartagena with a large coral reef
* List of tallest buildings in Cartagena
* Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Cartagena in Colombia
* Manuel Rodríguez Torices
* Cartagena Manifesto
* United Provinces of New Granada
* Gran Colombia
* War of the Supremes
* 1829–51 cholera pandemic, in which 4000 Cartageneros died in 1849{{rp|72}}

== Notes ==
{{reflist|group=Note}}

==References==
{{Reflist}}

==Further reading==

===Colonial history===
{{Div col}}
* Álvarez Alonso, Fermina. &quot;La Inquisición en Cartagena de Indias durante el siglo XVII&quot;. Madrid: Fundación Universitaria Española, 1999.
* Bossa Herrazo, Donaldo. &quot;Nomenclatur cartagenero&quot;. 1981.
* Böttcher, Nikolaus. &quot;Negreros portugueses y la Inquisición de Cartagena de Indias, siglo XVII.&quot; Memoria 9 (2003): 38–55.
* Dorta, Enrique Marco. &quot;Cartagena de Indias: Puerto y plaza fuerte&quot;. 1960.
* Escobar Quevedo, Ricardo. &quot;Los Criptojudíos de Cartagena de Indias: Un eslabón en la diáspora conversa (1635–1649).&quot; Anuario Colombiano de Historia Social y de la Cultura 29 (2002): 45–71.
* Fals-Borda, Orlando. &quot;Historia doble de la costa&quot;. 4 vols. 1979–1986.
* Goodsell, James Nelson. &quot;Cartagena de Indias: Entrepôt for a New World, 1533–1597.&quot; PhD dissertation, Harvard University 1966.
* Grahn, Lance R. &quot;Cartagena and Its Hinterland in the Eighteenth Century&quot; in &quot;Atlantic Port Cities: Economy, Culture, and Society in the Atlantic World, 1650–1850&quot;. Franklin W. Knight and Peggy K. Liss, eds. 1991, pp. 168–95.
* Grahn, Lance R. &quot;Cartagena&quot; in &quot;Encyclopedia of Latin American History and Culture&quot;, vol. 1, pp. 581–82. New York: Charles Scribner&#x27;s Sons 1996.
* Greenow, Linda. &quot;Family, Household, and Home: A Microgeographic Analysis of Cartagena (New Granada) in 1777&quot;. 1976.
* Greenow, Linda. &quot;Urban form in Spanish American colonial cities: Cartagena de Indias, New Granada, in 1777.&quot; Department of Geography Suny-New Paltz, NY. Middle States Geographer (2007).
* Lemaitre, Eduardo. &quot;Historia general de Cartagena&quot;. 4 vols. Bogota: Banco de la República, 1983.
* McKnight, Kathryn Joy. &quot;Confronted Rituals: Spanish Colonial and Angolan&quot; Maroon&quot; Executions in Cartagena de Indias (1634).&quot; Journal of Colonialism and Colonial History 5.3 (2004).
* Medina, José Toríbio. &quot;Historia del Tribunal del Santo Oficio de la Inquisicón de Cartagena de Indias&quot;. Santiago: Imprenta Elzeviriana, 1899.
* Meisel, Adolfo. &quot;Subsidy-Led Growth In A Fortified Port: Cartagena De Indias And The Situado, 1751–1810.&quot; Borradores de Economía 167 (2000).
* Molino García, María Paulina. &quot;La sede vacante en Cartagena de Indias, 1534–1700.&quot; &quot;Anuario de Estudios Americanos&quot; 32 (1975): 1–23.
* Newson, Linda A., and Susie Minchin. &quot;Slave mortality and African origins: a view from Cartagena, Colombia, in the early seventeenth century.&quot; &quot;Slavery &amp; Abolition&quot; 25.3 (2004): 18–43.
* Olsen, Margaret M. &quot;Slavery and Salvation in Colonial Cartagena de Indias&quot;. Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 2004.
* Pacheco, Juan Manuel. &quot;Sublevación portuguesa en Cartagena.&quot; Boletín de historia y antigüedades 42 (1955): 557–60.
* Rey Fajardo, José del. &quot;Los jesuitas en Cartagena de Indias, 1604–1767&quot;. Bogota: Pontificia Universidad Javeriana, 2004.
* Rocha, Carlos Guilherme. &quot;A disputa por poder em Cartagena das Índias: o embate entre o governador Francisco de Murga e o Tribunal do Santo Ofício (1629–1636).&quot; (2013).
* Ruiz Rivera, Julián B. &quot;Cartagena de Indias: ¿Un cabildo cosmopolita en una ciudad pluriétnica?&quot; In &quot;El municipio indiano: Relaciones interétnicas, económicas y sociales. Homenaje a Luis Navarro García&quot;, edited by Manuela Cristina García Bernal and Sandra Olivero Guidobono, 407–24. Seville: Universidad de Sevilla, 2009.
* –––. &quot;Gobierno, comercio y sociedad en Cartagena de Indias en el siglo XVII.&quot; In &quot;Cartagena de Indias en el siglo XVII&quot;, edited by Haroldo Calvo Stevenson and Adolfo Meisel Roca, 353–76. Cartagena: Banco de la República, 2007.
* –––. &quot;Los regimientos de Cartagena de Indias.&quot; In &quot;La venta de cargos y el ejercicio del poder en Cartagena de Indias&quot;, edited by Julián B. Ruiz Rivera y Ángel Sanz Tapia, 199–221. León: Universidad de León, 2007.
* –––. &quot;Cartagena de Indias y su provincia: Una mirada a los siglos XVII y XVIII&quot;. Bogota: El Áncora Editores, 2005.
* –––. &quot;Municipio, puerto y provincia (1600–1650).&quot; In Julián B. Ruiz Rivera, &quot;Cartagena de Indias y su provincia: Una mirada a los siglos XVII y XVIII&quot;, 203–24. Bogota: El Áncora Editores, 2005.
* –––. &quot;Vanquésel, casa de préstamos en Cartagena de Indias.&quot; In &quot;Estudios sobre América: siglos XVI–XX&quot;, edited by Antonio Gutiérrez Escudero and María Luisa Laviana Cuetos, 673–89. Seville: Asociación Española de Americanistas, 2005.
* –––. &quot;Una banca en el mercado de negros de Cartagena de Indias.&quot; &quot;Temas americanistas&quot; 17 (2004): 3–23.
* –––. &quot;Los portugueses y la trata negrera en Cartagena de Indias.&quot; &quot;Temas americanistas&quot; 15 (2002): 19–41.
* Salazar, Ricardo Raul. &quot;Running Chanzas: Slave-State Interactions in Cartagena de Indias, 1580 to 1713.&quot; Diss. Harvard University, 2014.
* Sánchez Bohórquez, José Enrique. &quot;La Inquisición en América durante los siglos XVI–XVII: Los dominicos y el Tribunal de Cartagena de Indias.&quot; In &quot;Praedicatores inquisitores, vol. 2, La Orden Dominicana y la Inquisición en el mundo ibérico e hispanoamericano&quot;, 753–808. Rome: Istituto Storico Domenicano, 2006.
* Solano Alonso, Jairo. &quot;Salud, cultura y sociedad en Cartagena de Indias, siglos XVI y XVII&quot; In &quot;De la Roma Medieval a la Cartagena Colonial: El Santo Oficio de la Inquisición. Vol. I of Cincuenta Años de Inquisición en el Tribunal de Cartagena deIndias, 1610–1660&quot;, edited by Anna María Splendiani, et al. Bogotá: Centro EditorialJaveriano, 1997.. Barranquilla: Universidad del Atlántico, 1998.
* Splendiani, Anna María, et al. eds. &quot;De la Roma Medieval a la Cartagena Colonial: El Santo Oficio de la Inquisición. Vol. I of Cincuenta Años de Inquisición en el Tribunal de Cartagena de Indias, 1610–1660&quot;, Bogotá: Centro Editorial Javeriano, 1997.
* Tejado Fernández, Manuel. &quot;El tribunal de Cartagena de Indias: La primera mitad del siglo XVII(1621–1650).&quot; In &quot;Historia de la Inquisición en España y América&quot;, 3 vols., edited by Joaquín Pérez Villanueva and Bartolomé Escandell Bonet, I.1141–45. Madrid: Centro de Estudios Inquisitoriales, 1984.
* –––. &quot;La ampliación del dispositivo: Fundación del Tribunal de Cartagena de Indias.&quot; In &quot;Historia de la Inquisición en España y América&quot;, 3 vols., edited by Joaquín Pérez Villanueva and Bartolomé Escandell Bonet, I.984–95. Madrid: Centro de Estudios Inquisitoriales, 1984.
* –––. &quot;Aspectos de la vida social en Cartagena de Indias durante el seiscientos&quot;. Seville: Escuela de Estudios Hispano-Americanos, 1954.
* –––. &quot;Un foco de judaísmo en Cartagena de Indias durante el seiscientos.&quot; &quot;Bulletin Hispanique&quot; 52 (1950): 55–72.
* Vidal Ortega, Antonino. &quot;Cartagena de Indias y la región histórica del Caribe, 1580–1640&quot;. Seville: Escuela de Estudios Hispano-Americanos, 2002.
* –––. &quot;Portugueses negreros en Cartagena, 1580–1640&quot;, in &quot;IV Seminario internacional de estudios del Caribe: Memorias&quot;, 135–54. Bogota: Fondo de Publicaciones de la Universidad del Atlántico, 1999.
* Vila Vilar, Enriqueta. &quot;Cartagena de Indias en el siglo XVII: Puerto negrero internacional.&quot; In Redescubriendo el Nuevo Mundo: Estudios americanistas en homenaje a Carmen Gómez, edited by María Salud Elvás Iniesta and Sandra Olivero Guidobono, 63–74. Seville: Universidad de Sevilla, 2012.
* –––. &quot;Extranjeros en Cartagena (1593–1630).&quot; &quot;Jahrbuch für Geschichte von Staat, Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft Lateinamerikas&quot; 16 (1979): 147–84.
* Von Germeten, Nicole. &quot;Violent Delights, Violent Ends: Sex, Race, &amp; Honor in Colonial Cartagena de Indias&quot;. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 2013.
* Wethey, Harold E. &quot;Enrique Marco Dorta, Cartagena de Indias. La ciudad y sus monumentos: Seville, Escuela de Estudios Hispano-americanos, 1951. pp. xxiii+ 322; 170 figs. 200 pesetas.&quot; (1952): 322–24.
{{Div col end}}

==External links==
{{Sister project links 
 |wikt=no |commonscat=Cartagena, Colombia |n=no |q=no |s=no |author=no |b=no |v=no
 |voy=Cartagena_(Colombia)
{{EB1911 poster|Cartagena (Colombia)}}
* Reference volumes and maps regarding the history of Cartagena. Library of the Royal Geographical Society of South Australia
* {{in lang|es}} Cartagena City Government website
* {{in lang|en}} Discover the Charms of Cartagena de Indias
* Map of the City and Bay of Cartagena de las Indias from 1735

{{Geographic location
 | Center = &quot;Cartagena&quot;
 | North = Caribbean Sea, Bocacanoa
 | Northeast = Bayunca, Clemencia
 | East = Villanueva, Bolívar, San Estanislao
 | Southeast = Turbaco, Arjona
 | South = Tierra Bomba Island, Portonao.
 | Southwest = Caribbean Sea
 | West = Caribbean Sea
 | Northwest = Caribbean Sea
{{Navboxes
|title= Other articles and topics related to Cartagena, Colombia
|state= collapsed
|list1=
{{Colombia topics}}
{{World Heritage Sites in Colombia}}
{{Treasures of Colombia}}
{{Spanish Colonial architecture}}
{{Latin american film festivals}}
{{Central American and Caribbean Games}}
{{Authority control}}</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q657461" start="0" end="9" title="Cartagena, Colombia" label="Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q657461" start="47" end="66" title="Cartagena, Colombia" label="Cartagena de Indias"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="133" end="141" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130185" start="149" end="171" title="Caribbean Region of Colombia" label="Caribbean Coast Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="183" end="196" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q123965285" start="506" end="533" title="Slavery in Cartagena" label="import of enslaved Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q21099469" start="544" end="551" title="asiento" label="asiento"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469245" start="586" end="592" title="Piracy in the Caribbean" label="pirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q191829" start="666" end="675" title="Magdalena River" label="Magdalena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132206" start="680" end="684" title="Sinú River" label="Sinú"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077264" start="736" end="747" title="New Kingdom of Granada" label="New Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q230597" start="909" end="927" title="Bolívar Department" label="Bolívar Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q130185" start="1032" end="1048" title="Caribbean region of Colombia" label="Caribbean region"/>
<link wikidata="Q62823" start="1056" end="1068" title="Barranquilla" label="Barranquilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q487967" start="1078" end="1091" title="List of cities in Colombia" label="fifth-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="1114" end="1131" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="1199" end="1216" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q243766" start="1220" end="1231" title="Bucaramanga" label="Bucaramanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q155930" start="1265" end="1273" title="maritime industry" label="maritime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364904" start="1278" end="1291" title="petrochemical" label="petrochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q162615" start="1353" end="1369" title="Cartagena, Spain" label="Cartagena, Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="1409" end="1417" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="1705" end="1719" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="1868" end="1894" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366970" start="1925" end="1954" title="Battle of Cartagena de Indias" label="Battle of Cartagena de Indias"/>
<link wikidata="Q54434" start="1974" end="1998" title="War of Jenkins&amp;#x27; Ear" label="War of Jenkins&amp;#x27; Ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="2007" end="2012" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="2017" end="2024" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q762517" start="2088" end="2110" title="Puerto Hormiga Culture" label="Puerto Hormiga Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132206" start="2238" end="2248" title="Sinú River" label="Sinú River"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="2353" end="2366" title="Archaeologists" label="Archeologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q230597" start="2484" end="2491" title="Bolívar Department" label="Bolívar"/>
<link wikidata="Q235188" start="2496" end="2501" title="Sucre Department" label="Sucre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936078" start="3041" end="3052" title="Canal del Dique" label="Dique Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="3632" end="3652" title="Spanish colonization" label="Spanish colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486742" start="3685" end="3690" title="Kalina people" label="Karib"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402048" start="3692" end="3698" title="Malibu languages" label="Malibu"/>
<link wikidata="Q626753" start="3703" end="3709" title="Arawakan languages" label="Arawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q25295" start="3710" end="3727" title="language families" label="language families"/>
<link wikidata="Q26728" start="3806" end="3834" title="Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta" label="Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645057" start="3851" end="3858" title="Tayrona" label="Tayrona"/>
<link wikidata="Q828578" start="3909" end="3916" title="Chibcha" label="Chibcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q56611" start="4001" end="4015" title="Carib language" label="Carib language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486742" start="4087" end="4099" title="Kalina people" label="Carib people"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593242" start="4237" end="4258" title="Tierra Bomba Island" label="island of Tierrabomba"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071570" start="4271" end="4280" title="Isla Barú" label="Isla Barú"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080243" start="4408" end="4415" title="Turbaco" label="Turbaco"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4691" end="4701" title="Membrillal" label="Membrillal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4706" end="4718" title="Pasacaballos" label="Pasacaballos"/>
<link wikidata="Q16115817" start="4790" end="4798" title="Calamari people" label="Kalamari"/>
<link wikidata="Q453058" start="5080" end="5099" title="Rodrigo de Bastidas" label="Rodrigo de Bastidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="5183" end="5194" title="Ferdinand II of Aragon" label="Ferdinand V"/>
<link wikidata="Q345620" start="5206" end="5221" title="Juan de la Cosa" label="Juan de la Cosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q761784" start="5438" end="5451" title="Gulf of Urabá" label="Gulf of Urabá"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920869" start="5540" end="5547" title="Veragua" label="Veragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573380" start="5725" end="5743" title="Antigua del Darién" label="Antigua del Darién"/>
<link wikidata="Q313369" start="5755" end="5770" title="Alonso de Ojeda" label="Alonso de Ojeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471634" start="5815" end="5837" title="San Sebastián de Urabá" label="San Sebastián de Urabá"/>
<link wikidata="Q922802" start="5849" end="5865" title="Diego de Nicuesa" label="Diego de Nicuesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="5963" end="5973" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="5978" end="5982" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046537" start="6033" end="6053" title="Casa de Contratación" label="Casa de Contratación"/>
<link wikidata="Q453058" start="6073" end="6092" title="Rodrigo de Bastidas" label="Rodrigo de Bastidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q354097" start="6139" end="6149" title="adelantado" label="adelantado"/>
<link wikidata="Q191829" start="6208" end="6223" title="Magdalena River" label="Magdalena River"/>
<link wikidata="Q272747" start="6256" end="6263" title="Department of La Guajira" label="Guajira"/>
<link wikidata="Q761784" start="6311" end="6324" title="Gulf of Urabá" label="Gulf of Urabá"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="6445" end="6458" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q761784" start="6462" end="6467" title="Gulf of Urabá" label="Urabá"/>
<link wikidata="Q182139" start="6476" end="6490" title="Panama isthmus" label="Panama isthmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q171136" start="6593" end="6610" title="Joanna of Castile" label="Joanna of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q645620" start="6612" end="6628" title="Pedro de Heredia" label="Pedro de Heredia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2694199" start="6678" end="6685" title="lighter (barge)" label="lighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032043" start="6941" end="6955" title="India Catalina" label="India Catalina"/>
<link wikidata="Q191322" start="7177" end="7181" title="Zenú" label="Sinú"/>
<link wikidata="Q645620" start="7373" end="7389" title="Pedro de Heredia" label="Pedro de Heredia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7442" end="7450" title="Calamarí" label="Calamarí"/>
<link wikidata="Q162615" start="7502" end="7511" title="Cartagena, Spain" label="Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q5772" start="7516" end="7522" title="Region of Murcia" label="Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="7598" end="7607" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II"/>
<link wikidata="Q35045" start="7820" end="7826" title="Potosí" label="Potosí"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780717" start="7879" end="7887" title="French corsairs" label="corsairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090868" start="8028" end="8050" title="Jean-François Roberval" label="Jean-François Roberval"/>
<link wikidata="Q315490" start="8718" end="8730" title="John Hawkins (naval commander)" label="John Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8758" end="8776" title="Martín de las Alas" label="Martín de las Alas"/>
<link wikidata="Q36517" start="9163" end="9176" title="Francis Drake" label="Francis Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636779" start="9351" end="9369" title="Battista Antonelli" label="Bautista Antonelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q184725" start="9544" end="9574" title="Spanish Inquisition" label="Holy Office of the Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q9054598" start="9612" end="9633" title="Palace of Inquisition" label="Palace of Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="9833" end="9839" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q200481" start="9841" end="9850" title="blasphemy" label="blasphemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q720243" start="9852" end="9858" title="bigamy" label="bigamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="9863" end="9873" title="witchcraft" label="witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447014" start="9947" end="9956" title="Sanbenito" label="Sanbenito"/>
<link wikidata="Q645620" start="10095" end="10111" title="Pedro de Heredia" label="Pedro de Heredia"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="10247" end="10256" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="10337" end="10353" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="enslaved peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393765" start="10443" end="10452" title="Factory (trading post)" label="factories"/>
<link wikidata="Q21099469" start="10529" end="10536" title="asiento" label="asiento"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484145" start="10666" end="10684" title="Francisco de Murga" label="Francisco de Murga"/>
<link wikidata="Q240313" start="11052" end="11059" title="artillery battery" label="battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q81851" start="11110" end="11117" title="bastion" label="bastion"/>
<link wikidata="Q892168" start="11188" end="11196" title="causeway" label="causeway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11237" end="11244" title="Situado" label="Situado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370372" start="11378" end="11390" title="Spanish real" label="Spanish real"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663104" start="11399" end="11416" title="Raid on Cartagena (1697)" label="Raid on Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q152218" start="11443" end="11463" title="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395234" start="11472" end="11505" title="Bernard Desjean, Baron de Pointis" label="Bernard Desjean, Baron de Pointis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339093" start="11510" end="11531" title="Jean Baptiste Ducasse" label="Jean Baptiste Ducasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q850220" start="11702" end="11712" title="buccaneers" label="buccaneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q27851819" start="11739" end="11762" title="Sancho Jimeno de Orozco" label="Sancho Jimeno de Orozco"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="12150" end="12159" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II"/>
<link wikidata="Q28337" start="12500" end="12508" title="sand bar" label="sand bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8342540" start="12695" end="12716" title="Castle of San Luis de Bocachica" label="San Luis de Bocachica"/>
<link wikidata="Q81851" start="13205" end="13212" title="bastion" label="bastion"/>
<link wikidata="Q89794" start="13227" end="13235" title="curtain wall (fortification)" label="curtains"/>
<link wikidata="Q91110" start="13353" end="13383" title="Castillo San Felipe de Barajas" label="Castillo San Felipe de Barajas"/>
<link wikidata="Q691402" start="13420" end="13429" title="Philip IV of Spain" label="Philip IV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13443" end="13486" title="Pedro Zapata de Mendoza, Marquis of Barajas" label="Pedro Zapata de Mendoza, Marquis of Barajas"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="13731" end="13746" title="Bourbon dynasty" label="Bourbon dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8965" start="13842" end="13868" title="Viceroyalty of New Granada" label="Viceroyalty of New Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q30594363" start="14266" end="14282" title="Puerta del Reloj, Cartagena" label="Puerta del Reloj"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="14386" end="14393" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q713145" start="14430" end="14443" title="Edward Vernon" label="Edward Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366970" start="14470" end="14499" title="Battle of Cartagena de Indias" label="Battle of Cartagena de Indias"/>
<link wikidata="Q54434" start="14524" end="14548" title="War of Jenkins&amp;#x27; Ear" label="War of Jenkins&amp;#x27; Ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747803" start="14723" end="14742" title="Sebastián de Eslava" label="Sebastián de Eslava"/>
<link wikidata="Q881760" start="14751" end="14763" title="Blas de Lezo" label="Blas de Lezo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="15210" end="15227" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q969817" start="15249" end="15268" title="Lawrence Washington (1718–1752)" label="Lawrence Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q731635" start="15337" end="15349" title="Mount Vernon" label="Mount Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082251" start="15751" end="15756" title="jetty" label="jetty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3810944" start="16137" end="16167" title="Juan de Torrezar Diaz Pimienta" label="Juan de Torrezar Diaz Pimienta"/>
<link wikidata="Q880524" start="16176" end="16198" title="Viceroy of New Granada" label="Viceroy of New Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q191321" start="16217" end="16236" title="Marquis of Ensenada" label="Marquis of Ensenada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932613" start="16305" end="16313" title="Catastro" label="Catastro"/>
<link wikidata="Q36234" start="16749" end="16760" title="Charles III of Spain" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="16883" end="16891" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q183226" start="16915" end="16925" title="Charles IV of Spain" label="Charles IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q186256" start="16930" end="16943" title="Ferdinand VII of Spain" label="Ferdinand VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="16966" end="16980" title="Peninsular War" label="Peninsular War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123201" start="16986" end="17021" title="Spanish American wars of independence" label="Latin American wars of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857493" start="17086" end="17107" title="Antonio Villavicencio" label="Antonio Villavicencio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6293240" start="17370" end="17397" title="Jose Maria Garcia de Toledo" label="Jose Maria Garcia de Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364163" start="17936" end="17949" title="Pablo Morillo" label="Pablo Morillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162128" start="18042" end="18060" title="Siege of Cartagena (1815)" label="placed under siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994814" start="18194" end="18220" title="Manuel del Castillo y Rada" label="Manuel del Castillo y Rada"/>
<link wikidata="Q8605" start="18370" end="18383" title="Simon Bolivar" label="Simon Bolivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6293240" start="18730" end="18757" title="José María García de Toledo" label="José María García de Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994814" start="18762" end="18788" title="Manuel del Castillo y Rada" label="Manuel del Castillo y Rada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291386" start="18830" end="18846" title="Mariano Montilla" label="Mariano Montilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645273" start="18869" end="18891" title="José Prudencio Padilla" label="José Prudencio Padilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875786" start="20742" end="20794" title="Coastal morphodynamics" label="characterized morphologically by dissipative beaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670003" start="20927" end="20961" title="Rafael Núñez International Airport" label="Rafael Núñez International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5720380" start="21528" end="21538" title="El Cabrero" label="El Cabrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q30594363" start="21781" end="21797" title="Puerta del Reloj, Cartagena" label="Puerta del Reloj"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21845" end="21864" title="Plaza de los Coches" label="Plaza de los Coches"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22017" end="22040" title="San Pedro Claver Square" label="San Pedro Claver Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q167458" start="22077" end="22089" title="Peter Claver" label="Peter Claver"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="22113" end="22119" title="Society of Jesus" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q9054598" start="22290" end="22311" title="Palace of Inquisition" label="Palace of Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q8605" start="22419" end="22432" title="Simón Bolívar" label="Simón Bolívar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047033" start="22775" end="22797" title="Cathedral of Cartagena, Colombia" label="Cathedral of Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q272877" start="23100" end="23115" title="Fernando Botero" label="Fernando Botero"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23131" end="23146" title="Tcherassi Hotel" label="Tcherassi Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7517055" start="23202" end="23218" title="Silvia Tcherassi" label="Silvia Tcherassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895227" start="23276" end="23299" title="University of Cartagena" label="University of Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q91110" start="23644" end="23677" title="Castillo de San Felipe de Barajas" label="Castillo de San Felipe de Barajas"/>
<link wikidata="Q733658" start="24243" end="24275" title="Poor Clares" label="Nuns of the Order of Saint Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q6492088" start="24558" end="24569" title="Las Bóvedas" label="Las Bóvedas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25421" end="25434" title="Cartagena Bay" label="Cartagena Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q113562" start="26130" end="26158" title="tropical wet and dry climate" label="tropical wet and dry climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="26160" end="26166" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190181" start="26517" end="26521" title="Departamento Administrativo Nacional de Estadística" label="DANE"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="26592" end="26598" title="Whites" label="Whites"/>
<link wikidata="Q106713" start="26603" end="26611" title="Mestizos" label="Mestizos"/>
<link wikidata="Q388449" start="26621" end="26670" title="Afro-Colombians" label="Black, mulatto, Afro-Colombian or Afro-descendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q692174" start="26680" end="26690" title="Palenque de San Basilio" label="Palenquero"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="26699" end="26709" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="26718" end="26721" title="Romani people" label="ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285231" start="26730" end="26736" title="Raizal" label="Raizal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292132" start="26949" end="26963" title="Cementos Argos" label="Cementos Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275322" start="26965" end="26978" title="Miss Colombia" label="Miss Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4995" start="27198" end="27207" title="SABMiller" label="SABMiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q855639" start="27209" end="27221" title="Dow Chemical" label="Dow Chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053348" start="27223" end="27228" title="Cemex" label="Cemex"/>
<link wikidata="Q492747" start="27230" end="27234" title="Dole Food Company" label="Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275322" start="27281" end="27294" title="Miss Colombia" label="Miss Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q657461" start="27310" end="27329" title="Cartagena de Indias" label="Cartagena de Indias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705954" start="27531" end="27549" title="Miss Supranational" label="Miss Supranational"/>
<link wikidata="Q475660" start="27647" end="27665" title="Miss International" label="Miss International"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929782" start="27828" end="27838" title="Free-trade zone" label="Free zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q30594314" start="28972" end="29046" title="Convento de la Popa" label="Convent, cloister and chapel of Nuestra Señora de la Candelaria de la Popa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047033" start="29083" end="29124" title="Cartagena Cathedral, Colombia" label="Cathedral of Santa Catalina de Alejandría"/>
<link wikidata="Q9007271" start="29127" end="29166" title="Iglesia de San Pedro Claver, Cartagena" label="Church and cloister of San Pedro Claver"/>
<link wikidata="Q8350470" start="29169" end="29204" title="Convento de Santo Domingo, Cartagena" label="Convent and church of Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9054598" start="29207" end="29228" title="Palace of Inquisition" label="Palace of Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6492088" start="29272" end="29283" title="Las Bóvedas" label="Las Bóvedas"/>
<link wikidata="Q30594363" start="29286" end="29297" title="Puerta del Reloj, Cartagena" label="Clock Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636779" start="29583" end="29601" title="Battista Antonelli" label="Battista Antonelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833821" start="31604" end="31615" title="Transcaribe" label="Transcaribe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31976" end="31984" title="Highways in Colombia#50px Caribbean Transverse - National Route 90" label="roads 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q62823" start="32064" end="32076" title="Barranquilla" label="Barranquilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q209016" start="32078" end="32089" title="Santa Marta" label="Santa Marta"/>
<link wikidata="Q826566" start="32094" end="32102" title="Riohacha" label="Riohacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060938" start="32113" end="32124" title="Paraguachón" label="Paraguachón"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533" start="32192" end="32199" title="Caracas" label="Caracas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080243" start="32340" end="32347" title="Turbaco" label="Turbaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q671427" start="32352" end="32358" title="Arjona, Colombia" label="Arjona"/>
<link wikidata="Q48278" start="32476" end="32484" title="Medellín" label="Medellín"/>
<link wikidata="Q376903" start="32505" end="32515" title="Valledupar" label="Valledupar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043513" start="32556" end="32565" title="Sincelejo" label="Sincelejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670003" start="32661" end="32695" title="Rafael Núñez International Airport" label="Rafael Núñez International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q201785" start="32913" end="32944" title="El Dorado International Airport" label="El Dorado International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420178" start="33139" end="33168" title="Tocumen International Airport" label="Tocumen International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139661" start="33183" end="33218" title="Queen Beatrix International Airport" label="Queen Beatrix International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q21203" start="33222" end="33227" title="Aruba" label="Aruba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33475" end="33500" title="Sociedad Portuaria de Cartagena de Indias" label="Port Society of Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33678" end="33695" title="Muelles El Bosque" label="Muelles El Bosque"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33782" end="33813" title="Terminal de Contenedores de Cartagena de Indias" label="Container Terminal of Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q12353044" start="33893" end="33905" title="Oil Refinery" label="Oil Refinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4995" start="33923" end="33932" title="SABMiller" label="SABMiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292132" start="33948" end="33953" title="Argos (cement company)" label="Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q855639" start="33968" end="33980" title="Dow Chemical" label="Dow Chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q9401" start="34013" end="34017" title="BASF" label="BASF"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="34018" end="34026" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q221062" start="34059" end="34066" title="DuPont (1802–2017)" label="Du Pont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053348" start="34093" end="34098" title="Cemex" label="Cemex"/>
<link wikidata="Q492747" start="34113" end="34117" title="Dole Food Company" label="Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526431" start="34134" end="34148" title="Colombian Navy" label="Colombian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q191829" start="34238" end="34253" title="Magdalena River" label="Magdalena River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936078" start="34261" end="34272" title="Canal del Dique" label="Dique Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q190632" start="34383" end="34397" title="centralization" label="centralization"/>
<link wikidata="Q467701" start="34511" end="34525" title="Laureano Gómez" label="Laureano Gómez"/>
<link wikidata="Q471855" start="34772" end="34784" title="jurisdiction" label="jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686472" start="35226" end="35240" title="marine outfall" label="marine outfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895227" start="35378" end="35401" title="University of Cartagena" label="University of Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894317" start="35404" end="35438" title="Universidad Tecnológica de Bolívar" label="Universidad Tecnológica de Bolívar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35509" end="35561" title="Corporacion Educativa Colegio Britanico de Cartagena" label="Corporacion Educativa Colegio Britanico de Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35574" end="35602" title="Gimnasio Cartagena de Indias" label="Gimnasio Cartagena de Indias"/>
<link wikidata="Q24765386" start="35621" end="35645" title="Colegio Jorge Washington" label="Colegio Jorge Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895227" start="35728" end="35752" title="Universidad de Cartagena" label="Universidad de Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645282" start="35753" end="35774" title="José Fernández Madrid" label="José Fernández Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886122" start="36208" end="36223" title="Bartolomé Calvo" label="Bartolomé Calvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19943" start="37502" end="37524" title="Juan Carlos I of Spain" label="Juan Carlos I of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q965526" start="38402" end="38419" title="Manuel de Guirior" label="Manuel de Guirior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607862" start="38424" end="38451" title="Antonio Caballero y Góngora" label="Antonio Caballero y Góngora"/>
<link wikidata="Q27103231" start="38623" end="38635" title="Teatro Tacón" label="Teatro Tacón"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="38639" end="38645" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146847" start="38833" end="38852" title="Tigres de Cartagena" label="Tigres de Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130643" start="38879" end="38917" title="Colombian Professional Baseball League" label="Colombian Professional Baseball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q549088" start="38930" end="38955" title="Estadio Once de Noviembre" label="Estadio Once de Noviembre"/>
<link wikidata="Q392284" start="39098" end="39112" title="Real Cartagena" label="Real Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046893" start="39160" end="39183" title="U-15 Baseball World Cup" label="U-15 Baseball World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q62823" start="39189" end="39201" title="Barranquilla" label="Barranquilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q115543" start="39324" end="39345" title="Maria Bernarda Bütler" label="Maria Bernarda Bütler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="39546" end="39610" title="United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization" label="United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="39612" end="39618" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q15544905" start="40804" end="40826" title="Our Lady of Candelaria" label="Our Lady of Candelaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275322" start="40981" end="40994" title="Miss Colombia" label="Miss Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054677" start="41448" end="41453" title="Burn! (1969 film)" label="Burn!"/>
<link wikidata="Q34012" start="41473" end="41486" title="Marlon Brando" label="Marlon Brando"/>
<link wikidata="Q502629" start="41534" end="41553" title="Romancing the Stone" label="Romancing the Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q222008" start="41598" end="41613" title="Kathleen Turner" label="Kathleen Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q119798" start="41775" end="41790" title="Michael Douglas" label="Michael Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q302490" start="41970" end="41981" title="The Mission (1986 film)" label="The Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="42001" end="42015" title="Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q849169" start="42069" end="42096" title="Love in the Time of Cholera (film)" label="Love in the Time of Cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q50276507" start="42153" end="42163" title="Gemini Man (film)" label="Gemini Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q40096" start="42183" end="42193" title="Will Smith" label="Will Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q85847274" start="42249" end="42265" title="Sound of Freedom (film)" label="Sound of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930" start="42301" end="42311" title="Family Guy" label="Family Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064506" start="42332" end="42344" title="Barely Legal (Family Guy)" label="Barely Legal"/>
<link wikidata="Q559321" start="42592" end="42602" title="Miami Vice" label="Miami Vice"/>
<link wikidata="Q472051" start="42631" end="42641" title="Glenn Frey" label="Glenn Frey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4525" start="42743" end="42747" title="NCIS (TV series)" label="NCIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q903771" start="42769" end="42781" title="Agent Afloat (NCIS)" label="Agent Afloat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751764" start="42798" end="42821" title="The Missionary Position (NCIS)" label="The Missionary Position"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="42855" end="42858" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="" start="42907" end="42934" title="The Challenge XXX: Dirty 30" label="The Challenge XXX: Dirty 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103920" start="42982" end="42994" title="Orphan Black" label="Orphan Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="43169" end="43176" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q61466337" start="43188" end="43201" title="Siempre Bruja" label="Siempre Bruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q21468128" start="43257" end="43276" title="The Amazing Race 28" label="The Amazing Race 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q56275562" start="43404" end="43413" title="The Real Housewives of New York City (season 10)" label="Season 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759596" start="43423" end="43459" title="The Real Housewives of New York City" label="The Real Housewives of New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663104" start="43577" end="43594" title="Raid on Cartagena (1697)" label="raid on Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621164" start="43628" end="43641" title="Captain Blood (novel)" label="Captain Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5878" start="43658" end="43680" title="Gabriel García Márquez" label="Gabriel García Márquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q499396" start="43700" end="43727" title="Love in the Time of Cholera" label="Love in the Time of Cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q961566" start="43856" end="43883" title="The Autumn of the Patriarch" label="The Autumn of the Patriarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q267650" start="43907" end="43931" title="Of Love and Other Demons" label="Of Love and Other Demons"/>
<link wikidata="Q468851" start="44000" end="44013" title="Brian Jacques" label="Brian Jacques"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713731" start="44032" end="44056" title="The Angel&amp;#x27;s Command" label="The Angel&amp;#x27;s Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q897421" start="44181" end="44195" title="Sándor Kányádi" label="Sándor Kányádi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934886" start="44292" end="44298" title="Nam Le" label="Nam Le"/>
<link wikidata="Q17512402" start="44550" end="44565" title="The Bone Clocks" label="The Bone Clocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q40479" start="44575" end="44598" title="David Mitchell (author)" label="David Mitchell (author)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532132" start="44637" end="44653" title="Claudia Amengual" label="Claudia Amengual"/>
<link wikidata="Q20827589" start="44669" end="44678" title="Cartagena (novel)" label="Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="" start="44836" end="44871" title="Uncharted 3: Drake&amp;#x27;s Deception" label="Uncharted 3: Drake&amp;#x27;s Deception"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169680" start="45006" end="45022" title="Corazón Profundo" label="Corazón Profundo"/>
<link wikidata="Q965888" start="45030" end="45042" title="Carlos Vives" label="Carlos Vives"/>
<link wikidata="Q205352" start="45185" end="45202" title="Zion &amp;amp; Lennox" label="Zion &amp;amp; Lennox"/>
<link wikidata="Q758934" start="45280" end="45288" title="Alestorm" label="Alestorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q17509139" start="45316" end="45340" title="Sunset on the Golden Age" label="Sunset on the Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398718" start="45408" end="45418" title="Joe Arroyo" label="Joe Arroyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6844442" start="45454" end="45466" title="Miguel Avila" label="Miguel Avila"/>
<link wikidata="Q56678511" start="45508" end="45520" title="Valeria Ayos" label="Valeria Ayos"/>
<link wikidata="Q108113269" start="45522" end="45549" title="Miss Universe Colombia 2021" label="Miss Universe Colombia 2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q9098179" start="45552" end="45566" title="Alvaro Barrios" label="Alvaro Barrios"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886122" start="45588" end="45603" title="Bartolomé Calvo" label="Bartolomé Calvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q96357496" start="45629" end="45647" title="Governor of Panama" label="Governor of Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120972" start="45659" end="45699" title="President of the Granadine Confederation" label="President of the Granadine Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8246826" start="45710" end="45728" title="Bernardo Caraballo" label="Bernardo Caraballo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5667038" start="45738" end="45760" title="Alfonso Múnera Cavadía" label="Alfonso Múnera Cavadía"/>
<link wikidata="Q601512" start="45787" end="45804" title="Antonio Cervantes" label="Antonio Cervantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q167458" start="45814" end="45835" title="Peter Claver" label="Saint Peter Claver SJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q51620" start="45975" end="45984" title="Beatified" label="Beatified"/>
<link wikidata="Q43720" start="45993" end="46005" title="Pope Pius IX" label="Pope Pius IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="46007" end="46016" title="canonized" label="canonized"/>
<link wikidata="Q43922" start="46025" end="46038" title="Pope Leo XIII" label="Pope Leo XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284236" start="46050" end="46068" title="Colombian Congress" label="Colombian Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q75843853" start="46151" end="46162" title="William Dau" label="William Dau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039682" start="46192" end="46207" title="Germán Espinosa" label="Germán Espinosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6293240" start="46306" end="46333" title="José María García de Toledo" label="José María García de Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q28975411" start="46469" end="46483" title="Laura González (Miss Colombia)" label="Laura González"/>
<link wikidata="Q21800744" start="46485" end="46503" title="Miss Colombia 2017" label="Miss Colombia 2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q558553" start="46506" end="46518" title="Enrique Grau" label="Enrique Grau"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="46537" end="46543" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q15051108" start="46614" end="46628" title="Dilson Herrera" label="Dilson Herrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293416" start="46661" end="46673" title="Zharick León" label="Zharick León"/>
<link wikidata="Q17309916" start="46685" end="46696" title="Nereo Lopez" label="Nereo Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q24667401" start="46725" end="46739" title="Manuel Medrano" label="Manuel Medrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755208" start="46750" end="46764" title="Andrea Nocetti" label="Andrea Nocetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6876362" start="46766" end="46784" title="Miss Colombia 2000" label="Miss Colombia 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q683532" start="46787" end="46799" title="Rafael Núñez (politician)" label="Rafael Núñez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284236" start="47060" end="47078" title="Colombian Congress" label="Colombian Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q230597" start="47101" end="47108" title="Bolívar Department" label="Bolívar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591868" start="47175" end="47201" title="Sovereign State of Bolivar" label="Sovereign State of Bolivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q853475" start="47257" end="47278" title="President of Colombia" label="President of Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995129" start="47434" end="47464" title="Colombian Constitution of 1886" label="Colombian Constitution of 1886"/>
<link wikidata="Q102082210" start="47537" end="47552" title="Laura Olascuaga" label="Laura Olascuaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q99764948" start="47554" end="47581" title="Miss Universe Colombia 2020" label="Miss Universe Colombia 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q484959" start="47584" end="47597" title="Alfonso Pérez (boxer)" label="Alfonso Pérez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660117" start="47607" end="47631" title="Carlos Pizarro Leongómez" label="Carlos Pizarro Leongómez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789014" start="47659" end="47681" title="19th of April Movement" label="19th of April Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460483" start="47684" end="47708" title="Sabas Pretelt de la Vega" label="Sabas Pretelt de la Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503286" start="47770" end="47780" title="Frey Ramos" label="Frey Ramos"/>
<link wikidata="Q55685928" start="47795" end="47807" title="Ramses Ramos" label="Ramses Ramos"/>
<link wikidata="Q10472617" start="47817" end="47826" title="Hugo Soto (footballer)" label="Hugo Soto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3065498" start="47841" end="47854" title="Julio Teherán" label="Julio Teherán"/>
<link wikidata="Q20078801" start="47887" end="47898" title="Gio Urshela" label="Gio Urshela"/>
<link wikidata="Q423236" start="47931" end="47945" title="Rodrigo Valdez" label="Rodrigo Valdez"/>
<link wikidata="Q112127349" start="47955" end="47967" title="Kevin Flórez" label="Kevin Flórez"/>
<link wikidata="Q16301258" start="47978" end="47992" title="Karoll Márquez" label="Karoll Márquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q502045" start="48003" end="48021" title="Teresa Román Vélez" label="Teresa Román Vélez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178832" start="48032" end="48047" title="Orlando Cabrera" label="Orlando Cabrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709668" start="48067" end="48080" title="Jeymmy Vargas" label="Jeymmy Vargas"/>
<link wikidata="Q123680292" start="48107" end="48130" title="Vanessa Rosales Altamar" label="Vanessa Rosales Altamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q28047367" start="48141" end="48163" title="Laura De León Céspedes" label="Laura De León Céspedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q769547" start="48175" end="48187" title="Angie Cepeda" label="Angie Cepeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643612" start="48199" end="48211" title="Lorna Cepeda" label="Lorna Cepeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340659" start="48223" end="48239" title="Eduardo Lemaitre" label="Eduardo Lemaitre"/>
<link wikidata="Q124041363" start="48253" end="48281" title="Salomón Bustamante Sanmiguel" label="Salomón Bustamante Sanmiguel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6066606" start="48293" end="48316" title="Patricia Teherán Romero" label="Patricia Teherán Romero"/>
<link wikidata="Q130355829" start="48327" end="48349" title="Rafael Vergara Navarro" label="Rafael Vergara Navarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q692174" start="48374" end="48397" title="San Basilio de Palenque" label="San Basilio de Palenque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674250" start="48522" end="48537" title="Rosario Islands" label="Rosario Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6347899" start="48617" end="48655" title="List of tallest buildings in Cartagena" label="List of tallest buildings in Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q666987" start="48658" end="48709" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Cartagena in Colombia" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Cartagena in Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390096" start="48712" end="48736" title="Manuel Rodríguez Torices" label="Manuel Rodríguez Torices"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641709" start="48739" end="48758" title="Cartagena Manifesto" label="Cartagena Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249661" start="48761" end="48792" title="United Provinces of New Granada" label="United Provinces of New Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q199821" start="48795" end="48808" title="Gran Colombia" label="Gran Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071310" start="48811" end="48830" title="War of the Supremes" label="War of the Supremes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646343" start="48833" end="48857" title="1829–51 cholera pandemic" label="1829–51 cholera pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q21793962" start="56313" end="56334" title="Vila Vilar, Enriqueta" label="Vila Vilar, Enriqueta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524792" start="57792" end="57801" title="Clemencia, Colombia" label="Clemencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433377" start="57812" end="57831" title="Villanueva, Bolívar" label="Villanueva, Bolívar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093463" start="57833" end="57847" title="San Estanislao" label="San Estanislao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080243" start="57863" end="57870" title="Turbaco" label="Turbaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q671427" start="57872" end="57878" title="Arjona, Colombia" label="Arjona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593242" start="57890" end="57909" title="Tierra Bomba Island" label="Tierra Bomba Island"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="63928" wikidata="Q776280" url="?curid=63928" title="Mohicans">
<text>The Mohicans ( or ) are an Eastern Algonquian Native American tribe that historically spoke an Algonquian language. As part of the Eastern Algonquian family of tribes, they are related to the neighboring Lenape, whose indigenous territory was to the south as far as the Atlantic coast. The Mohicans lived in the upper tidal Hudson River Valley, including the confluence of the Mohawk River (where present-day Albany, New York, developed) and into western New England centered on the upper Housatonic River watershed. After 1680, due to conflicts with the powerful Mohawk to the west during the Beaver Wars, many were driven southeastward across the present-day Massachusetts western border and the Taconic Mountains to Berkshire County around Stockbridge, Massachusetts.
They combined with Lenape Native Americans (a branch known as the Munsee) in Stockbridge, MA, and later the people moved west away from pressure of European invasion. They settled in what became Shawano County, Wisconsin. Most eastern Native American populations were forced to reservations in Indian Territory during the 1830s, and other reservations in the American West later. Decades later the United States government organized the Stockbridge-Munsee Community with registered members of the Munsee people and a reservation, which was originally the land of the Menominee Nation.

Following the disruption of the American Revolutionary War, most of the Mohican descendants first migrated westward to join the Iroquois Oneida on their reservation in central New York. The Oneida gave them about 22,000 acres for their use. After more than two decades, in the 1820s and 1830s, the Oneida and the Stockbridge moved again, pressured to sell their lands and relocate to northeastern Wisconsin under the federal Indian Removal Act. A group of Mohican also migrated to Ontario, Canada to live with the predominately Iroquois Six Nations of the Grand River reserve.

The tribe identified by the place where they lived: (or &quot;people of the continually flowing waters&quot;). According to Daniel G. Brinton and James Hammond Trumbull &quot;two well-known authorities on Mohican history&quot;, the word refers to a body of water that flows in both directions, being tidal to most of its Mohican range, so they named the Hudson River , or the river with waters that are never still. Therefore, they, along with other tribes living along the Hudson River, such as the &quot;Munsee&quot; to their west, known by the dialect of Lenape that they spoke, and &quot;Wappinger&quot; to the south, were called &quot;the River Indians&quot; by the Dutch and English. 

The Dutch heard and transliterated the term for the people of the area in their own language, variously as: &quot;Mahigan&quot;, &quot;Mahinganak&quot;, &quot;Maikan&quot;, among other variants, which the English later expressed as &quot;Mohican&quot;, in a transliteration to their own spelling system. The French, adopting names used by their Indian allies in Canada, knew the Mohican as the (or wolves). They referred to the Iroquois Confederacy as the &quot;Snake People&quot; (as they were called by some competitors, or &quot;Five Nations&quot;, representing their original tribes). Like the Munsee and Wappinger peoples, the Mohican were Algonquian-speaking, part of a large language family related also to the Lenape people, who occupied coastal areas from western Long Island to the Delaware River valley to the south.

In the late twentieth century, the Mohican joined other former New York tribes, including the Oneida and some other Iroquois nations, in filing land claims against New York for what were considered unconstitutional purchases of their lands after the Revolutionary War. Only the federal government had constitutional authority to deal with the Indian nations. In 2010, outgoing governor David Paterson announced a land exchange with the Stockbridge-Munsee that would enable them to build a large casino on in Sullivan County in the Catskills, as a settlement in exchange for dropping their larger claim in Madison County. The deal had many opponents.

==Territory==
In their own language, the Mohican identified collectively as the , &quot;people of the waters that are never still&quot;.

At the time of their first contact with Europeans traders along the river in the 1590s, the Mohican were living in and around the Hudson River (or ). After 1609, at the time of the Dutch settlement of New Netherland, they also ranged along the eastern Mohawk River and the Hoosic River, and south along the Hudson to the Roeliff Jansen Kill, where they bordered on the Wappinger people. This nation inhabited the river area and its interior southward to today&#x27;s New York City.

Most of the Mohican communities lay along the upper tidal reaches of the Hudson River and along the watersheds of Kinderhook-Claverack-Taghkanic Creek, the Roeliff Jansen Kill, Catskil Creek, and adjacent areas of the Housatonic watershed. Mohican territory reached along Hudson River watersheds northeastward to Wood Creek just south of Lake Champlain.

==Culture==
The Mohican villages were governed by hereditary sachems advised by a council of clan elders. They had a matrilineal kinship system, with property and inheritance (including such hereditary offices) passed through the maternal line. Moravian missionary John Heckewelder and early anthropologist Lewis H. Morgan both learned from Mohican informants that their matrilineal society was divided into three phratries (Turkey, Turtle, and Wolf). These were divided into clans or subclans, including a potentially prominent Bear Clan. This finding is supported by the evidence of Mohican signatures on treaties and land deeds (see the works of Shirley Dunn).

A general council of sachems met regularly at Scodac (east of present-day Albany) to decide important matters affecting the entire confederacy. In his history of the Indians of the Hudson River, Edward Manning Ruttenber described the clans of the Mohican as the Bear, the Turkey, the Turtle, and the Wolf. Each had a role in the lives of the people, and the Wolf served as warriors in the north to defend against the Mohawk, the easternmost of the Five Nations of the Iroquois.

Like the Munsee-speaking communities to their south, Mohican villages followed a dispersed settlement pattern, with each community likely dominated by a single lineage or clan. The villages usually consisted of a small cluster of small and mid-sized longhouses, and were located along floodplains. During times of war, they built fortifications in defensive locations (such as along ridges) as places of retreat. Their cornfields were located near their communities; the women also cultivated varieties of squash, beans, sunflowers, and other crops from the Eastern Agricultural Complex. Horticulture and the gathering and processing of nuts (hickory, butternuts, black walnuts and acorns), fruits (blueberries, raspberries, juneberries among many others), and roots (groundnuts, wood lilies, arrowroot among others) provided much of their diet. This was supplemented by the men hunting game (turkeys, deer, elk, bears, and moose in the Taconics) and fishing (sturgeon, alewives, shad, eels, lamprey and striped bass).

==Language==
The formally extinct Mohican language belonged to the Eastern Algonquian branch of the Algonquian language family.

==History==
===Mohican Confederacy===
The Mohican were a confederacy of five tribes and as many as forty villages.
* &quot;Mohican proper&quot;, lived in the vicinity of today&#x27;s Albany (, &quot;the fireplace of the Mahican Nation&quot;) west towards the Mohawk River and to the northwest to Lake Champlain and Lake George
* , lived along the west shore of the Hudson River above the Catskill Creek
*&quot;Wawyachtonoc&quot; (or , &quot;eddy people&quot; or &quot;people of the curving channel&quot;), lived in Dutchess County and Columbia County eastward to the Housatonic River in Litchfield County, Connecticut, main village was &quot;Weantinock&quot;, additional villages: &quot;Shecomeco&quot;, &quot;Wechquadnach&quot;, &quot;Pamperaug&quot;, &quot;Bantam&quot;, &quot;Weataug&quot;, &quot;Scaticook&quot;
* &quot;Westenhuck&quot; (from , &quot;on the other side of the mountains&quot;), the name of a village near Great Barrington, Massachusetts. Often called the &quot;Housatonic people&quot;, they lived in the Housatonic Valley in Connecticut and Massachusetts and in the vicinity of Great Barrington, which they called , meaning &quot;the place downstream&quot;
* &quot;Wiekagjoc&quot; (from , &quot;upper reaches of a river&quot;), lived east of the Hudson Rivers near the city of Hudson, Columbia County, New York

=== Conflict with the Mohawk ===
The Algonquians (Mohican) and Iroquois (Mohawk) were traditional competitors and enemies. Iroquois oral tradition, as recorded in the &quot;Jesuit Relations&quot;, speaks of a war between the Mohawks and an alliance of the Susquehannock and Algonquin (sometime between 1580 and 1600). This was perhaps in response to the formation of the League of the Iroquois.

In September 1609 Henry Hudson encountered Mohican villages just below present day Albany, with whom he traded goods for furs. Hudson returned to Holland with a cargo of valuable furs which immediately attracted Dutch merchants to the area. The first Dutch fur traders arrived on the Hudson River the following year to trade with the Mohicans. Besides exposing them to European epidemics, the fur trade destabilized the region.

In 1614, the Dutch decided to establish a permanent trading post on Castle Island, on the site of a previous French post that had been long abandoned; but first they had to arrange a truce to end fighting which had broken out between the Mohicans and Mohawks. Fighting broke out again between the Mohicans and Mohawks in 1617, and with Fort Nassau badly damaged by a freshet, the Dutch abandoned the fort. In 1618, having once again negotiated a truce, the Dutch rebuilt Fort Nassau on higher ground. Late that year, Fort Nassau was destroyed by flooding and abandoned for good. In 1624, Captain Cornelius Jacobsen May sailed the upriver and landed eighteen families of Walloons on a plain opposite Castle Island. They commenced to construct Fort Orange.

The Mohicans invited the Algonquin and Montagnais to bring their furs to Fort Orange as an alternative to French traders in Quebec. Seeing the Mohicans extend their control over the fur trade, the Mohawk attacked, with initial success. In 1625 or 1626 the Mohicans destroyed the easternmost Iroquois &quot;castle&quot;. The Mohawks then re-located south of the Mohawk River, closer to Fort Orange. In July 1626 many of the settlers moved to New Amsterdam because of the conflict. The Mohicans requested help from the Dutch and Commander Daniel Van Krieckebeek set out from the fort with six soldiers. Van Krieckebeek, three soldiers, and twenty-four Mohicans were killed when their party was ambushed by the Mohawk about a mile from the fort. The Mohawks withdrew with some body parts of those slain for later consumption as a demonstration of supremacy.

War continued to rage between the Mohicans and Mohawks throughout the area from Skahnéhtati (Schenectady) to Kinderhoek (Kinderhook). By 1629, the Mohawks had taken over territories on the west bank of the Hudson River that were formerly held by the Mohicans. The conflict caused most of the Mohicans to migrate eastward across the Hudson River into western Massachusetts and Connecticut. The Mohawks gained a near-monopoly in the fur trade with the Dutch by prohibiting the nearby Algonquian-speaking tribes to the north or east from trading.

===Stockbridge===
Many Mohicans settled in the town of Stockbridge, Massachusetts, where they gradually became known as the &quot;Stockbridge Indians&quot;. , one of their chiefs, accompanied three Mohawk chiefs on a state visit to Queen Anne and her government in England in 1710. They were popularly referred to as the Four Mohawk Kings.
The Stockbridge Indians allowed Protestant missionaries, including Jonathan Edwards, to live among them. In the 18th century, many converted to Christianity, while keeping certain traditions of their own. They fought on the side of the British colonists in the French and Indian War (also known as the Seven Years&#x27; War). During the American Revolution, they sided with the colonists.

In the eighteenth century, some of the Mohicans developed strong ties with missionaries of the Moravian Church from Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, who founded a mission at their village of in Dutchess County, New York. Henry Rauch reached out to two Mohican leaders, , also known as ; and , who took him back to Shekomeko. They named him the new religious teacher. Over time, Rauch won listeners, as the Mohicans had suffered much from disease and warfare, which had disrupted their society. Early in 1742, Shabash and two other Mohicans accompanied Rauch to Bethlehem, where he was to be ordained as a deacon. The three Mohicans were baptized on 11 February 1742 in John de Turk&#x27;s barn nearby at Oley, Pennsylvania. Shabash was the first Mohican of Shekomeko to adopt the Christian religion. The Moravians built a chapel for the Mohican people in 1743. They defended the Mohican against European colonists&#x27; exploitation, trying to protect them against land encroachment and abuses of liquor.

On a 1738 visit to New York, the Mohicans spoke to Governor Lewis Morris concerning the sale of their land near Shekomeko. The Governor promised they would be paid as soon as the lands were surveyed. He suggested that for their own security, they should mark off their square mile of land they wished to keep, which the Mohicans never did. In September 1743, still under the Acting-Governor George Clarke the land was finally surveyed by New York Assembly agents and divided into lots, a row of which ran through the Indians&#x27; reserved land. With some help from the missionaries, on 17 October 1743 and already under the new Royal Governor George Clinton, Shabash put together a petition of names of people who could attest that the land in which one of the lots was running through was theirs. Despite Shabash&#x27;s appeals, his persistence, and the missionaries&#x27; help, the Mohicans lost the case. The lots were eventually bought up by European-American colonists and the Mohicans were forced out of Shekomeko. Some who opposed the missionaries&#x27; work accused them of being secret Catholic Jesuits (who had been outlawed from the colony in 1700) and of working with the Mohicans on the side of the French. The missionaries were summoned more than once before colonial government, but also had supporters. In the late 1740s the colonial government at Poughkeepsie expelled the missionaries from New York, in part because of their advocacy of Mohican rights. European colonists soon took over the Mohican land.

====Revolutionary War====
In August 1775, the Six Nations staged a council fire near Albany, after news of Bunker Hill had made war seem imminent. After much debate, they decided that such a war was a private affair between the British and the colonists (known as Rebels, Revolutionaries, Congress-Men, American Whigs, or Patriots), and that they should stay out of it. Mohawk Chief Joseph Brant feared that the Indians would lose their lands if the Colonists achieved independence. Sir William Johnson, his son John Johnson and son-in-law Guy Johnson and Brant used all their influence to engage the Iroquois to fight for the British cause. The Mohawk, Onondaga, Cayuga, and Seneca ultimately became allies and provided warriors for the battles in the New York area. The Oneida and Tuscarora sided with the Colonists. The Mohicans, who as Algonquians were not part of the Iroquois Confederacy, sided with the Patriots, serving at the Siege of Boston, and the battles of Saratoga and Monmouth.

In 1778 they lost forty warriors of their Stockbridge Militia, around half &quot;Stockbridge Indians&quot; who were remnants of both Mohican and Wappinger tribes, in a British attack on the land of the van Cortlandt family. (In 1888, the property became Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx, New York.) The Battle of Kingsbridge decimated the troop&#x27;s ranks. It received a commendation from George Washington, was paid $1,000 and dismissed.

===Move to Oneida, New York===
After the Revolution the citizens of the new United States forced many Native Americans off their land and westward. In the 1780s, groups of Stockbridge Indians, today regarded as Stockbridge Munsee, moved from Massachusetts to a new location among the Oneida people in central New York, who had been granted a reservation for their service to the Patriots, out of their former territory of . They called their settlement New Stockbridge. Some individuals and families, mostly people who were old or those with special ties to the area, remained behind at Stockbridge.

The central figures of Mohican society, including the chief sachem, Joseph Quanaukaunt, and his counselors and relatives, were part of the move to New Stockbridge. At the new town, the Stockbridge emigrants controlled their own affairs and combined traditional ways with the new as they chose. After learning from the Christian missionaries, the Stockbridge Indians were experienced in English ways. At New Stockbridge they replicated their former town. While continuing as Christians, they retained their language and Mohican cultural traditions. In general, their evolving Mohican identity was still rooted in traditions of the past.

===Removal to Wisconsin===
In the 1820s and 1830s, most of the Stockbridge Indians moved to Shawano County, Wisconsin, where they were promised land by the US government under the policy of Indian removal. In Wisconsin, they settled on reservations with the Lenape (called Munsee after one of their major dialects), who were also speakers of one of the Algonquian languages. Together, the two formed a band and are federally recognized as the Stockbridge-Munsee Community.

Their 22,000-acre reservation is known as that of the Stockbridge-Munsee Band of Mohican Indians and is located near the town of Bowler. Since the late twentieth century, they have developed the North Star Mohican Resort and Casino on their reservation, which has successfully generated funds for tribal welfare and economic development.

==Land claims==
In the late twentieth century, the Stockbridge-Munsee were among tribes filing land claims against New York, which had been ruled to have unconstitutionally acquired land from Indians without Senate ratification. The Stockbridge-Munsee filed a land claim against New York state for in Madison County, the location of its former property. In 2011, outgoing governor David Paterson announced having reached a deal with the tribe. They would be given nearly in Madison County and give up their larger claim in exchange for the state&#x27;s giving them 330 acres of land in Sullivan County in the Catskill Mountains, where the government was trying to encourage economic development. The federal government had agreed to take the land in trust, making it eligible for development as a gaming casino, and the state would allow gaming, an increasingly important source of revenue for American Indians. Race track and casinos, private interests and other tribes opposed the deal.

In 2011, the Stockbridge-Munsee Community Band of the Mohican Indians regained ownership 156 acres along the Hudson River, a tract known as Papscanee Island Nature Preserve near East Greenbush and Schodack. The land was donated to descendants of its indigenous inhabitants by the Open Space Initiative. Prior to colonization, the island was used for ceremonies by the Mohicans before it was acquired by Dutch merchant Kiliaen Van Rensselaer in 1637. The property is managed by Rensselaer County and the Rensselaer Land Trust for public access and protection, while owned by the Mohicans.

==Representation in media==
James Fenimore Cooper based his novel, &quot;The Last of the Mohicans&quot;, on the Mohican tribe. His description includes some cultural aspects of the Mohegan, a different Algonquian tribe that lived in eastern Connecticut. Cooper set his novel in the Hudson Valley, Mohican land, but used some Mohegan names for his characters, such as Uncas.

The novel has been adapted for the cinema more than a dozen times, the first time in 1920. Michael Mann directed a 1992 adaptation, which starred Daniel Day-Lewis as a Mohican-adopted white man.

In 2016, German metal band Running Wild released their 16th album Rapid Foray. The last song in the album is &#x27;Last of the Mohicans&#x27;.

==Notable members==
* Etow Oh Koam, Mohican sachem and one of the Four Indian Kings, who, with three Mohawk leaders, made a state visit to Queen Anne and her government in England in 1710.
* Hendrick Aupaumut, (1757–1830) sachem, historian, and American Revolutionary War captain
* Steve Conliff, (1949-2006) political writer, historian, Yippie activist
* Brent Michael Davids, (b. 1959) composer/flautist 
* Bill Miller, (b. 1955) musician
* Electa Quinney, (1798–1885) first public teacher and school mistress in Wisconsin
* John Wannuaucon Quinney, (1797–1855) diplomat
* Don Coyhis (born August 16, 1943), addiction specialist, Native American health activist and author.

* Jon Kókókóhó Reavey (born June 17, 1986), Wildlife Activist Nature Conservancy Magazine.

* Anthony Kiedis (born November 1, 1962), lead singer of the Red Hot Chili Peppers.
* Alaqua Cox - actress, &quot;Hawkeye &amp; Echo&quot;

== See also ==
* Native American tribes in Massachusetts

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Aupaumut, Hendrick. (1790). &quot;History of the Muh-he-con-nuk Indians&quot;, in &quot;American Indian Nonfiction, An Anthology of Writings, 1760s–1930s&quot; (pp. 63–71). Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
* Nekatcit. &quot;The Celestial Bear Comes Down to Earth: The Bear Sacrifice Ceremony of the Munsee-Mahican in Canada as Related by Nekatcit&quot; Edited by Frank G. Speck in collaboration with Jesse Moses, Delaware Nation. Pub. 1945, Reading Public Museum.
* Jones, Electa. (1854). &quot;Stockbridge Past and Present&quot;.
* Ruttenber, E. M. (1872). &quot;History of the Indian Tribes of Hudson&#x27;s River; Their Origin, Manners and Customs; Tribal and Sub-Tribal Organizations; Wars, Treaties, Etc., Etc.&quot; Albany: J. Munsell History Series.
* Starna, William A.: &quot;From Homeland to New Land: A History of the Mahican Indians, 1600–1830.&quot; University of Nebraska Press, 2013. 
* Brasser, T. J. (1978). &quot;Mahican&quot;, in B. G. Trigger (Ed.), &quot;Northeast&quot; (pp. 198–212). &quot;Handbook of North American Indian languages&quot; (Vol. 15). Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution.
* Cappel, Constance, &quot;The Smallpox Genocide of the Odawa Tribe at L&#x27;Arbre Croche, 1763&quot;, &quot;The History of a Native American People&quot;, Lewiston, New York: Edwin Mellen Press, 2007.
* Conkey, Laura E.; Bolissevain, Ethel; &amp; Goddard, Ives. (1978). &quot;Indians of southern New England and Long Island: Late period&quot;, in B. G. Trigger (Ed.), &quot;Northeast&quot; (pp. 177–189). &quot;Handbook of North American Indian languages&quot; (Vol. 15). Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution.
* Salwen, Bert. (1978). &quot;Indians of southern New England and Long Island: Early period&quot;, in B. G. Trigger (Ed.), &quot;Northeast&quot; (pp. 160–176). &quot;Handbook of North American Indian languages&quot; (Vol. 15). Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution.
* Simpson, J. A.; &amp; Weiner, E. S. C. (1989). &quot;Mohican&quot;, &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot;. Oxford: Clarendon Press. (Online version).
* Sturtevant, William C. (Ed.). (1978–present). &quot;Handbook of North American Indians&quot; (Vol. 1–20). Washington, D. C.: Smithsonian Institution.
* Trigger, Bruce G. (Ed.). (1978). &quot;Northeast&quot;, &quot;Handbook of North American Indians&quot; (Vol. 15). Washington, D. C.: Smithsonian Institution.

==External links==

* Stockbridge-Munsee community
* Mohican nation Stockbridge-Munsee band: Our history
* Mohican Indians</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q776280" start="4" end="12" title="Mohicans" label="Mohicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257525" start="27" end="45" title="Eastern Algonquian" label="Eastern Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="46" end="61" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="62" end="67" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="204" end="210" title="Lenape" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140235" start="324" end="343" title="Hudson River Valley" label="Hudson River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="409" end="425" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631368" start="489" end="505" title="Housatonic River" label="Housatonic River"/>
<link wikidata="Q116971" start="564" end="570" title="Mohawk people" label="Mohawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q856216" start="594" end="605" title="Beaver Wars" label="Beaver Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477664" start="698" end="715" title="Taconic Mountains" label="Taconic Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q54165" start="719" end="735" title="Berkshire County" label="Berkshire County"/>
<link wikidata="Q222705" start="743" end="769" title="Stockbridge, Massachusetts" label="Stockbridge, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q500838" start="966" end="991" title="Shawano County, Wisconsin" label="Shawano County, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="1130" end="1143" title="American Frontier" label="American West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695829" start="1208" end="1236" title="Stockbridge-Munsee Community" label="Stockbridge-Munsee Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q16108686" start="1268" end="1274" title="Munsee" label="Munsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="1389" end="1415" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="1485" end="1493" title="Iroquois" label="Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572875" start="1494" end="1500" title="Oneida people" label="Oneida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="1754" end="1763" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519192" start="1782" end="1796" title="Indian Removal" label="Indian Removal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="1838" end="1853" title="Ontario, Canada" label="Ontario, Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457190" start="1894" end="1924" title="Six Nations of the Grand River" label="Six Nations of the Grand River"/>
<link wikidata="Q16108686" start="2441" end="2447" title="Munsee" label="Munsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811930" start="2527" end="2536" title="Wappinger" label="Wappinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="3055" end="3063" title="Iroquois" label="Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="3345" end="3358" title="Lenape people" label="Lenape people"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="3419" end="3433" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093666" start="3550" end="3556" title="Oneida Indian Nation" label="Oneida"/>
<link wikidata="Q11674" start="3842" end="3856" title="David Paterson" label="David Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q70979" start="3964" end="3979" title="Sullivan County, New York" label="Sullivan County"/>
<link wikidata="Q630566" start="3987" end="3996" title="Catskills" label="Catskills"/>
<link wikidata="Q115166" start="4061" end="4075" title="Madison County, New York" label="Madison County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182562" start="4124" end="4142" title="Mohican language" label="their own language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090195" start="4266" end="4279" title="first contact (anthropology)" label="first contact"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="4285" end="4291" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="4375" end="4387" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q382593" start="4446" end="4460" title="New Netherland" label="New Netherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345896" start="4497" end="4509" title="Mohawk River" label="Mohawk River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133035" start="4518" end="4530" title="Hoosic River" label="Hoosic River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7357592" start="4566" end="4585" title="Roeliff Jansen Kill" label="Roeliff Jansen Kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811930" start="4614" end="4623" title="Wappinger" label="Wappinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631368" start="4946" end="4966" title="Housatonic River" label="Housatonic watershed"/>
<link wikidata="Q68467" start="5066" end="5080" title="Lake Champlain" label="Lake Champlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433209" start="5144" end="5150" title="sachem" label="sachem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136773" start="5200" end="5226" title="Matrilineality" label="matrilineal kinship system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6238500" start="5348" end="5364" title="John Heckewelder" label="John Heckewelder"/>
<link wikidata="Q313458" start="5390" end="5405" title="Lewis H. Morgan" label="Lewis H. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552552" start="5497" end="5506" title="phratries" label="phratries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5732" end="5744" title="Shirley Dunn" label="Shirley Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710635" start="5794" end="5800" title="Schodack, New York" label="Scodac"/>
<link wikidata="Q52159152" start="5943" end="5967" title="Edward Manning Ruttenber" label="Edward Manning Ruttenber"/>
<link wikidata="Q211503" start="5982" end="5986" title="clan" label="clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q116971" start="6165" end="6171" title="Mohawk people" label="Mohawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q504106" start="6477" end="6486" title="longhouse" label="longhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329949" start="6785" end="6813" title="Eastern Agricultural Complex" label="Eastern Agricultural Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182562" start="7281" end="7297" title="Mohican language" label="Mohican language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257525" start="7314" end="7332" title="Eastern Algonquian languages" label="Eastern Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="7347" end="7366" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="7559" end="7565" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978040" start="7786" end="7798" title="Wawyachtonoc" label="Wawyachtonoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q115148" start="7891" end="7906" title="Dutchess County, New York" label="Dutchess County"/>
<link wikidata="Q115200" start="7911" end="7926" title="Columbia County, New York" label="Columbia County"/>
<link wikidata="Q54235" start="7963" end="7980" title="Litchfield County, Connecticut" label="Litchfield County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144518" start="8301" end="8317" title="Great Barrington, Massachusetts" label="Great Barrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631368" start="8400" end="8417" title="Housatonic Valley" label="Housatonic Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023499" start="8673" end="8679" title="Hudson, New York" label="Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="8771" end="8779" title="Iroquois" label="Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q923974" start="8881" end="8897" title="Jesuit Relations" label="Jesuit Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279673" start="8964" end="8977" title="Susquehannock" label="Susquehannock"/>
<link wikidata="Q135863" start="8982" end="8991" title="Algonquin people" label="Algonquin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050170" start="9601" end="9614" title="Castle Island (New York)" label="Castle Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256755" start="9869" end="9880" title="Fort Nassau (North River)" label="Fort Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736292" start="10129" end="10151" title="Cornelius Jacobsen May" label="Cornelius Jacobsen May"/>
<link wikidata="Q381151" start="10203" end="10211" title="Walloons" label="Walloons"/>
<link wikidata="Q693096" start="10275" end="10286" title="Fort Orange (New Netherland)" label="Fort Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q135863" start="10314" end="10323" title="Algonquin people" label="Algonquin"/>
<link wikidata="Q497568" start="10328" end="10338" title="Innu" label="Montagnais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345896" start="10650" end="10662" title="Mohawk River" label="Mohawk River"/>
<link wikidata="Q223308" start="10730" end="10743" title="New Amsterdam" label="New Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q331380" start="11238" end="11249" title="Schenectady, New York" label="Schenectady"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478629" start="11266" end="11276" title="Kinderhook (village), New York" label="Kinderhook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="11477" end="11489" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q222705" start="11745" end="11771" title="Stockbridge, Massachusetts" label="Stockbridge, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="11922" end="11932" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Queen Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475365" start="12011" end="12028" title="Four Mohawk Kings" label="Four Mohawk Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="12062" end="12072" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="12073" end="12085" title="missionary" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q313073" start="12097" end="12113" title="Jonathan Edwards (theologian)" label="Jonathan Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="12174" end="12186" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="12291" end="12312" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="12332" end="12353" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="12367" end="12386" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q159318" start="12515" end="12530" title="Moravian Church" label="Moravian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q164380" start="12536" end="12559" title="Bethlehem, Pennsylvania" label="Bethlehem, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q115148" start="12606" end="12631" title="Dutchess County, New York" label="Dutchess County, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877723" start="13116" end="13134" title="Oley, Pennsylvania" label="Oley, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536900" start="13478" end="13490" title="Lewis Morris (governor)" label="Lewis Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537947" start="13809" end="13822" title="George Clarke (governor)" label="George Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537983" start="14062" end="14076" title="George Clinton (Royal Navy officer)" label="George Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="14514" end="14522" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="14523" end="14530" title="Society of Jesus" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q178093" start="14783" end="14795" title="Poughkeepsie, New York" label="Poughkeepsie"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="14989" end="15000" title="Iroquois Confederacy" label="Six Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365374" start="15265" end="15273" title="Patriot (American Revolution)" label="Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q505146" start="15326" end="15338" title="Joseph Brant" label="Joseph Brant"/>
<link wikidata="Q457369" start="15430" end="15445" title="Sir William Johnson, 1st Baronet" label="William Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527858" start="15455" end="15467" title="Sir John Johnson, 2nd Baronet" label="John Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5622372" start="15483" end="15494" title="Guy Johnson" label="Guy Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q116971" start="15589" end="15595" title="Mohawk people" label="Mohawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q21056" start="15597" end="15605" title="Onondaga people" label="Onondaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q210334" start="15607" end="15613" title="Cayuga people" label="Cayuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q213422" start="15619" end="15625" title="Seneca people" label="Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572875" start="15715" end="15721" title="Oneida people" label="Oneida"/>
<link wikidata="Q504912" start="15726" end="15735" title="Tuscarora people" label="Tuscarora"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617949" start="15980" end="15999" title="Stockbridge Militia" label="Stockbridge Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811930" start="16083" end="16092" title="Wappinger" label="Wappinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915656" start="16192" end="16210" title="Van Cortlandt Park" label="Van Cortlandt Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16240" end="16261" title="Stockbridge Militia#The Stockbridge Massacre" label="Battle of Kingsbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695829" start="16590" end="16608" title="Stockbridge Munsee" label="Stockbridge Munsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572875" start="16663" end="16676" title="Oneida people" label="Oneida people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002394" start="16832" end="16847" title="Stockbridge, New York" label="New Stockbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q500838" start="17709" end="17734" title="Shawano County, Wisconsin" label="Shawano County, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519192" start="17807" end="17821" title="Indian removal" label="Indian removal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="17853" end="17864" title="Indian reservation" label="reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="17875" end="17881" title="Lenape" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695829" start="18060" end="18088" title="Stockbridge-Munsee Community" label="Stockbridge-Munsee Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062699" start="18220" end="18226" title="Bowler, Wisconsin" label="Bowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q11674" start="18811" end="18825" title="David Paterson" label="David Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q70979" start="19016" end="19031" title="Sullivan County, New York" label="Sullivan County"/>
<link wikidata="Q630566" start="19039" end="19057" title="Catskill Mountains" label="Catskill Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q986308" start="19598" end="19612" title="East Greenbush, New York" label="East Greenbush"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710635" start="19617" end="19625" title="Schodack" label="Schodack"/>
<link wikidata="Q513339" start="19838" end="19860" title="Kiliaen van Rensselaer (merchant)" label="Kiliaen Van Rensselaer"/>
<link wikidata="Q167856" start="20037" end="20058" title="James Fenimore Cooper" label="James Fenimore Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q493574" start="20082" end="20106" title="The Last of the Mohicans" label="The Last of the Mohicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q201024" start="20190" end="20197" title="Mohegan" label="Mohegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="20250" end="20261" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388815" start="20376" end="20381" title="Uncas" label="Uncas"/>
<link wikidata="Q270097" start="20475" end="20487" title="Michael Mann (director)" label="Michael Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q144483" start="20499" end="20514" title="The Last of the Mohicans (1992 film)" label="1992 adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q166389" start="20530" end="20546" title="Daniel Day-Lewis" label="Daniel Day-Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q163173" start="20607" end="20619" title="Running Wild (band)" label="Running Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q26963138" start="20646" end="20657" title="Rapid Foray" label="Rapid Foray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475365" start="20746" end="20758" title="Etow Oh Koam" label="Etow Oh Koam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550444" start="20915" end="20932" title="Hendrick Aupaumut" label="Hendrick Aupaumut"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="20969" end="20995" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612247" start="21006" end="21019" title="Steve Conliff" label="Steve Conliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890424" start="21062" end="21068" title="Yippie" label="Yippie"/>
<link wikidata="Q909776" start="21080" end="21100" title="Brent Michael Davids" label="Brent Michael Davids"/>
<link wikidata="Q438279" start="21133" end="21144" title="Bill Miller (musician)" label="Bill Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q26260395" start="21167" end="21181" title="Electa Quinney" label="Electa Quinney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="21239" end="21248" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182683" start="21251" end="21274" title="John Wannuaucon Quinney" label="John Wannuaucon Quinney"/>
<link wikidata="Q97707674" start="21299" end="21309" title="Don Coyhis" label="Don Coyhis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12029" start="21334" end="21343" title="addiction" label="addiction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21403" end="21422" title="Jon Kókókóhó Reavey" label="Jon Kókókóhó Reavey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813186" start="21463" end="21490" title="Nature Conservancy Magazine" label="Nature Conservancy Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q204751" start="21495" end="21509" title="Anthony Kiedis" label="Anthony Kiedis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10708" start="21554" end="21575" title="Red Hot Chili Peppers" label="Red Hot Chili Peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q106286632" start="21579" end="21589" title="Alaqua Cox" label="Alaqua Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q65980843" start="21607" end="21614" title="Hawkeye (miniseries)" label="Hawkeye"/>
<link wikidata="Q111676994" start="21621" end="21625" title="Echo (miniseries)" label="Echo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509236" start="21650" end="21689" title="Native American tribes in Massachusetts" label="Native American tribes in Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q111662993" start="22918" end="22937" title="L&amp;#x27;Arbre Croche" label="L&amp;#x27;Arbre Croche"/>
<link wikidata="Q985068" start="23004" end="23022" title="Lewiston, New York" label="Lewiston, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558777" start="23024" end="23042" title="Edwin Mellen Press" label="Edwin Mellen Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="63941" wikidata="Q1755775" url="?curid=63941" title="Session key">
<text>A session key is a single-use symmetric key used for encrypting all messages in one communication session. A closely related term is content encryption key (CEK), traffic encryption key (TEK), or [[multicast]] key which refers to any key used for encrypting messages, contrary to other uses like encrypting other keys (key encryption key (KEK) or key encryption has been made public key).

Session keys can introduce complications into a system, yet they solve some real problems. There are two primary reasons to use session keys:

# Several cryptanalytic attacks become easier the more material encrypted with a specific key is available. By limiting the amount of data processed using a particular key, those attacks are rendered harder to perform.
# Asymmetric encryption is too slow for many purposes, and all secret key algorithms require that the key is securely distributed. By using an asymmetric algorithm to encrypt the secret key for another, faster, symmetric algorithm, it&#x27;s possible to improve overall performance considerably. This is the process used by TLS and by PGP.

Like all cryptographic keys, session keys must be chosen so that they cannot be predicted by an attacker, usually requiring them to be chosen randomly. Failure to choose session keys (or any key) properly is a major (and too common in actual practice) design flaw in any crypto system.

==See also==
* Ephemeral key
* Random number generator
* List of cryptographic key types
* One-time pad
* Perfect forward secrecy

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1755775" start="2" end="13" title="Session key" label="session key"/>
<link wikidata="Q327675" start="30" end="43" title="symmetric key" label="symmetric key"/>
<link wikidata="Q141090" start="53" end="63" title="encrypting" label="encrypting"/>
<link wikidata="Q628523" start="68" end="75" title="message" label="message"/>
<link wikidata="Q932410" start="84" end="105" title="Session (computer science)" label="communication session"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755775" start="133" end="155" title="Session key" label="content encryption key"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755775" start="157" end="160" title="Session key" label="CEK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755775" start="163" end="185" title="Session key" label="traffic encryption key"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755775" start="187" end="190" title="Session key" label="TEK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755775" start="196" end="213" title="Session key" label="[[multicast]] key"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755775" start="319" end="337" title="Session key" label="key encryption key"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755775" start="339" end="342" title="Session key" label="KEK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755775" start="347" end="386" title="Session key" label="key encryption has been made public key"/>
<link wikidata="Q201339" start="754" end="775" title="public key cryptography" label="Asymmetric encryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q327675" start="815" end="835" title="symmetric key algorithm" label="secret key algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q206494" start="1076" end="1079" title="Transport Layer Security" label="TLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227452" start="1087" end="1090" title="Pretty Good Privacy" label="PGP"/>
<link wikidata="Q471771" start="1102" end="1120" title="cryptographic keys" label="cryptographic keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q4533181" start="1395" end="1408" title="Ephemeral key" label="Ephemeral key"/>
<link wikidata="Q228206" start="1411" end="1434" title="Random number generator" label="Random number generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571785" start="1437" end="1468" title="List of cryptographic key types" label="List of cryptographic key types"/>
<link wikidata="Q150474" start="1471" end="1483" title="One-time pad" label="One-time pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q935662" start="1486" end="1509" title="Perfect forward secrecy" label="Perfect forward secrecy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="63942" wikidata="Q898943" url="?curid=63942" title="Biosafety level">
<text>A biosafety level (BSL), or pathogen/protection level, is a set of biocontainment precautions required to isolate dangerous biological agents in an enclosed laboratory facility. The levels of containment range from the lowest biosafety level 1 (BSL-1) to the highest at level 4 (BSL-4). In the United States, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) have specified these levels in a publication referred to as Biosafety in Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories (BMBL). In the European Union (EU), the same biosafety levels are defined in a directive. In Canada the four levels are known as Containment Levels. Facilities with these designations are also sometimes given as P1 through P4 (for pathogen or protection level), as in the term &quot;P3 laboratory&quot;.

At the lowest level of biosafety, precautions may consist of regular hand-washing and minimal protective equipment. At higher biosafety levels, precautions may include airflow systems, multiple containment rooms, sealed containers, positive pressure personnel suits, established protocols for all procedures, extensive personnel training, and high levels of security to control access to the facility. Health Canada reports that world-wide until 1999 there were recorded over 5,000 cases of accidental laboratory infections and 190 deaths.

== History ==
The first prototype Class III (maximum containment) biosafety cabinet was fashioned in 1943 by Hubert Kaempf Jr., then a U.S. Army soldier, under the direction of Arnold G. Wedum, Director (1944–1969) of Industrial Health and Safety at the United States Army Biological Warfare Laboratories, Camp Detrick, Maryland. Kaempf was tired of his MP duties at Detrick and was able to transfer to the sheet metal department working with the contractor, the H.K. Ferguson Co.

On 18 April 1955, fourteen representatives met at Camp Detrick in Frederick, Maryland. The meeting was to share knowledge and experiences regarding biosafety, chemical, radiological, and industrial safety issues that were common to the operations at the three principal biological warfare (BW) laboratories of the U.S. Army. Because of the potential implication of the work conducted at biological warfare laboratories, the conferences were restricted to top level security clearances. Beginning in 1957, these conferences were planned to include non-classified sessions as well as classified sessions to enable broader sharing of biological safety information. It was not until 1964, however, that conferences were held in a government installation not associated with a biological warfare program.

Over the next ten years, the biological safety conferences grew to include representatives from all federal agencies that sponsored or conducted research with pathogenic microorganisms. By 1966, it began to include representatives from universities, private laboratories, hospitals, and industrial complexes. Throughout the 1970s, participation in the conferences continued to expand and by 1983 discussions began regarding the creation of a formal organization. The American Biological Safety Association (ABSA) was officially established in 1984 and a constitution and bylaws were drafted the same year. As of 2008, ABSA includes some 1,600 members in its professional association.

In 1977, Jim Peacock of the Australian Academy of Science asked Bill Snowdon, then chief of the CSIRO&#x27;s Australian Animal Health Laboratory (AAHL) if he could have the newly released United States&#x27; National Institutes of Health and the British equivalent requirements for the development of infrastructure for bio-containment reviewed by AAHL personnel with a view to recommending the adoption of one of them by Australian authorities. The review was carried out by CSIRO AAHL Project Manager Bill Curnow and CSIRO Engineer Arthur Jenkins. They drafted outcomes for each of the levels of security. AAHL was notionally classified as &quot;substantially beyond P4&quot;. These were adopted by the Australian Academy of Science and became the basis for Australian legislation. It opened in 1985 costing AU$185 million, built on Corio Oval. The Australian Animal Health Laboratory is a Class 4/ P4 Laboratory.

In 2003, the Chinese Academy of Sciences approved the construction of mainland China&#x27;s first BSL-4 laboratory at the Wuhan Institute of Virology (WIV). In 2014, the WIV&#x27;s National Bio-safety Laboratory was built at a cost of 300 million yuan (US$44 million), in collaboration and with assistance from the French government&#x27;s CIRI lab.

In 2007 a scientific review paper stated that the Canadian Science Centre for Human and Animal Health, which was designed in the early 1990s, &quot;has become the prototype for modern BSL4 laboratories&quot;.

Starting with the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic near the facilities of the WIV, work in biocontainment facilities has been politicized, especially in the US Senate for example as the result of Rand Paul&#x27;s work. Russia asked questions on 25 October 2022 in the United Nations over the presence in Ukraine of biolabs. In April 2023, Sudan&#x27;s descent into civil war caused worries at the World Health Organization over its National Public Laboratory as contending factions battled over its area and NPL staff were kicked out in favor of installing a military base at its premises. At the time, the facility contained organisms rated at BSL-2.

== Levels ==
=== Biosafety level 1 ===
Biosafety level 1 (BSL-1) is suitable for work with well-characterized agents which do not cause disease in healthy humans. In general, these agents should pose minimal potential hazard to laboratory personnel and the environment. At this level, precautions are limited relative to other levels. Laboratory personnel must wash their hands upon entering and exiting the lab. Research with these agents may be performed on standard open laboratory benches without the use of special containment equipment. However, eating and drinking are generally prohibited in laboratory areas. Potentially infectious material must be decontaminated before disposal, either by adding a chemical such as bleach or isopropanol or by packaging for decontamination elsewhere. Personal protective equipment is only required for circumstances where personnel might be exposed to hazardous material. BSL-1 laboratories must have a door which can be closed to limit access to the lab. However, it is not necessary for BSL-1 labs to be isolated from the general building.

This level of biosafety is appropriate for work with several kinds of microorganisms including non-pathogenic strains of &quot;Escherichia coli&quot; and &quot;Staphylococcus&quot;, &quot;Bacillus subtilis&quot;, &quot;Saccharomyces cerevisiae&quot; and other organisms not suspected to contribute to human disease. Due to the relative ease and safety of maintaining a BSL-1 laboratory, these are the types of laboratories generally used as teaching spaces for high schools and colleges.

=== Biosafety level 2 ===
At this level, all precautions used at Biosafety level 1 are followed, and some additional precautions are taken. BSL-2 differs from BSL-1 in that:
* &quot;laboratory personnel have specific training in handling pathogenic agents and are directed by competent scientists.&quot;
* Access to the laboratory is limited when work is being conducted.
* Certain procedures in which infectious aerosols or splashes may be created are conducted in biological safety cabinets or other physical containment equipment.
* Extreme precautions are taken with contaminated sharp items.

Biosafety level 2 is suitable for work involving agents of moderate potential hazard to personnel and the environment. This includes various microbes that cause mild disease to humans, or are difficult to contract via aerosol in a lab setting. Examples of pathogens classified as &quot;Risk Group 2&quot; in the United States include seasonal influenza, SARS-CoV-2, hepatitis A, B, and C viruses, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), pathogenic strains of &quot;Escherichia coli&quot; and &quot;Staphylococcus&quot;, &quot;Salmonella&quot;, &quot;Plasmodium falciparum&quot;, and &quot;Toxoplasma gondii&quot;. Notably, the European Union departs from the United States and classifies HIV and hepatitis B G as Risk Group 3 agents best handled at BSL-3.

Prions, the infectious agents that transmit prion diseases such as vCJD, are typically handled under Biosafety Level 2 or higher. This is due to the lack of any evidence of aerosol transmission and relatively higher infective dose of prion diseases, though some circumstances (such as handling animal-infective prions in a facility which cares for vulnerable animals) would require BSL-3 conditions.

=== Biosafety level 3 ===
Biosafety level 3 is appropriate for work involving microbes which can cause serious and potentially lethal disease via the inhalation route. This type of work can be done in clinical, diagnostic, teaching, research, or production facilities. Here, the precautions undertaken in BSL-1 and BSL-2 labs are followed, as well as additional measures including:
* A laboratory-specific biosafety manual must be drafted which details how the laboratory will operate in compliance with all safety requirements.
* All laboratory personnel are provided medical surveillance and offered relevant immunizations (where available) to reduce the risk of an accidental or unnoticed infection.
* All procedures involving infectious material must be done within a biosafety cabinet.
* Lab personnel must wear solid-front protective clothing (i.e. gowns that tie in the back). This cannot be worn outside of the lab and must be discarded or decontaminated after each use.

Also, the facility which houses the BSL-3 lab must have certain features to ensure appropriate containment. The entrance to the lab must be separated from areas of the building with unrestricted traffic flow. Also, the lab must be behind two sets of self-closing doors (to reduce the risk of aerosols escaping). The construction of the lab is such that it can be easily cleaned. Carpets are not permitted, and any seams in the floors, walls, and ceilings are sealed to allow easy cleaning and decontamination. Also, windows must be sealed, and a ventilation system installed which forces air to flow from the &quot;clean&quot; areas of the lab to the areas where infectious agents are handled. Air from the lab must be filtered before it can be recirculated.

A 2015 study by &quot;USA Today&quot; journalists, identified more than 200 lab sites in the U.S. that were accredited biosafety levels 3 or 4. The Proceedings of a Workshop on &quot;Developing Norms for the Provision of Biological Laboratories in Low-Resource Contexts&quot; provides a list of BSL-3 laboratories in those countries.

Biosafety level 3 is commonly used for research and diagnostic work involving various microbes which can be transmitted by aerosol and/or cause severe disease. These include &quot;Francisella tularensis&quot;, &quot;Mycobacterium tuberculosis&quot;, &quot;Chlamydia psittaci&quot;, Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus, Eastern equine encephalitis virus, SARS-CoV-1, MERS-CoV, &quot;Coxiella burnetii&quot;, Rift Valley fever virus, &quot;Rickettsia rickettsii&quot;, several species of &quot;Brucella&quot;, chikungunya, yellow fever virus, West Nile virus, and &quot;Yersinia pestis&quot;.

=== Biosafety level 4 ===

Biosafety level 4 (BSL-4) is the highest level of biosafety precautions, and is appropriate for work with agents that could easily be aerosol-transmitted within the laboratory and cause severe to fatal disease in humans for which there are no available vaccines or treatments. BSL-4 labs are generally set up to be either cabinet laboratories or protective-suit laboratories. In cabinet laboratories, all work must be done within a class III biosafety cabinet. Materials leaving the cabinet must be decontaminated by passing through an autoclave or a tank of disinfectant. The cabinets themselves are required to have seamless edges to allow easy cleaning. Also, the cabinet and all materials within must be free of sharp edges to reduce the risk of damage to the gloves. In a protective-suit lab, all work must be done in a class II biosafety cabinet by personnel wearing a positive pressure suit. To exit a BSL-4 lab, personnel must pass through a chemical shower for decontamination, then a room for removing the positive-pressure suit, followed by a personal shower. Entry into the BSL-4 lab is restricted to trained and authorized individuals, and all persons entering and exiting the lab must be recorded.

As with BSL-3 laboratories, BSL-4 labs must be separated from areas that receive unrestricted traffic. Also, airflow is tightly controlled to ensure that air always flows from &quot;clean&quot; areas of the lab to areas where work with infectious agents is being performed. The entrance to the BSL-4 lab must also employ airlocks to minimize the possibility that aerosols from the lab could be removed from the lab. All laboratory waste, including filtered air, water, and trash must also be decontaminated before it can leave the facility.

Biosafety level 4 laboratories are used for diagnostic work and research on easily transmitted pathogens which can cause fatal disease. These include a number of viruses known to cause viral hemorrhagic fever such as Marburg virus, Ebola virus, Lassa virus, and Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever. Other pathogens handled at BSL-4 include Hendra virus, Nipah virus, and some flaviviruses. Also, poorly characterized pathogens which appear closely related to dangerous pathogens are often handled at this level until enough data is obtained either to confirm continued work at this level, or to permit working with them at a lower level. This level is also used for work with smallpox virus, though this work is only performed at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, United States, and the State Research Center of Virology and Biotechnology in Koltsovo, Russia.

==== BSL-4 facilities for extraterrestrial samples ====

Sample-return missions that bring samples from a Category V body back to Earth must be curated at facilities rated BSL-4. Because the existing BSL-4 facilities in the world do not provide the level of cleanliness needed for such pristine samples, there is a need to design a facility dedicated to curation of restricted (potentially biohazardous) extraterrestrial materials. The systems of such facilities must be able to contain unknown biohazards, as the size of any putative alien microorganism is unknown. Ideally, it should filter particles down to 10 nanometers, and release of a particle 50 nanometers or larger is unacceptable under any circumstance.

Because NASA and ESA are collaborating on the Mars Sample Return campaign, due to return samples from Mars in the early 2030s, the need for a Sample Receiving Facility (SRF) is becoming more pressing. An SRF is expected to take 7 to 10 years from design to completion, and an additional two years is recommended for the staff to become proficient and accustomed to the facilities.

== List of BSL-4 facilities ==
According to a U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) report published on 4 October 2007, a total of 1,356 CDC/USDA registered BSL-3 facilities were identified throughout the United States. Approximately 36% of these laboratories are located in academia. 15 BSL-4 facilities were identified in the U.S. in 2007, including nine at federal labs. As of May 2021, there are 42 BSL-4 facilities in operation around the world, with a further 17 planned or under construction.
The following is a list of existing BSL-4 facilities worldwide.

==Safety concerns==
A North Carolina Mosquito &amp; Vector Control Association (NCMVCA) study highlighted safety concerns. In the United States, laboratories can be funded by federal, state, private, non-profit, or academically. The last accounts for 72% of the funding.

High-containment labs that are registered with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the U.S. Department of Agriculture&#x27;s (USDA) Select Agent Program must adhere to Department of Defense standards. Since BSL3 and 4 laboratories in the United States are regulated by either the CDC or USDA or another federal agency (depending on the pathogens they handle), no single federal agency is responsible for regulating or tracking the number of these labs. U.S. high-containment laboratories that handle pathogens which are declared as &quot;select agents&quot; must be inspected periodically by the CDC or USDA, adhere to certain standards, and maintain ongoing education on biosecurity and biosafety policies as mandated by law.

== See also ==
* Aeromedical Isolation Team
* Biocontainment
* Biological hazard
* Biosafety
* Hazmat suit
* Interplanetary contamination
* Laboratory Response Network
* List of laboratory biosecurity incidents
* Safety engineering
* Security engineering
* Select agent

== References ==
== External links ==
* Biosafety in Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories, CDC publication
* Federation of American Scientists: Biosafety Level 3 and 4 Labs</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q898943" start="2" end="17" title="Biosafety level" label="biosafety level"/>
<link wikidata="Q898943" start="19" end="22" title="Biosafety level" label="BSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q898943" start="28" end="53" title="Biosafety level" label="pathogen/protection level"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992495" start="67" end="81" title="biocontainment" label="biocontainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742406" start="124" end="140" title="biological agent" label="biological agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="313" end="355" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="494" end="508" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q326124" start="558" end="567" title="European Union directive" label="directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q898943" start="691" end="693" title="Biosafety level" label="P1"/>
<link wikidata="Q898943" start="702" end="704" title="Biosafety level" label="P4"/>
<link wikidata="Q552461" start="853" end="865" title="hand-washing" label="hand-washing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233286" start="1016" end="1048" title="positive pressure personnel suit" label="positive pressure personnel suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057591" start="1186" end="1199" title="Health Canada" label="Health Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180281" start="1391" end="1408" title="biosafety cabinet" label="biosafety cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889453" start="1579" end="1629" title="United States Army Biological Warfare Laboratories" label="United States Army Biological Warfare Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438504" start="1631" end="1643" title="Camp Detrick" label="Camp Detrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="1645" end="1653" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q210815" start="1679" end="1681" title="military police" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q864713" start="1955" end="1964" title="biosafety" label="biosafety"/>
<link wikidata="Q161959" start="2272" end="2290" title="security clearance" label="security clearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003765" start="3075" end="3113" title="American Biological Safety Association" label="American Biological Safety Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q514105" start="3321" end="3350" title="Australian Academy of Science" label="Australian Academy of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117048" start="3389" end="3394" title="CSIRO" label="CSIRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823811" start="3402" end="3437" title="Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness" label="Australian Animal Health Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="3501" end="3530" title="National Institutes of Health" label="National Institutes of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170700" start="4128" end="4138" title="Corio Oval" label="Corio Oval"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823811" start="4144" end="4179" title="Australian Animal Health Laboratory" label="Australian Animal Health Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q530471" start="4223" end="4250" title="Chinese Academy of Sciences" label="Chinese Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q30292611" start="4332" end="4359" title="Wuhan Institute of Virology" label="Wuhan Institute of Virology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450662" start="4525" end="4542" title="French government" label="French government"/>
<link wikidata="Q30261449" start="4550" end="4558" title="Centre International de Recherche en Infectiologie" label="CIRI lab"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030541" start="4611" end="4662" title="Canadian Science Centre for Human and Animal Health" label="Canadian Science Centre for Human and Animal Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="4794" end="4802" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="4918" end="4927" title="US Senate" label="US Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q463557" start="4957" end="4966" title="Rand Paul" label="Rand Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="5029" end="5043" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="5100" end="5105" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="5158" end="5183" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q123456571" start="5193" end="5219" title="National Public Health Laboratory (Sudan)" label="National Public Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q407204" start="6140" end="6146" title="sodium hypochlorite" label="bleach"/>
<link wikidata="Q16392" start="6150" end="6161" title="isopropanol" label="isopropanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419" start="6628" end="6644" title="Escherichia coli" label="Escherichia coli"/>
<link wikidata="Q199695" start="6661" end="6675" title="Staphylococcus" label="Staphylococcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131238" start="6689" end="6706" title="Bacillus subtilis" label="Bacillus subtilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q719725" start="6720" end="6744" title="Saccharomyces cerevisiae" label="Saccharomyces cerevisiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="6979" end="6987" title="University" label="colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q104541" start="7403" end="7410" title="aerosol" label="aerosol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180281" start="7456" end="7481" title="Biosafety cabinet" label="biological safety cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q82069695" start="7942" end="7952" title="SARS-CoV-2" label="SARS-CoV-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q157661" start="7964" end="7965" title="Hepatitis A" label="A"/>
<link wikidata="Q6853" start="7967" end="7968" title="Hepatitis B" label="B"/>
<link wikidata="Q154869" start="7974" end="7975" title="Hepatitis C" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="7985" end="8013" title="HIV" label="human immunodeficiency virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q150839" start="8110" end="8120" title="Salmonella" label="Salmonella"/>
<link wikidata="Q311383" start="8134" end="8155" title="Plasmodium falciparum" label="Plasmodium falciparum"/>
<link wikidata="Q131003" start="8173" end="8190" title="Toxoplasma gondii" label="Toxoplasma gondii"/>
<link wikidata="Q47051" start="8341" end="8347" title="Prions" label="Prions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323502" start="8408" end="8412" title="Variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease" label="vCJD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180281" start="9514" end="9531" title="biosafety cabinet" label="biosafety cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="10504" end="10513" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003460" start="10997" end="11019" title="Francisella tularensis" label="Francisella tularensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q130971" start="11033" end="11059" title="Mycobacterium tuberculosis" label="Mycobacterium tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q62869749" start="11073" end="11091" title="Chlamydia psittaci" label="Chlamydia psittaci"/>
<link wikidata="Q473462" start="11099" end="11135" title="Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus" label="Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18553951" start="11137" end="11170" title="Eastern equine encephalitis virus" label="Eastern equine encephalitis virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q85438966" start="11172" end="11182" title="SARS coronavirus" label="SARS-CoV-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902157" start="11184" end="11192" title="Middle East respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus" label="MERS-CoV"/>
<link wikidata="Q133971" start="11200" end="11217" title="Coxiella burnetii" label="Coxiella burnetii"/>
<link wikidata="Q326638" start="11225" end="11248" title="Rift Valley fever virus" label="Rift Valley fever virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698925" start="11256" end="11277" title="Rickettsia rickettsii" label="Rickettsia rickettsii"/>
<link wikidata="Q313358" start="11310" end="11318" title="Brucella" label="Brucella"/>
<link wikidata="Q243257" start="11326" end="11337" title="chikungunya" label="chikungunya"/>
<link wikidata="Q154874" start="11339" end="11357" title="yellow fever virus" label="yellow fever virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q158856" start="11359" end="11374" title="West Nile virus" label="West Nile virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q153875" start="11386" end="11401" title="Yersinia pestis" label="Yersinia pestis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11869" end="11896" title="Biosafety cabinet#Class III" label="class III biosafety cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q188223" start="11973" end="11982" title="autoclave" label="autoclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q73984" start="11996" end="12008" title="disinfectant" label="disinfectant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12262" end="12288" title="Biosafety cabinet#Class II" label="class II biosafety cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233286" start="12312" end="12334" title="positive pressure personnel suit" label="positive pressure suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q594958" start="12971" end="12978" title="airlock" label="airlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q162272" start="13377" end="13400" title="viral hemorrhagic fever" label="viral hemorrhagic fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q6755287" start="13409" end="13422" title="Marburg virus" label="Marburg virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8064876" start="13424" end="13435" title="Ebola virus" label="Ebola virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q24719561" start="13437" end="13448" title="Lassa virus" label="Lassa virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077505" start="13454" end="13485" title="Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever" label="Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604979" start="13528" end="13540" title="Hendra virus" label="Hendra virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15928531" start="13542" end="13553" title="Nipah virus" label="Nipah virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165479" start="13564" end="13574" title="flavivirus" label="flavivirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="13864" end="13872" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="13922" end="13964" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q4106097" start="14000" end="14051" title="State Research Center of Virology and Biotechnology" label="State Research Center of Virology and Biotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093833" start="14131" end="14152" title="Sample-return mission" label="Sample-return mission"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14180" end="14190" title="Planetary protection#Category V" label="Category V"/>
<link wikidata="Q864360" start="14464" end="14473" title="biohazard" label="biohazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422264" start="14478" end="14504" title="extraterrestrial materials" label="extraterrestrial materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="14615" end="14628" title="microorganism" label="microorganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178674" start="14688" end="14697" title="nanometer" label="nanometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="14893" end="14897" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q749118" start="15224" end="15256" title="Government Accountability Office" label="Government Accountability Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447670" start="16575" end="16587" title="select agent" label="select agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688328" start="16782" end="16808" title="Aeromedical Isolation Team" label="Aeromedical Isolation Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992495" start="16811" end="16825" title="Biocontainment" label="Biocontainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q864360" start="16828" end="16845" title="Biological hazard" label="Biological hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q864713" start="16848" end="16857" title="Biosafety" label="Biosafety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641373" start="16860" end="16871" title="Hazmat suit" label="Hazmat suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860312" start="16874" end="16902" title="Interplanetary contamination" label="Interplanetary contamination"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467262" start="16905" end="16932" title="Laboratory Response Network" label="Laboratory Response Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q105226834" start="16935" end="16975" title="List of laboratory biosecurity incidents" label="List of laboratory biosecurity incidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496962" start="16978" end="16996" title="Safety engineering" label="Safety engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q365674" start="16999" end="17019" title="Security engineering" label="Security engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447670" start="17022" end="17034" title="Select agent" label="Select agent"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="63943" wikidata="Q753773" url="?curid=63943" title="Glorfindel">
<text>Glorfindel () is a fictional character in J. R. R. Tolkien&#x27;s Middle-earth legendarium. He is a member of the Noldor, one of the three groups of High Elves. The character and his name, which means &quot;blond&quot; or &quot;golden-haired&quot;, were among the first created for what would become part of his Middle-earth legendarium in 1916–17, beginning with the initial draft of &quot;The Fall of Gondolin&quot;. His name indicates his hair as a mark of his distinction, as the Noldor were generally dark-haired. A character of the same name appears in the first book of &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;, &quot;The Fellowship of the Ring&quot;, which takes place in Middle-earth&#x27;s Third Age. Within the story, he is depicted as a powerful Elf-lord who could withstand the Nazgûl, wraith-like servants of Sauron, and holds his own against some of them single-handedly. Glorfindel and a version of the story of the Fall of Gondolin appear in &quot;The Silmarillion&quot;, posthumously published in 1977.

In later writings, Tolkien explored Glorfindel&#x27;s backstory in various material relating to the First Age of Middle-earth. He worked out how both characters named Glorfindel could be one and the same, something not evident from the published version of &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;; the question has been debated by scholars. The incremental changes made to Glorfindel&#x27;s character, most notably the introduction of the theme of reincarnation, as part of the ongoing development of Tolkien&#x27;s legendarium have been analysed by scholars.

In Peter Jackson&#x27;s 2001 live-action film &quot;The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring&quot;, Glorfindel&#x27;s role of rescuing Frodo from the pursuing Nazgûl by lending his horse is given to the elf-woman Arwen. He has also featured in various video games.

==Development==

===Conception and creation===

In &quot;The Fall of Gondolin&quot;, which details the conquest of the Elven city Gondolin by the Dark Lord Morgoth, Tolkien writes that Glorfindel&#x27;s name &quot;meaneth Goldtress for his hair was golden&quot;. It was the first part of &quot;The Book of Lost Tales&quot; to be written, circa 1916–17, and the story was read aloud by Tolkien to the Exeter College Essay Club in the spring of 1920. &quot;The Fall of Gondolin&quot; appears in compressed form in &quot;The Silmarillion&quot;, where the character is called &quot;yellow-haired Glorfindel&quot;. According to Tolkien&#x27;s son, Christopher Tolkien, &quot;this was from the beginning the meaning of his name&quot;. An Elf of the same name appears in &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;, written many years after the original draft of &quot;The Fall of Gondolin&quot;: in &quot;The Fellowship of the Ring&quot;, he appears to assist the hobbit Frodo Baggins in his attempt to escape the servants of the Dark Lord Sauron, Morgoth&#x27;s successor.

As his ideas changed and evolved over the years, Tolkien wrote about Glorfindel&#x27;s backstory at various times. In the very first draft of the &quot;Council of Elrond&quot;, which was to become &quot;The Fellowship of the Ring&quot;, the members of the Fellowship were to be Frodo, Gandalf, Trotter (later Strider/Aragorn), Glorfindel, Durin son of Balin (who became Gimli son of Glóin), Sam, Merry and Pippin; Boromir and Legolas did not come in until much later. Early notes for the Council of Elrond state that Glorfindel &quot;tells of his ancestry in Gondolin&quot;. In the final published version of &quot;The Fellowship of the Ring&quot;, Legolas is the representative of the Elven people, though the power that Tolkien attributed to Glorfindel remains as he is depicted as being strong enough to stand against the Nazgûl, and so he is chosen to guide Frodo to safety from them.

Towards the end of his life, Tolkien would devote his last writings to the issue of Glorfindel and some related topics, as detailed in &quot;The Peoples of Middle-earth&quot;. Christopher Tolkien stated that his father had not conceived the Glorfindel of &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; as the same person as the similarly named Elf of Gondolin, but had simply reused the name. The issue lay in Tolkien&#x27;s original conception of the spirits of dead Elves as being re-embodied in their old bodies after a Purgatory-like period in the Halls of Mandos in Valinor, the home of Tolkien&#x27;s &quot;gods&quot;, the Valar and Maiar, where Elves previously lived before (re)migrating to Middle-earth. After being re-embodied, previously dead Elves stay in Valinor permanently.

Tolkien eventually decided that each Elf&#x27;s name should be unique, and therefore the two Glorfindels should be one and the same. In 1972, he wrote an essay in which he explains how Glorfindel returns to Middle-earth following his death in the First Age. On Glorfindel&#x27;s status as a Noldor Exile, Tolkien noted that Glorfindel left Valinor reluctantly and is blameless in the Kinslaying, and since his sacrifice in defeating the Balrog was deemed to be &quot;of vital importance to the designs of the Valar&quot;, he is granted an exemption to the Exiles&#x27; ban and purged of any guilt. Once restored and allowed to dwell in Valinor, his spiritual power is greatly enhanced, almost an equal of the Maiar. Tolkien considered having Glorfindel as a companion to Gandalf during the latter&#x27;s travel to Middle-earth in the Third Age, but changed his mind as breaching the divide between Valinor and the &quot;Circles of the World&quot; would make him &quot;of greater power and importance than seems fitting&quot;. He proposed that Glorfindel is sent back to Middle-earth by the Valar during the Second Age , when Barad-dûr was completed and Sauron forged the One Ring, and while Númenor was still friendly with the Elves under Tar-Minastir. In one version he is sent as a predecessor to the Istari (Wizards); in a different version, he arrived in Middle-earth together with the Blue Wizards. At one point he was even considered as a possibility for the identity of one of the Wizards, but Tolkien abandoned the idea since the Elves were not initially conceived as possibilities for the Wizards, and he had come to the conclusion that they were exclusively Maiar.

==Biography==

===The First Age===
According to &quot;The Silmarillion&quot;, Glorfindel was born around the time of the Years of the Trees in Valinor. He was part of the host of Turgon, but only followed Turgon because of their kinship. He took no part in the Kinslaying at Alqualondë, but followed the rest of the Noldor host in their exile. Glorfindel later appears as a noble lord, one of King Turgon&#x27;s chief lieutenants who oversees his retreat during the Battle of Unnumbered Tears. After fighting in the city&#x27;s defence, Glorfindel escaped together with Tuor, Idril, Eärendil and others. The survivors passed through the Encircling Mountains above Gondolin. However, they were ambushed by enemies, including a Balrog. Glorfindel fought the Balrog and succeeded in slaying the monster, but was himself mortally wounded. His body was recovered by the great eagle Thorondor and buried under a stone cairn, where afterward grew yellow flowers. &quot;The Fall of Gondolin&quot; relates that &quot;Glorfindel and the Balrog&quot; became an in-universe proverb used in Elven culture to describe great skill and courage in battle.

Following his death in the First Age, Glorfindel&#x27;s spirit passed to the halls of Mandos in Valinor. The Valar eventually sent him back to Middle-Earth on a similar mission to that of the Istari, who appeared several thousand years later.

===The Third Age===

In &quot;The Fellowship of the Ring&quot;, Glorfindel was sent by Elrond of Rivendell in the direction that the Nazgûl were most likely to come from, to help the hobbit Frodo reach Rivendell. He set Frodo on his horse, Asfaloth, and has the hobbit riding ahead to the other side of the Ford of Bruinen, where he defies his pursuers. During his confrontation with Nazgûl at the Bridge of Mitheithel, Glorfindel reveals himself as a mighty Elf-lord terrible in his wrath; Frodo saw him as a shining figure. He is nearly captured, but manages to drive the Nazgûl into the nearby river with the aid of Strider and Frodo&#x27;s hobbit companions, where they were swept away by a wave of water resembling charging horses, an enchantment created by Elrond and Gandalf. While enjoying the hospitality of the Elves in Rivendell, Frodo was enchanted by the beauty and stature of Glorfindel and his kinfolk. He sat in honour next to Elrond and Gandalf in the Hall of Fire in Rivendell, and was part of the Council of Elrond which deliberated on their collective response to the discovery of the One Ring. He showed unusual wisdom by voicing caution about sending the Ring to the enigmatic Tom Bombadil, and suggested that the Ring be destroyed and that the Three Rings of the Elves be sacrifice to accomplish this quest.

Gandalf described Glorfindel as &quot;one of the mighty of the Firstborn&quot; and &quot;an Elf-lord of a house of princes.&quot; When Frodo asks about the protection of Rivendell from Sauron&#x27;s forces, Gandalf explains:

When Elrond seeks to fill the last two spots in the Fellowship to destroy the One Ring with folk of his own house, Gandalf mentioned Glorfindel. He justified the inclusion of Merry Brandybuck and Pippin Took by saying:

One of the Appendices usually published with the third volume, &quot;The Return of the King&quot;, relates that earlier in the Third Age, Glorfindel led the Elvish forces of Rivendell, the Grey Havens, and Lothlórien against Angmar in the Battle of Fornost. There he fought alongside Eärnur, the future king of Gondor, along with the remnants of Gondor&#x27;s sister kingdom Arnor. When the Witch-king of Angmar, Lord of the Nazgûl and chief servant of Sauron, rode out to defend his ruling seat at the captured Fornost, his presence frightened Eärnur&#x27;s horse and sent the prince flying backwards, and the Witch-king mocked him. Glorfindel confronted the Witch-king, who fled into the night. Eärnur wished to pursue him, but Glorfindel bade him not to and prophesied the Witch-king would fall in the far future, but not by &quot;the hand of man&quot;. Many years later, during the War of the Ring, Éowyn (a woman) slays the Witch-king during the Battle of Pelennor Fields, assisted by Meriadoc Brandybuck (a hobbit). Before Éowyn&#x27;s slaying of the Witch-king, the reference to &quot;man&quot; in the prophecy had been interpreted to mean that no human at all would slay him, rather than that no male human would do so.

==Analysis==

Alexander Lewis and Elizabeth Currie wrote that Glorfindel was a &quot;chance reuse of no significance&quot;, and argued that Tolkien &quot;tied himself, as well as readers and critics, in knots over the question of whether there were one or two characters of the name&quot;. Don Anger speculated that Glorfindel&#x27;s unequivocal death in &quot;The Fall of Gondolin&quot; may have prevented Tolkien from making an explicit connection between this Silmarillion character and the Elf with the same name in the published version of &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;. Anger took the view that Tolkien&#x27;s idea of a resolved story for the character was only &quot;possibly realized&quot; with the complete publication of the 12-volume book series &quot;The History of Middle-earth&quot; by 1996. He explained that as much of the background material for Glorfindel was unpublished when &quot;The Silmarillion&quot; was posthumously released, various Tolkien compendiums were forced into speculation to sate the curiosity of readers concerning the mystery of the character&#x27;s death and sudden reappearance in &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;, citing &quot;The Complete Guide to Middle-earth: from The Hobbit to The Silmarillion&quot; as an example.

The theme of reincarnation and the concept of Elves being divinely empowered is explored in its fullest extent within Tolkien&#x27;s legendarium through the character Glorfindel. Edmund Wainwright noted that Glorfindel is the best example of a male Elf in &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; who embodies his people&#x27;s aspect as semi-divine beings, given his immense power. Verlyn Flieger noted that the concept of Elven incarnation had been considered by the time of the publication of &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;. She suggested that being a devout Catholic, Tolkien initially found the idea to be theologically problematic and biologically difficult; he eventually reached the conclusion that &quot;it is a biological dictum&quot; in his imaginary world, and its purpose &quot;largely literary&quot;.

The Tolkien scholar Elizabeth Whittingham cited correspondence from readers, particularly Catholics like Father Murray and Peter Hastings. This raised questions that ultimately prompted changes to the mythology of Middle-earth, as acknowledged by Tolkien and his son Christopher. Whittingham noted that Tolkien sought to make his &quot;secondary world&quot; compatible with his &quot;primary world&quot;, reconsidering his focus on metaphysical and philosophical explorations from the 1950s onwards. His revisions gradually moved the texts of his legendarium into closer alignment with Christianity. She observed that Glorfindel is a notable exception to Tolkien&#x27;s later stance on abandoning one of his oldest concepts, reincarnation through rebirth, and that he is Tolkien&#x27;s first attempt of contemplating the portrayal of a reincarnated elf.

In &quot;Tor.com&quot;&#x27;s bi-weekly series on &quot;Exploring the People of Middle-earth&quot;, Megan Fontenot described Glorfindel&#x27;s role in &quot;The Fellowship of the Ring&quot; as a shaman-like figure, a medium who has direct access to both the spiritual (Valinor) and physical (Middle-earth) worlds, and that his purpose is to protect those who are threatened by the powers of the Shadow. She noted that his previous battle with the Balrog in the First Age essentially serves as an &quot;initiation&quot; to a shamanic trial and journey.

== In other media ==

=== Film and stage ===

In Ralph Bakshi&#x27;s 1978 animated version, his role and lines from the narrative are given to Legolas. In Peter Jackson&#x27;s 2001 live-action film &quot;The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring&quot;, his role is given to Arwen, who takes Frodo to the Ford and summons the floodwaters to disperse the Nazgûl through an incantation. 
In the British musical stage adaptation of &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;, which ran from June 2007 to July 2008 at the Theatre Royal Drury Lane in London&#x27;s West End, the character was reimagined as a dark-haired elf-woman, played by Alma Ferović.
In the 2015 film &quot;The Martian&quot;, NASA Director Teddy Sanders asks to be called Glorfindel during the discussion of Project Elrond, a secret meeting about plans to rescue stranded astronaut Mark Watney. The film&#x27;s writer Drew Goddard claimed that the reference was his proudest moment in the film.

=== Games ===

Glorfindel appears as a non player character in the 2002 video game &quot;The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring&quot;. He is voiced by Steve Staley.
In the 2006 real-time strategy game, &quot;The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth II&quot;, Glorfindel&#x27;s hair is silver-blond as opposed to his trademark golden-blond colour. He is featured on the game&#x27;s box art, and is one of the playable hero units of the Elvish faction who rides his steed Asfaloth.
In the &quot;Lord of the Rings Online&quot;, Glorfindel appeared as a non-player character.
The Games Workshop tabletop strategy battle game adaptation of &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; features two versions of Glorfindel: In one form, he is fully clad in armour, while the other has Glorfindel clad in robes and riding Asfaloth. 

A version of Glorfindel appears in the &quot;Lego Lord of the Rings&quot; video game, where he is available as downloadable content.

== References ==

=== Primary ===

=== Secondary ===

=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q753773" start="0" end="10" title="Glorfindel" label="Glorfindel"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="42" end="58" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q79734" start="66" end="78" title="Middle-earth" label="Middle-earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q81738" start="79" end="90" title="Tolkien&amp;#x27;s legendarium" label="legendarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672460" start="114" end="120" title="Noldor" label="Noldor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7473935" start="149" end="159" title="Sundering of the Elves" label="High Elves"/>
<link wikidata="Q202466" start="207" end="212" title="blond" label="blond"/>
<link wikidata="Q340515" start="391" end="411" title="The Fall of Gondolin" label="The Fall of Gondolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="583" end="604" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q208002" start="618" end="644" title="The Fellowship of the Ring" label="The Fellowship of the Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267028" start="693" end="702" title="Third Age" label="Third Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q308661" start="784" end="790" title="Nazgûl" label="Nazgûl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281" start="816" end="822" title="Sauron" label="Sauron"/>
<link wikidata="Q79762" start="958" end="974" title="The Silmarillion" label="The Silmarillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267028" start="1115" end="1124" title="First Age" label="First Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310272" start="1448" end="1470" title="Reincarnation in popular culture" label="theme of reincarnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q81738" start="1510" end="1536" title="Tolkien&amp;#x27;s legendarium" label="Tolkien&amp;#x27;s legendarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4465" start="1573" end="1586" title="Peter Jackson" label="Peter Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1622" end="1671" title="The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring" label="The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q177329" start="1714" end="1719" title="Frodo" label="Frodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q308661" start="1738" end="1744" title="Nazgûl" label="Nazgûl"/>
<link wikidata="Q206018" start="1792" end="1797" title="Arwen" label="Arwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q340515" start="1902" end="1922" title="The Fall of Gondolin" label="The Fall of Gondolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154417" start="1975" end="1983" title="Gondolin" label="Gondolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80453" start="2001" end="2008" title="Morgoth" label="Morgoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q340401" start="2139" end="2161" title="The Book of Lost Tales" label="The Book of Lost Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q81173" start="2245" end="2259" title="Exeter College, Oxford" label="Exeter College"/>
<link wikidata="Q82032" start="2488" end="2507" title="Christopher Tolkien" label="Christopher Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="2615" end="2636" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q177329" start="2800" end="2813" title="Frodo Baggins" label="Frodo Baggins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281" start="2869" end="2875" title="Sauron" label="Sauron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631743" start="3056" end="3073" title="Council of Elrond" label="Council of Elrond"/>
<link wikidata="Q177499" start="3189" end="3196" title="Gandalf" label="Gandalf"/>
<link wikidata="Q180322" start="3198" end="3205" title="Trotter (Lord of the Rings)" label="Trotter"/>
<link wikidata="Q180322" start="3221" end="3228" title="Aragorn" label="Aragorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q780499" start="3256" end="3261" title="Balin (Middle-earth)" label="Balin"/>
<link wikidata="Q206818" start="3274" end="3279" title="Gimli (Middle-earth)" label="Gimli"/>
<link wikidata="Q466636" start="3287" end="3292" title="Glóin" label="Glóin"/>
<link wikidata="Q219473" start="3295" end="3298" title="Samwise Gamgee" label="Sam"/>
<link wikidata="Q219498" start="3300" end="3305" title="Meriadoc Brandybuck" label="Merry"/>
<link wikidata="Q219493" start="3310" end="3316" title="Peregrin Took" label="Pippin"/>
<link wikidata="Q219504" start="3318" end="3325" title="Boromir" label="Boromir"/>
<link wikidata="Q213480" start="3330" end="3337" title="Legolas" label="Legolas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631743" start="3392" end="3409" title="Council of Elrond" label="Council of Elrond"/>
<link wikidata="Q308661" start="3729" end="3735" title="Nazgûl" label="Nazgûl"/>
<link wikidata="Q503974" start="3935" end="3962" title="The Peoples of Middle-earth" label="The Peoples of Middle-earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q82032" start="3970" end="3989" title="Christopher Tolkien" label="Christopher Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="4055" end="4076" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q566" start="4304" end="4313" title="Purgatory" label="Purgatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q368572" start="4352" end="4359" title="Valinor" label="Valinor"/>
<link wikidata="Q78493" start="4410" end="4415" title="Vala (Middle-earth)" label="Valar"/>
<link wikidata="Q719506" start="4420" end="4425" title="Maia (Middle-earth)" label="Maiar"/>
<link wikidata="Q78493" start="5661" end="5666" title="Vala (Middle-earth)" label="Valar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267028" start="5678" end="5688" title="Second Age" label="Second Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q202886" start="5696" end="5705" title="Barad-dûr" label="Barad-dûr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281" start="5724" end="5730" title="Sauron" label="Sauron"/>
<link wikidata="Q19852" start="5742" end="5750" title="One Ring" label="One Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q211686" start="5762" end="5769" title="Númenor" label="Númenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059791" start="5874" end="5880" title="Wizard (Middle-earth)" label="Istari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059791" start="5961" end="5973" title="Blue Wizards" label="Blue Wizards"/>
<link wikidata="Q719506" start="6239" end="6244" title="Maia (Middle-earth)" label="Maiar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267028" start="6368" end="6386" title="Years of the Trees" label="Years of the Trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q368572" start="6390" end="6397" title="Valinor" label="Valinor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267028" start="6713" end="6739" title="Battle of Unnumbered Tears" label="Battle of Unnumbered Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806136" start="6817" end="6821" title="Tuor" label="Tuor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806136" start="6823" end="6828" title="Tuor and Idril" label="Idril"/>
<link wikidata="Q593531" start="6830" end="6838" title="Eärendil" label="Eärendil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154417" start="6911" end="6919" title="Gondolin" label="Gondolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q716204" start="6973" end="6979" title="Balrog" label="Balrog"/>
<link wikidata="Q78493" start="7496" end="7501" title="Vala (Middle-earth)" label="Valar"/>
<link wikidata="Q79734" start="7530" end="7542" title="Middle-earth" label="Middle-Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059791" start="7579" end="7585" title="Wizard (Middle-earth)" label="Istari"/>
<link wikidata="Q208426" start="7718" end="7724" title="Elrond" label="Elrond"/>
<link wikidata="Q218562" start="7728" end="7737" title="Rivendell" label="Rivendell"/>
<link wikidata="Q177329" start="7821" end="7826" title="Frodo Baggins" label="Frodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q218562" start="7946" end="7953" title="Bruinen" label="Bruinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q180322" start="8250" end="8257" title="Aragorn" label="Strider"/>
<link wikidata="Q177499" start="8405" end="8412" title="Gandalf" label="Gandalf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631743" start="8643" end="8664" title="the Council of Elrond" label="the Council of Elrond"/>
<link wikidata="Q280608" start="8830" end="8842" title="Tom Bombadil" label="Tom Bombadil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406822" start="8898" end="8909" title="Three Rings" label="Three Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q19852" start="9267" end="9275" title="One Ring" label="One Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q332581" start="9478" end="9500" title="The Return of the King" label="The Return of the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267028" start="9536" end="9545" title="Third Age" label="Third Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q308659" start="9615" end="9625" title="Lothlórien" label="Lothlórien"/>
<link wikidata="Q105436668" start="9634" end="9640" title="Angmar" label="Angmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q213586" start="9720" end="9726" title="Gondor" label="Gondor"/>
<link wikidata="Q559524" start="9800" end="9820" title="Witch-king of Angmar" label="Witch-king of Angmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q308661" start="9834" end="9840" title="Nazgûl" label="Nazgûl"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="10295" end="10310" title="War of the Ring" label="War of the Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q716565" start="10312" end="10317" title="Éowyn" label="Éowyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q931519" start="10360" end="10385" title="Battle of Pelennor Fields" label="Battle of Pelennor Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q219498" start="10399" end="10418" title="Meriadoc Brandybuck" label="Meriadoc Brandybuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q74359" start="10422" end="10428" title="hobbit" label="hobbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q334750" start="11405" end="11432" title="The History of Middle-earth" label="The History of Middle-earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q83014" start="11811" end="11882" title="The Complete Guide to Middle-earth" label="The Complete Guide to Middle-earth: from The Hobbit to The Silmarillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q81738" start="12023" end="12049" title="Tolkien&amp;#x27;s legendarium" label="Tolkien&amp;#x27;s legendarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q93761" start="12281" end="12295" title="Verlyn Flieger" label="Verlyn Flieger"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="12463" end="12471" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q126708316" start="12737" end="12758" title="Elizabeth Whittingham" label="Elizabeth Whittingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q97366982" start="13264" end="13315" title="Christianity in Middle-earth" label="legendarium into closer alignment with Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353448" start="13581" end="13588" title="Tor.com" label="Tor.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="13767" end="13773" title="shaman" label="shaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q583271" start="13789" end="13795" title="Mediumship" label="medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q315441" start="14174" end="14186" title="Ralph Bakshi" label="Ralph Bakshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q378913" start="14199" end="14215" title="The Lord of the Rings (1978 film)" label="animated version"/>
<link wikidata="Q213480" start="14268" end="14275" title="Legolas" label="Legolas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4465" start="14280" end="14293" title="Peter Jackson" label="Peter Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14329" end="14378" title="The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring" label="The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q206018" start="14407" end="14412" title="Arwen" label="Arwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q905691" start="14567" end="14588" title="The Lord of the Rings (theatre)" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756626" start="14641" end="14665" title="Theatre Royal Drury Lane" label="Theatre Royal Drury Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q18547944" start="14797" end="14808" title="The Martian (film)" label="The Martian"/>
<link wikidata="Q208426" start="14906" end="14912" title="Elrond" label="Elrond"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111624" start="14972" end="14983" title="Mark Watney" label="Mark Watney"/>
<link wikidata="Q922368" start="15008" end="15020" title="Drew Goddard" label="Drew Goddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q330574" start="15038" end="15047" title="easter egg (media)" label="reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q466466" start="15125" end="15145" title="non player character" label="non player character"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15175" end="15224" title="The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (video game)#Plot" label="The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797840" start="15248" end="15260" title="Steve Staley" label="Steve Staley"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15305" end="15358" title="The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth II" label="The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q623479" start="15600" end="15624" title="Lord of the Rings Online" label="Lord of the Rings Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q466466" start="15657" end="15677" title="non-player character" label="non-player character"/>
<link wikidata="Q587270" start="15683" end="15697" title="Games Workshop" label="Games Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194265" start="15698" end="15775" title="Middle-earth Strategy Battle Game" label="tabletop strategy battle game adaptation of &amp;quot;The Lord of the Rings&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082291" start="15967" end="15989" title="Lego The Lord of the Rings (video game)" label="Lego Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066707" start="16033" end="16053" title="downloadable content" label="downloadable content"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="63944" wikidata="Q3306713" url="?curid=63944" title="Key-agreement protocol">
<text>In cryptography, a key-agreement protocol is a protocol whereby two (or more) parties generate a cryptographic key as a function of information provided by each honest party so that no party can predetermine the resulting value.
In particular, all honest participants influence the outcome. A key-agreement protocol is a specialisation of a key-exchange protocol.

At the completion of the protocol, all parties share the same key. A key-agreement protocol precludes undesired third parties from forcing a key choice on the agreeing parties. A secure key agreement can ensure confidentiality and data integrity in communications systems, ranging from simple messaging applications to complex banking transactions.

Secure agreement is defined relative to a security model, for example the Universal Model. More generally, when evaluating protocols, it is important to state security goals and the security model. For example, it may be required for the session key to be authenticated. A protocol can be evaluated for success only in the context of its goals and attack model. An example of an adversarial model is the Dolev–Yao model. 

In many key exchange systems, one party generates the key, and sends that key to the other party; the other party has no influence on the key.

== Exponential key exchange ==

The first publicly known public-key agreement protocol that meets the above criteria was the Diffie–Hellman key exchange, in which two parties jointly exponentiate a generator with random numbers, in such a way that an eavesdropper cannot feasibly determine what the resultant shared key is.

Exponential key agreement in and of itself does not specify any prior agreement or subsequent authentication between the participants. It has thus been described as an anonymous key agreement protocol.

== Symmetric key agreement ==

Symmetric key agreement (SKA) is a method of key agreement that uses solely symmetric cryptography and cryptographic hash functions as cryptographic primitives. It is related to symmetric authenticated key exchange.

SKA may assume the use of initial shared secrets or a trusted third party with whom the agreeing parties share a secret is assumed. If no third party is present, then achieving SKA can be trivial: we tautologically assume that two parties that share an initial secret and have achieved SKA. 

SKA contrasts with key-agreement protocols that include techniques from asymmetric cryptography, such as key encapsulation mechanisms. 

The initial exchange of a shared key must be done in a manner that is private and integrity-assured. Historically, this was achieved by physical means, such as by using a trusted courier. 

An example of a SKA protocol is the Needham–Schroeder protocol. It establishes a session key between two parties on the same network, using a server as a trusted third party. 
The original Needham–Schroeder protocol is vulnerable to a replay attack. Timestamps and nonces are included to fix this attack. It forms the basis for the Kerberos protocol.

=== Types of key agreement ===

Boyd et al. classify two-party key agreement protocols according to two criteria as follows:
# whether a pre-shared key already exists or not
# the method of generating the session key.

The pre-shared key may be shared between the two parties, or each party may share a key with a trusted third party. If there is no secure channel (as may be established via a pre-shared key), it is impossible to create an authenticated session key.

The session key may be generated via: key transport, key agreement and hybrid. If there is no trusted third party, then the cases of key transport and hybrid session key generation are indistinguishable. SKA is concerned with protocols in which the session key is established using only symmetric primitives.

== Authentication ==

Anonymous key exchange, like Diffie–Hellman, does not provide authentication of the parties, and is thus vulnerable to man-in-the-middle attacks.

A wide variety of cryptographic authentication schemes and protocols have been developed to provide authenticated key agreement to prevent man-in-the-middle and related attacks. These methods generally mathematically bind the agreed key to other agreed-upon data, such as the following:
* public–private key pairs
* shared secret keys
* passwords

=== Public keys ===
A widely used mechanism for defeating such attacks is the use of digitally signed keys that must be integrity-assured: if Bob&#x27;s key is signed by a trusted third party vouching for his identity, Alice can have considerable confidence that a signed key she receives is not an attempt to intercept by Eve. When Alice and Bob have a public-key infrastructure, they may digitally sign an agreed Diffie–Hellman key, or exchanged Diffie–Hellman public keys. Such signed keys, sometimes signed by a certificate authority, are one of the primary mechanisms used for secure web traffic (including HTTPS, SSL or TLS protocols). Other specific examples are MQV, YAK and the ISAKMP component of the IPsec protocol suite for securing Internet Protocol communications. However, these systems require care in endorsing the match between identity information and public keys by certificate authorities in order to work properly.

=== Hybrid systems ===
Hybrid systems use public-key cryptography to exchange secret keys, which are then used in a symmetric-key cryptography systems. Most practical applications of cryptography use a combination of cryptographic functions to implement an overall system that provides all of the four desirable features of secure communications (confidentiality, integrity, authentication, and non-repudiation).

=== Passwords ===
Password-authenticated key agreement protocols require the separate establishment of a password (which may be smaller than a key) in a manner that is both private and integrity-assured. These are designed to resist man-in-the-middle and other active attacks on the password and the established keys. For example, DH-EKE, SPEKE, and SRP are password-authenticated variations of Diffie–Hellman.

=== Other tricks ===
If one has an integrity-assured way to verify a shared key over a public channel, one may engage in a Diffie–Hellman key exchange to derive a short-term shared key, and then subsequently authenticate that the keys match. One way is to use a voice-authenticated read-out of the key, as in PGPfone. Voice authentication, however, presumes that it is infeasible for a man-in-the-middle to spoof one participant&#x27;s voice to the other in real-time, which may be an undesirable assumption. Such protocols may be designed to work with even a small public value, such as a password. Variations on this theme have been proposed for Bluetooth pairing protocols.

In an attempt to avoid using any additional out-of-band authentication factors, Davies and Price proposed the use of the interlock protocol of Ron Rivest and Adi Shamir, which has been subject to both attack and subsequent refinement.

== See also ==
* Key (cryptography)
* Computer security
* Cryptanalysis
* Secure channel
* Digital signature
* Key encapsulation mechanism
* Key management
* Password-authenticated key agreement
* Interlock protocol
* Zero-knowledge password proof
* Quantum key distribution

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3306713" start="19" end="41" title="Key-agreement protocol" label="key-agreement protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q471771" start="111" end="114" title="Key (cryptography)" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476929" start="576" end="591" title="confidentiality" label="confidentiality"/>
<link wikidata="Q461671" start="596" end="610" title="data integrity" label="data integrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825878" start="971" end="984" title="Authenticated Key Exchange" label="authenticated"/>
<link wikidata="Q165606" start="1119" end="1134" title="Dolev–Yao model" label="Dolev–Yao model"/>
<link wikidata="Q623447" start="1407" end="1434" title="Diffie–Hellman key exchange" label="Diffie–Hellman key exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q33456" start="1465" end="1477" title="Exponentiation" label="exponentiate"/>
<link wikidata="Q327675" start="1917" end="1939" title="Symmetric-key algorithm" label="symmetric cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q477202" start="1944" end="1971" title="cryptographic hash function" label="cryptographic hash function"/>
<link wikidata="Q246593" start="1976" end="1999" title="cryptographic primitive" label="cryptographic primitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q462624" start="2092" end="2106" title="shared secret" label="shared secrets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142273" start="2112" end="2131" title="trusted third party" label="trusted third party"/>
<link wikidata="Q201339" start="2423" end="2446" title="Public-key cryptography" label="asymmetric cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398156" start="2456" end="2483" title="key encapsulation mechanism" label="key encapsulation mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q848466" start="2667" end="2674" title="courier" label="courier"/>
<link wikidata="Q934370" start="2714" end="2740" title="Needham–Schroeder protocol" label="Needham–Schroeder protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755775" start="2759" end="2770" title="session key" label="session key"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="2803" end="2810" title="computer network" label="network"/>
<link wikidata="Q44127" start="2820" end="2826" title="server (computing)" label="server"/>
<link wikidata="Q186885" start="2928" end="2937" title="Timestamp" label="Timestamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749235" start="2943" end="2949" title="cryptographic nonce" label="nonces"/>
<link wikidata="Q506053" start="3010" end="3027" title="Kerberos (protocol)" label="Kerberos protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755775" start="3235" end="3246" title="session key" label="session key"/>
<link wikidata="Q212108" start="3893" end="3907" title="authentication" label="authentication"/>
<link wikidata="Q554830" start="3950" end="3974" title="man-in-the-middle attack" label="man-in-the-middle attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q220849" start="4411" end="4427" title="digital signature" label="digitally signed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142273" start="4498" end="4517" title="trusted third party" label="trusted third party"/>
<link wikidata="Q649676" start="4659" end="4672" title="Alice and Bob" label="Alice and Bob"/>
<link wikidata="Q196776" start="4842" end="4863" title="certificate authority" label="certificate authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172573" start="4915" end="4926" title="web traffic" label="web traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44484" start="4938" end="4943" title="HTTPS" label="HTTPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q206494" start="4945" end="4948" title="Secure Sockets Layer" label="SSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q206494" start="4952" end="4955" title="Transport Layer Security" label="TLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306069" start="4996" end="4999" title="MQV" label="MQV"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045815" start="5001" end="5004" title="YAK (cryptography)" label="YAK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667995" start="5013" end="5019" title="Internet Security Association and Key Management Protocol" label="ISAKMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142872" start="5696" end="5732" title="Password-authenticated key agreement" label="Password-authenticated key agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q161157" start="5783" end="5791" title="password" label="password"/>
<link wikidata="Q3725083" start="6012" end="6015" title="Encrypted key exchange" label="EKE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392527" start="6017" end="6022" title="SPEKE (cryptography)" label="SPEKE"/>
<link wikidata="Q576988" start="6028" end="6031" title="Secure remote password protocol" label="SRP"/>
<link wikidata="Q623447" start="6213" end="6240" title="Diffie–Hellman key exchange" label="Diffie–Hellman key exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044098" start="6399" end="6406" title="PGPfone" label="PGPfone"/>
<link wikidata="Q39531" start="6738" end="6747" title="Bluetooth" label="Bluetooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q15617427" start="6889" end="6907" title="interlock protocol" label="interlock protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q578036" start="6911" end="6921" title="Ron Rivest" label="Ron Rivest"/>
<link wikidata="Q320624" start="6926" end="6936" title="Adi Shamir" label="Adi Shamir"/>
<link wikidata="Q471771" start="7021" end="7039" title="Key (cryptography)" label="Key (cryptography)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510521" start="7042" end="7059" title="Computer security" label="Computer security"/>
<link wikidata="Q897511" start="7062" end="7075" title="Cryptanalysis" label="Cryptanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304359" start="7078" end="7092" title="Secure channel" label="Secure channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q220849" start="7095" end="7112" title="Digital signature" label="Digital signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398156" start="7115" end="7142" title="Key encapsulation mechanism" label="Key encapsulation mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320561" start="7145" end="7159" title="Key management" label="Key management"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142872" start="7162" end="7198" title="Password-authenticated key agreement" label="Password-authenticated key agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q15617427" start="7201" end="7219" title="Interlock protocol" label="Interlock protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069448" start="7222" end="7251" title="Zero-knowledge password proof" label="Zero-knowledge password proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027298" start="7254" end="7278" title="Quantum key distribution" label="Quantum key distribution"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="63946" wikidata="Q5431984" url="?curid=63946" title="Falkner Island">
<text>Falkner Island (also called Faulkner&#x27;s Island) is a crescent-shaped island located in Long Island Sound 3 miles (5 km) off Guilford, Connecticut, United States. The island has been visited by the Native Americans for thousands of years. Its Quinnipiac name is &quot;Massancummock&quot;, meaning &quot;the place of the great fish hawks&quot;. In 1641, Henry Whitfield and the founders of Guilford purchased the island from the Mohegan tribe&#x27;s sachem, Uncas, as part of a transaction for the land east of East River. Purchased by the Stone family in 1715, it remained in the family until it was sold to the government in 1801.

The Falkner Island Light was constructed in 1802 and commissioned by President Thomas Jefferson. The light is the second oldest in Connecticut and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. The lighthouse was automated in 1978, and continues to operate as a navigational aid to the nearby Intracoastal Waterway. The island is part of the Stewart B. McKinney National Wildlife Refuge and has the fifth-largest colony of nesting roseate terns in the northeastern United States. Much of the island&#x27;s land mass has been lost to erosion, down to about from its original . The United States Army Corps of Engineers reinforced the eastern boundary to slow the advancing deterioration.

== Name origins ==
The first recorded name of the Falkner Island was coined by the Native Americans. The island name in Quinnipiac was &quot;Massancummock&quot; meaning &quot;the place of the great fish hawks&quot;. The Quinnipiac name did not refer to possession, but instead the usage or resources of the island.

The identity of the first European explorer is unknown, but it was likely the Dutch explorer Adrian Block who sailed through Long Island Sound around 1614. The United States government credits Block as the discoverer. Early English settlers called it &quot;Falcon Island&quot;, likely stemming from the Native American name. Helander writes that the island was probably named for the osprey, but the English translation to &quot;Falcon&quot; suggesting the presence of the peregrine falcon was one of &quot;simple ignorance&quot;. The island&#x27;s name on Dutch maps was &quot;Valcken Eylandt&quot;. The name later evolved to Faulkner Island, perhaps as a result of the Faulkner family who lived on the island in the 1700s. When the island was transferred to the U.S. government in 1801, the deed states the name as &quot;Faulkners&quot;. The U.S. Board on Geographic Names changed and established &quot;Falkner Island&quot; as its name in 1891. However, the name change is not universally recognized and &quot;popular usage&quot; and the Faulkner&#x27;s Light Brigade that conserves the island&#x27;s lighthouse use &quot;Faulkner&quot;; including publications.

== History ==
Falkner Island has been the site of human activity for thousands of years. An archaeological survey performed on the island from 1997-1998 found a quartz projectile point of the Squibnocket triangle variety which dates to 1000-3000 B.C. The study was conducted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service as part of the erosion control project; it was required by law under the National Historic Preservation Act because the island is on the National Register of Historic Places. The findings were published in the Bulletin of the Archaeological Society of Connecticut in 2001. In 1994, John P. Menta&#x27;s &quot;The History of the Quinnipiac Indians&quot; identifies Falker Island as the site of ceremonial and religious practices, but that these practices are still unknown. According to Bruchac&#x27;s &quot;Thirteen Moons on Turtle&#x27;s Back&quot; the island was not a permanent settlement, but was likely used for fishing and hunting trips in the summer.

European contact occurred in the first half of the 1600s. A map in the possession of Reverend Henry Whitfield from a 1639 deed shows the island and the Quinnipiac name of &quot;Massancummock&quot;. In 1641, Whitfield and the founders of Guilford purchased the island from the Mohegan tribe&#x27;s sachem, Uncas, as part of a transaction for the land east of East River. Uncas acquired the land when he married the daughter of the Hammonassett sachem, Sebequanash. At some point in the 1600s, Andrew Leete was an owner of the island. In 1715, Caleb and Ebenezer Stone purchased the island and it remained in the Stone family until 1801. In 1800, Noah Stone sold it to a distant relative named Medad Stone for $158.34 (). On May 12, 1801, Medad Stone sold the island to the government for $325 (). Joel Helander, a historian, notes that Medad Stone and the government were likely openly communicating about the island. The United States Congress appropriated $6000 in March 1801 for the lighthouse, prior to the government&#x27;s acquisition of the property.

It was inhabited throughout the 1700s through 1976, with the Faulkner family and various lightkeepers of the Falkner Island Light. During the War of 1812, the British forces landed on the island and told the keeper&#x27;s wife, Thankful Stone, that they had nothing to fear as long as they kept the light burning. Later, the keeper, Solomon Stone, had to put the light out per order of the New London customs inspector. The British threatened to blow up the lighthouse and Stone got an order to relight the lighthouse. In 2008, the generator house for the light was renovated to be a summer house for the United States Fish and Wildlife Service interns who study the endangered roseate terns. The erosion control project was completed, but Hurricane Irene and Hurricane Sandy greatly reduced the breeding habitat of the terns to just .

Erosion threatens the island&#x27;s very existence, it is believed that it was around eight acres in 1639 before being reduced to 5.70 acres by 1818. By 1987, the total area has fallen to 2.87 acres and it was projected that it could lose another 12 inches each year until the lighthouse crumbles into the sea around 2026.

== Falkner Island Light ==

The Falkner Island Lighthouse was constructed in 1802 and commissioned by President Thomas Jefferson. The lighthouse has had three keeper&#x27;s houses throughout its service life, the first erected in 1802 and rebuilt in 1851 and again in 1871. The keeper&#x27;s house burned in 1976 and the lighthouse was repaired and automated in 1978. The Faulkner&#x27;s Light Brigade has undertaken the restoration and preservation of the lighthouse since 1991, with the last major restoration work being completed in March 2011. Access to Falkner Island and the light is restricted during the nesting season of the roseate terns, from May to August. The Falkner Island Lighthouse is the second oldest extant lighthouse in Connecticut and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

== Wildlife ==

In 1985, the island became part of the Stewart B. McKinney National Wildlife Refuge after it was acquired from the U.S. Coast Guard. According to the Connecticut Audubon Society, &quot;it currently supports over 95% of the nesting Common Terns in Connecticut. It is the site of one of the ten largest Roseate Tern (~45 pairs) colonies in Northeastern North America, and is the only regular nesting location for this federally endangered species in the state.&quot; Also living on the island is the American oystercatcher, with one to two breeding pairs noted each year. Although the erosion control project was completed, Hurricane Irene and Hurricane Sandy greatly reduced the breeding habitat of the terns to just . In spring 2014, the dock damaged by Hurricane Sandy was scheduled to be rebuilt.

==See also==
* Goose Island (Guilford)
* Falkner Island Light
* Thimble Islands
* Outer Lands
* List of Falkner Island Light keepers
* Stewart B. McKinney National Wildlife Refuge

== References ==
==Further reading==
* &quot;The Island Called Faulkner&#x27;s,&quot; Joel E. Helander, Guilford, CT, 1988. (; LCCCN: 88-91395)
* &quot;New worry for historic lighthouse fans. (Coast Guard may excess lighthouse on Falkner Island, in Long Island Sound)&quot; by Nick Ravo, the &quot;New York Times&quot; (August 15, 1993)
* &quot;Roseate Tern Recovery: Progress and Challenges&quot; by Rena R. Borkhataria, &quot;Endangered Species Bulletin&quot;, Sept 1998
* &quot;New England Lighthouses: Bay of Fundy to Long Island Sound&quot; by Bruce Roberts et al., Chelsea House, November 1999

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5431984" start="0" end="14" title="Falkner Island" label="Falkner Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431984" start="28" end="50" title="Falkner Island" label="Faulkner&amp;#x27;s Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q867460" start="91" end="108" title="Long Island Sound" label="Long Island Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q753857" start="128" end="136" title="Guilford, Connecticut" label="Guilford"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="138" end="149" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="151" end="164" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="201" end="217" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778363" start="246" end="256" title="Quinnipiac" label="Quinnipiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q201024" start="431" end="438" title="Mohegan" label="Mohegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433209" start="452" end="458" title="sachem" label="sachem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388815" start="460" end="465" title="Uncas" label="Uncas"/>
<link wikidata="Q212862" start="513" end="523" title="East River" label="East River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378217" start="640" end="660" title="Falkner Island Light" label="Falkner Island Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="715" end="731" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="800" end="836" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q756421" start="937" end="958" title="Intracoastal Waterway" label="Intracoastal Waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615723" start="986" end="1030" title="Stewart B. McKinney National Wildlife Refuge" label="Stewart B. McKinney National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q321293" start="1075" end="1087" title="roseate tern" label="roseate tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="1177" end="1184" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="1224" end="1261" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers" label="United States Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="1415" end="1431" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778363" start="1452" end="1462" title="Quinnipiac" label="Quinnipiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q367795" start="1741" end="1753" title="Adrian Block" label="Adrian Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q867460" start="1773" end="1790" title="Long Island Sound" label="Long Island Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q25332" start="2032" end="2038" title="osprey" label="osprey"/>
<link wikidata="Q30535" start="2121" end="2137" title="peregrine falcon" label="peregrine falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148422" start="2492" end="2522" title="U.S. Board on Geographic Names" label="U.S. Board on Geographic Names"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="3095" end="3123" title="U.S. Army Corps of Engineers" label="U.S. Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="3132" end="3162" title="U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service" label="U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973378" start="3236" end="3270" title="National Historic Preservation Act" label="National Historic Preservation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="3300" end="3336" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778363" start="3974" end="3984" title="Quinnipiac" label="Quinnipiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q753857" start="4059" end="4067" title="Guilford, Connecticut" label="Guilford"/>
<link wikidata="Q201024" start="4098" end="4105" title="Mohegan" label="Mohegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433209" start="4119" end="4125" title="sachem" label="sachem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388815" start="4127" end="4132" title="Uncas" label="Uncas"/>
<link wikidata="Q212862" start="4180" end="4190" title="East River" label="East River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4252" end="4264" title="Hammonassett" label="Hammonassett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378217" start="4989" end="5009" title="Falkner Island Light" label="Falkner Island Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="5022" end="5033" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q321293" start="5558" end="5570" title="roseate tern" label="roseate tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q187621" start="5620" end="5635" title="Hurricane Irene" label="Hurricane Irene"/>
<link wikidata="Q264" start="5640" end="5655" title="Hurricane Sandy" label="Hurricane Sandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="6153" end="6169" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q321293" start="6675" end="6687" title="roseate tern" label="roseate tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="6815" end="6851" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615723" start="6909" end="6953" title="Stewart B. McKinney National Wildlife Refuge" label="Stewart B. McKinney National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="6985" end="7001" title="U.S. Coast Guard" label="U.S. Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q24534421" start="7020" end="7047" title="Connecticut Audubon Society" label="Connecticut Audubon Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q18875" start="7101" end="7112" title="Common tern" label="Common Tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q321293" start="7171" end="7183" title="Roseate tern" label="Roseate Tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q692644" start="7368" end="7390" title="American oystercatcher" label="American oystercatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q187621" start="7492" end="7507" title="Hurricane Irene" label="Hurricane Irene"/>
<link wikidata="Q264" start="7512" end="7527" title="Hurricane Sandy" label="Hurricane Sandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457777" start="7685" end="7708" title="Goose Island (Guilford)" label="Goose Island (Guilford)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378217" start="7711" end="7731" title="Falkner Island Light" label="Falkner Island Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784200" start="7734" end="7749" title="Thimble Islands" label="Thimble Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111986" start="7752" end="7763" title="Outer Lands" label="Outer Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q16171794" start="7766" end="7802" title="List of Falkner Island Light keepers" label="List of Falkner Island Light keepers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615723" start="7805" end="7849" title="Stewart B. McKinney National Wildlife Refuge" label="Stewart B. McKinney National Wildlife Refuge"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="63952" wikidata="Q623036" url="?curid=63952" title="United Nations Population Fund">
<text>The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), formerly the United Nations Fund for Population Activities, is a UN agency aimed at improving reproductive and maternal health worldwide. Its work includes developing national healthcare strategies and protocols, increasing access to birth control, and leading campaigns against child marriage, gender-based violence, obstetric fistula, and female genital mutilation.

The UNFPA supports programs in more than 144 countries across four geographic regions: Arab States and Europe, Asia and the Pacific, Latin America, the Caribbean and Africa. Around three-quarters of the staff work in the field. It is a founding member of the United Nations Development Group, a collection of UN agencies and programmes focused on fulfilling the Sustainable Development Goals.

==Origins==
In December 1966, 12 heads of state made a declaration urging the United Nations to work on population issues. The Secretary-General created a trust fund for population in 1967. The agency began operations in 1969 as the United Nations Fund for Population Activities under the administration of the United Nations Development Fund. In 1971 it was placed under the authority of the United Nations General Assembly. Its name was changed into United Nations Population Fund in 1987. However, the shortened term of UNFPA has been retained.

==UNFPA and the Sustainable Development Goals==
In September 2015, the 193 member states of the United Nations unanimously adopted the Sustainable Development Goals, a set of 17 goals aiming to transform the world over the next 15 years. These goals are designed to eliminate poverty, discrimination, abuse and preventable deaths, address environmental destruction, and usher in an era of development for all people, everywhere.

The Sustainable Development Goals are ambitious, and they will require enormous efforts across countries, continents, industries and disciplines, but they are achievable. UNFPA works with governments, partners and other UN agencies to directly tackle many of these goals – in particular Goal 3 on health, Goal 4 on education and Goal 5 on gender equality – and contributes in a variety of ways to achieving many of the other goals.

==Leadership==
Executive Directors and Under-Secretaries-General of the UNFPA:
==Areas of work==
UNFPA is the world&#x27;s largest multilateral source of funding for population and reproductive health programs. The Fund works with governments and non-governmental organizations in over 150 countries with the support of the international community, supporting programs that help women, men and young people:

* voluntarily plan and have the number of children they desire and to avoid unwanted pregnancies
* undergo safe pregnancy and childbirth
* avoid spreading sexually transmitted infections
* decrease violence against women
* increase the equality of women
* encouraging the use of birth control

UNFPA uses a human rights-based approach in programming to address three &quot;transformative goals&quot;:

# Zero preventable maternal death
# Zero gender-based violence
# Zero unmet need for family planning.

The Fund raises awareness of and supports efforts to meet these goals, advocates close attention to population concerns and helps nations formulate policies and strategies in support of sustainable development. Osotimehin assumed leadership in January 2011. The Fund is also represented by UNFPA Goodwill Ambassadors and a Patron.

===How it works===
UNFPA works in partnership with governments, along with other United Nations agencies, communities, NGOs, foundations and the private sector, to raise awareness and mobilize the support and resources needed to achieve its mission to promote the rights and health of women and young people. For instance, it is one of the co-sponsors of the Special Programme on Human Reproduction.

Contributions from governments and the private sector to UNFPA in 2016 totaled $848 million. The amount includes $353 million for the organization&#x27;s core resources and $495 million earmarked for specific programs and initiatives. As a result of the economic impact of coronavirus pandemic, the United Kingdom imposed 85% aid cut to UNFPA.

Examples of campaigns:

===Campaign to end fistula===
* This UNFPA-led global campaign works to prevent obstetric fistula, a devastating and socially isolating injury of childbirth, to treat women who live with the condition and help those who have been treated to return to their communities. The campaign works in more than 40 countries in Africa, the Arab States and South Asia.
* The leader of the campaign to end fistula, Erin Anastasi, decided to start this campaign in 2003 in hopes of ending the deaths of new mothers after developing fistula. This campaign is now active in over 50 countries working not only to prevent fistula but also to give fistula survivors a sense of reforming their life after overcoming this burden. Nearly 800 women in Africa and Asia die after childbirth and more than 2 million young women live with untreated obstetric fistula in Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa. The campaign focuses mainly on providing training and funds to support women living with fistula, and also programs aimed towards survivors. The campaign is also looking at ways to prevent fistula from developing in general by providing medical supplies and technical guidance and support.

===Ending female genital mutilation===
* UNFPA has worked for many years to end the practice of female genital mutilation, the partial or total removal of external female genital organs for cultural or other non-medical reasons. The practice, which affects 100–140 million women and girls across the world, violates their right to health and bodily integrity. In 2007, UNFPA in partnership with UNICEF, launched a $44 million program to reduce the practice by 40 per cent in 16 countries by 2015 and to end it within a generation. UNFPA also recently sponsored a Global Technical Consultation, which drew experts from all over the world to discuss strategies to convince communities to abandon the practice. UNFPA supports the campaign to end female genital mutilation with &quot;The Guardian&quot;.

==Relations with the US government==
UNFPA has been accused by American pro-life groups of providing support for government programs which have promoted forced abortions and coercive sterilizations. UNFPA says it &quot;does not provide support for abortion services&quot;. Its charter includes a strong statement condemning coercion. In response to these allegations, the U.S. Congress passed the Kemp-Kasten amendment in 1985 to empower the president to block U.S. funding of programs deemed by the president to include &quot;coercive abortion or involuntary sterilization&quot;. Since its passage, all Republican presidents (Reagan, H.W. Bush, W. Bush, and Trump) have withheld funding from the UNFPA a policy known as the Mexico City Policy.

UNFPA provided aid to Peru&#x27;s reproductive health program in the mid-to-late 1990s. When it was discovered a Peruvian program had been engaged in carrying out coercive sterilizations, UNFPA called for reforms and protocols to protect the rights of women seeking assistance. UNFPA continued work with the country after the abuses had become public to help end the abuses and reform laws and practices.

Over the course of the George W. Bush administration, a total of $244 million in Congressionally approved funding was blocked by the Executive Branch. From 2002 through 2008, the administration denied funding to UNFPA that had already been allocated by the US Congress, on the grounds that the UNFPA supported Chinese government programs which include forced abortions and coercive sterilizations. In a letter from the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Nicholas Burns to Congress, the administration said it had determined that UNFPA&#x27;s support for China&#x27;s population program &quot;facilitates its government&#x27;s coercive abortion program&quot;, thus violating the Kemp-Kasten Amendment, which bans the use of United States aid to finance organizations that support or take part in managing a program of coercive abortion or sterilization.

The notion that UNFPA had any connection to China&#x27;s administration of forced abortions was deemed to be unsubstantiated by investigations carried out by various US, UK, and UN teams sent to examine UNFPA activities in China. Specifically, a three-person US State Department fact-finding team was sent on a two-week tour throughout China. It wrote in its report that it found &quot;no evidence that UNFPA has supported or participated in the management of a program of coercive abortion or involuntary sterilization in China,&quot; as has been charged by critics.

However, according to then-Secretary of State Colin Powell, the UNFPA contributed vehicles and computers to the Chinese to carry out their population planning policies. However, both &quot;The Washington Post&quot; and &quot;The Washington Times&quot; reported that Powell simply fell in line, signing a brief written by someone else. US Representative Chris Smith criticized the State Department investigation, saying the investigators were shown &quot;Potemkin Villages&quot; where residents had been intimidated into lying about the family-planning program. Nafis Sadik, former director of UNFPA, said her agency had been pivotal in reversing China&#x27;s coercive population planning methods, but a 2005 report by Amnesty International and a separate report by the US State Department found that coercive techniques were still regularly employed by the Chinese, casting doubt upon Sadik&#x27;s statements. However, Amnesty International found no evidence that UNFPA had supported the coercion.

A 2001 study conducted by the pro-life Population Research Institute claimed that the UNFPA shared an office with the Chinese family planning officials who were carrying out forced abortions. &quot;We located the family planning offices, and in that family planning office, we located the UNFPA office, and we confirmed from family planning officials there that there is no distinction between what the UNFPA does and what the Chinese Family Planning Office does,&quot; said Scott Weinberg, a spokesman for PRI. However, United Nations Members disagreed and approved UNFPA&#x27;s new country programme in January 2006. The more than 130 members of the &quot;Group of 77&quot; developing countries in the United Nations expressed support for the UNFPA programmes. In addition, speaking for several European democracies – Norway, Denmark, Sweden, Finland, the Netherlands, France, Belgium, Switzerland and Germany – the United Kingdom stated, &quot;UNFPA’s activities in China, as in the rest of the world, are in strict conformity with the unanimously adopted Programme of Action of the ICPD&quot; and plays &quot;a key role in supporting our common endeavour, the promotion and protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms&quot;.

In response, the EU decided to fill the gap left behind by the US under the Sandbæk Report. According to its Annual Report for 2008, the UNFPA received its funding mainly from European governments: Of the total income of $845.3 million, $118 million was donated by the Netherlands, $67 million by Sweden, $62 million by Norway, $54 million by Denmark, $53 million by the UK, $52 million by Spain, and $19 million by Luxembourg. The European Commission donated a further $36 million. The most important non-European donor state was Japan, which gave $36 million. The number of donors exceeded 180 in one year.

In the United States, nonprofit organizations like Friends of UNFPA, formerly Americans for UNFPA, worked to compensate for the loss of United States federal funding by raising private donations.

In January 2009 President Barack Obama restored US funding to UNFPA, saying in a public statement that he would &quot;look forward to working with Congress to restore U.S. financial support for the U.N. Population Fund. By resuming funding to UNFPA, the U.S. will be joining 180 other donor nations working collaboratively to reduce poverty, improve the health of women and children, prevent HIV/AIDS and provide family planning assistance to women in 154 countries.&quot;

The United States said during the UNDP/UNFPA/UNOPS Executive Board meeting that considered the China programme in 2015:During its recent visit, the U.S. delegation observed the positive impact of UNFPA&#x27;s rights-based programming in China. We commend the Fund&#x27;s adherence to demonstrating the advantages of a voluntary approach to family planning and were pleased to see – in support of its ICPD commitments – increased provider emphasis on patient rights.

In April 2017, the Trump administration announced that it will cut off funding to UNFPA, on the grounds that it &quot;supports, or participates in the management of, a program of coercive abortion or involuntary sterilization.&quot; UNFPA refuted this claim, as all of its work promotes the human rights of individuals and couples to make their own decisions, free of coercion or discrimination.

==Other UN population agencies and entities==
Entities with competencies about population in the United Nations:
*Commission on Population and Development
*United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs

==See also==

*Reproductive Health Supplies Coalition

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q623036" start="4" end="34" title="United Nations Population Fund" label="United Nations Population Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q623036" start="36" end="41" title="United Nations Population Fund" label="UNFPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q623036" start="57" end="102" title="United Nations Population Fund" label="United Nations Fund for Population Activities"/>
<link wikidata="Q854218" start="109" end="118" title="United Nations System" label="UN agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501817" start="138" end="170" title="reproductive health" label="reproductive and maternal health"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="278" end="291" title="birth control" label="birth control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546421" start="323" end="337" title="child marriage" label="child marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q679020" start="362" end="379" title="obstetric fistula" label="obstetric fistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q208373" start="385" end="410" title="female genital mutilation" label="female genital mutilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="500" end="511" title="Arab States" label="Arab States"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="516" end="522" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="524" end="528" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="537" end="544" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="546" end="559" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="565" end="574" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="579" end="585" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187686" start="672" end="704" title="United Nations Development Group" label="United Nations Development Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649586" start="775" end="804" title="Sustainable Development Goals" label="Sustainable Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="1118" end="1149" title="United Nations Development Fund" label="United Nations Development Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="1200" end="1231" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649586" start="1491" end="1520" title="Sustainable Development Goals" label="Sustainable Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294" start="1632" end="1639" title="poverty" label="poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q169207" start="1641" end="1655" title="discrimination" label="discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863217" start="1667" end="1685" title="preventable deaths" label="preventable deaths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334780" start="1695" end="1720" title="environmental destruction" label="environmental destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q113453" start="2125" end="2140" title="gender equality" label="gender equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501817" start="2400" end="2419" title="reproductive health" label="reproductive health"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="2713" end="2724" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancies"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="2783" end="2814" title="sexually transmitted infections" label="sexually transmitted infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800556" start="2826" end="2848" title="violence against women" label="violence against women"/>
<link wikidata="Q131201" start="3319" end="3342" title="sustainable development" label="sustainable development"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067229" start="3423" end="3448" title="UNFPA Goodwill Ambassador" label="UNFPA Goodwill Ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q56721121" start="3824" end="3863" title="Special Programme on Human Reproduction" label="Special Programme on Human Reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="4139" end="4159" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="coronavirus pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q679020" start="4315" end="4332" title="obstetric fistula" label="obstetric fistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q208373" start="5495" end="5520" title="female genital mutilation" label="female genital mutilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919435" start="5721" end="5736" title="right to health" label="right to health"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="5794" end="5800" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="6179" end="6191" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129261" start="6272" end="6280" title="pro-life" label="pro-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q231577" start="6353" end="6368" title="forced abortion" label="forced abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q706716" start="6374" end="6396" title="coercive sterilization" label="coercive sterilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="6572" end="6585" title="U.S. Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="6804" end="6814" title="GOP" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="6827" end="6833" title="Reagan" label="Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="6835" end="6844" title="H.W. Bush" label="H.W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="6846" end="6853" title="George W. Bush" label="W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="6859" end="6864" title="Donald Trump" label="Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138492" start="6925" end="6943" title="Mexico City Policy" label="Mexico City Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q111950190" start="7176" end="7183" title="Humanitarian protection" label="protect"/>
<link wikidata="Q519825" start="7818" end="7832" title="R. Nicholas Burns" label="Nicholas Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="8477" end="8496" title="United States Department of State" label="US State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q150851" start="8833" end="8845" title="Colin Powell" label="Colin Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="8976" end="8995" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q494170" start="9012" end="9032" title="The Washington Times" label="The Washington Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q981167" start="9140" end="9151" title="Chris Smith (New Jersey politician)" label="Chris Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6958181" start="9348" end="9359" title="Nafis Sadik" label="Nafis Sadik"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="9505" end="9526" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229787" start="9825" end="9854" title="Population Research Institute (organization)" label="Population Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q477328" start="10444" end="10455" title="Group of 77" label="Group of 77"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="10704" end="10718" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416045" start="11104" end="11118" title="Sandbæk Report" label="Sandbæk Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="11460" end="11479" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504313" start="11716" end="11735" title="Americans for UNFPA" label="Americans for UNFPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="11861" end="11873" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q27809653" start="12795" end="12815" title="First presidency of Donald Trump" label="Trump administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152731" start="13287" end="13327" title="Commission on Population and Development" label="Commission on Population and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671637" start="13329" end="13385" title="United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs" label="United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314304" start="13402" end="13440" title="Reproductive Health Supplies Coalition" label="Reproductive Health Supplies Coalition"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="63966" wikidata="Q1778743" url="?curid=63966" title="Warchalking">
<text>Warchalking is the drawing of symbols in public places to advertise an open Wi-Fi network.
Inspired by hobo symbols, the warchalking marks were conceived by a group of friends in June 2002 and published by Matt Jones who designed the set of icons and produced a downloadable document containing them. Within days of Jones publishing a blog entry about warchalking, articles appeared in dozens of publications and stories appeared on several major television news programs around the world.

The word is formed by analogy to &quot;wardriving&quot;, the practice of driving around an area in a car to detect open Wi-Fi nodes. That term in turn is based on &quot;wardialing&quot;, the practice of dialing many phone numbers hoping to find a modem.
Having found a Wi-Fi node, the warchalker draws a special symbol on a nearby object, such as a wall, the pavement, or a lamp post. Those offering Wi-Fi service might also draw such a symbol to advertise the availability of their Wi-Fi location, whether commercial or personal.

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1778743" start="0" end="11" title="Warchalking" label="Warchalking"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="30" end="36" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q294440" start="41" end="53" title="public place" label="public place"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="76" end="81" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11375" start="82" end="89" title="wireless network" label="network"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="103" end="115" title="Hobo#Hobo signs and graffiti" label="hobo symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q751980" start="530" end="540" title="wardriving" label="wardriving"/>
<link wikidata="Q173106" start="617" end="622" title="node (networking)" label="nodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092537" start="660" end="670" title="wardialing" label="wardialing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607" start="738" end="743" title="modem" label="modem"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="63967" wikidata="Q1243208" url="?curid=63967" title="Double pendulum">
<text>In physics and mathematics, in the area of dynamical systems, a double pendulum, also known as a chaotic pendulum, is a pendulum with another pendulum attached to its end, forming a simple physical system that exhibits rich dynamic behavior with a strong sensitivity to initial conditions. The motion of a double pendulum is governed by a pair of coupled ordinary differential equations and is chaotic.

==Analysis and interpretation==
Several variants of the double pendulum may be considered; the two limbs may be of equal or unequal lengths and masses, they may be simple pendulums or compound pendulums (also called complex pendulums) and the motion may be in three dimensions or restricted to the vertical plane. In the following analysis, the limbs are taken to be identical compound pendulums of length and mass , and the motion is restricted to two dimensions.


In a compound pendulum, the mass is distributed along its length. If the double pendulum mass is evenly distributed, then the center of mass of each limb is at its midpoint, and the limb has a moment of inertia of about that point.

It is convenient to use the angles between each limb and the vertical as the generalized coordinates defining the configuration of the system. These angles are denoted and . The position of the center of mass of each rod may be written in terms of these two coordinates. If the origin of the Cartesian coordinate system is taken to be at the point of suspension of the first pendulum, then the center of mass of this pendulum is at:formula_1

and the center of mass of the second pendulum is at
formula_2
This is enough information to write out the Lagrangian.

===Lagrangian===
The Lagrangian is given by
formula_3
The first term is the &quot;linear&quot; kinetic energy of the center of mass of the bodies and the second term is the &quot;rotational&quot; kinetic energy around the center of mass of each rod. The last term is the potential energy of the bodies in a uniform gravitational field. The dot-notation indicates the time derivative of the variable in question.

Using the values of formula_4 and formula_5 defined above, we have
formula_6
which leads to
formula_7

Similarly, for formula_8 and formula_9 we have
formula_10

and therefore

formula_11

Substituting the coordinates above into the definition of the Lagrangian, and rearranging the equation, gives
formula_12

The equations of motion can now be derived using the Euler–Lagrange equations, which are given by
formula_13
We begin with the equation of motion for formula_14. The derivatives of the Lagrangian are given by
formula_15
and
formula_16
Thus
formula_17
Combining these results and simplifying yields the first equation of motion,
|equation=formula_18

Similarly, the derivatives of the Lagrangian with respect to formula_19 and formula_20 are given by
formula_21
and
formula_22
Thus
formula_23
Plugging these results into the Euler-Lagrange equation and simplifying yields the second equation of motion,
formula_24

No closed form solutions for formula_14 and formula_19 as functions of time are known, therefore the system can only be solved numerically, using the Runge Kutta method or similar techniques.

==Chaotic motion==

The double pendulum undergoes chaotic motion, and clearly shows a sensitive dependence on initial conditions. The image to the right shows the amount of elapsed time before the pendulum flips over, as a function of initial position when released at rest. Here, the initial value of ranges along the -direction from −3.14 to 3.14. The initial value ranges along the -direction, from −3.14 to 3.14. The color of each pixel indicates whether either pendulum flips within:
* formula_27 (black)
* formula_28 (red)
* formula_29 (green)
* formula_30 (blue) or
* formula_31 (purple).

Initial conditions that do not lead to a flip within formula_31 are plotted white.

The boundary of the central white region is defined in part by energy conservation with the following curve:
formula_33

Within the region defined by this curve, that is ifformula_34then it is energetically impossible for either pendulum to flip. Outside this region, the pendulum can flip, but it is a complex question to determine when it will flip. Similar behavior is observed for a double pendulum composed of two point masses rather than two rods with distributed mass.

The lack of a natural excitation frequency has led to the use of double pendulum systems in seismic resistance designs in buildings, where the building itself is the primary inverted pendulum, and a secondary mass is connected to complete the double pendulum.

==See also==
* Double inverted pendulum
* Pendulum (mechanics)
* Trebuchet
* Bolas
* Mass damper
* Mid-20th century physics textbooks use the term &quot;double pendulum&quot; to mean a single bob suspended from a string which is in turn suspended from a V-shaped string. This type of pendulum, which produces Lissajous curves, is now referred to as a Blackburn pendulum.

==References==
== Further reading ==
* Eric W. Weisstein, &quot;Double pendulum&quot; (2005), ScienceWorld &quot;(contains details of the complicated equations involved)&quot; and &quot;Double Pendulum&quot; by Rob Morris, Wolfram Demonstrations Project, 2007 (animations of those equations).
* Peter Lynch, &quot;Double Pendulum&quot;, (2001). &quot;(Java applet simulation.)&quot;
* Northwestern University, &quot;Double Pendulum &quot;, &quot;(Java applet simulation.)&quot;
* Theoretical High-Energy Astrophysics Group at UBC, &quot;Double pendulum&quot;, (2005).

==External links==
*Animations and explanations of a double pendulum and a physical double pendulum (two square plates) by Mike Wheatland (Univ. Sydney)

*Interactive Open Source Physics JavaScript simulation with detailed equations double pendulum
*Interactive Javascript simulation of a double pendulum
*Double pendulum physics simulation from www.myphysicslab.com using open source JavaScript code
*Simulation, equations and explanation of Rott&#x27;s pendulum
* Double Pendulum Simulator - An open source simulator written in C++ using the Qt toolkit.
* Online Java simulator of the Imaginary exhibition.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="3" end="10" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="15" end="26" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="43" end="60" title="dynamical systems" label="dynamical systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243208" start="64" end="79" title="Double pendulum" label="double pendulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243208" start="97" end="113" title="Double pendulum" label="chaotic pendulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q20702" start="120" end="128" title="pendulum" label="pendulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454986" start="189" end="204" title="physical system" label="physical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="224" end="240" title="dynamical systems" label="dynamic behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q187536" start="248" end="288" title="butterfly effect" label="strong sensitivity to initial conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q465274" start="355" end="385" title="ordinary differential equation" label="ordinary differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q166314" start="394" end="401" title="chaos theory" label="chaotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q20702" start="568" end="583" title="simple pendulum" label="simple pendulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q20702" start="588" end="605" title="compound pendulum" label="compound pendulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945123" start="997" end="1011" title="center of mass" label="center of mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q165618" start="1064" end="1081" title="moment of inertia" label="moment of inertia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057607" start="1181" end="1204" title="generalized coordinates" label="generalized coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156912" start="1218" end="1231" title="Configuration space (physics)" label="configuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q62912" start="1396" end="1423" title="Cartesian coordinate system" label="Cartesian coordinate system"/>
<link wikidata="Q324669" start="1687" end="1697" title="Lagrangian mechanics" label="Lagrangian"/>
<link wikidata="Q46276" start="1761" end="1775" title="kinetic energy" label="kinetic energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945123" start="1783" end="1797" title="center of mass" label="center of mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q155640" start="1937" end="1953" title="potential energy" label="potential energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269411" start="2006" end="2018" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s notation" label="dot-notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6960532" start="2033" end="2048" title="time derivative" label="time derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q875744" start="2443" end="2466" title="Euler–Lagrange equation" label="Euler–Lagrange equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q777407" start="3007" end="3018" title="closed form expression" label="closed form"/>
<link wikidata="Q753445" start="3131" end="3142" title="numerical integration" label="numerically"/>
<link wikidata="Q725944" start="3154" end="3172" title="Runge–Kutta methods" label="Runge Kutta method"/>
<link wikidata="Q541182" start="3176" end="3194" title="numerical methods for ordinary differential equations" label="similar techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q166314" start="3247" end="3261" title="chaotic motion" label="chaotic motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q18351510" start="3307" end="3325" title="initial conditions" label="initial conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068091" start="4297" end="4307" title="point mass" label="point mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891986" start="4420" end="4473" title="Tuned mass damper" label="double pendulum systems in seismic resistance designs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300047" start="4631" end="4655" title="Double inverted pendulum" label="Double inverted pendulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q829360" start="4658" end="4678" title="Pendulum (mechanics)" label="Pendulum (mechanics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19776" start="4681" end="4690" title="Trebuchet" label="Trebuchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q689962" start="4693" end="4698" title="Bolas" label="Bolas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891986" start="4701" end="4712" title="Mass damper" label="Mass damper"/>
<link wikidata="Q20702" start="4900" end="4908" title="pendulum" label="pendulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q594135" start="4925" end="4941" title="Lissajous curves" label="Lissajous curves"/>
<link wikidata="Q240559" start="4967" end="4985" title="Blackburn pendulum" label="Blackburn pendulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632017" start="5211" end="5241" title="Wolfram Demonstrations Project" label="Wolfram Demonstrations Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136921" start="5283" end="5294" title="Peter Lynch (meteorologist)" label="Peter Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="6087" end="6090" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q201904" start="6101" end="6111" title="Qt (toolkit)" label="Qt toolkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474563" start="6144" end="6164" title="Imaginary (exhibition)" label="Imaginary exhibition"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="63969" wikidata="Q268181" url="?curid=63969" title="Chuck Palahniuk">
<text>Charles Michael Palahniuk (; born February 21, 1962) is an American novelist who describes his work as transgressional fiction. He has published 19 novels, three nonfiction books, two graphic novels, and two adult coloring books, as well as several short stories. His first published novel was &quot;Fight Club&quot;, which was adapted into a film of the same title.

==Early life==
Palahniuk was born in Pasco, Washington, the son of Carol Adele (née Tallent) and Fred Palahniuk. He has French and Ukrainian ancestry. His paternal grandfather migrated from Ukraine to Canada and then to New York in 1907.

Palahniuk grew up living in a mobile home in Burbank, Washington. His parents separated when he was 14 years old, and they subsequently divorced, often leaving him and his three siblings to live with their maternal grandparents at their cattle ranch in eastern Washington. Palahniuk acknowledged in a 2007 interview that he is a distant nephew of actor Jack Palance, and that his family had talked of distant relations with Palance. 

Palahniuk attended the University of Oregon, graduating with a degree in journalism in 1986. He interned at the local public radio station, KLCC, as part of his coursework.

==Career==

===Early career===
Palahniuk wrote for his local newspaper for a short while but then began working for Freightliner Trucks as a diesel mechanic, continuing until his writing career took off. During that time, he wrote manuals on fixing trucks and had a stint as a journalist, a job to which he did not return until after he became a successful novelist. After casually attending a seminar by Landmark Education, Palahniuk quit his job as a journalist in 1988. He performed volunteer work for a homeless shelter and volunteered at a hospice as an escort, providing transportation for terminally ill people, taking them to support group meetings. He ceased volunteering upon the death of a patient to whom he had grown attached.

Palahniuk began writing fiction in his early 30s. By his account, he started writing while attending workshops for writers that were hosted by Tom Spanbauer, which he attended to meet new friends. Spanbauer largely inspired Palahniuk&#x27;s minimalistic writing style.

===&quot;Fight Club&quot;===
After his first novel – &quot;Invisible Monsters&quot; – was rejected by all publishers he submitted it to, he began work on his first published novel, &quot;Fight Club&quot;. Palahniuk wrote this story in his spare time while working for Freightliner. After initially publishing it as a short story (which became chapter 6 of the novel) in the 1995 compilation &quot;Pursuit of Happiness&quot;, Palahniuk expanded it into a full novel, which, contrary to his expectations, a publisher accepted. While the original hardcover edition of the book received positive reviews and some awards, it had a short shelf life.

Initially, Palahniuk struggled to find a literary agent and went without one until after the publication of &quot;Fight Club&quot;. After he began receiving attention from 20th Century Fox, Palahniuk was signed by actor and literary agent Edward Hibbert. Hibbert eventually guided and brokered the deal that took &quot;Fight Club&quot; to the big screen. In 1999, the film adaptation by director David Fincher was released. The film was a box office disappointment (although it was No. 1 at the U.S. box office in its first weekend) and critical reaction was mixed, but a cult following soon emerged as the DVD of the film became popular upon release. Three editions of the novel have been published in paperback: in 1999, in 2004 (with a new introduction by the author about the success of the film adaptation), and in 2005 (with an afterword by Palahniuk).

===&quot;Invisible Monsters&quot;, &quot;Survivor&quot;, and &quot;Choke&quot;===
A revised version of &quot;Invisible Monsters&quot;, as well as his fourth novel, &quot;Survivor&quot;, were published in 1999. A few years later Palahniuk managed to complete his first &quot;New York Times&quot; bestseller, the novel &quot;Choke&quot;, which later was made into a movie.

===&quot;Lullaby&quot;===

The year 1999 brought a series of great personal tragedies to Palahniuk&#x27;s life. At that time, his father, Fred Palahniuk, had started dating a woman named Donna Fontaine, whom he had met through a personal ad under the title &quot;&quot;. Her former boyfriend, Dale Shackelford, had previously been imprisoned for sexual abuse and had vowed to kill Fontaine as soon as he was released from prison. Palahniuk believes that, using a personal ad, Fontaine was looking for &quot;the biggest man she could find&quot; to protect her from Shackelford, and Palahniuk&#x27;s father qualified. After his release, Shackelford followed Fontaine and the senior Palahniuk to Fontaine&#x27;s home in Kendrick, Idaho, after they had gone out for a date. Shackelford then shot them both and dragged their bodies into Fontaine&#x27;s cabin home, which he then set alight. In the spring of 2001, Shackelford was found guilty for two counts of murder in the first degree and sentenced to death. In the wake of these events, Palahniuk began working on the novel &quot;Lullaby&quot;. He has stated that he wrote the novel to help him cope with having participated in the decision to have Shackelford receive the death sentence.

===&quot;Guts&quot; and &quot;Haunted&quot;===
While on his 2003 tour to promote his novel &quot;Diary&quot;, Palahniuk read to his audiences a short story entitled &quot;Guts&quot;, a sensational tale of accidents involving masturbation, which appears in his book &quot;Haunted&quot;. The story begins with the author telling his listeners to inhale deeply and that &quot;this story should last about as long as you can hold your breath.&quot; It was reported that 40 people had fainted listening to the readings while holding their breath. &quot;Playboy&quot; magazine later published the story in their March 2004 issue and Palahniuk offered to let them publish another story along with it, but the publishers found the second work too disturbing to publish. On his tour to promote &quot;Stranger than Fiction: True Stories&quot; during the summer of 2004, he read &quot;Guts&quot; to audiences again, bringing the total number of fainters up to 53 (and later up to 60 while on tour to promote the softcover edition of &quot;Diary&quot;). In the fall of that year, he began promoting &quot;Haunted&quot;, and continued to read &quot;Guts&quot;. In June 2005, Palahniuk noted that his number of fainters was up to 67. 

At a 2005 appearance in Miami, Florida, during the &quot;Haunted&quot; tour, Palahniuk commented that &quot;Haunted&quot; represented the last of a &quot;horror trilogy&quot; (including &quot;Lullaby&quot; and &quot;Diary&quot;). He also indicated that his then-forthcoming novel, &quot;Rant&quot;, would be the first of a &quot;science fiction trilogy&quot;.

In 2008, Palahniuk spent a week at the Clarion West Writers Workshop, instructing eighteen students about his writing methods and theory of fiction.

===Adaptations===
In addition to the film, &quot;Fight Club&quot; was adapted into a fighting video game loosely based on the film, which was released in October 2004, receiving poor reviews universally. Palahniuk has mentioned at book readings that he is working on a musical based on &quot;Fight Club&quot; with David Fincher and Trent Reznor. Edward Norton has said that he thinks it is unlikely that he and Brad Pitt, who &quot;can&#x27;t sing,&quot; would reprise their film roles in a musical.

Graphic novel adaptations of &quot;Invisible Monsters&quot; and &quot;Lullaby&quot;, drawn by comic artist Kissgz, a.k.a. Gabor, are available online.

Following the success of the movie of &quot;Fight Club&quot;, interest began to build about adapting &quot;Survivor&quot; to film. The film rights to &quot;Survivor&quot; were sold in early 2001, but no movie studio had committed to filming the novel. After the attacks on the Pentagon and World Trade Center on September 11, 2001, movie studios apparently deemed the novel too controversial to film because it includes the hijacking and crashing of a civilian airplane. In mid-2004, however, 20th Century Fox committed to adapting Palahniuk&#x27;s novel. Palahniuk has said that the same people who made the film &quot;Constantine&quot; will be working on this film.

Following that, the film rights to &quot;Invisible Monsters&quot; and &quot;Diary&quot; also were sold. While little is known about some of these projects, it is known that Jessica Biel was signed on to play the roles of both Shannon and Brandy in &quot;Invisible Monsters&quot;, which was supposed to begin filming in 2004, but was still in development.

On January 14, 2008, the film version of &quot;Choke&quot; premiered at the Sundance Film Festival, starring Sam Rockwell, Kelly Macdonald and Anjelica Huston with Clark Gregg directing. David Fincher expressed interest in filming &quot;Diary&quot; as an HBO miniseries.

On September 11, 2014, the film version of &quot;Rant&quot; was announced, starring James Franco, with Pamela Romanowsky writing and directing.

==Writing style and themes==

===Style===
Palahniuk says that his writing style has been influenced by authors such as the minimalist Tom Spanbauer (whose weekly workshop Palahniuk attended in Portland from 1991 to 1996), Amy Hempel, Mark Richard, Denis Johnson, Joan Didion, Thom Jones, Bret Easton Ellis and philosophers Michel Foucault, Friedrich Nietzsche and Albert Camus. In what the author refers to as a minimalistic approach, his writings include a limited vocabulary and short sentences to mimic the way that an average person telling a story would speak. In an interview, he said that he &quot;prefers to write in verbs instead of adjectives.&quot; Repetitions of certain lines or phrases in the story narrative (what Palahniuk refers to as &quot;choruses&quot;) are one of the most common characteristics of his writing style, being dispersed within most chapters of his novels. Palahniuk has said that there also are some choruses between novels, noting that the color cornflower blue and the city of Missoula, Montana appear in many of his novels. The characters in Palahniuk&#x27;s stories often break into philosophical asides (either by the narrator to the reader, or spoken to the narrator through dialogue), offering numerous odd theories and opinions, often misanthropic or darkly absurdist in nature, on complex issues such as death, morality, childhood, parenthood, sexuality, and a deity. Other concepts borrowed from Spanbauer include the avoidance of &quot;received text&quot; (clichéd phrases or wording) and use of &quot;burnt tongue&quot; (intentionally odd wording).

In an interview with Jason Tanamor, he said, &quot;It’s pathetic how much I rewrite. I’ll rework every scene a hundred times before my agent sees it. Then rework it a dozen times before my editor sees it. Then rework it all - almost beyond recognition - before it goes to the copy editor. My first draft is almost a bare-bones outline, fleshed out with every subsequent pass through. I’ll “test” the scenes in workshop and with friends, then revise them based on audience reaction and feedback. The only time a book is “done” is when the type is set. By then I&#x27;m in love with a new idea, so the old one is officially finished.&quot;

===Themes===
Palahniuk&#x27;s writing often contains anti-consumerist themes. Writing about &quot;Fight Club&quot;, Paul Kennett argues that because the Narrator&#x27;s fights with Tyler Durden are fights with himself, and because he fights himself in front of his boss at the hotel, the Narrator is using the fights as a way of asserting himself as his own boss. These fights are a representation of the struggle of the proletarian at the hands of a higher capitalist power; by asserting himself as capable of having the same power he thus becomes his own master. Later when fight club is formed, the participants are all dressed and groomed similarly, allowing them to symbolically fight themselves at the club and gain the same power. In an interview with &quot;HuffPost&quot;, Palahniuk says that &quot;the central message of &quot;Fight Club&quot; was always about the empowerment of the individual through small, escalating challenges.&quot;

===Reception and criticism===
The content of Palahniuk&#x27;s works has been described as nihilistic. Palahniuk has rejected this label, stating that he is a romantic, and that his works are mistakenly seen as nihilistic because they express ideas that others do not believe in.

==Personal life==
As an adult, Palahniuk became a member of the rebellious Cacophony Society. 
He is a regular participant in their events, including the annual Santa Rampage (a public Christmas party involving pranks and drunkenness) in Portland, Oregon. His participation in the Society inspired some of the events in his writings, both fictional and non-fictional. 

In 2004, Palahniuk came out as gay after an interview with Karen Valby, a reporter for &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot;. Falsely believing that he would be outed by Valby after confidentially referring to his male partner, he openly declared his homosexuality on his website. Once Valby&#x27;s article was published with no indication of Palahniuk&#x27;s homosexuality (as she had promised), he publicly apologized for having unfairly smeared and excoriated her on his blog on a false pretense: &quot;I mis-represented, because I mis-remembered, some details about Karen&#x27;s private life. I deeply regret doing that. It was something I did out of anger and fear, and it was something I did inaccurately, and something I wish I had not done.&quot; According to an interview with &quot;The Advocate&quot; in May 2008, he and his partner Mike live in a former church compound outside Vancouver, Washington. He and his partner have been together since the 1990s, having met while Palahniuk was working at Freightliner. He told one interviewer, &quot;We both had these very blue-collar lives, and now our lives are completely different.&quot;

==Awards==
Palahniuk has won the following awards:
* 1997 Pacific Northwest Booksellers Association Award (for &quot;Fight Club&quot;)
* 1997 Oregon Book Award for Best Novel (for &quot;Fight Club&quot;)
* 2003 Pacific Northwest Booksellers Association Award (for &quot;Lullaby&quot;)

He was nominated for the 1999 Oregon Book Award for Best Novel for &quot;Survivor&quot; and for the Bram Stoker Award for Best Novel for &quot;Lullaby&quot; in 2002 and for &quot;Haunted&quot; in 2005.

==Bibliography==

===Fiction===
* &quot;Fight Club&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Survivor&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Invisible Monsters&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Choke&quot; (2001)
* &quot;Lullaby&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Diary&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Haunted&quot; (2005)
* &quot;Rant&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Snuff&quot; (2008)
* &quot;Pygmy&quot; (2009)
* &quot;Tell-All&quot; (2010)
* &quot;Damned&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Invisible Monsters Remix&quot; (2012)
* &quot;Doomed&quot; (2013)
* &quot;Burnt Tongues&quot; (2014) (editor)
* &quot;Beautiful You&quot; (2014)
* &quot;Make Something Up&quot; (2015)
* &quot;Fight Club 2&quot; (2015–16) (graphic novel with Cameron Stewart)
* &quot;Bait: Off-Color Stories for You to Color&quot; (2016)
* &quot;Legacy: An Off-Color Novella for You to Color&quot; (2017)
* &quot;Adjustment Day&quot; (2018)
* &quot;Fight Club 3&quot; (2019) (graphic novel with Cameron Stewart)
* &quot;The Invention of Sound&quot; (2020)
* &quot;Not Forever, But For Now&quot; (2023)
* &quot;Shock Induction&quot; (2024)

===Short fiction===
* &quot;Negative Reinforcement&quot; in &quot;Modern Short Stories&quot; (1990)
* &quot;The Love Theme of Sybil and William&quot; in &quot;Modern Short Stories&quot; (1990)
* &quot;Insiders&quot; in &quot;Best Life&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Mister Elegant&quot; in &quot;VICE&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Fetch&quot; in &quot;Dark Delicacies III&quot; (2009)
* &quot;Loser&quot; in &quot;Stories&quot; (2010)
* &quot;Knock, Knock&quot; in &quot;Playboy&quot; (2010)
* &quot;Romance&quot; in &quot;Playboy&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Phoenix&quot; (2013)
* &quot;Cannibal&quot; in &quot;Playboy&quot; (2013)
* &quot;Zombie&quot; in &quot;Playboy&quot; (2013)
* &quot;Let&#x27;s See What Happens&quot; in &quot;Nightmare Magazine&quot;, Issue 37 (2015)
* &quot;One Day You&#x27;ll Thank Me&quot; in &quot;Fangoria&quot;, Volume 2, Issue 1 (2018)
* &quot;Unlawful Entry&quot; in &quot;Playboy&quot; (2018)
* &quot;Repercussions&quot; in &quot;Playboy&quot; (2019)

===Non-fiction===
* &quot;Fugitives and Refugees: A Walk in Portland, Oregon&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Stranger than Fiction: True Stories&quot; (2004)
* &quot;You Do Not Talk About Fight Club: I Am Jack&#x27;s Completely Unauthorized Essay Collection&quot; (2008) (introduction)
* &quot;Consider This: Moments In My Writing Life After Which Everything Was Different&quot; (2020)

===Films===
* &quot;Fight Club&quot; (1999) (feature based on the novel)
* &quot;Choke&quot; (2008) (feature based on the novel)
* &quot;Romance&quot; (2012) (short based on the short story)
* &quot;Lullaby&quot; (TBD) (feature based on the novel)
* &quot;Rant&quot; (TBD) (feature based on the novel)

==Scholarship==
* Francisco Collado-Rodriguez, editor, (2013) &quot;Chuck Palahniuk: Fight Club, Invisible Monsters, Choke&quot;. London, UK: Bloomsbury.
*Douglas Keesey (2016) &quot;Understanding Chuck Palahniuk&quot;. Columbia, SC: The University of South Carolina Press.
*Cynthia Kuhn and Lance Rubin, editors, (2009) &quot;Reading Chuck Palahniuk: American Monsters and Literary Mayhem&quot;. New York, NY: Routledge.
* David McCracken (2016) &quot;Chuck Palahniuk, Parodist: Postmodern Irony in Six Transgressive Novels&quot;. Jefferson, NC: McFarland &amp; Company, Inc.
*Jeffrey A. Sartain, editor, (2009) &quot;Sacred and Immoral: On the Writings of Chuck Palahniuk&quot;. Newcastle upon Tyne, UK: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
*Read Mercer Schuchardt, editor (2008) &quot;You Do Not Talk About Fight Club: I Am Jack&#x27;s Completely Unauthorized Essay Collection.&quot; Dallas, TX: Benbella Books.
*Massimo Bracci, (2023) &quot;La Filosofia del fight club&quot;, Odoya, Bologna (Italy).

==Notes==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q268181" start="0" end="25" title="Chuck Palahniuk" label="Charles Michael Palahniuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834250" start="103" end="126" title="transgressional fiction" label="transgressional fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q837283" start="300" end="310" title="Fight Club (novel)" label="Fight Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q190050" start="343" end="365" title="Fight Club" label="film of the same title"/>
<link wikidata="Q844016" start="405" end="422" title="Pasco, Washington" label="Pasco, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="488" end="494" title="French people" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="499" end="508" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505383" start="652" end="671" title="Burbank, Washington" label="Burbank, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046581" start="860" end="878" title="eastern Washington" label="eastern Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q193653" start="960" end="972" title="Jack Palance" label="Jack Palance"/>
<link wikidata="Q766145" start="1065" end="1085" title="University of Oregon" label="University of Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26398" start="1160" end="1172" title="public broadcasting" label="public radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6332457" start="1182" end="1186" title="KLCC (FM)" label="KLCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420724" start="1332" end="1351" title="Freightliner Trucks" label="Freightliner Trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1803626" start="1621" end="1639" title="Landmark Education" label="Landmark Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q772298" start="1723" end="1739" title="homeless shelter" label="homeless shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q608152" start="1761" end="1768" title="hospice" label="hospice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117735" start="1850" end="1863" title="support group" label="support group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530894" start="2100" end="2113" title="Tom Spanbauer" label="Tom Spanbauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600527" start="2286" end="2304" title="Invisible Monsters" label="Invisible Monsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q837283" start="2414" end="2424" title="Fight Club (novel)" label="Fight Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q278919" start="2913" end="2927" title="literary agent" label="literary agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="3044" end="3060" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q560413" start="3111" end="3125" title="Edward Hibbert" label="Edward Hibbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q190050" start="3240" end="3255" title="Fight Club" label="film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184903" start="3268" end="3281" title="David Fincher" label="David Fincher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165644" start="3311" end="3336" title="box office bomb" label="box office disappointment"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="3444" end="3458" title="cult film" label="cult following"/>
<link wikidata="Q568143" start="3902" end="3910" title="Survivor (Chuck Palahniuk novel)" label="Survivor"/>
<link wikidata="Q578913" start="4000" end="4037" title="New York Times bestseller list" label="&amp;quot;New York Times&amp;quot; bestseller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466091" start="4055" end="4060" title="Choke (novel)" label="Choke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075839" start="4096" end="4101" title="Choke (2008 film)" label="movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299496" start="4333" end="4344" title="personal ad" label="personal ad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509997" start="4821" end="4836" title="Kendrick, Idaho" label="Kendrick, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400673" start="5183" end="5190" title="Lullaby (Palahniuk novel)" label="Lullaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="5326" end="5340" title="capital punishment" label="death sentence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738660" start="5440" end="5445" title="Diary (novel)" label="Diary"/>
<link wikidata="Q8396" start="5568" end="5580" title="masturbation" label="masturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447088" start="5614" end="5621" title="Haunted (Palahniuk novel)" label="Haunted"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="5891" end="5898" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6134" end="6169" title="Stranger than Fiction: True Stories" label="Stranger than Fiction: True Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q16575965" start="6719" end="6725" title="horror fiction" label="horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278436" start="6852" end="6856" title="Rant (novel)" label="Rant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127036" start="6965" end="6994" title="Clarion West Writers Workshop" label="Clarion West Writers Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071621" start="7161" end="7180" title="Fight Club (video game)" label="fighting video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q282722" start="7408" end="7420" title="Trent Reznor" label="Trent Reznor"/>
<link wikidata="Q125904" start="7422" end="7435" title="Edward Norton" label="Edward Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q35332" start="7487" end="7496" title="Brad Pitt" label="Brad Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q375336" start="7932" end="7944" title="movie studio" label="movie studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="7991" end="8059" title="September 11 attacks" label="attacks on the Pentagon and World Trade Center on September 11, 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q219150" start="8349" end="8360" title="Constantine (movie)" label="Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q163249" start="8571" end="8583" title="Jessica Biel" label="Jessica Biel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075839" start="8775" end="8812" title="Choke (2008 film)" label="the film version of &amp;quot;Choke&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q189887" start="8830" end="8852" title="Sundance Film Festival" label="Sundance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q316446" start="8863" end="8875" title="Sam Rockwell" label="Sam Rockwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q230383" start="8877" end="8892" title="Kelly Macdonald" label="Kelly Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q190998" start="8897" end="8912" title="Anjelica Huston" label="Anjelica Huston"/>
<link wikidata="Q113206" start="8918" end="8929" title="Clark Gregg" label="Clark Gregg"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="9009" end="9012" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q306403" start="9110" end="9122" title="James Franco" label="James Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q19850621" start="9129" end="9146" title="Pamela Romanowsky" label="Pamela Romanowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530894" start="9305" end="9318" title="Tom Spanbauer" label="Tom Spanbauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q481871" start="9393" end="9403" title="Amy Hempel" label="Amy Hempel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769414" start="9405" end="9417" title="Mark Richard" label="Mark Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q340016" start="9419" end="9432" title="Denis Johnson" label="Denis Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q267691" start="9434" end="9445" title="Joan Didion" label="Joan Didion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786728" start="9447" end="9457" title="Thom Jones" label="Thom Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q241583" start="9459" end="9476" title="Bret Easton Ellis" label="Bret Easton Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q44272" start="9494" end="9509" title="Michel Foucault" label="Michel Foucault"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="9511" end="9530" title="Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Friedrich Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q34670" start="9535" end="9547" title="Albert Camus" label="Albert Camus"/>
<link wikidata="Q173436" start="9583" end="9595" title="minimalism" label="minimalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021643" start="10153" end="10168" title="cornflower blue" label="cornflower blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q189602" start="10185" end="10202" title="Missoula, Montana" label="Missoula, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q219645" start="10449" end="10461" title="misanthropy" label="misanthropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q333625" start="10472" end="10481" title="absurdism" label="absurdist"/>
<link wikidata="Q132603" start="11828" end="11839" title="Proletariat" label="proletarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q18049522" start="12172" end="12180" title="HuffPost" label="HuffPost"/>
<link wikidata="Q80968" start="12446" end="12456" title="nihilism" label="nihilistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="12514" end="12522" title="romanticism (literature)" label="romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016070" start="12711" end="12728" title="Cacophony Society" label="Cacophony Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845980" start="12797" end="12810" title="Santa Rampage" label="Santa Rampage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="12874" end="12890" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q208099" start="13025" end="13033" title="coming out" label="came out"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13065" end="13076" title="Karen Valby" label="Karen Valby"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="13099" end="13119" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q752361" start="13793" end="13805" title="The Advocate (LGBT magazine)" label="The Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q234053" start="13890" end="13911" title="Vancouver, Washington" label="Vancouver, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191714" start="14078" end="14089" title="blue-collar" label="blue-collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122576" start="14206" end="14253" title="Pacific Northwest Booksellers Association Award" label="Pacific Northwest Booksellers Association Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101102" start="14290" end="14307" title="Oregon Book Award" label="Oregon Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q221178" start="14534" end="14566" title="Bram Stoker Award for Best Novel" label="Bram Stoker Award for Best Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q837283" start="14677" end="14687" title="Fight Club (novel)" label="Fight Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q568143" start="14709" end="14717" title="Survivor (Palahniuk novel)" label="Survivor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600527" start="14739" end="14757" title="Invisible Monsters" label="Invisible Monsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466091" start="14779" end="14784" title="Choke (novel)" label="Choke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400673" start="14806" end="14813" title="Lullaby (Palahniuk novel)" label="Lullaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738660" start="14835" end="14840" title="Diary (novel)" label="Diary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447088" start="14862" end="14869" title="Haunted (Palahniuk novel)" label="Haunted"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278436" start="14891" end="14895" title="Rant (novel)" label="Rant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649136" start="14917" end="14922" title="Snuff (Palahniuk novel)" label="Snuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771221" start="14944" end="14949" title="Pygmy (novel)" label="Pygmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3955571" start="14971" end="14979" title="Tell-All" label="Tell-All"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026869" start="15001" end="15007" title="Damned (novel)" label="Damned"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15029" end="15053" title="Invisible Monsters#Invisible Monsters Remix" label="Invisible Monsters Remix"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385516" start="15075" end="15081" title="Doomed (novel)" label="Doomed"/>
<link wikidata="Q48990330" start="15103" end="15116" title="Burnt Tongues" label="Burnt Tongues"/>
<link wikidata="Q18357203" start="15147" end="15160" title="Beautiful You (novel)" label="Beautiful You"/>
<link wikidata="Q20856968" start="15182" end="15199" title="Make Something Up" label="Make Something Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q18400927" start="15221" end="15233" title="Fight Club 2" label="Fight Club 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026387" start="15270" end="15285" title="Cameron Stewart" label="Cameron Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q56283194" start="15295" end="15335" title="Bait (book)" label="Bait: Off-Color Stories for You to Color"/>
<link wikidata="Q56283303" start="15357" end="15402" title="Legacy (novella)" label="Legacy: An Off-Color Novella for You to Color"/>
<link wikidata="Q55603229" start="15424" end="15438" title="Adjustment Day" label="Adjustment Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q65053969" start="15460" end="15472" title="Fight Club 3" label="Fight Club 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026387" start="15506" end="15521" title="Cameron Stewart" label="Cameron Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15531" end="15553" title="The Invention of Sound" label="The Invention of Sound"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15575" end="15599" title="Not Forever, But For Now" label="Not Forever, But For Now"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15621" end="15636" title="Shock Induction" label="Shock Induction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15717" end="15737" title="Modern Short Stories (literary journal)" label="Modern Short Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896716" start="15876" end="15885" title="Best Life (magazine)" label="Best Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q249838" start="15937" end="15941" title="Vice (magazine)" label="VICE"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15984" end="16003" title="Dark Delicacies III" label="Dark Delicacies III"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="16103" end="16110" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242102" start="16360" end="16378" title="Nightmare Magazine" label="Nightmare Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433849" start="16454" end="16462" title="Fangoria" label="Fangoria"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16639" end="16689" title="Fugitives and Refugees: A Walk in Portland, Oregon" label="Fugitives and Refugees: A Walk in Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16711" end="16746" title="Stranger than Fiction: True Stories" label="Stranger than Fiction: True Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q190050" start="17009" end="17019" title="Fight Club" label="Fight Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075839" start="17070" end="17075" title="Choke (2008 film)" label="Choke"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="63971" wikidata="Q35962" url="?curid=63971" title="Maserati">
<text>Maserati S.p.A. () is an Italian luxury vehicle manufacturer. Established on 1 December 1914 in Bologna, Italy, the company&#x27;s headquarters are now in Modena, and its emblem is a trident. The company has been owned by Stellantis since 2021. Maserati was initially associated with Ferrari. In May 2014, due to ambitious plans and product launches, Maserati sold a record of over 3,000 cars in one month. This caused them to increase production of the Quattroporte and Ghibli models. In addition to the Ghibli and Quattroporte, Maserati offers the Maserati GranTurismo and two SUV models, the Maserati Levante (the first ever Maserati SUV) and the Maserati Grecale. Maserati has placed a yearly production output cap at 75,000 vehicles globally.

==History==
===The Maserati brothers===
The Maserati brothers, Alfieri (1887–1932), Bindo (1883–1980), Carlo (1881–1910), Ettore (1894–1990), and Ernesto (1898–1975), were all involved with automobiles from the beginning of the 20th century. Alfieri, Bindo, and Ernesto built 2-litre Grand Prix cars for Diatto. In 1926, Diatto suspended the production of race cars, leading to the creation of the first Maserati and the founding of the Maserati marque. One of the first Maseratis, driven by Alfieri, won the 1926 Targa Florio. Maserati began making race cars with 4, 6, 8, and 16 cylinders (two straight-eights mounted parallel to one another).
The trident logo of the Maserati car company, designed by Mario Maserati, is based on the Fountain of Neptune in Bologna&#x27;s Piazza Maggiore. In 1920, one of the Maserati brothers used this symbol in the logo at the suggestion of family friend Marquis Diego de Sterlich. It was considered particularly appropriate for the sports car company due to the fact that Neptune represents strength and vigour; additionally the statue is a characteristic symbol of the company&#x27;s original home city.

Alfieri Maserati died in 1932, but three other brothers, Bindo, Ernesto, and Ettore kept the firm going.

===Orsi ownership===
In 1937, the remaining Maserati brothers sold their shares in the company to the Adolfo Orsi family, who, in 1940, relocated the company headquarters to their home town of Modena, where it remains to this day. The brothers continued in engineering roles with the company. Racing successes continued, even against the giants of German racing, Auto Union and Mercedes. In back-to-back wins in 1939 and 1940, an 8CTF won the Indianapolis 500, making Maserati the only Italian manufacturer ever to do so.

The second world war then intervened and Maserati abandoned car making to produce components for the Italian war effort. During this time, Maserati worked in fierce competition to construct a V16 town car for Benito Mussolini before Ferry Porsche of Volkswagen built one for Adolf Hitler. This failed, and the plans were scrapped. Once peace was restored, Maserati returned to making cars; the A6 series did well in the post-war racing scene.

Key people joined the Maserati team. Alberto Massimino, a former FIAT engineer with both Alfa Romeo and Ferrari experience, oversaw the design of all racing models for the next ten years. With him joined engineers Giulio Alfieri, Vittorio Bellentani, and Gioacchino Colombo. The focus was on the best engines and chassis to succeed in car racing. These new projects saw the last contributions of the Maserati brothers, who, after their 10-year contract with Orsi expired, went on to form O.S.C.A. This new team at Maserati worked on several projects: the 4CLT, the A6 series, the 8CLT, and, pivotally for the future success of the company, the A6GCS.

The famous Argentinian grand prix driver Juan-Manuel Fangio raced for Maserati for a number of years in the 1950s, achieving a number of stunning victories including winning the world championship in 1957 in the 250F. Other racing projects in the 1950s were the 200S, 300S, 350S, and 450S, followed in 1961 by the famous &quot;Tipo&quot; 61.

====Withdrawal from racing====
Maserati retired from factory racing participation because of the &quot;Guidizzolo tragedy&quot; during the 1957 Mille Miglia, though they continued to build cars for privateers. Maserati became more and more focused on building road-going grand tourers.

The 1957 3500 GT marked a turning point in the marque&#x27;s history, as its first ground-up grand tourer design and first series-produced car. Production jumped from a dozen to a few hundred cars a year.
Chief engineer Giulio Alfieri took charge of the project and turned the 3.5-litre inline six from the 350S into a road-going engine. Launched with a Carrozzeria Touring 2+2 coupé aluminium body over superleggera structure, a steel-bodied short wheelbase Vignale 3500 GT Spyder open top version followed in 1959. The 3500 GT&#x27;s success, with over 2,200 made, was critical to Maserati&#x27;s survival in the years following withdrawal from racing.

The 3500 GT also provided the underpinnings for the small-volume V8-engined 5000 GT, another seminal car for Maserati. Born from the Shah of Persia&#x27;s whim of owning a road car powered by the Maserati 450S racing engine, it became one of the fastest and most expensive cars of its days. The third to the thirty-fourth and last example produced were powered by Maserati&#x27;s first purely road-going V8 engine design.

In 1962, the 3500 GT evolved into the Sebring, bodied by Vignale and based on the shorter wheelbase convertible chassis. Next came the two-seater Mistral coupé in 1963 and Spider in 1964, both powered by a six-cylinder engine and styled by Pietro Frua.

In 1963, the company&#x27;s first saloon was launched, the Quattroporte, also styled by Frua. If the 5000 GT inaugurated the marque&#x27;s first road-going V8, the Quattroporte&#x27;s &quot;Tipo 107&quot; 4.2-litre DOHC V8 was the forefather of all Maserati V8s up to 1990.

The Ghia-designed Ghibli coupé was launched in 1967. It was powered by a 4.7-litre dry sump version of Maserati&#x27;s quad cam V8. The Ghibli Spyder and high performance 4.9-litre Ghibli SS followed.

===Citroën ownership===
In 1968, Maserati was taken over by Citroën. Adolfo Orsi remained the nominal president, but Maserati was controlled by its new owner. The relationship started as a joint venture, made public in January 1968, in which Maserati would design and manufacture an engine for Citroën&#x27;s upcoming flagship called SM. Launched in 1970, the SM was a four-seat front-wheel-drive coupé, powered by a Maserati &quot;Tipo C114&quot; 2.7-litre 90° V6 engine; this engine and its gearbox had been used in other vehicles, such as rally-prepared DSs used by Bob Neyret in Bandama Rally, and in the Ligier JS2.

With secure financial backing, new models were launched and built in much greater numbers than years prior. Citroën borrowed Maserati&#x27;s expertise and engines for the SM and other vehicles, and Maserati incorporated Citroën&#x27;s technology, particularly in hydraulics. Engineer Giulio Alfieri was key to many of the ambitious designs of this period.

The first new arrival was the 1969 Indy—a Vignale-bodied four-seater GT with a traditional V8 drivetrain, 1,100 units of the Indy were made.

In 1971, the Bora was the company&#x27;s first series production mid-engine model, an idea agreed with administrator Guy Malleret shortly after the 1968 takeover. The Bora ended Maserati&#x27;s reputation for producing fast but technologically out of date cars, being the first Maserati with four wheel independent suspension. In contrast, competitor Lamborghini had used independent suspension in 1964.

In 1972, the Bora was transformed to the Merak, now employing a &quot;Tipo 114&quot; SM-derived V6 enlarged to 3.0-litres.

Citroën never developed a 4-door version of the SM – instead Maserati developed the Quattroporte II, which shared most of its mechanical parts with the SM, including the mid-engine, front-wheel-drive layout, and six headlight arrangement.

To power this large car, Alfieri developed a V8 engine from the SM&#x27;s V6 on the behest of Factory Manager Guy Malleret. The engine was rated at and fitted to a lightly modified SM, which proved that the chassis could easily handle the power increase. Citroën&#x27;s and Maserati&#x27;s financial difficulties hampered the type homologation process; the development costs for the stillborn saloon further aggravated Maserati&#x27;s situation. Only a dozen Quattroporte IIs were ever produced, all with the V6.

The replacement for the successful Ghibli was the Bertone-designed Khamsin, a front-engine grand tourer introduced in 1972 and produced until 1974; it combined the traditional Maserati V8 GT layout with modern independent suspension, unibody construction, and refined Citroën technologies such as DIRAVI power steering.

====Crisis years====
Meanwhile, the 1973 oil crisis put the brakes on the ambitious expansion of Maserati; demand for fuel-hungry sports cars and grand tourers shrank drastically. Austerity measures in Italy meant that the domestic market contracted by 60–70%. All of the main Italian GT car manufacturers were heavily affected, having to lay off workers in order to empty lots of unsold cars. Maserati received the hardest blow, as its home market sales accounted for over half of the total—in contrast with Ferrari&#x27;s 20%. In this situation, the only Maserati automobile that continued to sell in appreciable numbers was the small-displacement Merak.

In 1974, with the 1973–75 recession at its climax, things took a turn for the worse. Citroën went bankrupt and its incorporation into PSA Peugeot Citroën begun. The year closed with domestic sales tumbling from 1973&#x27;s 360 to 150 units, and losses exceeding the share capital.

On 22 May 1975, a press release from Citroën management abruptly announced Maserati had been put into liquidation. The workforce immediately picketed the factory, but production was not halted. Trade unions, the mayor of Modena, and local politicians mobilised to save the 800 jobs; industry minister Carlo Donat-Cattin even flew to Paris to meet Citroën chairman Francois Rollier. An agreement was reached in June, after several meetings and assemblies. During one of these meetings, Citroën liquidators disclosed that a possible Italian buyer had showed up, and the name of Alejandro de Tomaso was put forth for the first time. Citroën accepted to suspend liquidation as requested by the Italian government, which on its part guaranteed six months of special redundancy fund to pay the salaries.

===De Tomaso era===
On 8 August 1975, an agreement was signed at the Ministry of Industry in Rome, and property of Maserati passed from Citroën to Italian state-owned holding company GEPI and Alejandro de Tomaso, an Argentinian industrialist and former racing driver, became president and CEO. As of December 1979, GEPI&#x27;s quota amounted to 88.75% of Maserati, the remaining 11.25% stake was being controlled by de Tomaso through a holding company which grouped his automotive interests in Maserati and Innocenti.

After de Tomaso bought Maserati in August 1975, he dismissed long time Chief Engineer Alfieri on the day of taking over the business.

Beginning in 1976, new models were introduced, sharing their underpinnings—but not their engines—with De Tomaso cars; first came the Kyalami grand tourer, derived from the De Tomaso Longchamp, restyled by Frua and powered by Maserati&#x27;s own V8. Following the Kyalami was the Giugiaro-designed Quattroporte III based on the De Tomaso Deauville, which was introduced in 1976 and put on sale in 1979.

The Bora&#x27;s sales dwindled down; the Khamsin was discontinued between 1982 and 1983. Progressively stripped of its Citroën-derived parts, the Merak continued to sell over one hundred units a year, until 1982. Despite the downturn in sales, awareness of the brand increased during this time as a result of the popular song Life&#x27;s Been Good by Joe Walsh, which contained the lyrics &quot;My Maserati does one eighty-five.&quot;

====The Biturbo====
The 1980s saw the company largely abandoning the mid-engine sports car in favour of a compact front-engine, rear-drive coupé, the Biturbo.
Of fairly conventional construction, the Biturbo&#x27;s highlight was its twin-turbocharged V6 engine, the first for a production car. This engine, descending from the 90° V6 engineered by Giulio Alfieri, was fitted in a large number of models, all sharing key components; every new Maserati launched up to the 1990s would be based on the Biturbo&#x27;s platform.
The Biturbo family was extremely successful at exploiting the aspirational image of the &quot;Maserati&quot; name—selling 40,000 units.

In 1983 and 1984, the range was extended to include saloons (the 425 and 420) and a cabriolet (the Zagato-bodied Spyder), respectively on a long and short wheelbase of the Biturbo platform.

During 1984, Chrysler bought a 5% share in Maserati. Following an agreement between De Tomaso&#x27;s friend and Chrysler head Lee Iacocca, a joint venture was signed. Maserati would go on to produce a car for export to the American market, the Chrysler TC by Maserati, with Chrysler-sourced engines. In July of that same year, a merger between Maserati and Nuova Innocenti was decided; it was carried out in 1985. Chrysler upped its stake to 15.6% by underwriting three quarters of a 75 billion Lire capital raise in 1986.

New Biturbo-based cars and model evolutions were launched year after year. In 1984, it was the 228, a large coupé built on the long wheelbase saloon chassis, with a new 2.8-litre version of the twin-turbocharged V6. Weber Fuel injection was phased in starting in 1986, bringing improved reliability and a host of new model variants. The same year, the ageing Quattroporte III was updated and marketed as the luxurious Royale, built to order in an handful of examples a year; its discontinuation in 1990 marked the disappearance of Maserati&#x27;s four-cam V8 engine, a design that could trace its roots back to the 450S racer and the legendary 5000 GT. In 1987, the 2.8-litre 430 topped the saloon range. 1988 brought the Karif, a two-seater, based on the short wheelbase Spyder chassis. Meanwhile, the Biturbo name was dropped altogether, as updated coupés and saloons were updated and became the 222 and 422. 1989 marked the reintroduction of an eight-cylinder grand tourer: the Shamal, built on a modified short wheelbase Biturbo chassis, clad in new muscular bodywork styled by Marcello Gandini. It was powered by an all-new twin-turbocharged 32-valve V8 engine paired to a 6-speed gearbox. 2.0-litre, 24-valve V6 engines were also added to the Shamal range.

====De Tomaso-FIAT years====
In October 1989, De Tomaso bought the remaining GEPI quota. In December, FIAT entered in Maserati&#x27;s history. Maserati and Innocenti were separated; Innocenti Milano S.p.A., the company that sold Innocenti cars, continued its business under a 51% FIAT Auto ownership. All of the Modena and Lambrate plants went to a newly created company, the still existent Maserati S.p.A.; 49% of it was owned by FIAT Auto and 51% was controlled by De Tomaso through the old company, Officine Alfieri Maserati.

In the early 1990s, a mid-engine sports car was developed, the — which was to début in 1992. It featured Gandini-designed body, a V8 powertrain, and a backbone chassis. The project was cancelled, as part owner Fiat deemed the project to be too close to Ferrari in the marketplace. Starting in 1990, the entire range of the Biturbo received a facelift designed by Marcello Gandini, on the lines of the Shamal&#x27;s styling. The last version of the Biturbo coupé was called Racing. It was a transitional model in which several features to be found on the upcoming Ghibli were tested.

The Ghibli II was introduced in 1992. It was a six-cylinder coupé, with modified Biturbo underpinnings dressed by new Gandini bodywork (toned down from the Shamal) and the latest evolution of the 24-valve twin-turbocharged V6 with record breaking specific output. The underpinnings of the stillborn Chubasco gave birth to the Maserati Barchetta, a small open top mid-engine sports car styled by Synthesis Design&#x27;s Carlo Gaino. a one-make racing series was held in 1992 and 1993, using the Barchetta Corsa racing version; the road-going Barchetta Stradale was never put into production. Just 17 units of the Barchetta were produced.

Between 1992 and 1994, all models save for the Ghibli and Shamal were progressively discontinued.

===FIAT ownership===


On 19 May 1993, 17 years after having rescued it from liquidation, Alejandro De Tomaso sold his 51% stake in Maserati to FIAT, which became the sole owner.

In 1994, the aging Quattroporte III/Royale was replaced by the Quattroporte IV which was ultimately based on Biturbo underpinnings. Styled by Marcello Gandini, it was initially available with a V6 engine shared with the Ghibli II. A more powerful V8 variant was made available in 1996 and &quot;Seicilindri&quot; and &quot;Ottocilindri&quot; (six and eight cylindres in Italian) badging was introduced to distinguish between the two models. The engine of the V8 model was a development of the Shamal&#x27;s V8.

Over two decades after the ill-fated Chrysler TC by Maserati during Chrysler&#x27;s brief ownership stake in Maserati, the two companies became interconnected again when FIAT purchased majority control of Chrysler in 2011 as a result of Chrysler&#x27;s bankruptcy. Maserati and Citroen also later interconnected for the first time since 1975, following the Stellantis merger in 2021.

====Ferrari====
In July 1997, FIAT sold a 50% share in the company to Maserati&#x27;s long-time arch-rival Ferrari (Ferrari itself being owned by FIAT). In 1999, Ferrari took full control, making Maserati its luxury division. A new factory was built, replacing the existing 1940s-era facility.

The steps taken by the new parent company resulted in the improved Quattroporte Evoluzione which was introduced at the March 1998 Geneva Motor Show.
In 1998, a new chapter began in Maserati&#x27;s history when the company launched the 3200 GT. This two-door coupé is powered by a 3.2 L twin-turbocharged V8 derived from the Shamal engine, which is rated at .

In 2002 the 3200 GT was replaced by the Maserati Coupé and Spyder; evolved from the 3200, these cars used an all-new, naturally aspirated, dry sump 4.2-litre V8 with a transaxle gearbox. In turn Coupé and Spyder were replaced by the GranTurismo and GranCabrio.

Meanwhile, two new models were shown to the public: the MC12 road supersports and successful GT racer with a Ferrari Enzo–derived chassis and engine and the new Quattroporte, a luxury saloon with the 4.2-litre V8 engine of the Gran Turismo. In 2001, Ferrari decided to change all of the old tooling and installed high-tech devices in the Modena factory.

Since early 2002, Maserati once again entered the United States market, which has quickly become its largest market worldwide. The company has also re-entered the racing arena with their Trofeo and, in December 2003, the MC12 (formerly known as the MCC), which was developed according to FIA GT regulations and has since competed with great success in the world FIA GT championship, winning the teams championship three consecutive times from 2005 to 2007. The MC12 has also been raced in various national GT championship as well as in the American Le Mans series. The MC12 is based on the Enzo Ferrari sports car; 50 street-legal homologation models (roadsters and coupés) have been sold.

====The Maserati and Alfa Romeo Group under FIAT Group====
The Maserati and Alfa Romeo group, under FIAT Group, started in 2005, when Maserati was split off from Ferrari and partnered with Alfa Romeo. On 9 June 2005, the 20,000th Maserati, a Quattroporte V, left the factory. In the second quarter of 2007, Maserati made profit for the first time in 17 years under FIAT ownership.

On January 22, 2010, FIAT announced that it had created a new partnership/brand group for Alfa Romeo, Maserati, and Abarth. The group was led by Harald J. Wester, the current CEO of Maserati. Sergio Marchionne stated that &quot;[the] purpose of bringing the Alfa Romeo, Maserati and Abarth brands under the same leadership is to emphasize and leverage the value of the shared qualities of the three brands in terms of their sporting characteristics and performance.&quot; Abarth stayed under Wester&#x27;s leadership until 2013, leaving Maserati and Alfa Romeo in the brand group, led by Wester. Although Maserati and Alfa Romeo are in a brand group, Alfa Romeo is structured under FCA Italy S.p.A., which itself is structured under FCA, whereas Maserati is structured solely under FCA. In addition, in an interview with Wester in 2015, he clarified that his &quot;role at Maserati is different from that in the Alfa Romeo as the latter is better integrated into the FIAT Group&quot; and that &quot;the new Alfa car won&#x27;t share any parts with the current Maserati model. I&#x27;m not planning any technical merging of these two makes.&quot;

In 2013, Maserati started its expansion with the Quattroporte VI, which was designed to better compete with the Mercedes-Benz S-Class. This was followed by the introduction of the Ghibli, which was slated to compete against the Mercedes-Benz E-Class and the BMW 5 Series. On May 6, 2014, Maserati confirmed production of the Levante SUV and the Alfieri (previously a 2+2 concept sports car that was named after Alfieri Maserati). The Alfieri has not started production as yet. At this event, it was revealed that 2014 will be the last year of production for the GranTurismo and GranCabrio (GranTurismo Convertible in the US), although production of the GranTurismo was extended, with a facelifted GranTurismo being unveiled in 2018. The model was finally phased out in November 2019.

Along with their expansion, Maserati started their re-entrance into the high-performance car field, in order to compete with brands such as Mercedes-AMG, BMW M, Porsche, Jaguar, and in certain cases, Ferrari. This was done by introducing Maserati models that have high power output engines, higher performance components, and better handling. The top-of-the-line variants of the Quattroporte VI, Ghibli, and Levante have V8 engines with all-wheel drive, in order to better compete with their rival offerings.

Maserati sales in 2013 was 15,400 units, which is up from just over 6,000 units worldwide in 2012 (2013 included the release of the new Quattroporte and Ghibli towards the end of the year, and thus the first year to fully represent the sales inclusive of these models is 2014). In May, 2014, Maserati sold a company record of over 3,000 cars worldwide, causing them to increase production of the Ghibli and Quattroporte. For that same month in the United States, Maserati sold 1,114 vehicles, which is up 406.19% over the same month in the previous year in the United States. Maserati&#x27;s best month of sales in the United States was September 2014, with 1,318 units sold.&lt;ref name=&quot;autoblog.com 10/14&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The month in 2014 where the increase on sales for the same month of the previous year was the highest was May, with a volume increase of 406.19%. The sales target for 2018 was 75,000 units worldwide.

2014 marked a historic record of 13,411 total units sold in North America for the year, a 169% increase versus 2013, boasting the highest-ever overall sales year for Maserati North America, Inc. Worldwide, in 2014 Maserati sold about 36,500 cars, a 136% increase over 2013. Harald J. Wester stated that Maserati would not surpass the 70,000 sales per year mark, and that Maserati would maintain its current position in the higher end of the luxury sports car market, rather than expanding downmarket and making vehicles smaller and less expensive than the Ghibli and Levante (such as those similar to the Audi Q5 and Mercedes-Benz C-Class), as other FCA brands, specifically Alfa Romeo, are in those market spaces.

Since 2009, Marco Tencone was the head designer of Maserati cars, although, in late 2015, he was announced as remaining in executive positions at Lancia and FIAT only.

In 2014, Fiat S.p.A. merged with American automaker Chrysler to form Fiat Chrysler Automobiles. Subsequently, in 2021, FCA merged with the French PSA Group to form Stellantis, reuniting Maserati with Citroën.

==== Electrification ====
On 17 March 2022, chief executive officer Davide Grasso announced that Maserati will produce an electric version of all of its models by 2025. CEO also announced the plans to phase out all of its internal combustion engine vehicles by 2030. All Maserati EVs will wear the name (that means &quot;lightning&quot; in Italian).

==Automobiles==
:&quot;See List of Maserati vehicles for a complete historical list&quot;

===Current models===
====Maserati Quattroporte====

Italian for &quot;four-door,&quot; the Maserati Quattroporte is a sports luxury saloon. The sixth generation of the Quattroporte was introduced in 2013. The Quattroporte is currently available in S Q4, GTS and Diesel trim. The S Q4 has an advanced four wheel drive system, and a 404-horsepower twin-turbochrged V6 engine. The GTS is rear wheel drive, and has a 523-horsepower V8. A Quattroporte Diesel model is offered on selected markets, rated at (250 hp in Italy) and 600 Nm of torque. The sixth-generation of the Quattroporte has grown in size in order to better compete with the roomier luxury saloons like the Mercedes-Benz S-Class.

Since 2018, the Quattroporte has received a facelift and the Quattroporte S Q4 has been upgraded and is now rated at from its V6, and the GTS is rated at , both with all-wheel drive (for the V8 to increase performance).

====Maserati Ghibli====

The first presentation of the Ghibli was on 20 April 2013 in Shanghai. It is a sports executive saloon that competes against the BMW 5 Series, Mercedes E-Class and Audi A6. The car, along with the new Quattroporte, is built in the Italian factory of Grugliasco, Turin (former Bertone). The base Ghibli is rated at 330 horsepower, the Ghibli Diesel at 275 horsepower (also 250 in Italy only), and the Ghibli S Q4 at 410 horsepower. Since 2018, the base Ghibli is rated at 350 horsepower and the S Q4 at 450 horsepower. and also has received a facelift.

====Maserati Levante====

The Maserati Levante is a crossover SUV introduced in 2014. It has been anticipated with the Maserati Kubang concept SUV in September 2003 at the Frankfurt Motor Show and again in 2011. It was announced, at the Paris Motor Show held in Paris in September 2012. The Levante is assembled in Mirafiori Plant, in Turin. Production was confirmed on May 6, 2014. The Levante is offered with a 3.0-litre V6 rated at either 350 or 425 horsepower states of tune. All models have all-wheel drive. Production of the Levante will cease by the end of March 2024.

====Maserati MC20====

The Maserati MC20 is a 2-door, mid-engined sports car that debuted in September 2020. The car features a carbon fibre monocoque and a 3-litre V6 engine producing 630 horsepower.

====Maserati Grecale====

The Maserati Grecale is a front-engine, five-door, five passenger compact luxury crossover SUV. Grecale shares the company&#x27;s Giorgio platform with the Alfa Romeo Stelvio and the fifth generation Jeep Grand Cherokee. Available engines include 300 or 330 hp mild hybrid inline-four and a 530 hp V6 &quot;Nettuno&quot; engine for the Trofeo specification.

====Maserati GranTurismo====

The Maserati GranTurismo is a grand tourer introduced in 2007. The GranTurismo has a 4.7-litre V8, rated at in Sport trim and for the MC Stradale. A convertible (GranCabrio) version is also available in standard, Sport, and MC models. The final production year for the Maserati GranTurismo was scheduled to be 2014, and its position would be succeeded by Maserati Alfieri. Production continued until 2019, with final example called Zéda rolled off the line. 
The current 2nd generation GranTurismo was revealed online in 2022 and production commenced in April 2023. It comes with either a 3-litre V6 engine, shared with the MC20, albeit detuned to 483 and 542 hp for the Modena and Trofeo trims respectively, or as an electrified version with 3 motors producing 761 hp under the Folgore trim.

===Sales history===
;Annual Maserati shipments to sales network (number of type-approved vehicles)


==Motorsport==

Throughout its history, Maserati has participated in various forms of motorsports including Formula One, sportscar racing and touring car racing, both as a works team and through private entrants. Notable drivers include Juan Manuel Fangio and Prince Bira of Siam.

Maserati developed fifteen GranTurismo MC racecars, homologated for the European Cup and National Endurance Series, one of which was raced by GT motorsport organization Cool Victory in Dubai in January, 2010.

On 10 January 2022, Maserati announced they would join Formula E in the 2022–23 season.

==See also==

* Maserati (motorcycle)
* CMD – Costruzioni Motori Diesel S.p.A.

==Notes==
== References ==
== Additional sources ==


==External links==
* Official Maserati Racing website 
* Official Maserati Awards website
* Autoexpress.cz: Andrea Piccini on the Maserati GranTurismo MC Stradale</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q35962" start="0" end="15" title="Maserati" label="Maserati S.p.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q5581707" start="33" end="47" title="luxury vehicle" label="luxury vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="96" end="103" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q279" start="155" end="161" title="Modena" label="Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q271628" start="183" end="190" title="trident" label="trident"/>
<link wikidata="Q97439162" start="222" end="232" title="Stellantis" label="Stellantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q27586" start="284" end="291" title="Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132565" start="454" end="466" title="Maserati Quattroporte" label="Quattroporte"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005400" start="471" end="477" title="Maserati Ghibli (M157)" label="Ghibli"/>
<link wikidata="Q123038" start="550" end="570" title="Maserati GranTurismo" label="Maserati GranTurismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q80862" start="595" end="611" title="Maserati Levante" label="Maserati Levante"/>
<link wikidata="Q100881867" start="650" end="666" title="Maserati Grecale" label="Maserati Grecale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3611086" start="812" end="819" title="Alfieri Maserati" label="Alfieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640105" start="833" end="838" title="Bindo Maserati" label="Bindo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3659600" start="852" end="857" title="Carlo Maserati" label="Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3733966" start="871" end="877" title="Ettore Maserati" label="Ettore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3732284" start="895" end="902" title="Ernesto Maserati" label="Ernesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209227" start="1053" end="1059" title="Diatto" label="Diatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q952162" start="1263" end="1275" title="Targa Florio" label="Targa Florio"/>
<link wikidata="Q271628" start="1399" end="1406" title="trident" label="trident"/>
<link wikidata="Q994471" start="1485" end="1504" title="Fountain of Neptune, Bologna" label="Fountain of Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="1508" end="1515" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q634917" start="1523" end="1538" title="Piazza Maggiore" label="Piazza Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3605461" start="2102" end="2113" title="Adolfo Orsi" label="Adolfo Orsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q279" start="2193" end="2199" title="Modena" label="Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q23317" start="2363" end="2373" title="Audi" label="Auto Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q36008" start="2378" end="2386" title="Mercedes-Benz" label="Mercedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032" start="2443" end="2459" title="Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137599" start="2719" end="2727" title="town car" label="town car"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="2732" end="2748" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q78769" start="2756" end="2769" title="Ferry Porsche" label="Ferry Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="2773" end="2783" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="2798" end="2810" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q556825" start="2917" end="2919" title="Maserati A6" label="A6"/>
<link wikidata="Q173564" start="3004" end="3021" title="Alberto Massimino" label="Alberto Massimino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341592" start="3181" end="3195" title="Giulio Alfieri" label="Giulio Alfieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q785421" start="3197" end="3216" title="Vittorio Bellentani" label="Vittorio Bellentani"/>
<link wikidata="Q173628" start="3222" end="3240" title="Gioacchino Colombo" label="Gioacchino Colombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q936574" start="3455" end="3463" title="O.S.C.A." label="O.S.C.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q2549417" start="3522" end="3526" title="Maserati 4CLT" label="4CLT"/>
<link wikidata="Q556825" start="3532" end="3534" title="Maserati A6" label="A6"/>
<link wikidata="Q556825" start="3611" end="3616" title="Maserati A6GCS" label="A6GCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069" start="3660" end="3678" title="Juan-Manuel Fangio" label="Juan-Manuel Fangio"/>
<link wikidata="Q173741" start="3831" end="3835" title="Maserati 250F" label="250F"/>
<link wikidata="Q9304137" start="3881" end="3885" title="Maserati 200S" label="200S"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850744" start="3887" end="3891" title="Maserati 300S" label="300S"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644853" start="3893" end="3897" title="Maserati 350S" label="350S"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644732" start="3903" end="3907" title="Maserati 450S" label="450S"/>
<link wikidata="Q633937" start="3940" end="3959" title="Maserati Birdcage" label="&amp;quot;Tipo&amp;quot; 61"/>
<link wikidata="Q42343" start="4065" end="4075" title="Guidizzolo" label="Guidizzolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935482" start="4106" end="4118" title="Mille Miglia" label="Mille Miglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301433" start="4160" end="4169" title="privateer (motorsport)" label="privateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q744620" start="4233" end="4245" title="grand tourer" label="grand tourer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850430" start="4258" end="4265" title="Maserati 3500 GT" label="3500 GT"/>
<link wikidata="Q744620" start="4342" end="4354" title="grand tourer" label="grand tourer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341592" start="4469" end="4483" title="Giulio Alfieri" label="Giulio Alfieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148385" start="4536" end="4546" title="inline-six engine" label="inline six"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644853" start="4556" end="4560" title="Maserati 350S" label="350S"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045332" start="4603" end="4622" title="Carrozzeria Touring" label="Carrozzeria Touring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643729" start="4653" end="4665" title="superleggera" label="superleggera"/>
<link wikidata="Q59179" start="4708" end="4715" title="Vignale" label="Vignale"/>
<link wikidata="Q55989" start="4731" end="4739" title="Convertible" label="open top"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907012" start="4981" end="4988" title="Maserati 5000 GT" label="5000 GT"/>
<link wikidata="Q128245" start="5038" end="5052" title="Mohammad Reza Pahlavi" label="Shah of Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644732" start="5101" end="5114" title="Maserati 450S" label="Maserati 450S"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907047" start="5366" end="5373" title="Maserati Sebring" label="Sebring"/>
<link wikidata="Q59179" start="5385" end="5392" title="Vignale" label="Vignale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907028" start="5474" end="5481" title="Maserati Mistral" label="Mistral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345767" start="5568" end="5579" title="Pietro Frua" label="Pietro Frua"/>
<link wikidata="Q190578" start="5616" end="5622" title="Sedan (automobile)" label="saloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132565" start="5641" end="5653" title="Maserati Quattroporte" label="Quattroporte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163122" start="5797" end="5801" title="DOHC" label="DOHC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045339" start="5861" end="5865" title="Ghia" label="Ghia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14623301" start="5875" end="5881" title="Maserati Ghibli" label="Ghibli"/>
<link wikidata="Q779325" start="5940" end="5948" title="dry sump" label="dry sump"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746" start="6119" end="6126" title="Citroën" label="Citroën"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093694" start="6393" end="6395" title="Citroën SM" label="SM"/>
<link wikidata="Q847962" start="6438" end="6455" title="front-wheel-drive" label="front-wheel-drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856569" start="6521" end="6530" title="V6 engine" label="V6 engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856" start="6601" end="6606" title="Rallying" label="rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q465966" start="6616" end="6618" title="Citroën DS" label="DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q981367" start="6642" end="6655" title="Bandama Rally" label="Bandama Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824740" start="6668" end="6678" title="Ligier JS2" label="Ligier JS2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5955345" start="6944" end="6954" title="hydropneumatic" label="hydraulics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341592" start="6965" end="6979" title="Giulio Alfieri" label="Giulio Alfieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767422" start="7073" end="7077" title="Maserati Indy" label="Indy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857154" start="7193" end="7197" title="Maserati Bora" label="Bora"/>
<link wikidata="Q762891" start="7245" end="7255" title="Mid-engine design" label="mid-engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310203" start="7483" end="7505" title="independent suspension" label="independent suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851498" start="7626" end="7631" title="Maserati Merak" label="Merak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132565" start="7793" end="7808" title="Maserati Quattroporte II" label="Quattroporte II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840863" start="7879" end="7915" title="mid-engine, front-wheel-drive layout" label="mid-engine, front-wheel-drive layout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377204" start="8280" end="8292" title="homologation" label="homologation"/>
<link wikidata="Q27325" start="8513" end="8520" title="Gruppo Bertone" label="Bertone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851994" start="8530" end="8537" title="Maserati Khamsin" label="Khamsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q744620" start="8554" end="8566" title="Grand touring" label="grand tourer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310203" start="8673" end="8695" title="independent suspension" label="independent suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q10709419" start="8697" end="8704" title="unibody" label="unibody"/>
<link wikidata="Q466397" start="8760" end="8766" title="DIRAVI" label="DIRAVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="8820" end="8835" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814650" start="8964" end="8973" title="Austerity" label="Austerity"/>
<link wikidata="Q27586" start="9293" end="9300" title="Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560230" start="9460" end="9477" title="1973–75 recession" label="1973–75 recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q275623" start="9576" end="9595" title="PSA Peugeot Citroën" label="PSA Peugeot Citroën"/>
<link wikidata="Q330601" start="9708" end="9721" title="share capital" label="share capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q885621" start="9826" end="9837" title="liquidation" label="liquidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="9918" end="9929" title="Trade union" label="Trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="9936" end="9941" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q279" start="9945" end="9951" title="Modena" label="Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812509" start="10007" end="10024" title="industry minister" label="industry minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q3659287" start="10025" end="10043" title="Carlo Donat-Cattin" label="Carlo Donat-Cattin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085731" start="10088" end="10104" title="Francois Rollier" label="Francois Rollier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10477" end="10500" title="Unemployment benefits in Italy#Redundancy fund" label="special redundancy fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q219577" start="10690" end="10705" title="holding company" label="holding company"/>
<link wikidata="Q172234" start="10715" end="10734" title="Alejandro de Tomaso" label="Alejandro de Tomaso"/>
<link wikidata="Q911554" start="10751" end="10764" title="Business magnate" label="industrialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255921" start="10798" end="10807" title="President (corporate title)" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664128" start="11030" end="11039" title="Innocenti" label="Innocenti"/>
<link wikidata="Q173085" start="11279" end="11288" title="De Tomaso" label="De Tomaso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455267" start="11310" end="11317" title="Maserati Kyalami" label="Kyalami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180376" start="11349" end="11368" title="De Tomaso Longchamp" label="De Tomaso Longchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345767" start="11382" end="11386" title="Pietro Frua" label="Frua"/>
<link wikidata="Q283754" start="11456" end="11464" title="Italdesign Giugiaro" label="Giugiaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132565" start="11474" end="11490" title="Maserati Quattroporte III" label="Quattroporte III"/>
<link wikidata="Q935274" start="11504" end="11523" title="De Tomaso Deauville" label="De Tomaso Deauville"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021449" start="11906" end="11927" title="Life&amp;#x27;s Been Good" label="Life&amp;#x27;s Been Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q354033" start="11931" end="11940" title="Joe Walsh" label="Joe Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115030" start="12130" end="12142" title="Front-engine, rear-wheel-drive layout" label="front-engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070558" start="12144" end="12154" title="rear-wheel drive" label="rear-drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851695" start="12166" end="12173" title="Maserati Biturbo" label="Biturbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657116" start="12249" end="12266" title="twin-turbocharged" label="twin-turbocharged"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856569" start="12267" end="12276" title="V6 engine" label="V6 engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5409476" start="12282" end="12308" title="List of automotive superlatives" label="first for a production car"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310152" start="12601" end="12619" title="Aspirational brand" label="aspirational image"/>
<link wikidata="Q190578" start="12728" end="12735" title="Sedan (car)" label="saloons"/>
<link wikidata="Q55989" start="12760" end="12769" title="cabriolet" label="cabriolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q140266" start="12775" end="12781" title="Zagato" label="Zagato"/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="12880" end="12888" title="Chrysler" label="Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q281847" start="12993" end="13004" title="Lee Iacocca" label="Lee Iacocca"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="13008" end="13021" title="joint venture" label="joint venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088788" start="13111" end="13134" title="Chrysler TC by Maserati" label="Chrysler TC by Maserati"/>
<link wikidata="Q731112" start="13196" end="13202" title="merger" label="merger"/>
<link wikidata="Q204992" start="13362" end="13366" title="Italian Lira" label="Lire"/>
<link wikidata="Q772430" start="13607" end="13612" title="Weber carburetors" label="Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q308881" start="13613" end="13627" title="Fuel injection" label="Fuel injection"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13809" end="13815" title="Maserati Quattroporte#Maserati Royale" label="Royale"/>
<link wikidata="Q613488" start="14113" end="14118" title="Maserati Karif" label="Karif"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528403" start="14372" end="14378" title="Maserati Shamal" label="Shamal"/>
<link wikidata="Q438424" start="14473" end="14489" title="Marcello Gandini" label="Marcello Gandini"/>
<link wikidata="Q940689" start="14757" end="14761" title="Fiat S.p.A." label="FIAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q279" start="14967" end="14973" title="Modena" label="Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q609904" start="14978" end="14986" title="Lambrate" label="Lambrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q762891" start="15207" end="15217" title="mid-engine" label="mid-engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12047754" start="15336" end="15352" title="backbone chassis" label="backbone chassis"/>
<link wikidata="Q14623301" start="15773" end="15782" title="Maserati Ghibli II" label="Ghibli II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907009" start="16095" end="16113" title="Maserati Barchetta" label="Maserati Barchetta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16203" end="16225" title="auto racing#One-make racing" label="one-make racing series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132565" start="16749" end="16764" title="Maserati Quattroporte IV" label="Quattroporte IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088788" start="17235" end="17258" title="Chrysler TC by Maserati" label="Chrysler TC by Maserati"/>
<link wikidata="Q27597" start="17368" end="17372" title="Fiat" label="FIAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114643" start="17435" end="17461" title="Chrysler Chapter 11 reorganization" label="Chrysler&amp;#x27;s bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27597" start="17613" end="17617" title="Fiat" label="FIAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q27586" start="17690" end="17697" title="Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q27597" start="17729" end="17733" title="Fiat" label="FIAT"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18008" end="18025" title="Geneva Motor Show#1998" label="Geneva Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322630" start="18113" end="18120" title="Maserati 3200 GT" label="3200 GT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322659" start="18278" end="18292" title="Maserati Coupé" label="Maserati Coupé"/>
<link wikidata="Q795410" start="18356" end="18375" title="naturally aspirated" label="naturally aspirated"/>
<link wikidata="Q779325" start="18377" end="18385" title="dry sump" label="dry sump"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141173" start="18406" end="18415" title="transaxle" label="transaxle"/>
<link wikidata="Q123038" start="18471" end="18497" title="Maserati GranTurismo" label="GranTurismo and GranCabrio"/>
<link wikidata="Q389575" start="18556" end="18560" title="Maserati MC12" label="MC12"/>
<link wikidata="Q269880" start="18609" end="18621" title="Enzo Ferrari (automobile)" label="Ferrari Enzo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18661" end="18673" title="Maserati Quattroporte#Quattroporte V (M139, 2003–2012)" label="Quattroporte"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="18905" end="18918" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q269880" start="19445" end="19457" title="Enzo Ferrari (car)" label="Enzo Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q26921" start="19622" end="19632" title="Alfa Romeo" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q27597" start="19646" end="19656" title="Fiat" label="FIAT Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q27597" start="19911" end="19915" title="Fiat" label="FIAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229223" start="20120" end="20137" title="Sergio Marchionne" label="Sergio Marchionne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132565" start="21124" end="21139" title="Maserati Quattroporte" label="Quattroporte VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q461469" start="21187" end="21208" title="Mercedes-Benz S-Class" label="Mercedes-Benz S-Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005400" start="21255" end="21261" title="Maserati Ghibli (M157)" label="Ghibli"/>
<link wikidata="Q324127" start="21303" end="21324" title="Mercedes-Benz E-Class" label="Mercedes-Benz E-Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q501613" start="21333" end="21345" title="BMW 5 Series" label="BMW 5 Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q80862" start="21400" end="21407" title="Maserati Levante" label="Levante"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974579" start="21420" end="21427" title="Maserati Alfieri" label="Alfieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q123038" start="21637" end="21648" title="Maserati GranTurismo" label="GranTurismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q26966" start="22000" end="22012" title="Mercedes-AMG" label="Mercedes-AMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q173339" start="22014" end="22019" title="BMW M" label="BMW M"/>
<link wikidata="Q40993" start="22021" end="22028" title="Porsche" label="Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q30055" start="22030" end="22036" title="Jaguar Cars" label="Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q27586" start="22060" end="22067" title="Ferrari" label="Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197100" start="24034" end="24047" title="Marco Tencone" label="Marco Tencone"/>
<link wikidata="Q940689" start="24200" end="24211" title="Fiat S.p.A." label="Fiat S.p.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="24243" end="24251" title="Chrysler" label="Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q15678788" start="24260" end="24285" title="Fiat Chrysler Automobiles" label="Fiat Chrysler Automobiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q275623" start="24337" end="24346" title="PSA Group" label="PSA Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q97439162" start="24355" end="24365" title="Stellantis" label="Stellantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="24445" end="24468" title="chief executive officer" label="chief executive officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629441" start="24523" end="24531" title="Electric vehicle" label="electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="24741" end="24748" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q927386" start="24779" end="24804" title="List of Maserati vehicles" label="List of Maserati vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="25842" end="25850" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q9398" start="26031" end="26041" title="Grugliasco" label="Grugliasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="26043" end="26048" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27325" start="26057" end="26064" title="Gruppo Bertone" label="Bertone"/>
<link wikidata="Q875600" start="26386" end="26399" title="crossover SUV" label="crossover SUV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850780" start="26453" end="26468" title="Maserati Kubang" label="Maserati Kubang"/>
<link wikidata="Q57583" start="26506" end="26526" title="Frankfurt Motor Show" label="Frankfurt Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="26669" end="26674" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6850886" start="27400" end="27411" title="mild hybrid" label="mild hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q744620" start="27558" end="27570" title="grand tourer" label="grand tourer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974579" start="27883" end="27899" title="Maserati Alfieri" label="Maserati Alfieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="28531" end="28542" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q371804" start="28544" end="28560" title="sportscar racing" label="sportscar racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4245261" start="28565" end="28583" title="touring car racing" label="touring car racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069" start="28660" end="28678" title="Juan Manuel Fangio" label="Juan Manuel Fangio"/>
<link wikidata="Q173204" start="28683" end="28694" title="Birabongse Bhanudej" label="Prince Bira"/>
<link wikidata="Q319565" start="28970" end="28979" title="Formula E" label="Formula E"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850740" start="29020" end="29041" title="Maserati (motorcycle)" label="Maserati (motorcycle)"/>
<link wikidata="Q96417971" start="29044" end="29082" title="CMD – Costruzioni Motori Diesel S.p.A." label="CMD – Costruzioni Motori Diesel S.p.A."/>
</links>
</doc>
