<doc id="58917" wikidata="Q184854" url="?curid=58917" title="Edward the Black Prince">
<text>Edward of Woodstock (15 June 1330 – 8 June 1376), latterly known as the Black Prince, was the eldest son and heir apparent of King Edward III of England. He died before his father and so his son, Richard II, succeeded to the throne instead. Edward nevertheless earned distinction as one of the most successful English commanders during the Hundred Years&#x27; War, being regarded by his English contemporaries as a model of chivalry and one of the greatest knights of his age. Edward was made Duke of Cornwall, the first English dukedom, in 1337. He was guardian of the kingdom in his father&#x27;s absence in 1338, 1340, and 1342. He was created Prince of Wales in 1343 and knighted by his father at La Hougue in 1346.

In 1346, Prince Edward commanded the vanguard at the Battle of Crécy, his father intentionally leaving him to win the battle. He took part in Edward III&#x27;s 1349 Calais expedition. In 1355, he was appointed the king&#x27;s lieutenant in Gascony, and ordered to lead an army into Aquitaine on a chevauchée, during which he pillaged Avignonet and Castelnaudary, sacked Carcassonne, and plundered Narbonne. In 1356, on another chevauchée, he ravaged Auvergne, Limousin, and Berry but failed to take Bourges. He offered terms of peace to King John II of France, who had outflanked him near Poitiers, but refused to surrender himself as the price of their acceptance. This led to the Battle of Poitiers, where his army routed the French and took King John prisoner.

The year after Poitiers, Edward returned to England. In 1360, he negotiated the Treaty of Brétigny. He was created Prince of Aquitaine and Gascony in 1362, but his suzerainty was not recognised by the lord of Albret or other Gascon nobles. He was directed by his father to forbid the marauding raids of the English and Gascon free companies in 1364. He entered into an agreement with Kings Peter of Castile and Charles II of Navarre, by which Peter covenanted to mortgage Castro Urdiales and the province of Biscay to him as security for a loan; in 1366 a passage was secured through Navarre. In 1367, he received a letter of defiance from Henry of Trastámara, Peter&#x27;s half-brother and rival. The same year, after an obstinate conflict, he defeated Henry at the Battle of Nájera. However, after a wait of several months, during which he failed to obtain either the province of Biscay or liquidation of the debt from Don Pedro, he returned to Aquitaine. Prince Edward persuaded the estates of Aquitaine to allow him a hearth tax of ten sous for five years in 1368, thereby alienating the lord of Albret and other nobles.

Prince Edward returned to England in 1371, and the next year resigned the principality of Aquitaine and Gascony. He led the Commons in their attack upon the Lancastrian administration in 1376. He died in 1376 of dysentery and was buried in Canterbury Cathedral, where his surcoat, helmet, shield, and gauntlets are still preserved.

==Early life (1330–1343)==
Edward, the eldest son of Edward III of England, Lord of Ireland and ruler of Gascony, and Queen Philippa, was born at Woodstock, Oxfordshire, on 15 June 1330. His father, Edward III, had been in conflict with the French over English lands in France and also the kingship of France; Edward III&#x27;s mother and the Prince&#x27;s grandmother, Queen Isabella of France was a daughter of the French king Philip IV of France, thus placing her son in line for the throne of France. England and France&#x27;s relations quickly deteriorated when the French king threatened to confiscate his lands in France, beginning the Hundred Years War. His mother was Queen Philippa of Hainault, daughter of the Count of Hainault, who married Edward III when his mother, Queen Isabella, arranged the marriage between them. His father on 10 September 1330 allowed five hundred marks a year from the profits of the county of Chester for his maintenance; on 25 February 1331, the whole of these profits were assigned to the queen for maintaining him and the king&#x27;s sister Eleanor. In July of that year, the king proposed to marry him to a daughter of Philip VI of France.

His father was Edward III of England, who became king at the young age of fourteen years in 1327, when his father (and the Black Prince&#x27;s grandfather) Edward II of England was deposed by his wife Isabella of France, daughter of Philip IV of France, and by the English nobility due to his ineffectiveness and weakness to assert his control over the government and his failed wars against Scotland. His mother, Philippa of Hainault, was the daughter of William II, Count of Hainault. The marriage between his mother and father was arranged by his grandmother, Isabella of France, to get financial and military aid from the Count of Hainault for her own benefit to depose her husband, Edward II. The marriage of Edward III and Phillippa of Hainault produced thirteen children; Edward was the eldest child and eldest son.

His father had begun a war with Scotland to regain lost territories which were captured by the Scots during the reign of Edward II and began the military operations undertaken by Edward III&#x27;s grandfather, Edward I of England, recapturing English lands such as Berwick-Upon-Tweed. Edward III took his grandfather&#x27;s military strategies and tactics against the Scots to avenge the humiliating defeat of the English under Edward II at the Battle of Bannockburn in 1314, and this time, Edward III defeated the Scots at the decisive Battle of Halidon Hill in 1333, killing many Scottish nobles and routing the entire Scottish army. Edward III was able to recover the country politically and militarily, and was welcomed as a &quot;great champion of the English nation&quot;.

On 18 March 1333, Edward was invested with the earldom and county of Chester, and in the parliament of 9 February 1337, he was created Duke of Cornwall and received the duchy by charter dated 17 March. This is the earliest instance of the creation of a duke in England. By the terms of the charter the duchy was to be held by him and the eldest sons of kings of England. His tutor was Dr. Walter Burley of Merton College, Oxford. His revenues were placed at the disposal of his mother in March 1334 for the expenses she incurred in bringing up him and his two sisters, Isabella and Joan. Rumours of an impending French invasion led the king in August 1335 to order that he and his household should remove to Nottingham Castle as a place of safety.

When two cardinals came to England at the end of 1337 to make peace between Edward III and Philip VI of France, the Duke of Cornwall is said to have met the cardinals outside the City of London and, in company with many nobles, to have conducted them to King Edward. On 11 July 1338 his father, who was on the point of leaving England for Flanders, appointed him guardian of the kingdom during his absence, and he was appointed to the same office on 27 May 1340 and 6 October 1342; he was, of course, too young to take any save a nominal part in the administration, which was carried on by the council. To attach Duke John III of Brabant to his cause, the king in 1339 proposed a marriage between the young Duke of Cornwall and John&#x27;s daughter Margaret, and in the spring of 1345 wrote urgently to Pope Clement VI for a dispensation for the marriage.

On 12 May 1343, Edward III created the duke Prince of Wales in a parliament held at Westminster, investing him with a circlet, gold ring, and silver rod. The prince accompanied his father to Sluys on 3 July 1345, and the king tried to persuade the burgomasters of Ghent, Bruges and Ypres to accept his son as their lord, but the murder of Jacob van Artevelde put an end to this project. Both in September and in the following April the prince was called on to furnish troops from his principality and earldom for the impending campaign in France, and as he incurred heavy debts in the king&#x27;s service, his father authorised him to make his will and provided that, in case he fell in the war, his executors should have all his revenue for a year.

== Early campaigns (1346–53) ==

===Battle of Crécy===

Edward, Prince of Wales, sailed with King Edward III on 11 July 1346, and as soon as he landed at La Hougue received knighthood from his father in the local church of Quettehou. Then he &quot;made a right good beginning&quot;, for he rode through the Cotentin, burning and ravaging as he went, and distinguished himself at the taking of Caen and in the engagement with the force under Sir Godemar I du Fay, which endeavoured to prevent the English army from crossing the Somme by the ford of Blanchetaque.

Early on Saturday, 26 August 1346, before the start of the battle of Crécy, Edward, Prince of Wales, received the sacrament with his father at Crécy, and took the command of the right, or van, of the army with the earls of Warwick and Oxford, Sir Geoffroy d&#x27;Harcourt, Sir John Chandos, and other leaders, and at the head of eight hundred men-at-arms, two thousand archers, and a thousand Welsh foot, though the numbers are by no means trustworthy. When the Genoese bowmen were discomfited and the front line of the French was in some disorder, the prince appears to have left his position to attack their second line. At this moment, however, the Count of Alençon charged his division with such fury that he was in great danger, and the leaders who commanded with him sent a messenger to tell his father that he was in great straits and to beg for assistance.

When Edward learned that his son was not wounded, he responded that he would send no help, for he wished to give the prince the opportunity to &quot;win his spurs&quot; (he was in fact already a knight), and to allow him and those who had charge of him the honour of the victory. The prince was thrown to the ground and was rescued by Sir Richard FitzSimon, his standard bearer, who threw down the banner, stood over his body, and beat back his assailants while he regained his feet. Harcourt now sent to Earl of Arundel for help, and he forced back the French, who had probably by this time advanced to the rising ground of the English position.

A flank attack on the side of Wadicourt was next made by the Counts of Alençon and Ponthieu, but the English were strongly entrenched there, and the French were unable to penetrate the defences and lost the Duke of Lorraine and the Counts of Alençon and Blois.

The two front lines of their army were utterly broken before King Philip&#x27;s division engaged. Then Edward appears to have advanced at the head of the reserve, and the rout soon became complete. When Edward met his son after the battle was over, he embraced him and declared that he had acquitted himself loyally, and the prince bowed low and did reverence to his father. The next day he joined the king in paying funeral honours to King John of Bohemia.
The prince was present at the siege of Calais (1346–1347), and after the surrender of the town and burned the country for around, and brought much booty back with him. He returned to England with his father on 12 October 1347, took part in the jousts and other festivities of the court, and was invested by the king with the new Order of the Garter (1348).

===Siege of Calais and Battle of Winchelsea===
Prince Edward shared in the king&#x27;s expedition to Calais in the last days of 1349, came to the rescue of his father, and when the combat was over and the king and his prisoners sat down to feast, he and the other English knights served the king and his guests at the first course and then sat down for the second course at another table. When the king embarked at Winchelsea on 28 August 1350 to intercept the fleet of La Cerda, the Prince sailed with him, though in another ship, and in company with his brother, the young John of Gaunt, Earl of Richmond. During the Battle of Winchelsea his ship was grappled by a large Spanish ship and was so full of leaks that it was likely to sink, and though he and his knights attacked the enemy manfully, they were unable to take her. Henry of Grosmont, Earl of Lancaster, came to his rescue and attacked the Spaniard on the other side; she was soon taken, her crew were thrown into the sea, and as the Prince and his men got on board her their own ship foundered.

===Cheshire expedition===
In 1353 some disturbances seem to have broken out in Cheshire, for the Prince as Earl of Chester marched with Henry of Grosmont, now Duke of Lancaster, to the neighbourhood of Chester to protect the justices, who were holding an assize there. The men of the earldom offered to pay him a heavy fine to bring the assize to an end, but when they thought they had arranged matters the justices opened an inquisition of trailbaston, took a large sum of money from them, and seized many houses and much land into the prince&#x27;s, their earl&#x27;s, hands. On his return from Chester the prince is said to have passed by the Abbey of Dieulacres in Staffordshire, to have seen a fine church which his great-grandfather, Edward I, had built there, and to have granted five hundred marks, a tenth of the sum he had taken from his earldom, towards its completion; the abbey was almost certainly not Dieulacres but Vale Royal.

==Further campaigns (1355–64)==
===Aquitaine===
When Edward III determined to renew the war with France in 1355, he ordered the Black Prince to lead an army into Aquitaine while he, as his plan was, acted with the king of Navarre in Normandy, and the Duke of Lancaster upheld the cause of John of Montfort in Brittany. The prince&#x27;s expedition was made in accordance with the request of some of the Gascon lords who were anxious for plunder. On 10 July the king appointed him his lieutenant in Gascony, and gave him powers to act in his stead, and, on 4 August, to receive homages. He left London for Plymouth on 30 June, was detained there by contrary winds, and set sail on 8 September with about three hundred ships, in company with four earls (Thomas Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick, William Ufford, Earl of Suffolk, William Montagu, Earl of Salisbury, and John Vere, Earl of Oxford), and in command of a thousand men-at-arms, two thousand archers, and a large body of Welsh foot. At Bordeaux the Gascon lords received him with much rejoicing. It was decided to make a short campaign before the winter, and on 10 October he set out with fifteen hundred lances, two thousand archers, and three thousand light foot. Whatever scheme of operations the King may have formed during the summer, this expedition of the Prince was purely a piece of marauding. After grievously harrying the counties of Juliac, Armagnac, Astarac, and part of Comminges, he crossed the Garonne at Sainte-Marie a little above Toulouse, which was occupied by John I, Count of Armagnac, and a considerable force. The count refused to allow the garrison to make a sally, and the prince passed on into the Lauragais. His troops stormed and burnt Montgiscard, where many men, women, and children were ill-treated and slain, and took and pillaged Avignonet and Castelnaudary. The country was &quot;very rich and fertile&quot; according to the Black Prince, and the people &quot;good, simple, and ignorant of war&quot;, so the prince took great spoil, especially of carpets, draperies, and jewels, for &quot;the robbers&quot; spared nothing, and the Gascons who marched with him were especially greedy. The only castle to resist the English forces was Montgey. Its châtelaine defended its walls by pouring beehives onto the attackers, who fled in panic.

Carcassonne was taken and sacked, but he did not take the citadel, which was strongly situated and fortified. Ourmes (or Homps, near Narbonne) and Trèbes bought off his army. He plundered Narbonne and thought of attacking the citadel, for he heard that there was much booty there, but gave up the idea on finding that it was well defended. While he was there a messenger came to him from the papal court, urging him to allow negotiations for peace. He replied that he could do nothing without knowing his father&#x27;s will. From Narbonne he turned to march back to Bordeaux. The Count of Armagnac tried to intercept him, but a small body of French having been defeated in a skirmish near Toulouse the rest of the army retreated into the city, and the prince returned in peace to Bordeaux, bringing back with him enormous spoils. The expedition lasted eight weeks, during which the prince only rested eleven days in all the places he visited, and without performing any feat of arms did the French king much mischief. During the next month, before 21 January 1356, the leaders under his command reduced five towns and seventeen castles.

====Battle of Poitiers====

On 6 July 1356 Prince Edward set out on another expedition, undertaken with the intention of passing through France to Normandy, and there giving aid to his father&#x27;s Norman allies, the party headed by the king of Navarre and Geoffrey d&#x27;Harcourt. In Normandy he expected to be met by his father, He crossed the Dordogne at Bergerac on 4 August, and rode through Auvergne, Limousin, and Berry, plundering and burning as he went until he came to Bourges, where he burnt the suburbs but failed to take the city. He then turned westward and made an unsuccessful attack on Issoudun on 25–27 August. Meanwhile, King John II was gathering a large force at Chartres, from which he was able to defend the passages of the Loire, and was sending troops to the fortresses that seemed in danger of attack. From Issoudun the prince returned to his former line of march and took Vierzon. There he learnt that it would be impossible for him to cross the Loire or to form a junction with Lancaster, who was then in Brittany. Accordingly he determined to return to Bordeaux by way of Poitiers, and after putting to death most of the garrison of the castle of Vierzon set out on 29 August towards Romorantin.

Some French knights who skirmished with the English advanced guard retreated into Romorantin, and when Prince Edward heard of this he said: &quot;Let us go there; I should like to see them a little nearer&quot;. He inspected the fortress in person and sent his friend Chandos to summon the garrison to surrender. The place was defended by Boucicault and other leaders, and on their refusing his summons he assaulted it on 31 August. The siege lasted three days, and the prince, who was enraged at the death of one of his friends, declared that he would not leave the place untaken. Finally he set fire to the roofs of the fortress by using Greek fire, reduced it on 3 September.

On 5 September the English proceeded to march through Berry. On 9 September King John II, who had now gathered a large force, crossed the Loire at Blois and went in pursuit of them. When the king was at Loches on 12 September he had as many as twenty thousand men-at-arms, and with these and his other forces he advanced to Chauvigny. On 16 and 17 September his army crossed the Vienne.

Meanwhile, the prince was marching almost parallel to the French and at only a few miles distance from them. It is impossible to believe Froissart&#x27;s statement that he was ignorant of the movements of the French. From 14 to 16 September he was at Châtellerault, and on the next day, Saturday, as he was marching towards Poitiers, some French men-at-arms skirmished with his advance guard, pursued them up to the main body of his army, and were all slain or taken prisoners. The French king had outstripped him, and his retreat was cut off by an army at least fifty thousand strong, while he had not, it is said, more than about two thousand men-at-arms, four thousand archers, and fifteen hundred light foot. Lancaster had endeavoured to come to his relief, but had been stopped by the French at Pont-de-Cé.

When Prince Edward knew that the French army lay between him and Poitiers, he took up his position on some rising ground to the south-east of the city, between the right bank of the Miausson and the old Roman road, probably on a spot now called La Cardinerie, a farm in the commune of Beauvoir, for the name Maupertuis has long gone out of use, and remained there that night. The next day, Sunday, 18 September, the cardinal, Hélie Talleyrand, called &quot;of Périgord&quot;, obtained leave from King John II to endeavour to make peace. The prince was willing enough to come to terms, and offered to give up all the towns and castles he had conquered, to set free all his prisoners, and not to serve against the king of France for seven years, besides, it is said, offering a payment of a hundred thousand francs. King John, however, was persuaded to demand that the prince and a hundred of his knights should surrender themselves up as prisoners, and to this he would not consent. The cardinal&#x27;s negotiations lasted the whole day, and were protracted in the interest of the French, for John II was anxious to give time for further reinforcements to join his army. Considering the position in which the prince then was, it seems probable that the French might have destroyed his little army simply by hemming it in with a portion of their host, and so either starving it or forcing it to leave its strong station and fight in the open with the certainty of defeat. John II made a fatal mistake in allowing the prince the respite of Sunday; for while the negotiations were going forward he employed his army in strengthening its position. The English front was well covered by vines and hedges; on its left and rear was the ravine of the Miausson and a good deal of broken ground, and its right was flanked by the wood and abbey of Nouaillé. All through the day the army was busily engaged in digging trenches and making fences, so that it stood, as at Crécy, in a kind of entrenched camp.

Prince Edward drew up his men in three divisions, the first being commanded by the earls of Warwick and Suffolk, the second by himself, and the rear by Salisbury and Oxford. The French were drawn up in four divisions, one behind the other, and so lost much of the advantage of their superior numbers. In front of his first line and on either side of the narrow lane that led to his position the prince stationed his archers, who were well protected by hedges, and posted a kind of ambush of three hundred men-at-arms and three hundred mounted archers, who were to fall on the flank of the second battle of the enemy, commanded by the Dauphin, Charles, Duke of Normandy.

At daybreak on 19 September Prince Edward addressed his little army, and the fight began. An attempt was made by three hundred picked men-at-arms to ride through the narrow lane and force the English position, but they were shot down by the archers. A body of Germans and the first division of the army which followed were thrown into disorder; then the English force in ambush charged the second division on the flank, and as it began to waver the English men-at-arms mounted their horses, which they had kept near them, and charged down the hill. The prince kept Chandos by his side, and his friend did him good service in the fray. As they prepared to charge he cried: &quot;John, get forward; you shall not see me turn my back this day, but I will be ever with the foremost&quot;, and then he shouted to his banner-bearer, &quot;Banner, advance, in the name of God and St. George!&quot;. All the French except the advance guard fought on foot, and the division of the Duke of Normandy, already wavering, could not stand against the English charge and fled in disorder. The next division, under Philip, Duke of Orléans, also fled, though not so shamefully, but the rear, under King John II in person, fought with much gallantry. The prince, &quot;who had the courage of a lion, took great delight that day in the fight&quot;. The combat lasted until a little after 3 pm, and the French, who were utterly defeated, left eleven thousand dead on the field, of whom 2,426 were men of gentle birth. Nearly a hundred counts, barons, and bannerets and two thousand men-at-arms, besides many others, were made prisoners, and the king and his youngest son, Philip, were among those who were taken. The English losses were not large.

When King John II was brought to him, the prince received him with respect, helped him to take off his armour, and entertained him and the greater part of the princes and barons who had been made prisoners at supper. He served at the king&#x27;s table and would not sit down with him, declaring that &quot;he was not worthy to sit at table with so great a king or so valiant a man&quot;, and speaking many comfortable words to him, for which the French praised him highly. The next day the Black Prince continued his retreat on Bordeaux; he marched warily, but no one ventured to attack him.

At Bordeaux, which Prince Edward reached on 2 October, he was received with much rejoicing, and he and his men tarried there through the winter and wasted in festivities the immense spoil they had gathered. On 23 March 1357 the prince concluded a two years&#x27; truce, for he wished to return home. The Gascon lords were unwilling that King John II should be carried off to England, and the prince gave them a hundred thousand crowns to silence their murmurs. He left the country under the government of four Gascon lords and arrived in England on 4 May, after a voyage of eleven days, landing at Plymouth. When he entered London in triumph on 24 May, King John II, his prisoner, rode a fine white charger, while he was mounted on a little black hackney. Judged by modern ideas the prince&#x27;s show of humility appears affected, and the Florentine chronicler remarks that the honour done to King John II must have increased the misery of the captive and magnified the glory of King Edward; but this comment argues a refinement of feeling which neither Englishmen nor Frenchmen of that day had probably attained.

====England, tournaments and debts====
After his return to England Prince Edward took part in the many festivals and tournaments of his father&#x27;s court, and in May 1359 he and the king and other challengers held the lists at a joust proclaimed at London by the mayor and sheriffs, and, to the great delight of the citizens, the king appeared as the mayor and the prince as the senior sheriff. Festivities of this sort and the lavish gifts he bestowed on his friends brought him into debt, and on 27 August, when a new expedition into France was being prepared, the king granted that if he fell his executors should have his whole estate for four years for the payment of his debts.

=== Reims campaign ===
In October 1359 Prince Edward sailed with his father to Calais, and led a division of the army during the Reims campaign (1359–1360). At its close he took the principal part on the English side in negotiating the Treaty of Brétigny, and the preliminary truce arranged at Chartres on 7 May 1360 was drawn up by proctors acting in his name and the name of Charles, Duke of Normandy, the regent of France. He probably did not return to England until after his father, who landed at Rye on 18 May. On 9 July he and Henry, Duke of Lancaster, landed at Calais in attendance on the French king. As, however, the stipulated instalment of the king&#x27;s ransom was not ready, he returned to England, leaving King John in the charge of Sir Walter Manny and three other knights. He accompanied his father to Calais on 9 October to assist at the liberation of King John and the ratification of the treaty. He rode with John to Boulogne, where he made his offering in the Church of the Virgin. He returned with King Edward to England at the beginning of November.

====Marriage to Joan====
On 10 October 1361 the prince, now in his 31st year, married his cousin Joan, Countess of Kent, daughter of Edmund of Woodstock, Earl of Kent, younger son of Edward I, and Margaret, daughter of Philip III of France, and widow of Thomas Lord Holland, and in right of his wife Earl of Kent, then in her thirty-third year, and the mother of three children. As the prince and the countess were related in the third degree, and also by the spiritual tie of sponsorship, the prince being godfather to Joan&#x27;s elder son Thomas, a dispensation was obtained for their marriage from Pope Innocent VI, though they appear to have been contracted before it was applied for. The marriage was performed at Windsor, in the presence of King Edward III, by Simon Islip Archbishop of Canterbury. According to Jean Froissart the contract of marriage (the engagement) was entered into without the knowledge of the king. The prince and his wife resided at Berkhamsted Castle in Hertfordshire and held the manor of Princes Risborough from 1343; though local history describes the estate as &quot;his palace&quot;, many sources suggest it was used more as a hunting lodge.

===Prince of Aquitaine and Gascony===
On 19 July 1362 his father, Edward III granted Prince Edward all his dominions in Aquitaine and Gascony, to be held as a principality by liege homage on payment of an ounce of gold each year, together with the title of Prince of Aquitaine and Gascony. During the rest of the year he was occupied in preparing for his departure to his new principality, and after Christmas he received the king and his court at Berkhamsted, took leave of his father and mother, and in the following February sailed with his wife, Joan, and all his household for Gascony, landing at La Rochelle.

At La Rochelle the prince was met by John Chandos, the king&#x27;s lieutenant, and proceeded with him to Poitiers, where he received the homage of the lords of Poitou and Saintonge; he then rode to various cities and at last came to Bordeaux, where from 9 to 30 July he received the homage of the lords of Gascony. He received all graciously, and kept a splendid court, residing sometimes at Bordeaux and sometimes at Angoulême.

The prince appointed Chandos constable of Guyenne, and provided the knights of his household with profitable offices. They kept much state, and their extravagance displeased the people. Many of the Gascon lords were dissatisfied at being handed over to the dominion of the English, and the favour the prince showed to his own countrymen, and the ostentatious magnificence they exhibited, increased this feeling of dissatisfaction. Arnaud Amanieu, Lord of Albret, and many more were always ready to give what help they could to the French cause, and Gaston, Count of Foix, though he visited the prince on his first arrival, was thoroughly French at heart, and gave some trouble in 1365 by refusing to do homage for Bearn. Charles V, who succeeded to the throne of France in April 1364, was careful to encourage the malcontents, and the prince&#x27;s position was by no means easy.

In April 1363 the prince mediated between the Counts of Foix and Armagnac, who had for a long time been at war with each other. He also attempted in the following February to mediate between Charles of Blois and John of Montfort, the rival competitors for the Duchy of Brittany. Both appeared before him at Poitiers, but his mediation was unsuccessful.

The next month, May 1363, the prince entertained Peter, King of Cyprus, at Angoulême, and held a tournament there. At the same time he and his lords excused themselves from assuming the cross - that is, they declined to join Peter&#x27;s proposed crusade. During the summer the lord of Albret was at Paris, and his forces and several other Gascon lords held the French cause in Normandy against the party of Navarre. Meanwhile, war was renewed in Brittany; the prince allowed Chandos to raise and lead a force to succour the party of Montfort, and Chandos won the Battle of Auray (29 September 1364) against the French.

As the leaders of the free companies which desolated France were for the most part Englishmen or Gascons, they did not ravage Aquitaine, and the prince was suspected, probably not without cause, of encouraging, or at least of taking no pains to discourage, their proceedings. Accordingly on 14 November 1364 Edward III called upon him to restrain their ravages.

== Spanish campaign (1365–67) ==
In 1365 the free companies, under Sir Hugh Calveley and other leaders, took service with Bertrand du Guesclin, who employed them in 1366 in compelling King Peter of Castile to flee from his kingdom, and in setting up his bastard brother, Henry of Trastámara, as king in his stead. Peter, who was in alliance with Edward III, sent messengers to Prince Edward asking his help, and on receiving a gracious answer at Corunna, set out at once, and arrived at Bayonne with his son and his three daughters. The prince met him at Capbreton, and rode with him to Bordeaux.

Many of the prince&#x27;s lords, both English and Gascon, were unwilling that he should espouse Peter&#x27;s cause, but he declared that it was not fitting that a bastard should inherit a kingdom, or drive out his lawfully born brother, and that no king or king&#x27;s son ought to suffer such disrespect to royalty; nor could any turn him from his determination to restore the king.

Peter won friends by declaring that he would make Edward&#x27;s son king of Galicia, and would divide his riches among those who helped him. A parliament was held at Bordeaux, in which it was decided to ask the wishes of the English king. Edward replied that it was right that his son should help Peter, and the prince held another parliament at which the king&#x27;s letter was read. Then the lords agreed to give their help, provided that their pay was secured to them. To give them the required security, the prince agreed to lend Peter whatever money was necessary.

The prince and Peter then held a conference with Charles of Navarre at Bayonne, and agreed with him to allow their troops to pass through his dominions. To persuade him to do this, Peter had, besides other grants, to pay him 56,000 florins, and this sum was lent him by the prince. On 23 September a series of agreements (the Treaty of Libourne) were entered into between the prince, Peter, and Charles of Navarre, at Libourne, on the Dordogne, by which Peter covenanted to put the prince in possession of the province of Biscay and the territory and fortress of Castro de Urdialès as pledges for the repayment of this debt, to pay 550,000 florins for six months&#x27; wages at specified dates, 250,000 florins being the prince&#x27;s wages, and 800,000 florins the wages of the lords who were to serve in the expedition. He consented to leave his three daughters in the prince&#x27;s hands as hostages for the fulfilment of these terms, and further agreed that whenever the king, the prince, or their heirs, the king of England, should march in person against the Moors, they should have the command of the vanguard before all other Christian kings, and that if they were not present the banner of the king of England should be carried in the vanguard side by side with the banner of Castile.

The prince received a hundred thousand francs from his father out of the ransom of John II, the late king of France, and broke up his plate to help to pay the soldiers he was taking into his pay. While his army was assembling he remained at Angoulême, and was there visited by Peter. He then stayed over Christmas at Bordeaux, where his wife, Joan, gave birth to their second son Richard (the next king of England).

Prince Edward left Bordeaux early in February 1367, and joined his army at Dax, where he remained three days, and received a reinforcement of four hundred men-at-arms and four hundred archers sent out by his father under his brother John, duke of Lancaster. From Dax the prince advanced via Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port through Roncesvalles (in the Pyrenees) to Pamplona (the capital of Kingdom of Navarre).

When Calveley and other English and Gascon leaders of free companies found that Prince Edward was about to fight for Peter, they withdrew from the service of Henry of Trastámara, and joined Prince Edward &quot;because he was their natural lord&quot;. While the prince was at Pamplona he received a letter of defiance from Henry.

From Pamplona the prince marched by Arruiz to Salvatierra, which opened its gates to his army, and thence advanced to Vitoria, intending to march on Burgos by this direct route. A body of his knights, which he had sent out to reconnoitre under Sir William Felton, was defeated by a skirmishing party, and he found that Henry had occupied some strong positions, and especially Santo Domingo de la Calzada on the right of the river Ebro, and Zaldiaran mountain on the left, which made it impossible for him to reach Burgos through Álava. Accordingly he crossed the Ebro, and encamped under the walls of Logroño. During these movements the prince&#x27;s army had suffered from want of provisions both for men and horses, and from wet and windy weather. At Logroño, however, though provisions were still scarce, they were somewhat better off.

On 30 March 1367, the prince wrote an answer to Henry&#x27;s letter. On 2 April he left Logroño and moved to Navarrete, La Rioja. Meanwhile, Henry and his French allies had encamped at Nájera, so that the two armies were now near each other. Letters passed between Henry and the prince, for Henry seems to have been anxious to make terms. He declared that Peter was a tyrant, and had shed much innocent blood, to which the prince replied that the king had told him that all the persons he had slain were traitors.

On the morning of 3 April, the prince&#x27;s army marched from Navarrete, and all dismounted while they were yet some distance from Henry&#x27;s army. The vanguard, in which were three thousand men-at-arms, both English and Bretons, was led by Lancaster, Chandos, Calveley, and Clisson; the right division was commanded by Armagnac and other Gascon lords; the left, in which some German mercenaries marched with the Gascons, by Jean, Captal de Buch, and the Count of Foix; and the rear or main battle by the prince, with three thousand lances, and with the prince was Peter and, a little on his right, the dethroned James of Majorca and his company; the numbers, however, are scarcely to be depended on.

Before the battle of Nájera began, the prince prayed aloud to God that as he had come that day to uphold the right and reinstate a disinherited king, God would grant him success. Then, after telling Peter that he should know that day whether he should have his kingdom or not, he cried: &quot;Advance, banner, in the name of God and St. George; and God defend our right&quot;. The knights of Castile attacked and ed the English vanguard, but the wings of Henry&#x27;s army failed to move, so that the Gascon lords were able to attack the main body on the flanks. Then the prince brought the main body of his army into action, and the fighting became intense, for he had under him &quot;the flower of chivalry, and the most famous warriors in the whole world&quot;. At length Henry&#x27;s vanguard gave way, and he fled from the field.

When the battle was over the prince asked Peter to spare the lives of those who had offended him. Peter assented, with the exception of one notorious traitor, whom he at once put to death; and he also had two others slain the next day.

Among the prisoners was the French marshal Arnoul d&#x27;Audrehem, whom the prince had formerly taken prisoner at Poitiers, and whom he had released on d&#x27;Audrehem giving his word that he would not bear arms against the prince until his ransom was paid. When the prince saw him he reproached him bitterly, and called him &quot;liar and traitor&quot;. D&#x27;Audrehem denied that he was either, and the prince asked him whether he would submit to the judgment of a body of knights. To this d&#x27;Audrehem agreed, and after he had dined the prince chose twelve knights, four English, four Gascons, and four Bretons, to judge between himself and the marshal. After he had stated his case, d&#x27;Audrehem replied that he had not broken his word, for the army the prince led was not his own; he was merely in the pay of Peter. The knights considered that this view of the prince&#x27;s position was sound, and gave their verdict for d&#x27;Audrehem.

On 5 April 1367, the prince and Peter marched to Burgos, where they celebrated Easter. The prince, however, did not take up his quarters in the city, but camped outside the walls at the Monastery of Las Huelgas. Peter did not pay him any of the money he owed him, and the prince could get nothing from him except a solemn renewal of his bond of the previous 23 September, which he made on 2 May 1367 before the high altar of the Cathedral of Burgos. By this time, the prince began to suspect his ally of treachery. Peter had no intention of paying his debts, and when the prince demanded possession of Biscay told him that the Biscayans would not consent to be handed over to him. To get rid of his creditor Peter told him that he could not get money at Burgos, and persuaded the prince to take up his quarters at Valladolid while he went to Seville, whence he declared he would send the money he owed.

Prince Edward remained at Valladolid during some very hot weather, waiting in vain for his money. His army suffered so terribly from dysentery and other diseases that it is said that scarcely one Englishman out of five ever saw England again. He was himself seized with a sickness from which he never thoroughly recovered, and which some said was caused by poison. Food and drink were scarce, and the free companies in his pay did much mischief to the surrounding country.

Meanwhile, Henry of Trastámara made war upon Aquitaine, took Bagnères and wasted the country. Fearing that Charles of Navarre would not allow him to return through his dominions, the prince negotiated with the King Peter IV of Aragon for a passage for his troops. Peter IV made a treaty with him, and when Charles of Navarre heard of it he agreed to allow the prince, the Duke of Lancaster, and some of their lords to pass through his country; so they returned through Roncesvalles, and reached Bordeaux early in September 1367.

== War in Aquitaine (1366–70) ==
Some time after he had returned to Aquitaine the free companies, some six thousand strong, also reached Aquitaine, having passed through Kingdom of Aragon. As they had not received the whole of the money the prince had agreed to pay them, they took up their quarters in his country and began to do much mischief. He persuaded the captains to leave Aquitaine, and the companies under their command crossed the Loire and did much damage to France. This greatly angered Charles V, who about this time did the prince serious mischief by encouraging disaffection among the Gascon lords.

When the prince had been gathering his army for his Spanish expedition, the lord of Albret had agreed to serve with a thousand lances. Considering, however, that he had at least as many men as he could find provisions for, the prince on 8 December 1366 had written to him requesting that he would bring only two hundred lances. The lord of Albret was much incensed at this, and, though peace was made by his uncle the Count of Armagnac, did not forget the offence, and Froissart speaks of it as the &quot;first cause of hatred between him and the prince&quot;. A more powerful cause of this lord&#x27;s discontent was the non-payment of an annual pension which had been granted him by Edward. About this time he agreed to marry Margaret of Bourbon, sister of the queen of France. The Black Prince was annoyed at this betrothal, and, his temper probably being soured by sickness and disappointment, behaved with rudeness to both Albret and his intended bride. On the other hand, Charles offered the lord the pension which he had lost, and thus drew him and his uncle, the Count of Armagnac, altogether over to the French side.

The immense cost of the late campaign and his constant extravagance had brought the prince into financial difficulties, and as soon as he returned to Bordeaux he called an assembly of the estates of Aquitaine (Parliament) to meet at Saint-Émilion to obtain a grant from them. It seems as though no business was done then, for in January 1368 he held a meeting of the estates at Angoulême, and there persuaded them to allow him a &quot;fouage&quot;, or hearth tax, of ten sous for five years. An edict for this tax was published on 25 January 1368.

The chancellor, Bishop John Harewell, held a conference at Niort, at which he persuaded the barons of Poitou, Saintonge, Limousin, and Rouergue to agree to this tax, but the great vassals of the high marches refused, and on 20 June and again on 25 October the Counts of Armagnac, Périgord, and Comminges, and the lord of Albret laid their complaints before the king of France, declaring that he was their lord paramount. Meanwhile, the prince&#x27;s friend Chandos, who strongly urged him against imposing this tax, had retired to his Norman estate.

Charles took advantage of these appeals, and on 25 January 1369 sent messengers to Prince Edward, who was then residing at Bordeaux, summoning him to appear in person before him in Paris and there receive judgment. He replied: &quot;We will willingly attend at Paris on the day appointed since the king of France sends for us, but it shall be with our helmet on our head and sixty thousand men in our company&quot;.

Prince Edward caused the messengers to be imprisoned, and in revenge for this the Counts of Périgord and Comminges and other lords set on Sir Thomas Wake, the high-steward of Rouergue, slew many of his men, and put him to flight. The prince sent for Chandos, who came to his help, and some fighting took place, though war was not yet declared. His health was now so feeble that he could not take part in active operations, for he was swollen with dropsy and could not ride. By 18 March 1369 more than nine hundred towns, castles, and other places signified in one way or another their adherence to the French cause.

Prince Edward had already warned his father of the intentions of the French king, but there was evidently a party at Edward&#x27;s court that was jealous of his power, and his warnings were slighted. In April 1369, however, war was declared. Edward sent the Earls of Cambridge and Pembroke to his assistance, and Sir Robert Knolles, who now again took service with him, added much to his strength. The war in Aquitaine was desultory and, though the English maintained their ground fairly in the field, every day that it was prolonged weakened their hold on the country.

On 1 January 1370, Prince Edward sustained a heavy loss in the death of his friend Chandos. Several efforts were made by Edward to conciliate the Gascon lords, but they were fruitless and can only have served to weaken the prince&#x27;s authority. It is probable that John of Gaunt was working against him at the English court, and when he was sent out in the summer to help his elder brother, he came with such extensive powers that he almost seemed as though he had come to supersede him.

In the spring, Charles raised two large armies for the invasion of Aquitaine; one, under Louis I, Duke of Anjou, was to enter Guyenne by La Reole and Bergerac, the other, under John, Duke of Berry, was to march towards Limousin and Quercy, and both were to unite and besiege the prince in Angoulême. Ill as he was, the prince left his bed of sickness, and gathered an army at Cognac, where he was joined by the Barons of Poitou and Saintonge, and the Earls of Cambridge, Lancaster, and Pembroke. The two French armies gained many cities, united and laid siege to Limoges, which was treacherously surrendered to them by the bishop, Jean de Murat de Cros, who had been one of the prince&#x27;s trusted friends.
When Prince Edward heard of the surrender of Limoges to the French, he swore &quot;by the soul of his father&quot; that he would have the place again and would make the inhabitants pay dearly for their treachery. He set out from Cognac with an army of about 4,000 men. Due to his sickness he was unable to mount his horse, and was carried in a litter. During the siege of Limoges, the prince was determined to take the town and ordered the undermining of its walls. On 19 September, his miners succeeded in demolishing a large piece of wall which filled the ditches with its ruins. The town was then stormed, with the inevitable destruction and loss of life.

The Victorian historian William Hunt, author of Prince Edward&#x27;s biography in the &quot;Dictionary of National Biography&quot; (1889), relying on Froissart as a source, wrote that when the bishop (who was the most responsible for the surrender) was brought before the Prince, the Prince told him that his head should be cut off (Lancaster persuaded him not to carry out the deed), but that the city was nevertheless pillaged and burnt, and that 3,000 persons of all ranks and ages were massacred. However, modern scholarship, including the historian Richard Barber writing in 2008 in the &quot;Oxford Dictionary of National Biography&quot; and drawing on a wider range of evidence, places casualties much lower than Froissart did – around 300 garrison soldiers and civilians in total.

The prince returned to Cognac; his sickness increased and he was forced to give up all hope of being able to direct any further operations and to proceed first to Angoulème and then to Bordeaux.

==England==
The death of Edward&#x27;s eldest son, Edward of Angoulême, in 1371, caused him a great deal of grief. His health continued to deteriorate and his personal doctor advised him to return to England. Edward left Aquitaine with the Duke of Lancaster, and landed at Southampton early in January 1371. Edward met his father at Windsor. At this meeting, Prince Edward interceded to stop a treaty Edward III had made the previous month with Charles of Navarre because he did not agree to the ceding of lands King Charles demanded in it. After this, the Black Prince returned to his manor in Berkhamsted.

On his return to England, the prince was probably at once recognised as the natural opponent of the influence exercised by the anti-clerical and Lancastrian party, and it is evident that the clergy trusted him; for on 2 May he met the convocation of Canterbury at the Savoy, and persuaded them to make an exceptionally large grant. His health now began to improve, and in August 1372 he sailed with his father to the relief of Thouars; but contrary winds meant that the fleet never reached the French coast. On 6 October he resigned the principality of Aquitaine and Gascony, giving as his reason that its revenues were no longer sufficient to cover expenses, and acknowledging his resignation in Parliament of the next month. At the conclusion of this parliament, after the knights had been dismissed, he met the citizens and burgesses &quot;in a room near the white chamber&quot;, and prevailed on them to extend the customs granted the year before for the protection of merchant shipping for another year.

It is said that after Whitsunday, 20 May 1374, the prince presided at a council of prelates and nobles held at Westminster to answer a demand from Pope Gregory XI for a subsidy to help him against the Florentines. The bishops, after hearing the pope&#x27;s letter, which asserted his right as lord spiritual, and, by the grant of John, lord in chief, of the kingdom, declared that &quot;he was lord of all&quot;. The cause of the crown, however, was vigorously maintained, and the prince, provoked at the hesitation of Archbishop Wittlesey, spoke sharply to him, and at last told him that he was an ass. The bishops gave way, and it was declared that John had no power to bring the realm into subjection.

The prince&#x27;s illness soon returned in force, though when the &quot;Good Parliament&quot; met on 28 April 1376 he was looked upon as the chief support of the commons in their attack on the abuses of the administration, and evidently acted in concert with William of Wykeham in opposing the influence of Lancaster and the disreputable clique of courtiers who upheld it, and he had good cause to fear that his brother&#x27;s power would prove dangerous to the prospects of his son Richard. Richard Lyons, the king&#x27;s financial agent, who was impeached for gigantic frauds, sent him a bribe of £1,000 and other gifts, but he refused to receive it, though he afterwards said that it was a pity he had not kept it, and sent it to pay the soldiers who were fighting for the kingdom.

==Death==
From the period of the Good Parliament, Edward knew that he was dying. His dysentery had become so violent on occasion, causing him to faint from weakness, that his household believed he had died. He left gifts for his servants in his will and said goodbye to his father, Edward III, whom he asked to confirm his gifts, pay his debts quickly out of his estate, and protect his son Richard. The Black Prince’s illness is thought to have started after his victory at the Battle of Nájera in 1367, relapsing sporadically over the next 9 years of his life. There are several diverse infections or inflammatory conditions that may have led to his demise. These might include malaria (specifically vivax), brucellosis, inflammatory bowel disease, or long-term complications of acute dysentery. However, chronic dysentery is probably unlikely.

His death was announced at the Palace of Westminster on 8 June 1376. In his last moments, he was attended by the Bishop of Bangor, who urged him to ask forgiveness of God and of all those he had injured. He &quot;made a very noble end, remembering God his Creator in his heart&quot;, and asked people to pray for him.

Edward was buried in Canterbury Cathedral on 29September. His funeral and the design of his tomb were conducted in accordance to the directions dictated in his will. It has a bronze effigy beneath a tester depicting the Holy Trinity with his heraldic achievementshis surcoat, helmet, shield and gauntletshung over the tester; they have since been replaced with replicas; the originals now reside in a glass-fronted cabinet within the Cathedral. His epitaph inscribed around his effigy reads:

&lt;poem&gt;Such as thou art, sometime was I.
Such as I am, such shalt thou be.
I thought little on th&#x27;our of Death
So long as I enjoyed breath.
On earth I had great riches
Land, houses, great treasure, horses, money and gold.
But now a wretched captive am I,
Deep in the ground, lo here I lie.
My beauty great, is all quite gone,
My flesh is wasted to the bone.&lt;/poem&gt;

==Arms and heraldic badge==
Arms: &quot;Quarterly, 1st and 4th azure semée of fleur-de-lys or&quot; (France Ancient); &quot;2nd and 3rd gules, three lions passant guardant or&quot; (England); &quot;overall a label of three points argent&quot;. Crest: &quot;On a chapeau gules turned up ermine, a lion statant or gorged with a label of three points argent&quot;. Mantling: &quot;gules lined ermine&quot;.
Edward&#x27;s coat of arms as Prince of Wales were those of the kingdom, differenced by &quot;a label of three points argent&quot;.

Edward also used an alternative coat of &quot;Sable, three ostrich feathers argent&quot;, described as his &quot;shield for peace&quot; (probably meaning the shield he used for jousting). This shield can be seen several times on his tomb chest, alternating with the differenced royal arms. His younger brother, John of Gaunt, used a similar shield on which the ostrich feathers were ermine.

Edward&#x27;s &quot;shield for peace&quot; is believed to have inspired the badge of three ostrich feathers used by later Princes of Wales. The motto &quot;Ich dien&quot; means &quot;I serve&quot;.

==Family==
Edward married his cousin, Joan, Countess of Kent (1328–1385), on 10 October 1361. She was the daughter and heiress of Edmund, Earl of Kent, the younger son of King Edward I by his second wife Margaret of France.

They had two sons, both born in Aquitaine:
* Edward of Angoulême, born at Angoulême on 27 January 1365, died immediately before his father&#x27;s return to England in January 1371, and was buried in the church of the Austin Friars, London
* Richard, who succeeded his grandfather as king

From his marriage to Joan, he also became stepfather to her children by Thomas Holland:
* Thomas Holland, 2nd Earl of Kent, whose daughter, Joan Holland, later married Edward&#x27;s brother, Edmund of Langley.
* John Holland, 1st Duke of Exeter, who married Edward&#x27;s niece, Elizabeth of Lancaster, daughter of his brother, John of Gaunt.
* Joan Holland, Duchess of Brittany

Edward had several natural sons before his marriage.

With Edith de Willesford (died after 1385):
* Sir Roger Clarendon ( – executed 1402); he married Margaret (d. 1382), a daughter of John Fleming, Baron de la Roche.
With unknown mother:
* Sir John Sounders

===Ancestry===
==Appellation &quot;Black Prince&quot;==

Edward is often referred to as the &quot;Black Prince&quot;. The first known source to use this sobriquet was the antiquary John Leland in the 1530s or early 1540s (about 165 years after Edward&#x27;s death). Leland mentions it in two manuscript notes of this period, with the implication that it was in relatively widespread use by that date. In one instance, he refers in Latin to &quot;Edwardi Principis cog: Nigri&quot; (i.e., &quot;Edward the Prince, cognomen: The Black&quot;); in the other, in English to &quot;the Blake Prince&quot;. In both instances, Leland is summarising earlier works – respectively, the 14th-century &quot;Eulogium Historiarum&quot; and the late 15th-century chronicle attributed to John Warkworth – but in neither case does the name appear in his source texts. In print, Roger Ascham in his &quot;Toxophilus&quot; (1545) refers to &quot;ye noble black prince Edward beside Poeters&quot;; while Richard Grafton, in his &quot;Chronicle at Large&quot; (1569), uses the name on three occasions, saying that &quot;some writers name him the black prince&quot;, and elsewhere that he was &quot;commonly called the black Prince&quot;. Raphael Holinshed uses it several times in his &quot;Chronicles&quot; (1577); and it is also used by William Shakespeare, in his plays &quot;Richard II&quot; (written c. 1595; Act 2, scene 3) and &quot;Henry V&quot; (c. 1599; Act 2, scene 4). In 1688, it appears prominently in the title of Joshua Barnes&#x27;s &quot;The History of that Most Victorious Monarch, Edward IIId, King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland, and First Founder of the Most Noble Order of the Garter: Being a Full and Exact Account Of the Life and Death of the said King: Together with That of his Most Renowned Son, Edward, Prince of Wales and of Aquitain, Sirnamed the Black-Prince&quot;.

The origins of the name are uncertain, though many theories have been proposed, falling under two main themes, that it is derived from Edward&#x27;s:
* Black shield (and/or the rumours that he wore black armour).
* Brutal reputation, particularly towards the French in Aquitaine.

It might possibly have been intended as a &quot;double entendre&quot;, combining these two meanings.

The black (&quot;sable&quot;) field of his &quot;shield for peace&quot; is well documented (see Arms and heraldic badge above). However, there is no sound evidence that Edward ever wore black armour, although John Harvey (without citing a source) refers to &quot;some rather shadowy evidence that he was described in French as clad at the battle of Crécy &#x27; &quot;en armure noire en fer bruni&quot; &#x27; – in black armour of burnished steel&quot;. Richard Barber suggests that the name&#x27;s origins may have lain in pageantry, in that a tradition may have grown up in the 15th century of representing the prince in black armour. He points out that several chronicles refer to him as Edward IV (the title he would have taken as king had he outlived his father): this name would obviously have become confusing when the actual Edward IV succeeded in 1461, and this may have been the period when an alternative had to be found.

Edward&#x27;s reputation for brutality in France is also well documented, and it is possible that this is where the title had its origins. The French soldier Philippe de Mézières refers to Edward as the greatest of the &quot;black boars&quot; – those aggressors who had done so much to disrupt relations within Christendom. Other French writers made similar associations, and Peter Hoskins reports that an oral tradition of &quot;L&#x27;Homme Noir&quot;, who had passed by with an army, survived in southern France until recent years. In Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Henry V&quot;, the King of France alludes to &quot;that black name, Edward, Black Prince of Wales&quot;. John Speed reported in 1611 that the Black Prince was so named &quot;not of his colour, but of his dreaded Acts in battell&quot;; a comment echoed in 1642 by Thomas Fuller, who wrote that he was named &quot;from his dreaded acts and not from his complexion&quot;. Joshua Barnes claimed in 1688 that it was from the time of the Battle of Crécy that &quot;the &quot;French&quot; began to call [him] &quot;Le Neoir&quot;, or the &quot;Black-Prince&quot;&quot;, appearing to cite a record of Richard II (i.e. 1378–9); but his reference is insufficiently precise to be traceable. However, it is unclear how a French sobriquet might have crossed to England, and Barber finds this derivation of the name &quot;unlikely&quot;.

==See also==
* Black Prince&#x27;s Ruby, which he forced Peter of Castile to give to him after the Castilian campaign. It is actually a large red spinel, now set at the front of the British Imperial State Crown. (Originally, the term &quot;ruby&quot; was given to any red gemstone.)
* Black Prince (tank) A43 Infantry Tank, a British experimental AFV design, essentially a &quot;super Churchill&quot; of which six prototypes were built very late in World War II.
* Cultural depictions of Edward the Black Prince
* HMS &quot;Black Prince&quot;, for Royal Navy ships named in his honour
* Junio Valerio Borghese (1906–74), an Italian Navy commander also known as the Black Prince due to his aristocratic connections and adherence to fascism.
* List of knights and ladies of the Garter

==Notes==
== References ==
=== Sources ===
* 
* ;
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Endnotes
* 
* 
* }
* 
* 
* 
* 
=== Other sources ===

* Sloane MS, S. 56 and 335;
* For the battle of Poitiers
** 
* For the Spanish campaign, 
* For other references see under , in text of above article, and in the notes of M. Luce&#x27;s Froissart.
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
** – eulogistic and wordy, but useful; in the edition of 1836 James defends his work from the strictures of the Athenæum;
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* 



Welsh title: Owain Glyndwr (1400/15)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q184854" start="0" end="19" title="Edward the Black Prince" label="Edward of Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q184854" start="68" end="84" title="Edward the Black Prince" label="the Black Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762318" start="109" end="122" title="heir apparent" label="heir apparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="131" end="152" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q81000" start="196" end="206" title="Richard II" label="Richard II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832870" start="208" end="231" title="succession to the British throne" label="succeeded to the throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="340" end="363" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056721" start="424" end="432" title="chivalry" label="chivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="457" end="464" title="knights" label="knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494846" start="493" end="509" title="Duke of Cornwall" label="Duke of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q180729" start="647" end="662" title="Prince of Wales" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q627585" start="701" end="710" title="Saint-Vaast-la-Hougue" label="La Hougue"/>
<link wikidata="Q27759" start="774" end="789" title="Battle of Crécy" label="Battle of Crécy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701563" start="881" end="903" title="Battle of Calais" label="1349 Calais expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098506" start="935" end="968" title="Lieutenant of the Duchy of Aquitaine" label="king&amp;#x27;s lieutenant in Gascony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179" start="1003" end="1012" title="Aquitaine" label="Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q65051119" start="1016" end="1028" title="Black Prince&amp;#x27;s chevauchée of 1355" label="a chevauchée"/>
<link wikidata="Q193861" start="1069" end="1082" title="Castelnaudary" label="Castelnaudary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582" start="1091" end="1102" title="Carcassonne" label="Carcassonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555" start="1118" end="1126" title="Narbonne" label="Narbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963045" start="1140" end="1158" title="Black Prince&amp;#x27;s chevauchée of 1356" label="another chevauchée"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152" start="1171" end="1179" title="Auvergne" label="Auvergne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190" start="1181" end="1189" title="Limousin" label="Limousin"/>
<link wikidata="Q827169" start="1195" end="1200" title="Berry, France" label="Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q132404" start="1220" end="1227" title="Bourges" label="Bourges"/>
<link wikidata="Q169992" start="1263" end="1280" title="John II of France" label="John II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616" start="1310" end="1318" title="Poitiers" label="Poitiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q201692" start="1403" end="1421" title="Battle of Poitiers" label="Battle of Poitiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334924" start="1566" end="1584" title="Treaty of Brétigny" label="Treaty of Brétigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q429599" start="1601" end="1620" title="Prince of Aquitaine" label="Prince of Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q191085" start="1625" end="1632" title="Gascony" label="Gascony"/>
<link wikidata="Q463573" start="1650" end="1660" title="suzerainty" label="suzerainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q691160" start="1687" end="1701" title="Arnaud Amanieu d&amp;#x27;Albret" label="lord of Albret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543015" start="1812" end="1826" title="Free company" label="free companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q310963" start="1876" end="1892" title="Peter of Castile" label="Peter of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q43082" start="1897" end="1918" title="Charles II of Navarre" label="Charles II of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335929" start="1935" end="1945" title="Covenant (law)" label="covenanted"/>
<link wikidata="Q501090" start="1958" end="1973" title="Castro Urdiales" label="Castro Urdiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q93366" start="1982" end="2000" title="Biscay" label="province of Biscay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2070" end="2077" title="Kingdom of Navarre#Navarre in the Late Middle Ages" label="Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q262363" start="2126" end="2145" title="Henry II of Castile" label="Henry of Trastámara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631158" start="2253" end="2269" title="Battle of Nájera" label="Battle of Nájera"/>
<link wikidata="Q657326" start="2472" end="2479" title="Estates of the realm" label="estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361901" start="2508" end="2518" title="hearth tax" label="hearth tax"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2526" end="2530" title="Solidus (coin)#France" label="sous"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="2824" end="2833" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675826" start="2884" end="2891" title="surcoat" label="surcoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="2998" end="3019" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q844250" start="3021" end="3036" title="Lord of Ireland" label="Lord of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q191085" start="3050" end="3057" title="Gascony" label="Gascony"/>
<link wikidata="Q229279" start="3063" end="3077" title="Philippa of Hainault" label="Queen Philippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743089" start="3091" end="3100" title="Woodstock Palace" label="Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q228642" start="3315" end="3339" title="Queen Isabella of France" label="Queen Isabella of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969" start="3374" end="3393" title="Philip IV of France" label="Philip IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="3588" end="3605" title="Hundred Years War" label="Hundred Years War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3830" end="3834" title="Mark (currency)#England and Scotland" label="mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q447129" start="4009" end="4035" title="Eleanor of Woodstock" label="king&amp;#x27;s sister Eleanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q170586" start="4107" end="4126" title="Philip VI of France" label="Philip VI of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="4285" end="4305" title="Edward II of England" label="Edward II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q228642" start="4330" end="4348" title="Isabella of France" label="Isabella of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969" start="4362" end="4381" title="Philip IV of France" label="Philip IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="4402" end="4410" title="nobility" label="nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q229279" start="4543" end="4563" title="Philippa of Hainault" label="Philippa of Hainault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095090" start="4597" end="4614" title="Count of Hainault" label="Count of Hainault"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="5163" end="5182" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q222520" start="5398" end="5419" title="Battle of Bannockburn" label="Battle of Bannockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887057" start="5490" end="5512" title="Battle of Halidon Hill" label="Battle of Halidon Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277249" start="5780" end="5809" title="Earl of Chester" label="earldom and county of Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862572" start="6122" end="6135" title="Walter Burley" label="Walter Burley"/>
<link wikidata="Q82513" start="6139" end="6161" title="Merton College, Oxford" label="Merton College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q17642916" start="6441" end="6458" title="Nottingham Castle" label="Nottingham Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q170586" start="6573" end="6592" title="Philip VI of France" label="Philip VI of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494846" start="6598" end="6614" title="Duke of Cornwall" label="Duke of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="6661" end="6675" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q541658" start="7100" end="7119" title="John III of Brabant" label="John III of Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q170863" start="7285" end="7300" title="Pope Clement VI" label="Pope Clement VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q180729" start="7383" end="7398" title="Prince of Wales" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q10080" start="7530" end="7535" title="Sluys" label="Sluys"/>
<link wikidata="Q177529" start="7587" end="7598" title="burgomaster" label="burgomaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="7603" end="7608" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="7610" end="7616" title="Bruges" label="Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q102728" start="7621" end="7626" title="Ypres" label="Ypres"/>
<link wikidata="Q359165" start="7678" end="7697" title="Jacob van Artevelde" label="Jacob van Artevelde"/>
<link wikidata="Q627585" start="8244" end="8253" title="Saint-Vaast-la-Hougue" label="La Hougue"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="8263" end="8273" title="Knight Bachelor" label="knighthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q60586584" start="8313" end="8322" title="Quettehou" label="Quettehou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076444" start="8473" end="8482" title="Battle of Caen (1346)" label="taking of"/>
<link wikidata="Q41185" start="8483" end="8487" title="Caen" label="Caen"/>
<link wikidata="Q611827" start="8495" end="8509" title="Battle of Blanchetaque" label="the engagement"/>
<link wikidata="Q60792090" start="8535" end="8551" title="Godemar I du Fay" label="Godemar I du Fay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122389" start="8638" end="8650" title="Blanchetaque" label="Blanchetaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q27759" start="8712" end="8727" title="battle of Crécy" label="battle of Crécy"/>
<link wikidata="Q61765" start="8796" end="8801" title="Crécy-en-Ponthieu" label="Crécy"/>
<link wikidata="Q923162" start="8876" end="8883" title="Thomas de Beauchamp, 11th Earl of Warwick" label="Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3390008" start="8888" end="8894" title="John de Vere, 7th Earl of Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101165" start="8900" end="8924" title="Geoffroy d&amp;#x27;Harcourt" label="Geoffroy d&amp;#x27;Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q948191" start="8930" end="8942" title="John Chandos" label="John Chandos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384129" start="9305" end="9321" title="Charles II, Count of Alençon" label="Count of Alençon"/>
<link wikidata="Q740732" start="9676" end="9680" title="spur" label="spur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325685" start="9854" end="9875" title="Richard Fitz-Simon" label="Sir Richard FitzSimon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486919" start="9881" end="9896" title="standard bearer" label="standard bearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934800" start="10024" end="10039" title="Richard FitzAlan, 10th Earl of Arundel" label="Earl of Arundel"/>
<link wikidata="Q60792217" start="10197" end="10206" title="Wadicourt" label="Wadicourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848228" start="10238" end="10245" title="Count of Alençon" label="Alençon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748460" start="10250" end="10258" title="Count of Ponthieu" label="Ponthieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="10374" end="10390" title="Duke of Lorraine" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848228" start="10409" end="10416" title="Count of Alençon" label="Alençon"/>
<link wikidata="Q804519" start="10421" end="10426" title="Count of Blois" label="Blois"/>
<link wikidata="Q155167" start="10870" end="10885" title="John of Bohemia" label="John of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q676340" start="10917" end="10944" title="siege of Calais (1346–1347)" label="siege of Calais (1346–1347)"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="11216" end="11235" title="Order of the Garter" label="Order of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701563" start="11332" end="11352" title="Siege of Calais (1348)" label="expedition to Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026871" start="11660" end="11670" title="Winchelsea" label="Winchelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330182" start="11715" end="11723" title="La Cerda" label="La Cerda"/>
<link wikidata="Q193752" start="11820" end="11833" title="John of Gaunt" label="John of Gaunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q375236" start="11835" end="11851" title="Earl of Richmond" label="Earl of Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985934" start="11864" end="11884" title="Battle of Winchelsea" label="Battle of Winchelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q225604" start="12073" end="12109" title="Henry of Grosmont, 1st Duke of Lancaster" label="Henry of Grosmont, Earl of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q23064" start="12383" end="12391" title="Cheshire" label="Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277249" start="12411" end="12426" title="Earl of Chester" label="Earl of Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346992" start="12463" end="12480" title="Duke of Lancaster" label="Duke of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q170263" start="12506" end="12513" title="Chester" label="Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832770" start="12745" end="12756" title="trailbaston" label="trailbaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q178117" start="12950" end="12969" title="Abbey of Dieulacres" label="Abbey of Dieulacres"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="13044" end="13052" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623747" start="13235" end="13245" title="Vale Royal Abbey" label="Vale Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179" start="13410" end="13419" title="Aquitaine" label="Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q544055" start="13537" end="13553" title="John of Montfort" label="John of Montfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020194" start="14035" end="14066" title="William de Ufford, 2nd Earl of Suffolk" label="William Ufford, Earl of Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474950" start="14068" end="14102" title="William de Montagu, 2nd Earl of Salisbury" label="William Montagu, Earl of Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="14235" end="14243" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q676745" start="14652" end="14660" title="Armagnac (province)" label="Armagnac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541613" start="14662" end="14669" title="Astarac" label="Astarac"/>
<link wikidata="Q640024" start="14683" end="14692" title="Comminges" label="Comminges"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077" start="14709" end="14716" title="Garonne" label="Garonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="14748" end="14756" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302784" start="14780" end="14805" title="John I, Count of Armagnac" label="John I, Count of Armagnac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500011" start="14924" end="14933" title="Lauragais" label="Lauragais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153067" start="14964" end="14975" title="Montgiscard" label="Montgiscard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069612" start="15063" end="15072" title="Avignonet" label="Avignonet"/>
<link wikidata="Q193861" start="15077" end="15090" title="Castelnaudary" label="Castelnaudary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1600318" start="15467" end="15474" title="Montgey" label="Montgey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16144287" start="15480" end="15489" title="châtelain" label="châtelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582" start="15570" end="15581" title="Carcassonne" label="Carcassonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325125" start="15680" end="15686" title="Ourmes" label="Ourmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555" start="15703" end="15711" title="Narbonne" label="Narbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q187481" start="15717" end="15723" title="Trèbes" label="Trèbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357" start="17056" end="17064" title="Dordogne" label="Dordogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q187911" start="17068" end="17076" title="Bergerac, Dordogne" label="Bergerac"/>
<link wikidata="Q210772" start="17313" end="17321" title="Issoudun" label="Issoudun"/>
<link wikidata="Q130272" start="17394" end="17402" title="Chartres" label="Chartres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469" start="17457" end="17462" title="Loire" label="Loire"/>
<link wikidata="Q208538" start="17609" end="17616" title="Vierzon" label="Vierzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q214600" start="17923" end="17933" title="Romorantin-Lanthenay" label="Romorantin"/>
<link wikidata="Q213349" start="18819" end="18825" title="Loches" label="Loches"/>
<link wikidata="Q688473" start="18940" end="18949" title="Chauvigny" label="Chauvigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q659546" start="18995" end="19001" title="Vienne (river)" label="Vienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q205576" start="19255" end="19268" title="Châtellerault" label="Châtellerault"/>
<link wikidata="Q752975" start="19804" end="19814" title="Les Ponts-de-Cé" label="Pont-de-Cé"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19999" end="20007" title="Miausson" label="Miausson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436018" start="20091" end="20110" title="Mignaloux-Beauvoir" label="commune of Beauvoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q974959" start="20243" end="20259" title="Hélie de Talleyrand-Périgord (cardinal)" label="Hélie Talleyrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q192883" start="22446" end="22453" title="Dauphin of France" label="Dauphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q167782" start="22455" end="22480" title="Charles V of France" label="Charles, Duke of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q530039" start="23581" end="23604" title="Philip, Duke of Orléans" label="Philip, Duke of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q385010" start="24017" end="24025" title="banneret" label="banneret"/>
<link wikidata="Q635926" start="25551" end="25558" title="Hackney horse" label="hackney"/>
<link wikidata="Q19947612" start="26736" end="26750" title="Reims campaign" label="Reims campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334924" start="26843" end="26861" title="Treaty of Brétigny" label="Treaty of Brétigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020800" start="27109" end="27112" title="Rye, East Sussex" label="Rye"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566759" start="27361" end="27373" title="Walter Manny" label="Walter Manny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886913" start="27590" end="27610" title="Basilica of Notre-Dame de Boulogne" label="Church of the Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q234156" start="27780" end="27802" title="Joan of Kent" label="Joan, Countess of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q956563" start="27816" end="27849" title="Edmund of Woodstock, 1st Earl of Kent" label="Edmund of Woodstock, Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="27866" end="27874" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q235480" start="27880" end="27888" title="Margaret of France, Queen of England" label="Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q172203" start="27902" end="27922" title="Philip III of France" label="Philip III of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031944" start="27937" end="27956" title="Thomas Holland, 1st Earl of Kent" label="Thomas Lord Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q933789" start="28225" end="28231" title="Thomas Holland, 2nd Earl of Kent" label="Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q169288" start="28285" end="28301" title="Pope Innocent VI" label="Pope Innocent VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="28403" end="28410" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287592" start="28451" end="28462" title="Simon Islip" label="Simon Islip"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="28463" end="28487" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q315000" start="28502" end="28516" title="Jean Froissart" label="Jean Froissart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892150" start="28646" end="28664" title="Berkhamsted Castle" label="Berkhamsted Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568545" start="28704" end="28722" title="Princes Risborough" label="Princes Risborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q19784" start="29310" end="29321" title="Berkhamsted" label="Berkhamsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q82185" start="29464" end="29475" title="La Rochelle" label="La Rochelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509703" start="29649" end="29658" title="County of Saintonge" label="Saintonge"/>
<link wikidata="Q134346" start="29896" end="29905" title="Angoulême" label="Angoulême"/>
<link wikidata="Q849324" start="29950" end="29957" title="Guyenne" label="Guyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q691160" start="30339" end="30369" title="Arnaud Amanieu, Lord of Albret" label="Arnaud Amanieu, Lord of Albret"/>
<link wikidata="Q386816" start="30457" end="30478" title="Gaston III, Count of Foix" label="Gaston, Count of Foix"/>
<link wikidata="Q454063" start="30980" end="30996" title="Charles, Duke of Brittany" label="Charles of Blois"/>
<link wikidata="Q71747" start="31049" end="31066" title="Duchy of Brittany" label="Duchy of Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q546469" start="31192" end="31213" title="Peter I of Cyprus" label="Peter, King of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062615" start="31707" end="31722" title="Battle of Auray" label="Battle of Auray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142705" start="32198" end="32211" title="Hugh Calveley" label="Hugh Calveley"/>
<link wikidata="Q314905" start="32249" end="32269" title="Bertrand du Guesclin" label="Bertrand du Guesclin"/>
<link wikidata="Q310963" start="32316" end="32332" title="Peter of Castile" label="Peter of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q8757" start="32573" end="32580" title="Corunna" label="Corunna"/>
<link wikidata="Q134674" start="32614" end="32621" title="Bayonne" label="Bayonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q189918" start="32682" end="32691" title="Capbreton" label="Capbreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q43082" start="33730" end="33748" title="Charles II of Navarre" label="Charles of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q111181432" start="34007" end="34025" title="Treaty of Libourne" label="Treaty of Libourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q501090" start="34244" end="34262" title="Castro Urdiales" label="Castro de Urdialès"/>
<link wikidata="Q81000" start="35356" end="35363" title="Richard II of England" label="Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q188878" start="35468" end="35471" title="Dax, Landes" label="Dax"/>
<link wikidata="Q270294" start="35684" end="35707" title="Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port" label="Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q917891" start="35716" end="35728" title="Roncesvalles" label="Roncesvalles"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="35737" end="35745" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q10282" start="35750" end="35758" title="Pamplona" label="Pamplona"/>
<link wikidata="Q200262" start="35775" end="35793" title="Kingdom of Navarre" label="Kingdom of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864235" start="36163" end="36169" title="Arruiz" label="Arruiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q398698" start="36173" end="36184" title="Salvatierra/Agurain" label="Salvatierra"/>
<link wikidata="Q14318" start="36245" end="36252" title="Vitoria-Gasteiz" label="Vitoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q9580" start="36276" end="36282" title="Burgos" label="Burgos"/>
<link wikidata="Q18577185" start="36371" end="36389" title="Sir William Felton" label="Sir William Felton"/>
<link wikidata="Q646564" start="36503" end="36530" title="Santo Domingo de la Calzada" label="Santo Domingo de la Calzada"/>
<link wikidata="Q10965" start="36557" end="36561" title="Ebro" label="Ebro"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014411" start="36567" end="36576" title="Zaldiaran" label="Zaldiaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q81801" start="36656" end="36661" title="Álava" label="Álava"/>
<link wikidata="Q14325" start="36728" end="36735" title="Logroño" label="Logroño"/>
<link wikidata="Q916230" start="37076" end="37095" title="Navarrete, La Rioja" label="Navarrete, La Rioja"/>
<link wikidata="Q776113" start="37152" end="37158" title="Nájera" label="Nájera"/>
<link wikidata="Q934645" start="37910" end="37930" title="Jean III de Grailly, captal de Buch" label="Jean, Captal de Buch"/>
<link wikidata="Q878998" start="38098" end="38114" title="James IV of Majorca" label="James of Majorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631158" start="38198" end="38214" title="battle of Nájera" label="battle of Nájera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438499" start="39303" end="39325" title="Arnoul d&amp;#x27;Audrehem" label="Arnoul d&amp;#x27;Audrehem"/>
<link wikidata="Q9580" start="40261" end="40267" title="Burgos" label="Burgos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539949" start="40398" end="40422" title="Abbey of Santa María la Real de Las Huelgas" label="Monastery of Las Huelgas"/>
<link wikidata="Q744420" start="40641" end="40660" title="Cathedral of Burgos" label="Cathedral of Burgos"/>
<link wikidata="Q8356" start="41026" end="41036" title="Valladolid" label="Valladolid"/>
<link wikidata="Q208264" start="41651" end="41659" title="Bagnères-de-Bigorre" label="Bagnères"/>
<link wikidata="Q336823" start="41805" end="41823" title="Peter IV of Aragon" label="Peter IV of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q199442" start="42290" end="42307" title="Kingdom of Aragon" label="Kingdom of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192548" start="44096" end="44109" title="Saint-Émilion" label="Saint-Émilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6237773" start="44435" end="44448" title="John Harewell" label="John Harewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q184159" start="44471" end="44476" title="Niort" label="Niort"/>
<link wikidata="Q850620" start="44692" end="44700" title="Périgord" label="Périgord"/>
<link wikidata="Q640024" start="44706" end="44715" title="Comminges" label="Comminges"/>
<link wikidata="Q193752" start="46836" end="46849" title="John of Gaunt" label="John of Gaunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q348961" start="47149" end="47171" title="Louis I, Duke of Anjou" label="Louis I, Duke of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q263456" start="47197" end="47205" title="La Reole" label="La Reole"/>
<link wikidata="Q346761" start="47237" end="47256" title="John, Duke of Berry" label="John, Duke of Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895719" start="47292" end="47298" title="Quercy" label="Quercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q285" start="47436" end="47442" title="Cognac, France" label="Cognac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405733" start="47691" end="47712" title="Jean de Murat de Cros" label="Jean de Murat de Cros"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510196" start="48132" end="48148" title="siege of Limoges" label="siege of Limoges"/>
<link wikidata="Q249816" start="48453" end="48465" title="William Hunt (priest)" label="William Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210343" start="48521" end="48553" title="Dictionary of National Biography" label="Dictionary of National Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430499" start="48983" end="48997" title="Richard Barber" label="Richard Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210343" start="49027" end="49066" title="Oxford Dictionary of National Biography" label="Oxford Dictionary of National Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q16834706" start="49466" end="49485" title="Edward of Angoulême" label="Edward of Angoulême"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166598" start="50259" end="50284" title="convocation of Canterbury" label="convocation of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q279681" start="50451" end="50458" title="Thouars" label="Thouars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446130" start="51056" end="51066" title="Whitsunday" label="Whitsunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q169594" start="51181" end="51196" title="Pope Gregory XI" label="Pope Gregory XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424772" start="51553" end="51573" title="Archbishop Wittlesey" label="Archbishop Wittlesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420353" start="51812" end="51827" title="Good Parliament" label="Good Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q723451" start="51999" end="52017" title="William of Wykeham" label="William of Wykeham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327521" start="52232" end="52245" title="Richard Lyons (Warden of the Mint)" label="Richard Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="52611" end="52620" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q81000" start="52917" end="52924" title="Richard II of England" label="Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="53405" end="53426" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Palace of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q462693" start="53487" end="53503" title="Bishop of Bangor" label="Bishop of Bangor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29265" start="53714" end="53734" title="Canterbury Cathedral" label="Canterbury Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q119823642" start="53781" end="53789" title="Tomb of Edward, the Black Prince" label="his tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="53913" end="53925" title="Holy Trinity" label="Holy Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752472" start="53935" end="53956" title="Funerary hatchment" label="heraldic achievements"/>
<link wikidata="Q57200536" start="54986" end="55017" title="Coat of arms of the Prince of Wales" label="coat of arms as Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413053" start="55282" end="55290" title="jousting" label="jousting"/>
<link wikidata="Q193752" start="55416" end="55429" title="John of Gaunt, 1st Duke of Lancaster" label="John of Gaunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q384324" start="55488" end="55494" title="Ermine (heraldry)" label="ermine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899400" start="55582" end="55604" title="Prince of Wales&amp;#x27;s feathers" label="three ostrich feathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q180729" start="55619" end="55635" title="Prince of Wales" label="Princes of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q31485" start="55714" end="55732" title="Cousin marriage" label="married his cousin"/>
<link wikidata="Q234156" start="55734" end="55756" title="Joan, Countess of Kent" label="Joan, Countess of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q956563" start="55826" end="55846" title="Edmund of Woodstock, 1st Earl of Kent" label="Edmund, Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="55872" end="55880" title="Edward I" label="Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q235480" start="55900" end="55918" title="Margaret of France, Queen of England" label="Margaret of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q16834706" start="55966" end="55985" title="Edward of Angoulême" label="Edward of Angoulême"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823089" start="56138" end="56159" title="Austin Friars, London" label="Austin Friars, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q81000" start="56162" end="56169" title="Richard II of England" label="Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031944" start="56282" end="56296" title="Thomas Holland, 1st Earl of Kent" label="Thomas Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q933789" start="56300" end="56332" title="Thomas Holland, 2nd Earl of Kent" label="Thomas Holland, 2nd Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898144" start="56350" end="56362" title="Joan Holland" label="Joan Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q305002" start="56401" end="56418" title="Edmund of Langley, 1st Duke of York" label="Edmund of Langley"/>
<link wikidata="Q715919" start="56422" end="56454" title="John Holland, 1st Duke of Exeter" label="John Holland, 1st Duke of Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q456462" start="56489" end="56511" title="Elizabeth of Lancaster" label="Elizabeth of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q193752" start="56538" end="56551" title="John of Gaunt" label="John of Gaunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176074" start="56555" end="56588" title="Joan Holland, Duchess of Brittany" label="Joan Holland, Duchess of Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q378505" start="56609" end="56620" title="natural son" label="natural son"/>
<link wikidata="Q18527523" start="56694" end="56709" title="Roger Clarendon" label="Roger Clarendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q59577332" start="57003" end="57012" title="sobriquet" label="sobriquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5697103" start="57021" end="57030" title="antiquarian" label="antiquary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398356" start="57031" end="57042" title="John Leland (antiquary)" label="John Leland"/>
<link wikidata="Q777342" start="57363" end="57371" title="cognomen" label="cognomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6263051" start="57620" end="57634" title="John Warkworth" label="John Warkworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q965811" start="57709" end="57721" title="Roger Ascham" label="Roger Ascham"/>
<link wikidata="Q13493448" start="57735" end="57745" title="Toxophilus" label="Toxophilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326010" start="57832" end="57847" title="Richard Grafton" label="Richard Grafton"/>
<link wikidata="Q503126" start="58065" end="58082" title="Raphael Holinshed" label="Raphael Holinshed"/>
<link wikidata="Q690389" start="58118" end="58128" title="Holinshed&amp;#x27;s Chronicles" label="Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="58166" end="58185" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q649562" start="58206" end="58216" title="Richard II (play)" label="Richard II"/>
<link wikidata="Q495954" start="58267" end="58274" title="Henry V (play)" label="Henry V"/>
<link wikidata="Q3186021" start="58356" end="58369" title="Joshua Barnes" label="Joshua Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030511" start="59067" end="59082" title="double entendre" label="double entendre"/>
<link wikidata="Q936496" start="59138" end="59143" title="sable (heraldry)" label="sable"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59217" end="59240" title="#Arms and heraldic badge" label="Arms and heraldic badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722972" start="59330" end="59341" title="John Harvey (historian)" label="John Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430499" start="59575" end="59589" title="Richard Barber" label="Richard Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806852" start="59642" end="59654" title="Medieval pageant" label="in pageantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q160341" start="59954" end="59963" title="Edward IV of England" label="Edward IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q937715" start="60213" end="60233" title="Philippe de Mézières" label="Philippe de Mézières"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245028" start="60723" end="60733" title="John Speed" label="John Speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248758" start="60881" end="60894" title="Thomas Fuller" label="Thomas Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q81000" start="61211" end="61221" title="Richard II of England" label="Richard II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106213" start="61458" end="61482" title="Black Prince&amp;#x27;s Ruby" label="Black Prince&amp;#x27;s Ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q310963" start="61500" end="61516" title="Peter of Castile" label="Peter of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q191310" start="61589" end="61595" title="spinel" label="spinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358618" start="61633" end="61653" title="Imperial State Crown" label="Imperial State Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432081" start="61728" end="61747" title="Black Prince (tank)" label="Black Prince (tank)"/>
<link wikidata="Q696182" start="61828" end="61837" title="Churchill tank" label="Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q16828583" start="61908" end="61954" title="Cultural depictions of Edward the Black Prince" label="Cultural depictions of Edward the Black Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564397" start="61957" end="61985" title="HMS Black Prince" label="HMS &amp;quot;Black Prince&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="61991" end="62001" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q728006" start="62030" end="62052" title="Junio Valerio Borghese" label="Junio Valerio Borghese"/>
<link wikidata="Q821716" start="62185" end="62225" title="List of knights and ladies of the Garter" label="List of knights and ladies of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q310326" start="62347" end="62356" title="Sloane MS" label="Sloane MS"/>
<link wikidata="Q317279" start="62764" end="62777" title="Owain Glyndwr" label="Owain Glyndwr"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58920" wikidata="Q777403" url="?curid=58920" title="Washington University in St. Louis">
<text>Washington University in St. Louis (WashU or WUSTL) is a private research university in St. Louis, Missouri, United States. Founded in 1853, the university is named after George Washington, the first president of the United States.

Washington University comprises eight undergraduate, graduate, and professional schools, including Arts and Sciences, George Warren Brown School of Social Work, Olin Business School, Washington University School of Medicine, McKelvey School of Engineering, Washington University School of Law, School of Continuing &amp; Professional Studies, and Sam Fox School of Design &amp; Visual Arts. Washington University enrolls approximately 16,500 students across its campuses from all 50 states and more than 110 countries.

Washington University has been a member of the Association of American Universities since 1923 and is classified among &quot;R1: Doctoral Universities – Very high research activity&quot;. In 2021, the National Science Foundation ranked Washington University 25th among academic institutions in the United States for research and development expenditures. The university&#x27;s athletic teams, Washington University Bears, play in NCAA Division III as a founding member of the University Athletic Association.

As of 2023, 26 Nobel laureates, 11 Pulitzer Prize winners, 4 United States Poet Laureates, and 6 MacArthur Fellows have been affiliated with the university as faculty or alumni. Washington University alumni also include 16 university presidents, 21 members of the United States Congress, 30 Rhodes Scholars, 7 Marshall Scholars and 2 Churchill Scholars.

==History==
===19th century===

Washington University was conceived by 17 St. Louis business, political, and religious leaders concerned by the lack of institutions of higher learning in the Midwest. Missouri state senator Wayman Crow and Unitarian minister William Greenleaf Eliot, grandfather of the poet T. S. Eliot, led the effort.

The university&#x27;s first chancellor was Joseph Gibson Hoyt. Crow secured the university charter from the Missouri General Assembly in 1853, and Eliot was named president of the board of trustees. Early on, Eliot solicited support from members of the local business community, including John O&#x27;Fallon, but Eliot failed to secure a permanent endowment. Washington University is unusual among major American universities in not having had a prior financial endowment. The institution had no backing of a religious organization, single wealthy patron, or earmarked government support. To this day, Washington University is controlled by a board of trustees that, by charter, appoints its own members.

During the three years following its inception, the university had three different names. The board first approved &quot;Eliot Seminary&quot;, but William Eliot was uncomfortable with naming a university after himself and objected to the establishment of a seminary which would implicitly be charged with teaching a religious faith. He favored a nonsectarian university.

Under pressure from Eliot, the board of trustees created a task force charged with naming the university, headed by Samuel Treat. Several months later Treat&#x27;s committee proposed naming the university the &quot;Washington Institute&quot;, after the nation&#x27;s first president George Washington. In 1854, the board of trustees changed the name to &quot;Washington Institute&quot; in honor of George Washington and because the charter was coincidentally passed on Washington&#x27;s birthday, February 22. Naming the university after the nation&#x27;s first president, only seven years before the American Civil War and during a time of bitter national division, was no coincidence. During this time of conflict, Americans universally admired George Washington as the father of the United States and a symbol of national unity. The board believed that the university should be a force of unity in a strongly divided Missouri. In 1856, the university amended its name to &quot;Washington University&quot;.

Although chartered as a university, for many years Washington University functioned primarily as a night school located on 17th Street and Washington Avenue in downtown St. Louis. Owing to limited financial resources, Washington University initially used public buildings. Classes began on October 22, 1854, at the Benton School building. At first the university paid for the evening classes, but as their popularity grew, their funding was transferred to the St. Louis Public Schools. Eventually the board secured funds for the construction of Academic Hall and a half dozen other buildings. Later the university divided into three departments: the Manual Training School, Smith Academy, and the Mary Institute.

In 1867, the university opened the first private nonsectarian law school west of the Mississippi River. By 1882, Washington University had expanded to numerous departments, which were housed in various buildings across St. Louis. Medical classes were first held at Washington University in 1891 after the St. Louis Medical College decided to affiliate with the university, establishing the School of Medicine. However, by the 1890s the university was on the brink of financial collapse until Robert Sommers Brookings, president of the board of trustees, undertook the task of rebuilding the university&#x27;s finances and acquiring land for a new campus. Brookings was instrumental in raising money for the university, since Eliot, the primary fundraiser for the university, had died.

In 1896, Holmes Smith, professor of Drawing and History of Art, designed what became the basis for the modern-day university seal. The seal is made up of elements from the Washington family coat of arms and the symbol of Louis IX, whom the city is named after.

Washington University spent its first half century in downtown St. Louis bounded by Washington Ave., Lucas Place, and Locust Street. By the 1890s, owing to the dramatic expansion of the medical school and a new benefactor in Robert Brookings, the university began to move west. The university board of directors began a process to find suitable ground and hired the landscape architecture firm Olmsted, Olmsted &amp; Eliot of Boston. A committee of Robert S. Brookings, Henry Ware Eliot, and William Huse found a site of just beyond Forest Park, located west of the city limits in St. Louis County. The elevation of the land was thought to resemble the Acropolis and inspired the nickname of &quot;Hilltop&quot; campus, renamed the Danforth campus in 2006 to honor former chancellor William H. Danforth.

In 1899, the university opened a national design contest for the new campus. The renowned Philadelphia firm Cope &amp; Stewardson (the same architects who designed a large part of the University of Pennsylvania and Princeton University) won unanimously with its plan for a row of Collegiate Gothic quadrangles inspired by Oxford and Cambridge Universities.

===20th century===
The cornerstone of the first building, Busch Hall, was laid on October 20, 1900. The construction of Brookings Hall, Ridgley, and Cupples began shortly thereafter.

The university delayed occupying these buildings until 1905 to accommodate the 1904 World&#x27;s Fair and 1904 Summer Olympics, which allowed the university to construct ten buildings instead of the seven originally planned. This original cluster of buildings set a precedent for the development of the Danforth Campus; Cope and Stewardson&#x27;s original plan and its choice of building materials have, with few exceptions, guided the construction and expansion of the Danforth Campus to the present day.

By 1915, construction of a new medical complex was completed on Kings Highway in what is now St. Louis&#x27;s Central West End. In 1918, Washington University admitted its first women medical students.

During World War II, as part of the Manhattan Project, a cyclotron at Washington University was used to produce small quantities of the newly discovered element plutonium via neutron bombardment of uranium nitrate hexahydrate. The plutonium produced there in 1942 was shipped to the Metallurgical Laboratory Compton had established at the University of Chicago where Glenn Seaborg&#x27;s team used it for extraction, purification, and characterization studies of the exotic substance.

After working for 22 years at the University of Chicago, Compton returned to St. Louis in 1946 to serve as Washington University&#x27;s ninth chancellor. Compton reestablished the Washington University football team, making the declaration that athletics were to be henceforth played on a &quot;strictly amateur&quot; basis with no athletic scholarships. Under Compton&#x27;s leadership, enrollment at the university grew dramatically, fueled primarily by World War II veterans&#x27; use of their GI Bill benefits.

The desegregation of Washington University began in 1947 with the School of Medicine and the School of Social Work. The university ended racial segregation in its undergraduate divisions in 1952, making it the last local higher education institution to do so. During the 1940s, the university faced criticism from the local African American media, which included a letter-writing campaign by churches, the local Urban League, and legal briefs by the NAACP, seeking to strip the university of its tax-exempt status.

In 1949, a student group, the Student Committee for the Admission of Negroes (SCAN), was founded and began advocating for full racial integration. In 1951, then-vice chancellor Leslie Buchan argued that full desegregation would isolate the university from the community and potentially lead to incidents on campus. The following year, in May 1952, the board of trustees passed a resolution desegregating the university&#x27;s undergraduate divisions.

During the latter half of the 20th century, Washington University transitioned from a commuter college to a world-renowned institution. In 1957, planning began for the construction of the &quot;South 40&quot;, a complex of modern residential halls which primarily house freshmen and some sophomore students.

With additional on-campus housing, the university, which had been predominantly attended by commuter students, began attracting a greater number of applicants from across the nation. By 1964, over two-thirds of incoming students came from outside the St. Louis area.

In 1971, the board of trustees appointed Chancellor William Henry Danforth, who guided the university through the social and financial crises of the 1970s, strengthened the School of Medicine, and improved the often tense ties between the university and the St. Louis community. During his 24-year chancellorship, he established 70 new endowed professorships, constructed dozens of buildings, secured a $1.72 billion endowment, and tripled the amount of student scholarships.

To better distinguish itself in national media, the university&#x27;s board of trustees added the phrase &quot;in St. Louis&quot; in 1976.

In 1995, Mark S. Wrighton, former provost at MIT, was elected the university&#x27;s 14th chancellor. During Chancellor Wrighton&#x27;s tenure undergraduate applications to Washington University more than doubled. Since 1995, the university has added more than 190 endowed professorships, revamped its Arts &amp; Sciences curriculum, and completed more than 30 new buildings.
Washington University&#x27;s reputation was enhanced by two major fundraising efforts since the 1980s. From 1983 to 1987, the &quot;Alliance for Washington University&quot; campaign raised $630.5 million, which was then the most successful fund-raising effort in national history. From 1998 to 2004, the &quot;Campaign for Washington University&quot; raised $1.55 billion, which was applied to additional scholarships, professorships, and research initiatives.

=== 21st century ===
In 2002, Washington University co-founded the Cortex Innovation Community in St. Louis&#x27;s Midtown neighborhood. Cortex is the largest innovation hub in the midwest, home to offices of Square, Microsoft, Aon, Boeing, and Centene. The innovation hub has generated more than 3,800 tech jobs in 14 years.

In 2005, Washington University founded the McDonnell International Scholars Academy, an international network of premier research universities, with an initial endowment gift of $10 million from John F. McDonnell. The academy, which selects scholars from 35 partnered universities around the world, was created to develop a cohort of future leaders, strengthen ties with top foreign universities, and promote global awareness and social responsibility.

In Fall 2006, the St. Louis Metro opened the Cross–County extension of its light rail MetroLink system. Three of the nine new stations directly serve the university (Skinker, University City-Big Bend, and Forsyth). On July 1, 2006, the university began offering free Metro passes—the U Pass—to all full-time students, benefits-eligible faculty and staff, and full-time employees of qualified service providers.

In June 2019, Andrew D. Martin, former dean of the College of Literature, Science, and the Arts at the University of Michigan, was elected the university&#x27;s 15th chancellor. On the day of his inauguration, Martin announced the &quot;WashU Pledge&quot;, a financial aid program allowing full-time Missouri and southern Illinois students who are Pell Grant-eligible or from families with annual incomes of $75,000 or less to attend the university cost-free.

In October 2021, Washington University announced it would invest an additional $1 billion in financial aid for students. The university practices need-blind admissions and meets 100% of admitted students&#x27; demonstrated needs. The new financial aid initiative, called Gateway to Success, included $800 million in endowed funding to support need-blind undergraduate admissions, meaning the university will not consider an applicant&#x27;s financial situation when making admissions decisions while still meeting 100% of demonstrated financial need for admitted undergraduates. Another $200 million will be designated for financial aid for graduate and professional students in the university&#x27;s Brown School, the School of Law and the School of Medicine, as well as in business, engineering, art and architecture, and Arts &amp; Sciences.

In 2022, Washington University was one of 10 universities picked to join the Kessler Scholars Collaborative, which provides support for selected first-generation and Pell-Grant eligible STEM students. The program aims to recruit 20 fully funded Kessler scholars per year and provide additional opportunities to close the wealth gap. Also, in 2022, Washington University developed a needle-free nasal vaccine to combat COVID-19.

In March 2024, Washington University agreed to purchase the campus of neighboring Fontbonne University when it closes in 2025.

In April 2024, Washington University administrators called the police on a pro-Palestinian demonstration and encampment, resulting in more than 80 arrests. Those arrested included Green Party presidential candidate Jill Stein and the president of the St. Louis Board of Aldermen. A local professor&#x27;s ribs and hand were broken during his arrest, leading to his hospitalization.

In August 2024, the university rebranded, officially adopting the name &quot;WashU&quot; for marketing and communications, but not formal use, phasing out the use of other names such as &quot;WUSTL,&quot; &quot;Washington University,&quot; and &quot;WU.&quot; These changes were made citing ongoing efforts to form a more cohesive brand, attain name recognition on par with peer institutions, and reduce confusion with similarly-named universities as well as those in Washington or Washington, D.C.

===U.S. presidential and vice-presidential debates===
Washington University has been selected by the Commission on Presidential Debates to host more presidential and vice presidential debates than any other institution in history. The campus was the venue for four presidential debates, and one vice-presidential debate: the inaugural 1992 presidential debate on October 11, 1992, the third 2000 Presidential debate on October 17, the second 2004 Presidential debate on October 8, the sole 2008 Vice Presidential debate between Joe Biden and Sarah Palin on October 2, and the second 2016 Presidential debate on October 9. The university was scheduled to host a debate in 1996, but that debate was cancelled when the number of scheduled debates was scaled back to two.

Following the 2004 debate, Chancellor Wrighton initially expressed skepticism about hosting another debate but later changed his view. He acknowledged the unique educational opportunities for students and emphasized the role of these events in contributing to a national understanding of important issues. Wrighton also highlighted their impact in bringing national and international attention to the St. Louis region, positioning it as one of America&#x27;s great metropolitan areas.

Contrary to the majority opinion of the student body, the university opted not to host a 2020 presidential debate.

==Campuses==

===Danforth===
The university&#x27;s 169-acre Danforth Campus is bordered by the Forest Park section of St. Louis and Clayton and University City, Missouri.
A large portion of the Danforth Campus is recognized as the Washington University Hilltop Campus Historic District, which achieved National Historic Landmark status on February 27, 1987.

The Barry Flanagan bronze statue, &quot;Thinker on a Rock,&quot; widely known, simply, as &quot;The Bunny&quot;, is currently on permanent loan to Washington University and features prominently near Olin Library, Graham Chapel and Mallinckrodt.

==== Gephardt Institute for Civic and Community Engagement ====
Founded with a major gift from former U.S. congressman Richard Gephardt. Major activities of the Gephardt Institute include the hosting of speakers series, internship and career placement services, granting of money to faculty and students for community-based teaching and learning, supporting co-curricular activities with the community service office, and a summer stipend program, where the university financially supports students who take uncompensated internships in the field of public service.

==== Mildred Lane Kemper Art Museum ====

The Mildred Lane Kemper Art Museum, established in 1881, is one of the oldest teaching museums in the country. The collection includes works from 19th-, 20th-, and 21st-century American and European artists, including George Caleb Bingham, Thomas Cole, Pablo Picasso, Max Ernst, Alexander Calder, Jackson Pollock, Rembrandt, Robert Rauschenberg, Barbara Kruger, and Christian Boltanski. Also in the complex is the Newman Money Museum exhibiting the collection of American numismatist Eric P. Newman. In October 2006, the Kemper Art Museum moved from its previous location, Steinberg Hall, into a new facility designed by former faculty member Fumihiko Maki. The Kemper Art Museum is located directly across from Steinberg Hall, which was Maki&#x27;s first commission in 1959.

===Medical===

Washington University Medical Center comprises spread over 18 city blocks, located along the eastern edge of Forest Park within the Central West End neighborhood of St. Louis. The campus is home to the Washington University School of Medicine and its associated teaching hospitals, Barnes-Jewish Hospital and St. Louis Children&#x27;s Hospital. Many of the buildings are connected via a series of skyways and corridors.

The school&#x27;s 2,100 employed and volunteer faculty physicians also serve as the medical staff of Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children&#x27;s hospitals, which are part of BJC HealthCare. Washington University and BJC have taken on many joint venture projects, such as the Center for Advanced Medicine, completed in December 2001.

In 2019, Washington University was awarded a $7.6 million grant from the National Cancer Institute to create the Implementation Science Center for Cancer Control to address disparities in cancer care in parts of Missouri and Illinois. In 2022, Washington University&#x27;s Institute of Clinical and Translational Sciences was awarded a five-year $61 million grant from the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences of the National Institutes of Health, to focus on precision medicine, health equity, and diversity.

===Tyson Research Center===

Tyson Research Center is a field station located west of St. Louis on the Meramec River. Washington University obtained Tyson as surplus property from the federal government in 1963. It is used by the university as a biological field station and research/education center. In 2010, the Living Learning Center was named one of the first two buildings accredited nationwide as a &quot;living building&quot; under the Living Building Challenge, opened to serve as a biological research station and classroom for summer students.

=== Other ===
Washington University&#x27;s North Campus and West Campus principally house administrative functions that are not student focused. North Campus lies in St. Louis City near the Delmar Loop. The university acquired the building and adjacent property in 2004, formerly home to the Angelica Uniform Factory. Several university administrative departments are located at the North Campus location, including offices for Quadrangle Housing, Accounting and Treasury Services, Parking and Transportation Services, Army ROTC, and Network Technology Services. The North Campus location also provides off-site storage space for the Performing Arts Department.

The West Campus is located about to the west of the Danforth Campus in Clayton, Missouri, and primarily consists of a four-story former department store building housing mostly administrative space. The West Campus building was home to the Clayton branch of the Famous-Barr department store until 1990, when the university acquired the property and adjacent parking and began a series of renovations. Today, the basement level houses the West Campus Library, the University Archives, the Modern Graphic History Library, and conference space. The ground level still remains a retail space. The upper floors house consolidated capital gifts, portions of university advancement, and information systems offices from across the Danforth and Medical School campuses. There is also a music rehearsal room on the second floor.

== Academics ==
===Arts and Sciences===

Arts &amp; Sciences is home to the College of Arts &amp; Sciences as well as graduate programs across its many departments. The College of Arts &amp; Sciences is the central undergraduate unit of the university with 330 tenured and tenure-track faculty along with over 100 research scientists, lecturers, artists-in-residence, and visitors serving more than 3,700 undergraduates in 40 academic departments divided into divisions of Humanities, Social sciences, and Natural sciences and Mathematics. The College of Arts &amp; Sciences has an average class size of 18 students, with over 80% having fewer than 24. Almost one-half of the undergraduate classes have fewer than 10 students. The student-faculty ratio is 7:1.

The College of Arts &amp; Sciences offers courses in over a dozen languages, including Arabic, Hebrew, Spanish, German, French, Swahili, Chinese, Japanese, Korean, Russian, Greek, Italian, Hindi, Portuguese, and Latin. The School of Continuing &amp; Professional Studies in Arts &amp; Sciences also offers course work in Swedish, Vietnamese, Irish, and Czech.

===Business===
Founded as the School of Commerce and Finance in 1917, the Olin Business School was named after entrepreneur John M. Olin in 1988. The school&#x27;s academic programs include BSBA, MBA, Professional MBA (PMBA), Executive MBA (EMBA), Master of Science programs, Master of Accounting, Global Master of Finance Dual Degree program, and doctoral programs, as well as non-degree Executive Education. In 2002, an Executive MBA program was established in Shanghai, in cooperation with Fudan University.

Olin has a network of more than 16,000 alumni worldwide. In 2004, the school&#x27;s endowment increased to $213 million (2004) and annual gifts average $12 million per year. Simon Hall was opened in 1986 after a donation from John E. Simon. On May 2, 2014, the $90 million conjoined Knight and Bauer Halls were dedicated, following a $15 million gift from Charles F. Knight and Joanne Knight and a $10 million gift from George and Carol Bauer through the Bauer Foundation. The two buildings are joined by a three-story-high atrium and include spaces for lectures, faculty offices, and classrooms.

Undergraduate BSBA students take 40–60% of their courses within the business school. Students may also take elective courses from other disciplines at Washington University, including law and many other fields.

===School of Design and Visual Arts===
The Sam Fox School of Design &amp; Visual Arts was founded in 2006, merging the existing academic units of Architecture and Art with the university&#x27;s museum. The school comprises
* College of Architecture
* Graduate School of Architecture &amp; Urban Design
* College of Art
* Graduate School of Art
* Mildred Lane Kemper Art Museum, considered one of the most distinguished university art collections in the country
In October 2006 the Mildred Lane Kemper Art Museum moved into new facilities designed by Pritzker Prize-winning architect, and former faculty member, Fumihiko Maki. The art museum was first established in 1881 and was the first art museum west of the Mississippi River. It houses most of the university&#x27;s art and sculpture collections, including pieces by Jackson Pollock, Robert Rauschenberg, Jenny Holzer, Pablo Picasso, Max Ernst, Willem de Kooning, Henri Matisse, Joan Miró, and Rembrandt van Rijn, among others.

===McKelvey School of Engineering===
With approximately $27 million in annual research awards, the school focuses intellectual efforts on medicine and health, energy and environment, entrepreneurship, and security.

On January 31, 2019, the School of Engineering &amp; Applied Science was renamed to the James McKelvey School of Engineering. This renaming honored trustee and distinguished alumnus Jim McKelvey Jr., the co-founder of Square, following his substantial donation.

=== School of Continuing &amp; Professional Studies ===
In June 2023, Washington University announced its renamed and revamped University College as the School of Continuing &amp; Professional Studies (CAPS). CAPS was established to focus on adult learners with a focus on rapidly growing and high paying fields like data analytics, education, healthcare, and management. The pre-nursing program was developed in partnership with Goldfarb School of Nursing at Barnes-Jewish College.

=== School of Law ===
Washington University School of Law offers joint-degree programs with the Olin Business School, the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, the School of Medicine, and the School of Social Work. It also offers LLM programs, a Master of Juridical Studies (MJS), and a Juris Doctoris (JD). The law school offers 3 semesters of courses in the Spring, Summer, and Fall, and requires at least 85 credit hours of coursework for the JD.

The law school offers a full-time day program, beginning in August, for the J.D. degree. The law school is located in Anheuser-Busch Hall (opened in 1997).

===Medicine===
The Washington University School of Medicine was established in 1891. In the 2021 &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; rankings of U.S. medical schools, it was ranked sixth for research and tied for 31st for primary care. The McDonnell Genome Institute (directed by Richard K. Wilson) is housed within the Washington University School of Medicine; it is one of three NIH-funded major DNA sequencing centers in the U.S. and played a significant role in the Human Genome Project. In 2022, the Washington University School of Medicine ranked third among U.S. medical schools in terms of NIH funding received.

The medical school partners with St. Louis Children&#x27;s Hospital and Barnes-Jewish Hospital, where all physicians are members of the school&#x27;s faculty.

===Social Work and Public Health===

With roots dating back to 1909 in the university&#x27;s School of Social Economy, the George Warren Brown School of Social Work was founded in 1925. Brown&#x27;s academic degree offerings include a Master of Social Work, a Master of Public Health, a PhD programs. The school was endowed by Bettie Bofinger Brown and named for her husband, George Warren Brown, a St. Louis philanthropist and co-founder of the Brown Shoe Company. The school was the first in the country to have a building for the purpose of social work education, and it is also a founding member of the Association of Schools and Programs of Public Health.

===Former dental school===
Established as the Missouri Dental College in 1866, the Washington University School of Dental Medicine was the first dental school west of the Mississippi River and the sixth dental school in the United States. The school closed in 1991.

==Rankings and reputation==
Washington University is ranked 21st in the nation in the 2024 &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; National Universities ranking, and 11th by &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; in their 2018 rankings. The university is ranked 25th in the world for 2019 by the &quot;Academic Ranking of World Universities&quot;. Undergraduate admission to Washington University is characterized by the Carnegie Foundation and &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; as &quot;most selective&quot;. The &quot;Princeton Review&quot;, in its 2020 edition, gave the university an admissions selectivity rating of 99 out of 99. The acceptance rate for the class of 2026 (those entering in the fall of 2022) was 11.3%, with students selected from more than 33,000 applications. Of students admitted, 91 percent were in the top 10 percent of their class.
&quot;The Princeton Review&quot; ranked Washington University first for Best College Dorms and third for Best College Food, Best-Run Colleges, and Best Financial Aid in its 2020 edition. In its 2022 edition, Princeton Review also ranked Washington University as number 2 for &quot;Top Entrepreneurship Under Ten Thousand Students&quot;, #1 for &quot;Top Midwest Entreprenuerships&quot;, as a &quot;Colleges That Create Futures&quot; and of having a great quality of life. &quot;Niche&quot; listed the university as the best college for architecture and the second-best college campus and college dorms in the United States in 2020. The Washington University School of Medicine was ranked sixth for research by &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; in 2020 and has been listed among the top ten medical schools since the rankings were first published in 1987. Additionally, &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; ranked the university&#x27;s genetics and physical therapy as tied for first place. &quot;QS World University Rankings&quot; ranked Washington University sixth in the world for anatomy and physiology in 2020. In January 2020, Olin Business School was named the Poets&amp;Quants MBA Program of 2019.

Washington University was named one of the &quot;25 New Ivies&quot; by &quot;Newsweek&quot; in 2006 and has also been called a &quot;Hidden Ivy&quot;.

A 2014 study ranked Washington University #1 in the country for income inequality About 22% of Washington University&#x27;s students came from the top 1%, while only about 6% came from the bottom 60%. In response to backlash about these facts, university administration announced plans to increase the number of Pell-eligible recipients on campus from 6% to 13% by 2020 The university achieved that goal three years early, and as of 2022, 19.9% of undergraduate students were eligible for Pell Grants, representing a 300% increase since 2012. In October 2019, then newly inaugurated Chancellor Andrew D. Martin announced the &quot;WashU Pledge&quot;, a financial aid program that provides a free undergraduate education to all full-time Missouri and Southern Illinois students who are Pell Grant eligible or from families with annual incomes of $75,000 or less.

The American Talent Initiative found Washington University had the highest Pell growth rate among 130 major universities between the 2015–16 and 2019–20 academic years.

==Research==

More than 60% of undergraduates are involved in faculty research across all areas; it is an institutional priority for undergraduates to be allowed to participate in advanced research. According to the Center for Measuring University Performance, it is considered to be one of the top 10 private research universities in the nation. A dedicated Office of Undergraduate Research is located on the Danforth Campus and serves as a resource to post research opportunities, advise students in finding appropriate positions matching their interests, publish undergraduate research journals, and award research grants to make it financially possible to perform research.

According to the National Science Foundation, Washington University spent $989 million on research and development in 2021, ranking it 25th in the nation. The university has over 150 National Institutes of Health funded inventions, with many of them licensed to private companies. Governmental agencies and non-profit foundations such as the NIH, United States Department of Defense, National Science Foundation, and NASA provide the majority of research grant funding, with Washington University being one of the top recipients in NIH grants from year-to-year. Nearly 80% of NIH grants to institutions in the state of Missouri went to Washington University alone in 2007. Washington University and its medical school play a large part in the Human Genome Project, where it contributes approximately 25% of the finished sequence.

NASA hosts its Planetary Data System Geosciences Node on the campus of Washington University. Professors, students, and researchers have been heavily involved with many unmanned missions to Mars. Professor Raymond Arvidson has been deputy principal investigator of the Mars Exploration Rover mission and co-investigator of the Phoenix lander robotic arm.

Washington University professor Joseph Lowenstein, with the assistance of several undergraduate students, has been involved in editing, annotating, making a digital archive of the first publication of poet Edmund Spenser&#x27;s collective works in 100 years. A large grant from the National Endowment for the Humanities was given to support this project centralized at Washington University with support from other colleges in the United States.

In 2019, Folding@Home, a distributed computing project for performing molecular dynamics simulations of protein dynamics, was moved to Washington University School of Medicine from Stanford University. The project, currently led by Greg Bowman, uses the idle CPU time of personal computers owned by volunteers to conduct protein folding research. Folding@home&#x27;s research is primarily focused on biomedical problems such as Alzheimer&#x27;s disease, Cancer, Coronavirus disease 2019, and Ebola virus disease. In April 2020, Folding@home became the world&#x27;s first exaFLOP computing system with a peak performance of 1.5 exaflops, making it more than seven times faster than the world&#x27;s fastest supercomputer, Summit, and more powerful than the top 100 supercomputers in the world, combined.

===McDonnell International Scholars Academy===
The &quot;McDonnell International Scholars Academy&quot; (MISA) is an alliance between universities that supports collaboration on research, development of joint educational opportunities, and joint research conferences. The program is named after John F. McDonnell, who provided an initial $10 million gift to establish the academy in 2005. MISA features a graduate-level endowed scholarship program for international students to study at Washington University. Founded in 2005, the academy&#x27;s core mission is to develop a community of future global leaders from partner institutions worldwide. The program is believed to be the first of its kind in the United States.

==Library system==
The Washington University library system comprises 10 libraries, with the main library, Olin Library, centrally located on the Danforth Campus. According to the American Library Association, it is the 44th largest library in the United States in terms of volumes held, containing over 5.3 million volumes. In 2020, the Princeton Review ranked the Olin Library among the top 10 &quot;Best College Libraries&quot; in the United States. The remaining 9 libraries in the system include:
* Al and Ruth Kopolow (Business) Library
* Bernard Becker Medical Library
* Brown School Library
* East Asian Library
* Gaylord Music Library
* Kenneth and Nancy Kranzberg Art &amp; Architecture Library
* Law Library
* West Campus Library

==Campus life==
=== Student body ===
In 2023, Washington University enrolled approximately 16,550 students who came from all 50 U.S. states and more than 110 countries.

Of the 1,832 first year students enrolled in Fall 2023, 35% were Caucasian, 27% were Asian, 13% were Latino/Hispanic, 12% were Black/African-American, 11% were International, 1% were Native American/Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander and 1% did not identity; 52% were female and 48% were male.

=== Student organizations ===

Washington University has over 300 undergraduate student organizations on campus. Most are funded by the Washington University Student Union, which, as of fiscal year 2024, has an annual budget of $4.2 million. The Student Union sponsors large-scale campus programs including WILD (a semesterly concert in the quad) and free copies of the &quot;New York Times&quot;, &quot;USA Today&quot;, and the &quot;St. Louis Post-Dispatch&quot; through The Collegiate Readership Program; it also funds the campus television station, WUTV, and the radio station, KWUR. KWUR was named best radio station in St. Louis of 2003 by the Riverfront Times despite the fact its signal reaches only a few blocks beyond the boundaries of the campus. The Congress of the South 40 (CS40) is a Residential Life and Events Programming Board, which operates outside of the SU sphere. CS40&#x27;s funding comes from the housing activities fee of each student living in the South 40.Many of these organizations and other campus life amenities are housed in the $43 million Danforth University Center on the Danforth Campus, also dedicated in honor of emeritus Chancellor William Henry Danforth. The building opened on August 11, 2008.

Washington University has a large number of student-run musical groups on campus, including 13 official a cappella groups. The Pikers, an all-male group, is the oldest such group on campus. The Greenleafs, an all-female group is the oldest (and only) female group on campus. The Mosaic Whispers, founded in 1991, is the oldest co-ed group on campus. They have produced 9 albums and have appeared on a number of compilation albums, including Ben Folds&#x27; Ben Folds Presents: University A Cappella! The Amateurs, who also appeared on this album, is another co-ed a cappella group on campus, founded in 1991. They have recorded seven albums and toured extensively. After Dark is a co-ed a cappella group founded in 2001. It has released three albums and has won several Contemporary A Capella Recording (CARA) awards. In 2008 the group performed on MSNBC during coverage of the vice presidential debate with specially written songs about Joe Biden and Sarah Palin.

===Greek life===

Washington University has eleven fraternities and nine sororities on campus. In 2020, a large number of Greek life members, primarily from sororities permanently deactivated from their chapters as a result of perceived systematic oppression, racism, and sexism. Some students called for the total abolition of Greek Life on campus. As of Spring 2021, approximately 14% of the student body participated in Greek life.

===Residences===

Most of the residence halls on campus are located on the South 40, named because of its adjacent location on the south side of the Danforth Campus and its size of . It is the location of all freshman buildings as well as several sophomore buildings, which are set up in the traditional residential college system. All of the residential halls are co-ed. The South 40 is organized as a pedestrian-friendly environment wherein residences surround a central recreational lawn known as the Swamp. Bear&#x27;s Den (the largest dining hall on campus), the Student Health Center for the Danforth Campus, the Residential Life Office, University police headquarters, various student-owned businesses, and the baseball, softball, and intramural fields located on the South 40.Another group of residences, known as the Village, is located in the northwest corner of Danforth Campus. Only open to upperclassmen and January Scholars, the North Side consists of Millbrook Apartments, The Village, Village East on-campus apartments, and all fraternity houses except the Zeta Beta Tau house, which is off campus and located just northwest of the South 40. Sororities at Washington University do not have houses by their own accord. The Village is a group of residences where students who have similar interests or academic goals apply as small groups of 4 to 24, known as Living Learning Communities (LLCs), to live together in clustered suites . Like the South 40, the residences around the Village also surround a recreational lawn.

In addition to South 40 and North Side residence halls, Washington University owns several other buildings within walking distance to Danforth Campus, which are open to upperclassmen. They include the Rosedale Apartments, University Drive apartments (consisting of approximately eight buildings directly across Forest Park Parkway from the Danforth Campus), Greenway Apartments, and the Lofts. Until Spring 2024, three additional buildings (520 Kingsland, 6678 Washington Ave, and 6665 Washington Ave) were offered as three-person apartments for upperclassmen but will be converted to graduate student housing after the 2023-2024 academic year.

===Student media===
Washington University supports four major student-run media outlets. The university&#x27;s student-run newspaper, &quot;Student Life&quot;, is published twice a week under the auspices of Washington University Student Media, Inc., an independent not-for-profit organization incorporated in 1999. The paper was first founded in 1878.

KWUR (90.3 FM) serves as the students&#x27; official radio station; the station also attracts an audience in the immediately surrounding community due to its eclectic and free-form musical programming. WUTV is the university&#x27;s closed-circuit television channel.

The university&#x27;s main student-run political publication is the &quot;Washington University Political Review&quot; (nicknamed &quot;WUPR&quot;), a self-described &quot;multipartisan&quot; monthly magazine. Washington University undergraduates publish two literary and art journals, &quot;The Eliot Review&quot; and &quot;Spires Intercollegiate Arts and Literary Magazine&quot;.

A variety of other publications also serve the university community, ranging from in-house academic journals to glossy alumni magazines to &quot;WUnderground&quot;, the student-run satirical newspaper.

===Athletics===
Washington University was a founding member of the University Athletic Association of NCAA Division III and previously was a founding member of the Missouri Valley Conference. Between 1907 and 1942, Washington University played with what are now classified as NCAA Division I teams.

The Bears have won 24 NCAA Division III Championships— two in women&#x27;s cross country (2011, 2018), two in women&#x27;s indoor track and field (2017, 2023), one in women&#x27;s outdoor track and field (2017), one in men&#x27;s tennis (2008), two in men&#x27;s basketball (2008, 2009), five in women&#x27;s basketball (1998–2001, 2010), ten in women&#x27;s volleyball (1989, 1991–1996, 2003, 2007, 2009), and one in women&#x27;s soccer (2016) – and 262 conference titles in 16 different sports.Washington University hosts 42 club sports. The Washington University men&#x27;s club water polo team has been particularly successful, capturing the Collegiate Water Polo Association Division III Club National Championship title in 2011, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018, and 2019. Funding for club sports comes from the Student Union budget, as each club is deemed a campus group.

Washington University is home of Francis Olympic Field, site of the 1904 Summer Olympics. Francis Olympic Field is also home of the Washington University football, soccer, and track and field teams.

===Traditions===
* WILD – Walk In, Lay Down, the semesterly concert in the Quad which brings in popular musical acts. The future of WILD remains unclear with multiple cancelled events due to COVID and university concerns an alternative event NAP was run in Fall 2023 off campus in an attempt to redefine WILD.
* Thurtene Carnival – The oldest and largest student-run carnival in the nation, run by Thurtene Honorary.
* Vertigo – A dance party put on by the Engineering School Council (EnCouncil), featuring an innovative computer-controlled modular LED illuminated dance floor built by students.
* Cultural shows – Each year Washington University student groups put on several multicultural shows. Ashoka, the South Asian student association, puts on a performance for Diwali, the Indian festival of lights, that includes a skit and dances. Black Anthology is a student-run performance arts show celebrating black culture. Lunar New Year Festival is a student group that puts on a performance in collaboration with a philanthropic partner organization to celebrate the Lunar New Year through various Asian performing arts. Africa Week and the African Film Festival are annual events hosted by the African Students Association. Finally, the Association of Latin American Students showcases various forms of Latin and Spanish dances during their performance, Carnaval.
* Brookings Hall – A superstition among students to never step on the university seal at Brookings Hall. It is said that doing so will prevent one from graduating on time.
* Convocation – A large gathering for new students and their families intended to welcome them to the university. Among others, it includes speeches from seniors and university leadership.
* DUC N&#x27; Donuts – Taking place on the first Friday of every month at the Danforth University Center (DUC), this tradition allows students to learn about monthly events while enjoying free coffee and donuts.
* Cheap Lunch – Every Wednesday, the Engineering School Council (EnCouncil), provides pizza, chips, and cookies for a low cost.
* Art Prom – Every Spring, students from the Sam Fox School of Design and Visual Arts host a “formal” dance with a creative twist.
* Underpass Panels – A series of panels along the walls of the underpass connecting the South 40 to the main Danforth Campus. Tradition involves the painting of each panel by students and clubs to advertise upcoming events. Located adjacent to the underpass is a large concrete ball, a concrete cube, and pyramid, also painted to advertise student events.

==Notable people==

Washington University has over 19,000 faculty and staff members and over 156,000 living alumni. Awards and honors recognizing Washington University alumni and faculty include the Nobel Prize, Pulitzer Prize, U.S. Poet Laureate, National Book Award, National Book Critics Circle Award, National Medal of Science, National Medal of Arts, Rhodes Scholarship, Guggenheim Fellowship, Fulbright Fellowship, Putnam Fellowship, MacArthur Prize, and membership in the National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, Royal Society of London, American Institute of Architects, American Academy of Arts and Letters, American Association for the Advancement of Science, American Law Institute, American Philosophical Society, National Academy of Medicine, and American Academy of Arts and Sciences

=== Alumni ===
Notable undergrad alumni include the chairman of Manchester United, Avram Glazer; Lionsgate Films CEO, Jon Feltheimer; Men&#x27;s Wearhouse founder, George Zimmer; former Greenpeace executive director, Phil Radford; Gilead Sciences founder, Michael L. Riordan; Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia, Siniša Mali; Missouri senator, Jim Talent; Nevada senator, Chic Hecht; Nebraska congressman, Hal Daub; Pulitzer Prize-winning journalists, Ken Cooper and Hank Klibanoff; Tony Award-winning theatrical producer, David Merrick; baseball player, Dal Maxvill; and the first director of the World Health Organization&#x27;s Global Program on AIDS, Jonathan Mann. Additionally, the list includes science show host, Deanne Bell (Design Squad); New York Times best-selling author, Susannah Cahalan; character actress, Mary Wickes; television actor, Johnny Kastl; 41st attorney general of Missouri, Chris Koster; Paralympic Gold Medalist, Kendall Gretsch; and radical feminist, Shulamith Firestone. Undergraduate alumni also include co-inventor of nylon Julian W. Hill; co-discoverer of the neutrino Clyde Cowan; Governor of Illinois James R. Thompson; U.S. ambassador to Belgium Sam Fox; Edward S. Holden, president of the University of California; Thomas Lamb Eliot, founder of Reed College; and Abram L. Sachar, founding president of Brandeis University. Graduates of the College of Architecture include George Hellmuth, Gyo Obata, and George Kassabaum, founders of HOK, the world&#x27;s fourth-largest architectural firm. Lisa Sharkey, an American media executive and publisher, and member of Council of the District of Columbia, William Lightfoot

Graduate alumni include Nobel laureates Earl Sutherland, Edwin Krebs, and Daniel Nathans who all graduated from the School of Medicine. Businessman and adventurer Steve Fossett earned his MBA from the business school. Law school graduate Joseph Poindexter was governor of Hawaii during the Pearl Harbor attack. Doctoral alumni include the former presidents of Johns Hopkins, Clemson, Wake Forest, Morehouse, Mount Union, Yonsei, and Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. Mike Simpson, the U.S. representative for Idaho&#x27;s 2nd congressional district is a graduate of the Dental School.

Notable individuals who attended but did not graduate include playwright Tennessee Williams (who left in protest at not winning a playwriting prize); Charles Eames, who was expelled for defending modernist architecture; Jack C. Taylor, the founder of Enterprise Rent-a-Car, who withdrew to fight in World War II; Pulitzer Prize winner and bestselling author Bill Dedman, who left to pursue a career as a newspaper reporter; and Marilyn vos Savant, the IQ-record holder, who left to assist with a family investment business. 

=== Faculty ===
Notable faculty include 56th governor of Missouri Eric Greitens; economist Hyman Minsky; novelists Stanley Elkin and William H. Gass; poet Carl Phillips; architect Louis C. Spering; artist Max Beckmann; sex researchers William Masters and Virginia Johnson; writer and culture critic Gerald Early; two-time United States Poet Laureate Howard Nemerov; founder of the American Association of University Professors Arthur Oncken Lovejoy; chemist Joseph W. Kennedy, co-discoverer of the element plutonium; first woman director of both the National Gallery of Canada and the Philadelphia Museum of Art, Jean Sutherland Boggs; and chemist Holden Thorp, editor-in-chief of &quot;Science Magazine&quot;. 


== See also ==

* Center for Social Development
* Central Institute for the Deaf
* Crow Observatory
* Whitney R. Harris World Law Institute

==References==
==External links==
* Washington University Athletics website
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q777403" start="0" end="34" title="Washington University in St. Louis" label="Washington University in St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q777403" start="36" end="41" title="Washington University in St. Louis" label="WashU"/>
<link wikidata="Q777403" start="45" end="50" title="Washington University in St. Louis" label="WUSTL"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="57" end="64" title="Private university" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q15936437" start="65" end="84" title="research university" label="research university"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="88" end="97" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="171" end="188" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="200" end="230" title="president of the United States" label="president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801506" start="332" end="349" title="Arts and Sciences at Washington University in St. Louis" label="Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545897" start="351" end="392" title="George Warren Brown School of Social Work" label="George Warren Brown School of Social Work"/>
<link wikidata="Q7086906" start="394" end="414" title="Olin Business School" label="Olin Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972509" start="416" end="456" title="Washington University School of Medicine" label="Washington University School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972508" start="458" end="488" title="McKelvey School of Engineering" label="McKelvey School of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354197" start="490" end="525" title="Washington University School of Law" label="Washington University School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407484" start="580" end="622" title="Sam Fox School of Design &amp;amp; Visual Arts" label="Sam Fox School of Design &amp;amp; Visual Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q743812" start="800" end="836" title="Association of American Universities" label="Association of American Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4223026" start="855" end="865" title="Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education" label="classified"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="954" end="981" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="1069" end="1093" title="research and development" label="research and development"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972502" start="1146" end="1173" title="Washington University Bears" label="Washington University Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284440" start="1183" end="1200" title="NCAA Division III" label="NCAA Division III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401736" start="1229" end="1260" title="University Athletic Association" label="University Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592313" start="1275" end="1293" title="List of Nobel laureates affiliated with Washington University in St. Louis as alumni or faculty" label="26 Nobel laureates"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="1298" end="1312" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q981258" start="1324" end="1351" title="United States Poet Laureate" label="United States Poet Laureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543268" start="1360" end="1377" title="MacArthur Fellows Program" label="MacArthur Fellows"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603828" start="1441" end="1469" title="List of Washington University alumni" label="Washington University alumni"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="1527" end="1549" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204346" start="1554" end="1569" title="Rhodes Scholarship" label="Rhodes Scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4442635" start="1573" end="1590" title="Marshall Scholarship" label="Marshall Scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118221" start="1597" end="1615" title="Churchill Scholarship" label="Churchill Scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="1786" end="1801" title="Tertiary education" label="higher learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="1809" end="1816" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975961" start="1841" end="1852" title="Wayman Crow" label="Wayman Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843054" start="1857" end="1866" title="American Unitarian Association" label="Unitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010172" start="1876" end="1899" title="William Greenleaf Eliot" label="William Greenleaf Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="1925" end="1936" title="T. S. Eliot" label="T. S. Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q15515928" start="1998" end="2016" title="Joseph Gibson Hoyt" label="Joseph Gibson Hoyt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879566" start="2063" end="2088" title="Missouri General Assembly" label="Missouri General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250872" start="2244" end="2262" title="John O&amp;#x27;Fallon" label="John O&amp;#x27;Fallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412795" start="3149" end="3161" title="Samuel Treat" label="Samuel Treat"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="3316" end="3333" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="3431" end="3448" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="3634" end="3652" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117147" start="4503" end="4527" title="St. Louis Public Schools" label="St. Louis Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779832" start="4740" end="4754" title="Mary Institute" label="Mary Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354197" start="4819" end="4829" title="Washington University School of Law" label="law school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="4842" end="4859" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972509" start="5147" end="5165" title="Washington University School of Medicine" label="School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q521310" start="5249" end="5273" title="Robert S. Brookings" label="Robert Sommers Brookings"/>
<link wikidata="Q346" start="5764" end="5772" title="Louis IX of France" label="Louis IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021081" start="6199" end="6227" title="Olmsted Brothers" label="Olmsted, Olmsted &amp;amp; Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5729871" start="6275" end="6291" title="Henry Ware Eliot" label="Henry Ware Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q594411" start="6338" end="6349" title="Forest Park (St. Louis)" label="Forest Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q498034" start="6386" end="6402" title="St. Louis County, Missouri" label="St. Louis County"/>
<link wikidata="Q131013" start="6458" end="6467" title="Acropolis of Athens" label="Acropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643693" start="6588" end="6607" title="William Henry Danforth" label="William H. Danforth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168338" start="6718" end="6739" title="Cope &amp;amp; Stewardson" label="Cope &amp;amp; Stewardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="6794" end="6820" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="6825" end="6845" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q56266198" start="6890" end="6907" title="Collegiate Gothic" label="Collegiate Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="6932" end="6938" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="6943" end="6952" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974652" start="7088" end="7102" title="Brookings Hall" label="Brookings Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520847" start="7231" end="7253" title="1904 World&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="1904 World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q8098" start="7258" end="7278" title="1904 Summer Olympics" label="1904 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7869" end="7881" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="7898" end="7915" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q204469" start="7919" end="7928" title="cyclotron" label="cyclotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102" start="8023" end="8032" title="plutonium" label="plutonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="8037" end="8044" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q416785" start="8060" end="8087" title="Uranyl nitrate" label="uranium nitrate hexahydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433335" start="8145" end="8169" title="Metallurgical Laboratory" label="Metallurgical Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="8201" end="8222" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q48973" start="8229" end="8242" title="Glenn Seaborg" label="Glenn Seaborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="8382" end="8403" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="9314" end="9319" title="NAACP" label="NAACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643693" start="10461" end="10483" title="William Henry Danforth" label="William Henry Danforth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972509" start="10582" end="10600" title="Washington University School of Medicine" label="School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047357" start="10956" end="10973" title="Trustee" label="board of trustees"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769557" start="11035" end="11051" title="Mark S. Wrighton" label="Mark S. Wrighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="11071" end="11074" title="MIT" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q60744420" start="11930" end="11957" title="Cortex Innovation Community" label="Cortex Innovation Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843106" start="11978" end="11998" title="Midtown St. Louis" label="Midtown neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q60744420" start="12000" end="12006" title="Cortex Innovation Community" label="Cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="12044" end="12051" title="Midwestern United States" label="midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q110778747" start="12072" end="12078" title="Square, Inc." label="Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="12080" end="12089" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q739518" start="12091" end="12094" title="Aon (company)" label="Aon"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="12096" end="12102" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059102" start="12108" end="12115" title="Centene" label="Centene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247660" start="12385" end="12402" title="John McDonnell (businessman)" label="John F. McDonnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q122879277" start="12662" end="12677" title="Metro (St. Louis transit bus)" label="St. Louis Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="12719" end="12729" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632001" start="12730" end="12739" title="St. Louis MetroLink" label="MetroLink"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535457" start="12810" end="12817" title="Skinker (St. Louis MetroLink)" label="Skinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894592" start="12819" end="12843" title="University City-Big Bend (St. Louis MetroLink)" label="University City-Big Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470646" start="12849" end="12856" title="Forsyth (St. Louis MetroLink)" label="Forsyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756749" start="13070" end="13086" title="Andrew D. Martin" label="Andrew D. Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895753" start="13107" end="13151" title="University of Michigan College of Literature, Science, and the Arts" label="College of Literature, Science, and the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="13159" end="13181" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="13378" end="13386" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q936700" start="13663" end="13683" title="need-blind admission" label="need-blind admission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415386" start="14684" end="14694" title="wealth gap" label="wealth gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465153" start="14874" end="14894" title="Fontbonne University" label="Fontbonne University"/>
<link wikidata="Q849158" start="15100" end="15111" title="Green Party of the United States" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q235321" start="15135" end="15145" title="Jill Stein" label="Jill Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931302" start="15171" end="15198" title="St. Louis Board of Aldermen" label="St. Louis Board of Aldermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="15771" end="15781" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="15785" end="15801" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q2986784" start="15904" end="15938" title="Commission on Presidential Debates" label="Commission on Presidential Debates"/>
<link wikidata="Q699776" start="16138" end="16162" title="1992 United States presidential election" label="1992 presidential debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q327959" start="16194" end="16218" title="2000 United States presidential election" label="2000 Presidential debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q464075" start="16245" end="16269" title="2004 United States presidential election" label="2004 Presidential debate"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16293" end="16322" title="2008 United States presidential debates#October 2: Vice presidential debate (Washington University in St. Louis)" label="2008 Vice Presidential debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="16331" end="16340" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q43144" start="16345" end="16356" title="Sarah Palin" label="Sarah Palin"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="16386" end="16410" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 Presidential debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q594411" start="17269" end="17280" title="Forest Park (St. Louis)" label="Forest Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q966922" start="17306" end="17313" title="Clayton, Missouri" label="Clayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q959885" start="17318" end="17343" title="University City, Missouri" label="University City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972504" start="17405" end="17459" title="Washington University Hilltop Campus Historic District" label="Washington University Hilltop Campus Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="17476" end="17502" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q257113" start="17537" end="17551" title="Barry Flanagan" label="Barry Flanagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784562" start="17573" end="17590" title="Thinker on a Rock" label="Thinker on a Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209677" start="17898" end="17914" title="Richard Gephardt" label="Richard Gephardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q598030" start="18606" end="18626" title="George Caleb Bingham" label="George Caleb Bingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q334001" start="18628" end="18639" title="Thomas Cole" label="Thomas Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="18641" end="18654" title="Pablo Picasso" label="Pablo Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q154842" start="18656" end="18665" title="Max Ernst" label="Max Ernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q151580" start="18667" end="18683" title="Alexander Calder" label="Alexander Calder"/>
<link wikidata="Q37571" start="18685" end="18700" title="Jackson Pollock" label="Jackson Pollock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598" start="18702" end="18711" title="Rembrandt" label="Rembrandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q164358" start="18713" end="18732" title="Robert Rauschenberg" label="Robert Rauschenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q262284" start="18734" end="18748" title="Barbara Kruger" label="Barbara Kruger"/>
<link wikidata="Q705225" start="18754" end="18773" title="Christian Boltanski" label="Christian Boltanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q631286" start="18860" end="18871" title="Numismatics" label="numismatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387229" start="18872" end="18886" title="Eric P. Newman" label="Eric P. Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q312827" start="19031" end="19044" title="Fumihiko Maki" label="Fumihiko Maki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972506" start="19180" end="19216" title="Washington University Medical Center" label="Washington University Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q594411" start="19289" end="19300" title="Forest Park (St. Louis)" label="Forest Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062019" start="19312" end="19328" title="Central West End, St. Louis" label="Central West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972509" start="19382" end="19422" title="Washington University School of Medicine" label="Washington University School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861502" start="19462" end="19484" title="Barnes-Jewish Hospital" label="Barnes-Jewish Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673204" start="19489" end="19523" title="St. Louis Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="St. Louis Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361100" start="19577" end="19583" title="skyway" label="skyway"/>
<link wikidata="Q664846" start="20008" end="20033" title="National Cancer Institute" label="National Cancer Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932123" start="20308" end="20360" title="National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences" label="National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="20368" end="20397" title="National Institutes of Health" label="National Institutes of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="20548" end="20557" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921090" start="20565" end="20578" title="Meramec River" label="Meramec River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254258" start="21208" end="21219" title="Delmar Loop" label="Delmar Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q489983" start="21537" end="21546" title="Reserve Officer Training Corps" label="Army ROTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q184485" start="21652" end="21667" title="Performing arts" label="Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q966922" start="21752" end="21769" title="Clayton, Missouri" label="Clayton, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q216107" start="21817" end="21833" title="department store" label="department store"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433436" start="21943" end="21954" title="Famous-Barr" label="Famous-Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q121182" start="22361" end="22380" title="information systems" label="information systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420179" start="22459" end="22479" title="music rehearsal room" label="music rehearsal room"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154390" start="22775" end="22787" title="Academic tenure" label="tenure-track"/>
<link wikidata="Q713223" start="22848" end="22868" title="Artist-in-residence" label="artists-in-residence"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="22987" end="23002" title="Social sciences" label="Social sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="23008" end="23023" title="Natural science" label="Natural science"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="23029" end="23040" title="Mathematics" label="Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7086906" start="23699" end="23719" title="Olin Business School" label="Olin Business School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23749" end="23761" title="John M. Olin" label="John M. Olin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419939" start="24014" end="24033" title="Executive Education" label="Executive Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q191701" start="24047" end="24060" title="Executive MBA" label="Executive MBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q495015" start="24118" end="24134" title="Fudan University" label="Fudan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087533" start="24493" end="24510" title="Charles F. Knight" label="Charles F. Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129019" start="25293" end="25323" title="Mildred Lane Kemper Art Museum" label="Mildred Lane Kemper Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q133160" start="25497" end="25511" title="Pritzker Prize" label="Pritzker Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q312827" start="25558" end="25571" title="Fumihiko Maki" label="Fumihiko Maki"/>
<link wikidata="Q37571" start="25769" end="25784" title="Jackson Pollock" label="Jackson Pollock"/>
<link wikidata="Q164358" start="25786" end="25805" title="Robert Rauschenberg" label="Robert Rauschenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q270388" start="25807" end="25819" title="Jenny Holzer" label="Jenny Holzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="25821" end="25834" title="Pablo Picasso" label="Pablo Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q154842" start="25836" end="25845" title="Max Ernst" label="Max Ernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q132305" start="25847" end="25864" title="Willem de Kooning" label="Willem de Kooning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589" start="25866" end="25879" title="Henri Matisse" label="Henri Matisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q152384" start="25881" end="25890" title="Joan Miró" label="Joan Miró"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598" start="25896" end="25914" title="Rembrandt van Rijn" label="Rembrandt van Rijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6196866" start="26329" end="26344" title="Jim McKelvey" label="Jim McKelvey Jr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566099" start="26652" end="26665" title="adult learner" label="adult learner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861586" start="26840" end="26891" title="Goldfarb School of Nursing at Barnes-Jewish College" label="Goldfarb School of Nursing at Barnes-Jewish College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321960" start="27206" end="27216" title="law school" label="law school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="27369" end="27378" title="Full-time equivalent" label="full-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q125074" start="27463" end="27477" title="Anheuser-Busch" label="Anheuser-Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972509" start="27521" end="27561" title="Washington University School of Medicine" label="Washington University School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259956" start="27729" end="27741" title="primary care" label="primary care"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736114" start="27747" end="27773" title="McDonnell Genome Institute" label="McDonnell Genome Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q16193441" start="27787" end="27804" title="Richard K. Wilson" label="Richard K. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="27888" end="27891" title="NIH" label="NIH"/>
<link wikidata="Q380546" start="27905" end="27919" title="DNA sequencing" label="DNA sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q192446" start="27977" end="27997" title="Human Genome Project" label="Human Genome Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673204" start="28161" end="28195" title="St. Louis Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="St. Louis Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861502" start="28200" end="28222" title="Barnes-Jewish Hospital" label="Barnes-Jewish Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545897" start="28411" end="28452" title="George Warren Brown School of Social Work" label="George Warren Brown School of Social Work"/>
<link wikidata="Q6590175" start="28523" end="28544" title="Master of Social Work" label="Master of Social Work"/>
<link wikidata="Q203196" start="28548" end="28571" title="Master of Public Health" label="Master of Public Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q4112833" start="28734" end="28752" title="Brown Shoe Company" label="Brown Shoe Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="29314" end="29342" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="29398" end="29421" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q478743" start="29517" end="29555" title="Academic Ranking of World Universities" label="Academic Ranking of World Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4491651" start="29636" end="29655" title="Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching" label="Carnegie Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="29666" end="29694" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q851717" start="29742" end="29758" title="Princeton Review" label="Princeton Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q851717" start="30088" end="30108" title="The Princeton Review" label="The Princeton Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146526" start="30554" end="30571" title="Niche (company)" label="&amp;quot;Niche&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="30618" end="30630" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972509" start="30718" end="30758" title="Washington University School of Medicine" label="Washington University School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="30798" end="30826" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="31028" end="31036" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q186005" start="31041" end="31057" title="physical therapy" label="physical therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790510" start="31089" end="31117" title="QS World University Rankings" label="QS World University Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="31176" end="31198" title="anatomy and physiology" label="anatomy and physiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7086906" start="31225" end="31245" title="Olin Business School" label="Olin Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q191701" start="31277" end="31280" title="MBA" label="MBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q49113" start="31355" end="31360" title="Ivy League" label="Ivies"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="31376" end="31384" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5751841" start="31426" end="31442" title="Hidden Ivies" label="&amp;quot;Hidden Ivy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756749" start="32045" end="32061" title="Andrew D. Martin" label="Andrew D. Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059760" start="32700" end="32743" title="Center for Measuring University Performance" label="Center for Measuring University Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="33180" end="33207" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="33346" end="33375" title="National Institutes of Health" label="National Institutes of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="33510" end="33545" title="United States Department of Defense" label="United States Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="33547" end="33574" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="33580" end="33584" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q192446" start="33906" end="33926" title="Human Genome Project" label="Human Genome Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q220827" start="34263" end="34285" title="Mars Exploration Rover" label="Mars Exploration Rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352055" start="34556" end="34570" title="Edmund Spenser" label="Edmund Spenser"/>
<link wikidata="Q478050" start="34632" end="34669" title="National Endowment for the Humanities" label="National Endowment for the Humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q386283" start="34806" end="34818" title="Folding@home" label="Folding@Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q180634" start="34822" end="34843" title="distributed computing" label="distributed computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q901663" start="34867" end="34885" title="molecular dynamics" label="molecular dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="34978" end="34997" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q847556" start="35118" end="35133" title="protein folding" label="protein folding"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="35225" end="35249" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="35251" end="35257" title="Cancer" label="Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="35259" end="35283" title="Coronavirus disease 2019" label="Coronavirus disease 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q51993" start="35289" end="35308" title="Ebola virus disease" label="Ebola virus disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450880" start="35368" end="35392" title="Exascale computing" label="exaFLOP computing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q188768" start="35424" end="35432" title="exaflops" label="exaflops"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073261" start="35518" end="35524" title="Summit (supercomputer)" label="Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247660" start="35896" end="35913" title="John McDonnell (businessman)" label="John F. McDonnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q465584" start="36503" end="36531" title="American Library Association" label="American Library Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962020" start="37835" end="37839" title="Walk in lay down" label="WILD"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="37904" end="37918" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="37932" end="37941" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495288" start="37963" end="37986" title="St. Louis Post-Dispatch" label="St. Louis Post-Dispatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6340921" start="38110" end="38114" title="KWUR" label="KWUR"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38602" end="38628" title="Danforth Campus#Student Centers" label="Danforth University Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643693" start="38700" end="38722" title="William Henry Danforth" label="William Henry Danforth"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="38869" end="38879" title="a cappella" label="a cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915328" start="39044" end="39059" title="Mosaic Whispers" label="Mosaic Whispers"/>
<link wikidata="Q435681" start="39206" end="39215" title="Ben Folds" label="Ben Folds"/>
<link wikidata="" start="39222" end="39264" title="Ben Folds Presents: University A Cappella!" label="Ben Folds Presents: University A Cappella!"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="39452" end="39462" title="a cappella" label="a cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q13973" start="39614" end="39619" title="MSNBC" label="MSNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="39703" end="39712" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q43144" start="39717" end="39728" title="Sarah Palin" label="Sarah Palin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680291" start="40471" end="40490" title="residential college" label="residential college"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028727" start="40811" end="40828" title="University police" label="University police"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069701" start="41240" end="41253" title="Zeta Beta Tau" label="Zeta Beta Tau"/>
<link wikidata="Q738377" start="42462" end="42483" title="Student publication" label="student-run newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7627705" start="42485" end="42509" title="Student Life (newspaper)" label="&amp;quot;Student Life&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6340921" start="42705" end="42709" title="KWUR" label="KWUR"/>
<link wikidata="Q242256" start="42937" end="42951" title="closed-circuit television" label="closed-circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001305" start="42952" end="42970" title="television channel" label="television channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q737498" start="43447" end="43463" title="academic journal" label="academic journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401736" start="43626" end="43657" title="University Athletic Association" label="University Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284440" start="43661" end="43678" title="Division III (NCAA)" label="NCAA Division III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536057" start="43723" end="43749" title="Missouri Valley Conference" label="Missouri Valley Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="43835" end="43850" title="Division I (NCAA)" label="NCAA Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q500050" start="43934" end="43947" title="Cross country running" label="cross country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140737" start="44768" end="44789" title="Francis Olympic Field" label="Francis Olympic Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q8098" start="44803" end="44823" title="1904 Summer Olympics" label="1904 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962020" start="44954" end="44958" title="Walk In Lay Down" label="WILD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799466" start="45247" end="45264" title="Thurtene Carnival" label="Thurtene Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q17081531" start="45488" end="45511" title="illuminated dance floor" label="illuminated dance floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q10244" start="45704" end="45710" title="Diwali" label="Diwali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007177" start="45843" end="45856" title="African American culture" label="black culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944136" start="46004" end="46018" title="Lunar New Year" label="Lunar New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974652" start="46304" end="46318" title="Brookings Hall" label="Brookings Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="47690" end="47701" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="47703" end="47717" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q981258" start="47719" end="47737" title="United States Poet Laureate" label="U.S. Poet Laureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q572316" start="47739" end="47758" title="National Book Award" label="National Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505018" start="47760" end="47794" title="National Book Critics Circle Award" label="National Book Critics Circle Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q737051" start="47796" end="47821" title="National Medal of Science" label="National Medal of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789030" start="47823" end="47845" title="National Medal of Arts" label="National Medal of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204346" start="47847" end="47865" title="Rhodes Scholarship" label="Rhodes Scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316544" start="47867" end="47888" title="Guggenheim Fellowship" label="Guggenheim Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q253936" start="47890" end="47910" title="Fulbright Program" label="Fulbright Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014735" start="47912" end="47929" title="William Lowell Putnam Mathematical Competition" label="Putnam Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543268" start="47931" end="47946" title="MacArthur Fellows Program" label="MacArthur Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="47970" end="47998" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493021" start="48000" end="48031" title="National Academy of Engineering" label="National Academy of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="48033" end="48056" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q465197" start="48058" end="48090" title="American Institute of Architects" label="American Institute of Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q463281" start="48092" end="48128" title="American Academy of Arts and Letters" label="American Academy of Arts and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q40358" start="48130" end="48181" title="American Association for the Advancement of Science" label="American Association for the Advancement of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q465402" start="48183" end="48205" title="American Law Institute" label="American Law Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="48207" end="48237" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352382" start="48239" end="48267" title="National Academy of Medicine" label="National Academy of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="48273" end="48310" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="48376" end="48393" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185107" start="48395" end="48407" title="Avram Glazer" label="Avram Glazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17076072" start="48409" end="48424" title="Lionsgate Films" label="Lionsgate Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q6270693" start="48430" end="48444" title="Jon Feltheimer" label="Jon Feltheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q108739951" start="48446" end="48466" title="Men&amp;#x27;s Wearhouse" label="Men&amp;#x27;s Wearhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546644" start="48476" end="48489" title="George Zimmer" label="George Zimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q81307" start="48498" end="48508" title="Greenpeace" label="Greenpeace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182305" start="48529" end="48541" title="Phil Radford" label="Phil Radford"/>
<link wikidata="Q663596" start="48543" end="48558" title="Gilead Sciences" label="Gilead Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q16799332" start="48588" end="48619" title="Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia" label="Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16935101" start="48621" end="48632" title="Siniša Mali" label="Siniša Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689229" start="48652" end="48662" title="Jim Talent" label="Jim Talent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071782" start="48680" end="48690" title="Chic Hecht" label="Chic Hecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570100" start="48714" end="48722" title="Hal Daub" label="Hal Daub"/>
<link wikidata="Q5648378" start="48775" end="48789" title="Hank Klibanoff" label="Hank Klibanoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237521" start="48831" end="48844" title="David Merrick" label="David Merrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210130" start="48863" end="48874" title="Dal Maxvill" label="Dal Maxvill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="48906" end="48931" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q12404790" start="48963" end="48976" title="Jonathan Mann (physician)" label="Jonathan Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246770" start="49029" end="49040" title="Deanne Bell" label="Deanne Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16594439" start="49093" end="49109" title="Susannah Cahalan" label="Susannah Cahalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q263241" start="49130" end="49141" title="Mary Wickes" label="Mary Wickes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500330" start="49161" end="49173" title="Johnny Kastl" label="Johnny Kastl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879488" start="49180" end="49208" title="Missouri Attorney General" label="attorney general of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107148" start="49210" end="49222" title="Chris Koster" label="Chris Koster"/>
<link wikidata="Q73633" start="49224" end="49234" title="Paralympic Games" label="Paralympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q50384264" start="49250" end="49265" title="Kendall Gretsch" label="Kendall Gretsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q271551" start="49289" end="49308" title="Shulamith Firestone" label="Shulamith Firestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q29032449" start="49365" end="49379" title="Julian W. Hill" label="Julian W. Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q722947" start="49411" end="49422" title="Clyde Cowan" label="Clyde Cowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q735247" start="49445" end="49462" title="James R. Thompson" label="James R. Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065753" start="49491" end="49498" title="Sam Fox" label="Sam Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q710776" start="49500" end="49516" title="Edward S. Holden" label="Edward S. Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791675" start="49561" end="49578" title="Thomas Lamb Eliot" label="Thomas Lamb Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140775" start="49591" end="49603" title="Reed College" label="Reed College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669370" start="49609" end="49624" title="Abram L. Sachar" label="Abram L. Sachar"/>
<link wikidata="Q83689124" start="49718" end="49733" title="George F. Hellmuth" label="George Hellmuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6318224" start="49735" end="49744" title="Gyo Obata" label="Gyo Obata"/>
<link wikidata="Q98885250" start="49750" end="49766" title="George Kassabaum" label="George Kassabaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602991" start="49780" end="49783" title="Hellmuth, Obata and Kassabaum" label="HOK"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527389" start="49908" end="49944" title="Council of the District of Columbia" label="Council of the District of Columbia,"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014564" start="49945" end="49962" title="William Lightfoot" label="William Lightfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q68118" start="50004" end="50019" title="Earl Sutherland" label="Earl Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q109731" start="50021" end="50032" title="Edwin Krebs" label="Edwin Krebs"/>
<link wikidata="Q295706" start="50038" end="50052" title="Daniel Nathans" label="Daniel Nathans"/>
<link wikidata="Q311786" start="50127" end="50140" title="Steve Fossett" label="Steve Fossett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706668" start="50202" end="50219" title="Joseph Poindexter" label="Joseph Poindexter"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="50324" end="50337" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q631066" start="50339" end="50346" title="Clemson University" label="Clemson"/>
<link wikidata="Q392667" start="50348" end="50359" title="Wake Forest University" label="Wake Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524124" start="50361" end="50370" title="Morehouse College" label="Morehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551642" start="50372" end="50383" title="University of Mount Union" label="Mount Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q39988" start="50385" end="50391" title="Yonsei University" label="Yonsei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333303" start="50397" end="50443" title="Hong Kong University of Science and Technology" label="Hong Kong University of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q549521" start="50445" end="50457" title="Mike Simpson" label="Mike Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="50463" end="50482" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025304" start="50487" end="50526" title="Idaho&amp;#x27;s 2nd congressional district" label="Idaho&amp;#x27;s 2nd congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q134262" start="50637" end="50655" title="Tennessee Williams" label="Tennessee Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q170411" start="50714" end="50727" title="Charles Eames" label="Charles Eames"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908736" start="50922" end="50933" title="Bill Dedman" label="Bill Dedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q234122" start="50992" end="51010" title="Marilyn vos Savant" label="Marilyn vos Savant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386615" start="51156" end="51169" title="Eric Greitens" label="Eric Greitens"/>
<link wikidata="Q704076" start="51181" end="51193" title="Hyman Minsky" label="Hyman Minsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968234" start="51205" end="51218" title="Stanley Elkin" label="Stanley Elkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q304874" start="51223" end="51238" title="William H. Gass" label="William H. Gass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040647" start="51245" end="51258" title="Carl Phillips" label="Carl Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q26702854" start="51270" end="51286" title="Louis C. Spiering" label="Louis C. Spering"/>
<link wikidata="Q164683" start="51295" end="51307" title="Max Beckmann" label="Max Beckmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q170912" start="51309" end="51324" title="Sexology" label="sex researchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758260" start="51325" end="51361" title="Masters and Johnson" label="William Masters and Virginia Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549097" start="51389" end="51401" title="Gerald Early" label="Gerald Early"/>
<link wikidata="Q429011" start="51440" end="51454" title="Howard Nemerov" label="Howard Nemerov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743104" start="51471" end="51516" title="American Association of University Professors" label="American Association of University Professors"/>
<link wikidata="Q504753" start="51517" end="51538" title="Arthur Oncken Lovejoy" label="Arthur Oncken Lovejoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708246" start="51548" end="51565" title="Joseph W. Kennedy" label="Joseph W. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="51588" end="51595" title="chemical element" label="element"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102" start="51596" end="51605" title="plutonium" label="plutonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068063" start="51640" end="51666" title="National Gallery of Canada" label="National Gallery of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q510324" start="51675" end="51701" title="Philadelphia Museum of Art" label="Philadelphia Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174708" start="51703" end="51724" title="Jean Sutherland Boggs" label="Jean Sutherland Boggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11206458" start="51738" end="51750" title="Holden Thorp" label="Holden Thorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q192864" start="51771" end="51799" title="Science (journal)" label="&amp;quot;Science Magazine&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059871" start="51822" end="51851" title="Center for Social Development" label="Center for Social Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061253" start="51854" end="51884" title="Central Institute for the Deaf" label="Central Institute for the Deaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189109" start="51887" end="51903" title="Crow Observatory" label="Crow Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996738" start="51906" end="51943" title="Whitney R. Harris World Law Institute" label="Whitney R. Harris World Law Institute"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58921" wikidata="Q8065" url="?curid=58921" title="Natural disaster">
<text>A natural disaster is the very harmful impact on a society or community after a natural hazard event. Some examples of natural hazard events include avalanches, droughts, earthquakes, floods, heat waves, landslides - including submarine landslides, tropical cyclones, volcanic activity and wildfires. Additional natural hazards include blizzards, dust storms, firestorms, hails, ice storms, sinkholes, thunderstorms, tornadoes and tsunamis. A natural disaster can cause loss of life or damage property. It typically causes economic damage. How bad the damage is depends on how well people are prepared for disasters and how strong the buildings, roads, and other structures are. Scholars have been saying that the term &quot;natural disaster&quot; is unsuitable and should be abandoned. Instead, the simpler term &quot;disaster&quot; could be used. At the same time the type of hazard would be specified. A disaster happens when a natural or human-made hazard impacts a vulnerable community. It results from the combination of the hazard and the exposure of a vulnerable society.

Nowadays it is hard to distinguish between &quot;natural&quot; and &quot;human-made&quot; disasters. The term &quot;natural disaster&quot; was already challenged in 1976. Human choices in architecture, fire risk, and resource management can cause or worsen natural disasters. Climate change also affects how often disasters due to extreme weather hazards happen. These &quot;climate hazards&quot; are floods, heat waves, wildfires, tropical cyclones, and the like.

Some things can make natural disasters worse. Examples are inadequate building norms, marginalization of people and poor choices on land use planning. Many developing countries do not have proper disaster risk reduction systems. This makes them more vulnerable to natural disasters than high income countries. An adverse event only becomes a disaster if it occurs in an area with a vulnerable population. 

== Terminology ==

A &quot;natural disaster&quot; is the highly harmful impact on a society or community following a natural hazard event. The term &quot;disaster&quot; itself is defined as follows: &quot;Disasters are serious disruptions to the functioning of a community that exceed its capacity to cope using its own resources. Disasters can be caused by natural, man-made and technological hazards, as well as various factors that influence the exposure and vulnerability of a community.&quot;

The US Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) explains the relationship between natural disasters and natural hazards as follows: &quot;Natural hazards and natural disasters are related but are not the same. A natural hazard is the threat of an event that will likely have a negative impact. A natural disaster is the negative impact following an actual occurrence of natural hazard in the event that it significantly harms a community. An example of the distinction between a natural hazard and a disaster is that an earthquake is the hazard which caused the 1906 San Francisco earthquake disaster.

A &quot;natural hazard&quot; is a natural phenomenon that might have a negative effect on humans and other animals, or the environment. Natural hazard events can be classified into two broad categories: geophysical and biological. Natural hazards can be provoked or affected by anthropogenic processes, e.g. land-use change, drainage and construction.

There are 18 natural hazards included in the National Risk Index of FEMA: avalanche, coastal flooding, cold wave, drought, earthquake, hail, heat wave, tropical cyclone, ice storm, landslide, lightning, riverine flooding, strong wind, tornado, tsunami, volcanic activity, wildfire, winter weather. In addition, there are also dust storms.

=== Critique ===
The term &quot;natural disaster&quot; has been called a misnomer already in 1976. A disaster is a result of a natural hazard impacting a vulnerable community. But disasters can be avoided. Earthquakes, droughts, floods, storms, and other events lead to disasters because of human action and inaction. Poor land and policy planning and deregulation can create worse conditions. They often involve development activities that ignore or fail to reduce the disaster risks. Nature alone is blamed for disasters even when disasters result from failures in development. Disasters also result from failure of societies to prepare. Examples for such failures include inadequate building norms, marginalization of people, inequities, overexploitation of resources, extreme urban sprawl and climate change.

Defining disasters as solely natural events has serious implications when it comes to understanding the causes of a disaster and the distribution of political and financial responsibility in disaster risk reduction, disaster management, compensation, insurance and disaster prevention. Using &quot;natural&quot; to describe disasters misleads people to think the devastating results are inevitable, out of our control, and are simply part of a natural process. Hazards (earthquakes, hurricanes, pandemics, drought etc.) are inevitable, but the impact they have on society is not.

Thus, the term &quot;natural disaster&quot; is unsuitable and should be abandoned in favor of the simpler term &quot;disaster&quot;, while also specifying the category (or type) of hazard.

==Scale==

=== By region and country ===
As of 2019, the countries with the highest share of disability-adjusted life years (DALY) lost due to natural disasters are Bahamas, Haiti, Zimbabwe and Armenia (probably mainly due to the Spitak Earthquake). The Asia-Pacific region is the world&#x27;s most disaster prone region. A person in Asia-Pacific is five times more likely to be hit by a natural disaster than someone living in other regions.

Between 1995 and 2015, the greatest number of natural disasters occurred in America, China and India. In 2012, there were 905 natural disasters worldwide, 93% of which were weather-related disasters. Overall costs were US$170 billion and insured losses $70 billion. 2012 was a moderate year. 45% were meteorological (storms), 36% were hydrological (floods), 12% were climatological (heat waves, cold waves, droughts, wildfires) and 7% were geophysical events (earthquakes and volcanic eruptions). Between 1980 and 2011 geophysical events accounted for 14% of all natural catastrophes.

Developing countries often have ineffective communication systems as well as insufficient support for disaster risk reduction and emergency management. This makes them more vulnerable to natural disasters than high income countries.

=== Slow and rapid onset events ===
Natural hazards occur across different time scales as well as area scales. Tornadoes and flash floods are rapid onset events, meaning they occur with a short warning time and are short-lived. Slow onset events can also be very damaging, for example drought is a natural hazards that develops slowly, sometimes over years.

== Impacts ==
A natural disaster may cause loss of life, injury or other health impacts, property damage, loss of livelihoods and services, social and economic disruption, or environmental damage.

=== On death rates ===
Globally, the total number of deaths from natural disasters has been reduced by 75% over the last 100 years, due to the increased development of countries, increased preparedness, better education, better methods, and aid from international organizations. Since the global population has grown over the same time period, the decrease in number of deaths per capita is larger, dropping to 6% of the original amount.

The death rate from natural disasters is highest in developing countries due to the lower quality of building construction, infrastructure, and medical facilities.

=== On the economy ===
Global economic losses due to extreme weather, climate and water events are increasing. Costs have increased sevenfold from the 1970s to the 2010s. Direct losses from disasters have averaged above US$330 billion annually between 2015 and 2021. Socio-economic factors have contributed to this trend of increasing losses, such as population growth and increased wealth. This shows that increased exposure is the most important driver of economic losses. However, part of these are also due to human-induced climate change.

=== On the environment ===
During emergencies such as natural disasters and armed conflicts more waste may be produced, while waste management is given low priority compared with other services. Existing waste management services and infrastructures can be disrupted, leaving communities with unmanaged waste and increased littering. Under these circumstances human health and the environment are often negatively impacted.

Natural disasters (e.g. earthquakes, tsunamis, hurricanes) have the potential to generate a significant amount of waste within a short period. Waste management systems can be out of action or curtailed, often requiring considerable time and funding to restore. For example, the tsunami in Japan in 2011 produced huge amounts of debris: estimates of 5 million tonnes of waste were reported by the Japanese Ministry of the Environment. Some of this waste, mostly plastic and styrofoam washed up on the coasts of Canada and the United States in late 2011. Along the west coast of the United States, this increased the amount of litter by a factor of 10 and may have transported alien species. Storms are also important generators of plastic litter. A study by Lo et al. (2020) reported a 100% increase in the amount of microplastics on beaches surveyed following a typhoon in Hong Kong in 2018.

A significant amount of plastic waste can be produced during disaster relief operations. Following the 2010 earthquake in Haiti, the generation of waste from relief operations was referred to as a &quot;second disaster&quot;. The United States military reported that millions of water bottles and styrofoam food packages were distributed although there was no operational waste management system. Over 700,000 plastic tarpaulins and 100,000 tents were required for emergency shelters. The increase in plastic waste, combined with poor disposal practices, resulted in open drainage channels being blocked, increasing the risk of disease.

Conflicts can result in large-scale displacement of communities. People living under these conditions are often provided with minimal waste management facilities. Burn pits are widely used to dispose of mixed wastes, including plastics. Air pollution can lead to respiratory and other illnesses. For example, Sahrawi refugees have been living in five camps near Tindouf, Algeria for nearly 45 years. As waste collection services are underfunded and there is no recycling facility, plastics have flooded the camps&#x27; streets and surroundings. In contrast, the Azraq camp in Jordan for refugees from Syria has waste management services; of 20.7 tonnes of waste produced per day, 15% is recyclable.

=== On women and vulnerable populations ===
Because of the social, political and cultural context of many places throughout the world, women are often disproportionately affected by disaster. In the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, more women died than men, partly due to the fact that fewer women knew how to swim. During and after a natural disaster, women are at increased risk of being affected by gender based violence and are increasingly vulnerable to sexual violence. Disrupted police enforcement, lax regulations, and displacement all contribute to increased risk of gender based violence and sexual assault.

In addition to LGBT people and immigrants, women are also disproportionately victimized by religion-based scapegoating for natural disasters: fanatical religious leaders or adherents may claim that a god or gods are angry with women&#x27;s independent, freethinking behavior, such as dressing &#x27;immodestly&#x27;, having sex or abortions. For example, Hindutva party Hindu Makkal Katchi and others blamed women&#x27;s struggle for the right to enter the Sabarimala temple for the August 2018 Kerala floods, purportedly inflicted by the angry god Ayyappan.

During and after natural disasters, routine health behaviors become interrupted. In addition, health care systems may have broken down as a result of the disaster, further reducing access to contraceptives. Unprotected intercourse during this time can lead to increased rates of childbirth, unintended pregnancies and sexually transmitted infections (STIs).

Pregnant women are one of the groups disproportionately affected by natural disasters. Inadequate nutrition, little access to clean water, lack of health-care services and psychological stress in the aftermath of the disaster can lead to a significant increase in maternal morbidity and mortality. Furthermore, shortage of healthcare resources during this time can convert even routine obstetric complications into emergencies.

Once a vulnerable population has experienced a disaster, the community can take many years to repair and that repair period can lead to further vulnerability. The disastrous consequences of natural disaster also affect the mental health of affected communities, often leading to post-traumatic symptoms. These increased emotional experiences can be supported through collective processing, leading to resilience and increased community engagement.

=== On governments and voting processes ===
Disasters stress government capacity, as the government tries to conduct routine as well as emergency operations. Some theorists of voting behavior propose that citizens update information about government effectiveness based on their response to disasters, which affects their vote choice in the next election. Indeed, some evidence, based on data from the United States, reveals that incumbent parties can lose votes if citizens perceives them as responsible for a poor disaster response or gain votes based on perceptions of well-executed relief work. The latter study also finds, however, that voters do not reward incumbent parties for disaster preparedness, which may end up affecting government incentives to invest in such preparedness.

== Disasters caused by geological hazards ==
===Landslides===


=== Avalanches ===

===Earthquakes===


An earthquake is the result of a sudden release of energy in the Earth&#x27;s crust that creates seismic waves. At the Earth&#x27;s surface, earthquakes manifest themselves by vibration, shaking, and sometimes displacement of the ground. Earthquakes are caused by slippage within geological faults. The underground point of origin of the earthquake is called the seismic focus. The point directly above the focus on the surface is called the epicenter. Earthquakes by themselves rarely kill people or wildlife – it is usually the secondary events that they trigger, such as building collapse, fires, tsunamis and volcanic eruptions, that cause death. Many of these can possibly be avoided by better construction, safety systems, early warning and planning.

===Sinkholes===

A sinkhole is a depression or hole in the ground caused by some form of collapse of the surface layer. When natural erosion, human mining or underground excavation makes the ground too weak to support the structures built on it, the ground can collapse and produce a sinkhole.

=== Coastal erosion ===
Coastal erosion is a physical process by which shorelines in coastal areas around the world shift and change, primarily in response to waves and currents that can be influenced by tides and storm surge. Coastal erosion can result from long-term processes (see also beach evolution) as well as from episodic events such as tropical cyclones or other severe storm events. Coastal erosion is one of the most significant coastal hazards. It forms a threat to infrastructure, capital assets and property.

===Volcanic eruptions===
Volcanoes can cause widespread destruction and consequent disaster in several ways. One hazard is the volcanic eruption itself, with the force of the explosion and falling rocks able to cause harm. Lava may also be released during the eruption of a volcano; as it leaves the volcano, it can destroy buildings, plants and animals due to its extreme heat. In addition, volcanic ash may form a cloud (generally after cooling) and settle thickly in nearby locations. When mixed with water, this forms a concrete-like material. In sufficient quantities, ash may cause roofs to collapse under its weight. Even small quantities will harm humans if inhaled – it has the consistency of ground glass and therefore causes laceration to the throat and lungs. Volcanic ash can also cause abrasion damage to moving machinery such as engines. The main killer of humans in the immediate surroundings of a volcanic eruption is pyroclastic flows, consisting of a cloud of hot ash which builds up in the air above the volcano and rushes down the slopes when the eruption no longer supports the lifting of the gases. It is believed that Pompeii was destroyed by a pyroclastic flow. A lahar is a volcanic mudflow or landslide. The 1953 Tangiwai disaster was caused by a lahar, as was the 1985 Armero tragedy in which the town of Armero was buried and an estimated 23,000 people were killed.

Volcanoes rated at 8 (the highest level) on the volcanic explosivity index are known as supervolcanoes. According to the Toba catastrophe theory, 75,000 to 80,000 years ago, a supervolcanic eruption at what is now Lake Toba in Sumatra reduced the human population to 10,000 or even 1,000 breeding pairs, creating a bottleneck in human evolution, and killed three-quarters of all plant life in the northern hemisphere. However, there is considerable debate regarding the veracity of this theory. The main danger from a supervolcano is the immense cloud of ash, which has a disastrous global effect on climate and temperature for many years.

===Tsunami===


A tsunami (plural: tsunamis or tsunami; from Japanese: 津波, lit. &quot;harbour wave&quot;; English pronunciation: /tsuːˈnɑːmi/), also known as a seismic sea wave or tidal wave, is a series of waves in a water body caused by the displacement of a large volume of water, generally in an ocean or a large lake. Tsunamis can be caused by undersea earthquakes such as the 2004 Boxing Day tsunami, or by landslides such as the one in 1958 at Lituya Bay, Alaska, or by volcanic eruptions such as the ancient eruption of Santorini. On March 11, 2011, a tsunami occurred near Fukushima, Japan and spread through the Pacific Ocean.

== Disasters caused by extreme weather hazards ==
Some of the 18 natural hazards included in the National Risk Index of FEMA now have a higher probability of occurring, and at higher intensity, due to the effects of climate change. This applies to heat waves, droughts, wildfire and coastal flooding.

=== Hot and dry conditions ===

==== Heat waves ====


A heat wave is a period of unusually and excessively hot weather. Heat waves used to be rare, requiring specific combinations of weather events to take place, such as temperature inversions, katabatic winds, or other phenomena. Since the turn of this century, under the continuing pressure of global warming, many areas have experienced peaks of temperatures, along with more frequent, more intense, more prolonged warming events than ever met on record. This is notably the case in many ocean regions such as the Mediterranean Sea. On land heat waves coupled with severe winds are now causing hundreds of major wildfires every year, burning thousands of square kilometers of forests, and threatening the very heart of cities as observed in the January 2025 megafires that destroyed several sectors of Los Angeles.

==== Droughts ====

Well-known historical droughts include the 1997–2009 Millennium Drought in Australia which led to a water supply crisis across much of the country. As a result, many desalination plants were built for the first time (see list). In 2011, the State of Texas lived under a drought emergency declaration for the entire calendar year and suffered severe economic losses. The drought caused the Bastrop fires.

==== Duststorms ====
==== Firestorms ====
==== Wildfires ====

Wildfires are large fires which often start in wildland areas. Common causes include lightning and drought but wildfires may also be started by human negligence or arson. They can spread to populated areas and thus be a threat to humans and property, as well as wildlife. One example for a notable wildfire is the 1871 Peshtigo Fire in the United States, which killed at least 1700 people. Another one is the 2009 Victorian bushfires in Australia (collectively known as &quot;Black Saturday bushfires&quot;). In that year, a summer heat wave in Victoria, Australia, created conditions which fueled the massive bushfires in 2009. Melbourne experienced three days in a row of temperatures exceeding 40 °C (104 °F), with some regional areas sweltering through much higher temperatures.

=== Storms and heavy rain ===

==== Floods ====

A flood is an overflow of water that &#x27;submerges&#x27; land. The EU Floods Directive defines a flood as a temporary covering of land that is usually dry with water. In the sense of &#x27;flowing water&#x27;, the word may also be applied to the inflow of the tides. Flooding may result from the volume of a body of water, such as a river or lake, becoming higher than usual, causing some of the water to escape its usual boundaries. While the size of a lake or other body of water will vary with seasonal changes in precipitation and snow melt, a flood is not considered significant unless the water covers land used by humans, such as a village, city or other inhabited area, roads or expanses of farmland.

==== Thunderstorms ====

Severe storms, dust clouds and volcanic eruptions can generate lightning. Apart from the damage typically associated with storms, such as winds, hail and flooding, the lightning itself can damage buildings, ignite fires and kill by direct contact. Most deaths from lightning occur in the poorer countries of the Americas and Asia, where lightning is common and adobe mud brick housing provides little protection.

==== Tropical cyclone ====

Typhoon, cyclone, cyclonic storm and hurricane are different names for the same phenomenon: a tropical storm that forms over an ocean. It is caused by evaporated water that comes off of the ocean and becomes a storm. It is characterized by strong winds, heavy rainfall and thunderstorms. The determining factor on which term is used is based on where the storm originates. In the Atlantic and Northeast Pacific, the term &quot;hurricane&quot; is used; in the Northwest Pacific, it is referred to as a &quot;typhoon&quot;; a &quot;cyclone&quot; occurs in the South Pacific and Indian Ocean.

The deadliest hurricane ever was the 1970 Bhola cyclone; the deadliest Atlantic hurricane was the Great Hurricane of 1780, which devastated Martinique, St. Eustatius and Barbados. Another notable hurricane is Hurricane Katrina, which devastated the Gulf Coast of the United States in 2005. Hurricanes may become more intense and produce more heavy rainfall as a consequence of human-induced climate change.

==== Tornadoes ====

A tornado is a violent and dangerous rotating column of air that is in contact with both the surface of the Earth and a cumulonimbus cloud, or, in rare cases, the base of a cumulus cloud. It is also referred to as a &quot;twister&quot; or a &quot;cyclone&quot;, although the word cyclone is used in meteorology in a wider sense to refer to any closed low pressure circulation. Tornadoes come in many shapes and sizes but typically take the form of a visible condensation funnel, the narrow end of which touches the Earth and is often encircled by a cloud of debris and dust. Tornadoes can occur one at a time, or can occur in large tornado outbreaks associated with supercells or in other large areas of thunderstorm development.

Most tornadoes have wind speeds of less than , are approximately across, and travel a few kilometers before dissipating. The most extreme tornadoes can attain wind speeds of more than , attain a width exceeding across, and stay on the ground for perhaps more than .

=== Cold-weather events ===
==== Blizzards ====

Blizzards are severe winter storms characterized by heavy snow and strong winds. When high winds stir up snow that has already fallen, it is known as a ground blizzard. Blizzards can impact local economic activities, especially in regions where snowfall is rare. The Great Blizzard of 1888 affected the United States, when many tons of wheat crops were destroyed. In Asia, the 1972 Iran blizzard and the 2008 Afghanistan blizzard, were the deadliest blizzards in history; in the former, an area the size of Wisconsin was entirely buried in snow. The 1993 Superstorm originated in the Gulf of Mexico and traveled north, causing damage in 26 American states as well as in Canada and leading to more than 300 deaths.

==== Hailstorms ====

Hail is precipitation in the form of ice that does not melt before it hits the ground. Hailstorms are produced by thunderstorms. Hailstones usually measure between in diameter. These can damage the location in which they fall. Hailstorms can be especially devastating to farm fields, ruining crops and damaging equipment. A particularly damaging hailstorm hit Munich, Germany, on July 12, 1984, causing about $2 billion in insurance claims.

== Multi-hazard analysis ==
Each of the natural hazard types outlined above have very different characteristics, in terms of the spatial and temporal scales they influence, hazard frequency and return period, and measures of intensity and impact. These complexities result in &quot;single-hazard&quot; assessments being commonplace, where the hazard potential from one particular hazard type is constrained. In these examples, hazards are often treated as isolated or independent. An alternative is a &quot;multi-hazard&quot; approach which seeks to identify all possible natural hazards and their interactions or interrelationships.

Many examples exist of one natural hazard triggering or increasing the probability of one or more other natural hazards. For example, an earthquake may trigger landslides, whereas a wildfire may increase the probability of landslides being generated in the future. A detailed review of such interactions across 21 natural hazards identified 90 possible interactions, of varying likelihood and spatial importance. There may also be interactions between these natural hazards and anthropic processes. For example, groundwater abstraction may trigger groundwater-related subsidence.

Effective hazard analysis in any given area (e.g., for the purposes of disaster risk reduction) should ideally include an examination of all relevant hazards and their interactions. To be of most use for risk reduction, hazard analysis should be extended to risk assessment wherein the vulnerability of the built environment to each of the hazards is taken into account. This step is well developed for seismic risk, where the possible effect of future earthquakes on structures and infrastructure is assessed, as well as for risk from extreme wind and to a lesser extent flood risk. For other types of natural hazard the calculation of risk is more challenging, principally because of the lack of functions linking the intensity of a hazard and the probability of different levels of damage (fragility curves).

== Responses ==
Disaster management is a main function of civil protection (or civil defense) authorities. It should address all four of the phases of disasters: mitigation and prevention, disaster response, recovery and preparedness.

=== Mitigation and prevention ===
==== Disaster risk reduction ====
===Response===
=== Recovery ===

=== Preparedness ===
== Society and culture ==

=== International law ===

The 1951 Refugee Convention and its 1967 Protocol are the cornerstone documents for refugee protection and population displacement. The 1998 UN Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement and 2009 Kampala Convention protect people displaced due to natural disasters.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 

==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8065" start="2" end="18" title="Natural disaster" label="natural disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q8425" start="51" end="58" title="society" label="society"/>
<link wikidata="Q177634" start="62" end="71" title="community" label="community"/>
<link wikidata="Q8065" start="80" end="94" title="Natural disaster" label="natural hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132455" start="127" end="133" title="hazard" label="hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935" start="149" end="158" title="avalanche" label="avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="161" end="168" title="drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="171" end="181" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="184" end="189" title="flood" label="flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q215864" start="192" end="201" title="heat wave" label="heat wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q167903" start="204" end="213" title="landslide" label="landslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975740" start="227" end="246" title="submarine landslide" label="submarine landslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="249" end="265" title="tropical cyclone" label="tropical cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q505748" start="268" end="285" title="volcanism" label="volcanic activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="290" end="298" title="wildfire" label="wildfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q205418" start="336" end="344" title="blizzard" label="blizzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q182878" start="347" end="357" title="dust storm" label="dust storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q918145" start="360" end="369" title="firestorm" label="firestorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q37602" start="372" end="376" title="hail" label="hail"/>
<link wikidata="Q304958" start="379" end="388" title="ice storm" label="ice storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q188734" start="391" end="399" title="sinkhole" label="sinkhole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857578" start="402" end="414" title="thunderstorm" label="thunderstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081" start="417" end="424" title="tornado" label="tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="431" end="438" title="tsunami" label="tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235638" start="470" end="482" title="list of natural disasters by death toll" label="loss of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q554774" start="486" end="501" title="property damage" label="damage property"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460420" start="593" end="615" title="Emergency management" label="prepared for disasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="663" end="673" title="Infrastructure" label="structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132455" start="953" end="959" title="hazard" label="hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q581445" start="970" end="990" title="Social vulnerability" label="vulnerable community"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="1357" end="1371" title="Climate change" label="Climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277161" start="1412" end="1427" title="extreme weather" label="extreme weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132455" start="1456" end="1471" title="climate hazards" label="climate hazards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5853064" start="1633" end="1648" title="marginalization" label="marginalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738778" start="1679" end="1696" title="Land-use planning" label="land use planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="1703" end="1723" title="Developing country" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281359" start="1743" end="1766" title="disaster risk reduction" label="disaster risk reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994367" start="1834" end="1855" title="high income countries" label="high income countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q581445" start="1929" end="1950" title="Social vulnerability" label="vulnerable population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132455" start="2079" end="2085" title="hazard" label="hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3839081" start="2108" end="2116" title="disaster" label="disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132455" start="2348" end="2354" title="hazard" label="hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178984" start="2416" end="2429" title="vulnerability" label="vulnerability"/>
<link wikidata="Q503010" start="2460" end="2495" title="Federal Emergency Management Agency" label="Federal Emergency Management Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3839081" start="2955" end="2963" title="disaster" label="disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="2975" end="2985" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132455" start="2993" end="2999" title="hazard" label="hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q211386" start="3017" end="3046" title="1906 San Francisco earthquake" label="1906 San Francisco earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q65942121" start="3092" end="3110" title="list of natural phenomena" label="natural phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="3148" end="3153" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="3165" end="3171" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q43619" start="3181" end="3192" title="Environment (biophysical)" label="environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q46255" start="3261" end="3272" title="geophysics" label="geophysical"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="3277" end="3287" title="biology" label="biological"/>
<link wikidata="Q574376" start="3336" end="3359" title="human impact on the environment" label="anthropogenic processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165944" start="3366" end="3381" title="land-use change" label="land-use change"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935" start="3485" end="3494" title="avalanche" label="avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138350" start="3496" end="3512" title="coastal flooding" label="coastal flooding"/>
<link wikidata="Q642683" start="3514" end="3523" title="cold wave" label="cold wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="3525" end="3532" title="drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="3534" end="3544" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q37602" start="3546" end="3550" title="hail" label="hail"/>
<link wikidata="Q215864" start="3552" end="3561" title="heat wave" label="heat wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="3563" end="3579" title="tropical cyclone" label="tropical cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q304958" start="3581" end="3590" title="ice storm" label="ice storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q167903" start="3592" end="3601" title="landslide" label="landslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q33741" start="3603" end="3612" title="lightning" label="lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081" start="3646" end="3653" title="tornado" label="tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="3655" end="3662" title="tsunami" label="tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q505748" start="3664" end="3681" title="Volcanism" label="volcanic activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="3683" end="3691" title="wildfire" label="wildfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q182878" start="3737" end="3747" title="dust storm" label="dust storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132455" start="3886" end="3892" title="hazard" label="hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q581445" start="3905" end="3925" title="Social vulnerability" label="vulnerable community"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281359" start="4221" end="4235" title="Disaster risk reduction" label="disaster risks"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="4531" end="4543" title="urban sprawl" label="urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="4548" end="4562" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281359" start="4756" end="4779" title="disaster risk reduction" label="disaster risk reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460420" start="4781" end="4800" title="Emergency management" label="disaster management"/>
<link wikidata="Q55627" start="5461" end="5465" title="Disability-adjusted life year" label="DALY"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="5501" end="5508" title="The Bahamas" label="Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="5510" end="5515" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="5517" end="5525" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="5530" end="5537" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q815567" start="5566" end="5583" title="1988 Armenian earthquake" label="Spitak Earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="6366" end="6386" title="Developing country" label="Developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281359" start="6468" end="6491" title="disaster risk reduction" label="disaster risk reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460420" start="6496" end="6516" title="emergency management" label="emergency management"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994367" start="6576" end="6597" title="high income countries" label="high income countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="6885" end="6892" title="drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="7648" end="7668" title="Developing country" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="8028" end="8042" title="Socioeconomics" label="Socio-economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333592" start="8289" end="8303" title="Economic analysis of climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q180388" start="8874" end="8890" title="Waste management" label="Waste management"/>
<link wikidata="Q36204" start="9009" end="9033" title="2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami" label="tsunami in Japan in 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125558" start="9127" end="9163" title="Ministry of the Environment (Japan)" label="Japanese Ministry of the Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194725" start="9204" end="9213" title="styrofoam" label="styrofoam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839919" start="9547" end="9560" title="microplastics" label="microplastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="9604" end="9613" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q43777" start="9727" end="9751" title="2010 Haiti earthquake" label="2010 earthquake in Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194725" start="9921" end="9930" title="styrofoam" label="styrofoam"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="10252" end="10259" title="disease" label="disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999562" start="10425" end="10433" title="Burn pit" label="Burn pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211603" start="10571" end="10587" title="Sahrawi refugees" label="Sahrawi refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q328510" start="10624" end="10640" title="Tindouf" label="Tindouf, Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q107074942" start="11358" end="11379" title="gender based violence" label="gender based violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6576328" start="11590" end="11601" title="LGBT people" label="LGBT people"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="11606" end="11616" title="immigrants" label="immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912143" start="11681" end="11693" title="scapegoating" label="scapegoating"/>
<link wikidata="Q178885" start="11775" end="11786" title="deity" label="god or gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q281347" start="11930" end="11938" title="Hindutva" label="Hindutva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619344" start="11945" end="11964" title="Hindu Makkal Katchi" label="Hindu Makkal Katchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q58948804" start="11983" end="12027" title="Entry of women to Sabarimala" label="women&amp;#x27;s struggle for the right to enter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520207" start="12032" end="12042" title="Sabarimala" label="Sabarimala"/>
<link wikidata="Q56044878" start="12065" end="12083" title="2018 Kerala floods" label="2018 Kerala floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477202" start="12124" end="12132" title="Ayyappan" label="Ayyappan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460420" start="14057" end="14078" title="disaster preparedness" label="disaster preparedness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="14269" end="14279" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q15316" start="14331" end="14349" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s crust" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q186167" start="14363" end="14375" title="seismic wave" label="seismic wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="14557" end="14563" title="Fault (geology)" label="faults"/>
<link wikidata="Q107410" start="14637" end="14642" title="Hypocenter" label="focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q106032" start="14708" end="14717" title="epicenter" label="epicenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="14866" end="14873" title="tsunami" label="tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q188734" start="15308" end="15316" title="sinkhole" label="sinkhole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542312" start="15343" end="15358" title="Coastal erosion" label="Coastal erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875777" start="15608" end="15623" title="beach evolution" label="beach evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="15665" end="15681" title="tropical cyclone" label="tropical cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="15869" end="15876" title="Volcano" label="Volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692360" start="15971" end="15988" title="Types of volcanic eruptions" label="volcanic eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="16067" end="16071" title="Lava" label="Lava"/>
<link wikidata="Q107099" start="16236" end="16248" title="volcanic ash" label="volcanic ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q221616" start="16779" end="16796" title="pyroclastic flows" label="pyroclastic flows"/>
<link wikidata="Q43332" start="16986" end="16993" title="Pompeii" label="Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q47212" start="17033" end="17038" title="lahar" label="lahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q625316" start="17084" end="17101" title="Tangiwai disaster" label="Tangiwai disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532815" start="17141" end="17155" title="Armero tragedy" label="Armero tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q210510" start="17288" end="17314" title="volcanic explosivity index" label="volcanic explosivity index"/>
<link wikidata="Q332614" start="17328" end="17340" title="supervolcano" label="supervolcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123218" start="17361" end="17384" title="Toba catastrophe theory" label="Toba catastrophe theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q183360" start="17454" end="17463" title="Lake Toba" label="Lake Toba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="17467" end="17474" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q130754" start="18263" end="18286" title="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami" label="2004 Boxing Day tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q10745598" start="18317" end="18350" title="1958 Lituya Bay, Alaska earthquake and megatsunami" label="one in 1958 at Lituya Bay, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144693" start="18389" end="18418" title="Minoan eruption" label="ancient eruption of Santorini"/>
<link wikidata="Q36204" start="18441" end="18479" title="2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami" label="tsunami occurred near Fukushima, Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430548" start="18724" end="18749" title="effects of climate change" label="effects of climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q11663" start="19005" end="19012" title="weather" label="weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q190096" start="19043" end="19064" title="temperature inversion" label="temperature inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q212903" start="19067" end="19082" title="katabatic winds" label="katabatic winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="19734" end="19741" title="drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598107" start="19765" end="19783" title="2000s Australian drought" label="Millennium Drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616080" start="19929" end="19937" title="List of desalination plants in Australia" label="see list"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="19962" end="19967" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q108436" start="20101" end="20108" title="Bastrop County, Texas" label="Bastrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="20180" end="20188" title="Wildfire" label="Wildfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q911871" start="20227" end="20235" title="wildland" label="wildland"/>
<link wikidata="Q33741" start="20265" end="20274" title="lightning" label="lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="20279" end="20286" title="drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q327541" start="20344" end="20349" title="arson" label="arson"/>
<link wikidata="Q241741" start="20442" end="20450" title="wildlife" label="wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="20478" end="20486" title="wildfire" label="wildfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244543" start="20499" end="20512" title="Peshtigo Fire" label="Peshtigo Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q838278" start="20656" end="20680" title="Black Saturday bushfires" label="Black Saturday bushfires"/>
<link wikidata="Q838278" start="20790" end="20799" title="2009 Victorian bushfires" label="bushfires"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="20809" end="20818" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="21015" end="21020" title="flood" label="flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499091" start="21085" end="21101" title="Floods Directive" label="Floods Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="21275" end="21280" title="tides" label="tides"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="21348" end="21353" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="21357" end="21361" title="lake" label="lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q33741" start="21813" end="21822" title="lightning" label="lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q183496" start="22111" end="22116" title="adobe" label="adobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090236" start="22117" end="22126" title="mud brick" label="mud brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q140588" start="22192" end="22199" title="Typhoon" label="Typhoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q79602" start="22201" end="22208" title="cyclone" label="cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q79602" start="22210" end="22224" title="cyclonic storm" label="cyclonic storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="22229" end="22238" title="hurricane" label="hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="22286" end="22300" title="tropical storm" label="tropical storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="22354" end="22359" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="22382" end="22387" title="ocean" label="ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q81054" start="22402" end="22407" title="storm" label="storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q245551" start="22820" end="22838" title="1970 Bhola cyclone" label="1970 Bhola cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q186291" start="22881" end="22904" title="Great Hurricane of 1780" label="Great Hurricane of 1780"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="22992" end="23009" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5947963" start="23088" end="23139" title="Tropical cyclones and climate change" label="become more intense and produce more heavy rainfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="23174" end="23188" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081" start="23214" end="23221" title="tornado" label="tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q182311" start="23332" end="23350" title="cumulonimbus cloud" label="cumulonimbus cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q14189" start="23385" end="23398" title="cumulus cloud" label="cumulus cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q79602" start="23492" end="23499" title="cyclone" label="cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q209190" start="23563" end="23575" title="low pressure area" label="low pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757780" start="23670" end="23689" title="funnel cloud" label="condensation funnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q637703" start="23770" end="23776" title="debris" label="debris"/>
<link wikidata="Q165632" start="23781" end="23785" title="dust" label="dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696963" start="23844" end="23860" title="tornado outbreak" label="tornado outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q747894" start="23878" end="23887" title="supercell" label="supercell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24068" end="24090" title="Tornado records#Largest and most powerful tornadoes" label="most extreme tornadoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q75079023" start="24280" end="24292" title="winter storm" label="winter storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299029" start="24411" end="24426" title="ground blizzard" label="ground blizzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q170652" start="24526" end="24548" title="Great Blizzard of 1888" label="Great Blizzard of 1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575042" start="24636" end="24654" title="1972 Iran blizzard" label="1972 Iran blizzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4610424" start="24663" end="24688" title="2008 Afghanistan blizzard" label="2008 Afghanistan blizzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q10681317" start="24809" end="24824" title="1993 Storm of the Century" label="1993 Superstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q131596" start="25267" end="25271" title="farm" label="farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="25356" end="25362" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="25419" end="25428" title="insurance" label="insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627230" start="25632" end="25645" title="return period" label="return period"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="26210" end="26220" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q167903" start="26233" end="26243" title="landslides" label="landslides"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="26255" end="26263" title="wildfire" label="wildfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q116758847" start="26551" end="26560" title="anthropic" label="anthropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="26585" end="26596" title="groundwater" label="groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550770" start="26621" end="26651" title="groundwater-related subsidence" label="groundwater-related subsidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614972" start="26664" end="26679" title="hazard analysis" label="hazard analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281359" start="26725" end="26748" title="disaster risk reduction" label="disaster risk reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058438" start="26912" end="26927" title="risk assessment" label="risk assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632256" start="27057" end="27069" title="seismic risk" label="seismic risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441902" start="27190" end="27202" title="Wind engineering" label="extreme wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460077" start="27226" end="27236" title="Flood risk assessment" label="flood risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q10427676" start="27525" end="27560" title="Civil defense" label="civil protection (or civil defense)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27608" end="27627" title="Emergency management#Phases and personal activities" label="phases of disasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q60433" start="27883" end="27906" title="1951 Refugee Convention" label="1951 Refugee Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q30323983" start="28076" end="28094" title="Kampala Convention" label="Kampala Convention"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58923" wikidata="Q399570" url="?curid=58923" title="People (disambiguation)">
<text>A [[people]] is a coherent social group or ethnic group.

People may also refer to:
* The plural form of person
==Books and publications==
* &quot;People&quot; (play), a play by Alan Bennett
* &quot;People&quot; (magazine), an American celebrity news magazine
* &quot;People&quot; (Australian magazine), originally an Australian general-interest magazine, latterly a men&#x27;s magazine

==Film and television==
*&quot;People&quot; (TV series), a 1955 Canadian television series
*People (film), a 2004 French comedy film
*&quot;People&quot;, a talk show hosted by Indian actor Anupam Kher on Republic TV

==Music==
* People Records, a record label
* People!, a 1960s rock band

===Albums===
* &quot;People&quot; (Animal Collective EP)
* &quot;People (Babe the Blue Ox album)&quot;
* &quot;People&quot; (Barbra Streisand album)
* &quot;People&quot; (Code Kunst album)
* &quot;People&quot; (The Golden Republic EP)
* &quot;People&quot; (Hillsong United album)
* &quot;People&quot; (Hothouse Flowers album)
* &quot;People&quot; (Howard Jones album)
* &quot;People&quot; (James Brown album)
* &quot;People&quot; (Johnny Mathis album)

===Songs===
* &quot;People&quot; (Agust D song)
* &quot;People&quot; (Barbra Streisand song)
* &quot;People&quot; (King Crimson song)
* &quot;People&quot; (Libianca song)
* &quot;People&quot; (Mi-Sex song)
* &quot;People&quot; (The 1975 song)
* &quot;People&quot;, a song by Level 42 on the 1983 album &quot;Standing in the Light&quot;
* &quot;People&quot;, a song by Andrew Jackson Jihad on the 2007 album &quot;People That Can Eat People Are the Luckiest People in the World&quot;
* &quot;People II: The Reckoning&quot;, a song by Andrew Jackson Jihad on the 2007 album &quot;People That Can Eat People Are the Luckiest People in the World&quot;
* &quot;People II 2: Still Peoplin&#x27;&quot;, a song by Andrew Jackson Jihad on the 2011 album &quot;Knife Man&quot;
* &quot;People&quot;, a song by thenewno2 on the 2008 album &quot;You Are Here&quot; (Thenewno2 album)
* &quot;People&quot;, a song by Gorillaz on the 2005 single &quot;Dare&quot; (song)
* &quot;People&quot;, a song by Fat Mattress on the 1970 album &quot;Fat Mattress II&quot;

==Businesses and organisations==
*People&#x27;s, an Austrian airline
* Peoples, former name of China Mobile Hong Kong (CMHK)
*Peoples (store), a defunct department store chain in Tacoma, Washington
*Peoples II, the jewelry store chain in Canada
*Peoples Drug, a chain of drug stores based in Alexandria, Virginia
* People, the original name of the Green Party (UK)

==Persons==
*Ann Peoples (1947–2019), American politician
*Ann Peoples (Antarctic manager), American anthropologist
*Camerun Peoples (born 1999), American football player
*David Peoples (born 1940), American screenwriter
*Dorothy &quot;Dottie&quot; Peoples (born 1950), American gospel singer
*Michael Peoples (born 1991), American professional baseball player
*Theo Peoples (born 1961), American singer

==Other==

* Outlook People on Outlook.com, formerly named &quot;People&quot;, a consumer web-based address book service
* People (Windows), an address book application integrated into certain versions of Microsoft Windows
* In several US states, The People is the prosecuting party in criminal offenses.

==See also==
*People skills, ability to communicate effectively with people in a friendly way, especially in business
* Person (disambiguation)
* The People (disambiguation)
* Popular (disambiguation)
* Folk (disambiguation)
* Humans</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q399570" start="2" end="12" title="People (disambiguation)" label="[[people]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q399570" start="58" end="64" title="People (disambiguation)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q215627" start="105" end="111" title="person" label="person"/>
<link wikidata="Q16947329" start="141" end="166" title="People (play)" label="&amp;quot;People&amp;quot; (play)"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="193" end="222" title="People (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;People&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165847" start="262" end="302" title="People (Australian magazine)" label="&amp;quot;People&amp;quot; (Australian magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165850" start="413" end="443" title="People (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;People&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q769695" start="480" end="493" title="People (film)" label="People (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28180276" start="592" end="603" title="Republic TV" label="Republic TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q29982379" start="617" end="631" title="People Records" label="People Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165448" start="650" end="657" title="People!" label="People!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685796" start="693" end="734" title="People (Animal Collective EP)" label="&amp;quot;People&amp;quot; (Animal Collective EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q108822186" start="743" end="774" title="People (Babe the Blue Ox album)" label="People (Babe the Blue Ox album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283364" start="783" end="826" title="People (Barbra Streisand album)" label="&amp;quot;People&amp;quot; (Barbra Streisand album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110117248" start="829" end="866" title="People (Code Kunst album)" label="&amp;quot;People&amp;quot; (Code Kunst album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165851" start="869" end="912" title="People (The Golden Republic EP)" label="&amp;quot;People&amp;quot; (The Golden Republic EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q64159687" start="915" end="957" title="People (Hillsong United album)" label="&amp;quot;People&amp;quot; (Hillsong United album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165848" start="960" end="1003" title="People (Hothouse Flowers album)" label="&amp;quot;People&amp;quot; (Hothouse Flowers album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3899330" start="1006" end="1045" title="People (Howard Jones album)" label="&amp;quot;People&amp;quot; (Howard Jones album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20813876" start="1048" end="1086" title="People (James Brown album)" label="&amp;quot;People&amp;quot; (James Brown album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165849" start="1089" end="1129" title="People (Johnny Mathis album)" label="&amp;quot;People&amp;quot; (Johnny Mathis album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q126946544" start="1145" end="1178" title="People (Agust D song)" label="&amp;quot;People&amp;quot; (Agust D song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3899333" start="1181" end="1223" title="People (Barbra Streisand song)" label="&amp;quot;People&amp;quot; (Barbra Streisand song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q660337" start="1226" end="1264" title="People (King Crimson song)" label="&amp;quot;People&amp;quot; (King Crimson song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q117005413" start="1267" end="1301" title="People (Libianca song)" label="&amp;quot;People&amp;quot; (Libianca song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48789593" start="1304" end="1336" title="People (Mi-Sex song)" label="&amp;quot;People&amp;quot; (Mi-Sex song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85792776" start="1339" end="1373" title="People (The 1975 song)" label="&amp;quot;People&amp;quot; (The 1975 song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598606" start="1439" end="1460" title="Standing in the Light" label="Standing in the Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165929" start="1544" end="1607" title="People That Can Eat People Are the Luckiest People in the World" label="People That Can Eat People Are the Luckiest People in the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165929" start="1709" end="1772" title="People That Can Eat People Are the Luckiest People in the World" label="People That Can Eat People Are the Luckiest People in the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995732" start="1882" end="1891" title="Knife Man" label="Knife Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q8056854" start="1958" end="2000" title="You Are Here (Thenewno2 album)" label="&amp;quot;You Are Here&amp;quot; (Thenewno2 album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736561" start="2061" end="2084" title="Dare (song)" label="&amp;quot;Dare&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437212" start="2154" end="2169" title="Fat Mattress II" label="Fat Mattress II"/>
<link wikidata="Q873376" start="2211" end="2224" title="People&amp;#x27;s" label="People&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099786" start="2272" end="2294" title="China Mobile Hong Kong Company Limited" label="China Mobile Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166048" start="2303" end="2318" title="Peoples (store)" label="Peoples (store)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8065305" start="2376" end="2386" title="Peoples II" label="Peoples II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166061" start="2423" end="2435" title="Peoples Drug" label="Peoples Drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499324" start="2525" end="2541" title="Green Party (UK)" label="Green Party (UK)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766614" start="2556" end="2567" title="Ann Peoples" label="Ann Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q27450096" start="2602" end="2633" title="Ann Peoples (Antarctic manager)" label="Ann Peoples (Antarctic manager)"/>
<link wikidata="Q118177625" start="2660" end="2675" title="Camerun Peoples" label="Camerun Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177114" start="2715" end="2728" title="David Peoples" label="David Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845720" start="2765" end="2799" title="Dottie Peoples" label="Dorothy &amp;quot;Dottie&amp;quot; Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q77283754" start="2837" end="2852" title="Michael Peoples" label="Michael Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781482" start="2905" end="2917" title="Theo Peoples" label="Theo Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2961" end="2990" title="Outlook.com#People" label="Outlook People on Outlook.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398059" start="3071" end="3087" title="People (Windows)" label="People (Windows)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="3153" end="3170" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q600751" start="3213" end="3230" title="Prosecutor" label="prosecuting party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4229879" start="3268" end="3281" title="People skills" label="People skills"/>
<link wikidata="Q397098" start="3374" end="3397" title="Person (disambiguation)" label="Person (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756631" start="3400" end="3427" title="The People (disambiguation)" label="The People (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q400146" start="3430" end="3454" title="Popular (disambiguation)" label="Popular (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q340412" start="3457" end="3478" title="Folk (disambiguation)" label="Folk (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="3481" end="3487" title="Humans" label="Humans"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58925" wikidata="Q102139" url="?curid=58925" title="Margrethe II">
<text>Margrethe II (; Margrethe Alexandrine Þórhildur Ingrid, born 16 April 1940) is a member of the Danish royal family who reigned as Queen of Denmark from 14 January 1972 until her abdication on 14 January 2024. Having reigned for exactly 52 years, she was the second-longest reigning Danish monarch after Christian IV. She is also the world&#x27;s most recent female reigning monarch.

Margrethe was born into the House of Glücksburg, a cadet branch of the House of Oldenburg, during the reign of her paternal grandfather, King Christian X. She is the eldest child of King Frederik IX and Queen Ingrid. She became heir presumptive to her father in 1953, when a constitutional amendment allowed women to inherit the throne. In 1967, she married Henri de Laborde de Monpezat, with whom she had two sons, Frederik and Joachim. Margrethe succeeded her father upon his death in January 1972.

Margrethe has worked as a scenographer, a costume designer, and an illustrator of works by J. R. R. Tolkien. Support for the monarchy in Denmark, alongside her personal popularity, gradually rose throughout the course of her reign, attaining around eighty percent by the time of her abdication. She was succeeded by her elder son, Frederik X.

==Early life and education==

Margrethe was born on 16 April 1940 at 10:10 CET at Frederik VIII&#x27;s Palace, in her parents&#x27; residence at Amalienborg, the principal residence of the Danish royal family in the district of Frederiksstaden in central Copenhagen. She was the first child of Crown Prince Frederik (later King Frederik IX) and Crown Princess Ingrid (later Queen Ingrid). Her father was the elder son of the then-reigning King Christian X, while her mother was the only daughter of Crown Prince Gustaf Adolf of Sweden (later King Gustaf VI Adolf). Her birth took place just one week after the beginning of Nazi Germany&#x27;s occupation of Denmark following the war invasion.

Princess Margrethe was baptised on 14 May in the Holmen Church in Copenhagen. Her godparents were her grandfathers, King Christian X of Denmark and Crown Prince Gustaf Adolf of Sweden; her maternal great-grandfathers, King Gustaf V of Sweden and Prince Arthur, Duke of Connaught and Strathearn; her uncles Prince Knud of Denmark and Prince Gustaf Adolf, Duke of Västerbotten; as well as her first cousin twice removed, Prince Axel of Denmark. She was named Margrethe – the Danish variation of her late maternal grandmother Crown Princess Margareta of Sweden&#x27;s name – Alexandrine after her paternal grandmother, Queen Alexandrine, and Ingrid after her mother. Since her paternal grandfather was also King of Iceland at the time of her birth, she was given the Icelandic name Þórhildur. Like her maternal grandmother, Margrethe is known affectionately as &quot;Daisy&quot; to her family and close friends.

The birth of Margrethe&#x27;s younger sisters Benedikte and Anne-Marie followed in 1944 and 1946 respectively. The princesses grew up in apartments at Frederik VIII&#x27;s Palace at Amalienborg in Copenhagen and in Fredensborg Palace in North Zealand. Margrethe spent summer holidays with the royal family in her parents&#x27; summer residence at Gråsten Palace in Southern Jutland. On 20 April 1947, following the death of Christian X, Margrethe&#x27;s father ascended the throne as Frederik IX.

===Education===
Margrethe was educated at the private school N. Zahle&#x27;s School in Copenhagen, from which she graduated in 1959. She spent a year at North Foreland Lodge, a boarding school for girls in Hampshire, England, and later studied prehistoric archaeology at Girton College, Cambridge, during 1960–1961, political science at Aarhus University between 1961 and 1962, attended the Sorbonne in 1963, and was at the London School of Economics in 1965. She is a Fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London.

==Heir presumptive==

At the time of her birth, only males could ascend the throne of Denmark, owing to the changes in succession laws enacted in the 1850s when the Glücksburg branch was chosen to succeed. As Margrethe had no brothers, it was assumed that her uncle Prince Knud would one day assume the throne.

The process of changing the constitution started in 1947, not long after Margrethe&#x27;s father ascended the throne and it became clear that Queen Ingrid would have no more children. The popularity of Frederik and his daughters and the more prominent role of women in Danish life started the complicated process of altering the constitution. The law required that the proposal be passed by two successive Parliaments and then by a referendum, which occurred on 27 March 1953. The new Act of Succession permitted female succession to the throne of Denmark, according to male-preference cognatic primogeniture, where a female can ascend to the throne only if she does not have a brother. Princess Margrethe therefore became heir presumptive. In 2009, the law of succession was modified into absolute primogeniture.

Margrethe attended the traditional New Year Courts for the first time in 1956. On her eighteenth birthday, 16 April 1958, Margrethe was given a seat in the Council of State. She subsequently chaired the meetings of the Council in the absence of the King. In 1960, together with her first cousin, Princess Margaretha of Sweden, and Princess Astrid of Norway, she travelled to the United States, which included a visit to Los Angeles, and to the Paramount Studios, where they met several celebrities, including Dean Martin, Jerry Lewis and Elvis Presley.

She paid her first visit to the Faroe Islands in 1959, alongside her parents and sisters, and to Greenland in 1960.

===Marriage and family===
While Margrethe studied in London, she met the French diplomat, Henri de Laborde de Monpezat, who was legation secretary at the French Embassy in London. Their engagement was announced on 5 October 1966. They were married on 10 June 1967, at the Holmen Church in Copenhagen, and the wedding reception was held at Fredensborg Palace. Laborde de Monpezat received the style and title of &quot;His Royal Highness Prince Henrik of Denmark&quot; because of his new position as the spouse of the heir presumptive to the Danish throne. They were married for over fifty years, until his death on 13 February 2018.

Less than a year after the wedding, Margrethe gave birth to her first child, a son, on 26 May 1968. By tradition, Danish kings were alternately named either Frederik or Christian. She chose to maintain this by assuming the position of a Christian, and thus named her elder son Frederik. The following year, a second child, named Joachim, was born on 7 June 1969.

In 1974, she and Henrik purchased Château de Cayx in the wine district of Cahors in Southern France.

Margrethe announced in 2008 that her male-line descendants would bear the additional title of Count or Countess of Monpezat in recognition of her husband&#x27;s ancestry.

In 2022, the Queen announced that, from the start of 2023, the descendants of Prince Joachim will only be able to use their titles of Count and Countess of Monpezat, their previous titles of Prince and Princess of Denmark ceasing to exist. To allow the children, who were never expected to hold an official role within the royal family, to have normal lives, the Queen wanted &quot;to create a framework for the four grandchildren, to a much greater degree, to be able to shape their own existence without being limited by the special considerations and obligations that a formal affiliation with the Royal House as an institution implies&quot;. Her son, Joachim, daughter-in-law, Marie, former daughter-in-law, Alexandra, and eldest grandson, Nikolai, publicly expressed shock and confusion because of the decision, after which Margrethe released a statement in which she said that it saddened her that she had upset Joachim&#x27;s family.

Along with her late husband, Margrethe has kept dachshunds since the 1970s. She currently has one dog, the dachshund Tilia, who was Prince Henrik&#x27;s dog until his death in 2018.

==Reign==

===Accession===

On 3 January 1972, three days after King Frederik IX delivered his New Year&#x27;s address, he suffered a heart attack and was admitted to the Copenhagen Municipal Hospital. Margrethe was then designated regent the following day. The king died on 14 January, and Margrethe acceded the throne at the age of 31, becoming the first female Danish sovereign under the new Act of Succession. She was proclaimed Queen from the balcony of Christiansborg Palace the following day by Prime Minister Jens Otto Krag.

Her regnal number was chosen in recognition of the 14th century Danish monarch, Margrethe. Her motto was &quot;God&#x27;s help, the love of the people, Denmark&#x27;s strength&quot; (). She relinquished all the monarch&#x27;s former titles except the title to Denmark, hence her style &quot;By the Grace of God, Queen of Denmark&quot; ().

=== Constitutional role ===
The Queen&#x27;s main tasks were to represent the Kingdom abroad and to be a unifying figure at home. She performed the latter by opening exhibitions, attending anniversaries and inaugurating bridges, among other things. She received foreign ambassadors and awards, honours and medals.

As a constitutional sovereign, Margrethe took no part in party politics and does not express any political opinions. Although she had the right to vote, she opted not to do so to avoid even the appearance of partisanship.

The Queen held a meeting with the prime minister and the foreign affairs minister every Wednesday, unless either she or the prime minister was outside of the kingdom.

After an election where the incumbent prime minister does not have a majority behind him or her, the Queen held a &quot;&quot; (Queen&#x27;s meeting) in which she met the chairmen of each of the Danish political parties.

Each party has the choice of selecting a royal investigator to lead these negotiations or alternatively, give the incumbent prime minister the mandate to continue his or her government as is. In theory each party could choose its own leader as royal investigator, as the social liberal did in 2006, but often only one royal investigator is chosen plus the prime minister, before each election. The leader who, at that meeting, succeeds in securing a majority of the seats in the Folketing, is, by royal decree, charged with the task of forming a new government. (No party has held an absolute majority in the Folketing since 1903.)

Once the government had been formed, the Queen formally appointed it. Officially, it was the monarch who was the head of state, and she therefore presided over the Council of State (privy council), where the acts of legislation which have been passed by the parliament are signed into law. In practice, nearly all of the Queen&#x27;s formal powers were exercised by the Cabinet of Denmark.

It was customary for Margrethe, as the Danish monarch, to host the annual New Year levées. Every year on 1 January, a banquet was held for the government, the Speaker of the Danish Parliament, representatives of official Denmark and the Royal Court at Christian VIII&#x27;s Palace at Amalienborg. On day two, a levée was held at Christian VIII&#x27;s Palace for the justices of Supreme Court of Denmark and the Officer Corps of The Royal Life Guards and The Guard Hussar Regiment, followed by a levée at Christiansborg Palace for the diplomatic corps. On day three, a levée was held for officers from the Defence and the Danish Emergency Management Agency, the I., II. and III. ranking classes as well as invited representatives of major national organisations and the royal patronages.

===Official duties===

Up to the end of her reign, Margrethe held 72 Danish and 8 foreign patronages as queen, including Aarhus Festuge, ARoS Aarhus Kunstmuseum, DaneAge Association, Danes Worldwide, the , the , Den Gamle By, Det Classenske Fideicommis, the , Det Kongelige Vajsenhus, Diakonissestiftelsen, Foreningen Norden, Land of Legends (Sagnlandet Lejre), M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark, Moesgaard Museum, National Olympic Committee and Sports Confederation of Denmark, Nyborg Slot, Rebild National Park, the Royal Danish Academy of Music, Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters, Royal Danish Yacht Club, , Sankt Lukas Stiftelsen, Vallø stift and Vemmetofte.

A pillar of her reign was an intricate knowledge of and connection to all parts of the Danish Realm. In 2016, she contributed to a book about Denmark&#x27;s history.

Until her abdication, Margrethe served as colonel-in-chief of the Princess of Wales&#x27;s Royal Regiment, an infantry regiment of the British Army, following a tradition dating back to 1906 when Edward VII, married to Alexandra of Denmark, appointed his brother-in-law, Frederik VIII of Denmark, colonel-in-chief of the then Buffs (Royal East Kent Regiment).

As sovereign, Margrethe received 42 official state visits and she undertook 55 foreign state visits herself. She and the royal family have made several other foreign visits.

===Residences===

As queen, her official residences were Amalienborg (where she resides at Christian IX&#x27;s Palace) in Copenhagen and Fredensborg Palace near Hillerød. Her summer residences were Marselisborg Palace near Aarhus and Gråsten Palace near Sønderborg, the former home of her mother, Queen Ingrid, who died in 2000.

===Immigration debate===

In her New Year&#x27;s address at the end of 1984, the Queen addressed the xenophobia experienced by many immigrants in Denmark: 

The term &quot;cocky remarks&quot; (, ) has since become an integrated part of the Danish vocabulary.

In an interview within the 2016 book (&quot;The Deepest Roots&quot;), according to historians at the Saxo Institute of the University of Copenhagen, Margrethe showed a change in attitude to immigration towards a more conservative stance. She stated that the Danish people should have more explicitly clarified the rules and values of Danish culture in order to be able to teach them to new arrivals. She further stated that the Danes in general have underestimated the difficulties involved in successful integration of immigrants, exemplified with the rules of a democracy not being clarified to Muslim immigrants and a lack of readiness to enforce those rules. This was received as a change in line with the attitude of the Danish people.

===Silver, Ruby and Golden Jubilees===
Margrethe marked her Silver Jubilee in 1997 with a religious service and a gala dinner attended by fellow Scandinavian royals. She celebrated her Ruby Jubilee, the 40th year on the throne, on 14 January 2012. This was marked by a church service, concert, carriage procession, gala banquet at Christiansborg Palace and numerous TV interviews.

The Queen&#x27;s Golden Jubilee was marked on 14 January 2022, with celebrations to take place later in the year. In September, following the death of Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom, it was announced by the Royal House that it was &quot;Her Majesty The Queen&#x27;s wish that a number of adjustments be made&quot; to the upcoming celebrations.

Between Elizabeth II&#x27;s death and her abdication, Margrethe was Europe&#x27;s longest-reigning monarch, the world&#x27;s only queen regnant, and the longest-serving incumbent female head of state.

=== Sitting reign record ===
In July 2023, the Danish Royal House recognized Margrethe II as Denmark&#x27;s longest reigning sitting monarch. Though Christian IV reigned for over 59 years between 1588 and 1648, he was not officially installed until 1596, ruling with a &quot;guardian government&quot; up until then.

=== Abdication ===
In her annual live broadcast New Year&#x27;s Eve address on 31 December 2023, Margrethe announced her abdication, which took place on 14 January 2024, the 52nd anniversary of her accession to the throne. She said that time had taken its &quot;toll&quot;, that her number of &quot;ailments&quot; had increased, and that she cannot undertake as many duties as in the past. She cited her extensive back surgery in February 2023, and said that the operation made her reassess her position and consider &quot;whether now would be an appropriate time to pass on the responsibility to the next generation&quot;.

Margrethe&#x27;s elder son, Frederik, assumed the throne as Frederik X. Mirroring her first New Year Address in 1973, she said of the succession: &quot;The support and assistance which I have received throughout the years, have been crucial to the success of my task. It is my hope that the new King and Queen will be met with the same trust and devotion which have fallen to my lot.&quot;

Since her abdication, she has been referred to as &quot;Her Majesty Queen Margrethe&quot;. She is eligible to serve as regent in the event of the incapacity or absence of the King and Crown Prince Christian. As regent, Margrethe can perform the duties of the head of state on certain occasions, for example during Frederik and Christian&#x27;s stays abroad.

==Health issues==

Queen Margrethe II has had a number of health issues. Since the 1990s, she has undergone several operations on her right knee due to injuries and osteoarthritis. In 1994, she was treated for cervical cancer. In 2003, she underwent a 4.5 hour long operation for spinal stenosis.

On 9 February 2022, the Danish court disclosed in a press release that the Queen had contracted COVID-19. On 13 February, the Queen was able to leave home isolation after having had a mild case of the virus. On 21 September 2022, the Danish Royal House disclosed in a press release that Margrethe had tested positive for COVID-19 a second time after attending the state funeral of Elizabeth II, her third cousin, in London. She left home isolation again on 26 September and resumed her official duties immediately, stating that she felt fine.

On 22 February 2023, the Queen underwent &quot;major back surgery&quot; at Rigshospitalet due to continued back pain. In a statement the following day, a representative for the Queen said that the surgery had gone well and that she had already been up for a walk. She was discharged from the hospital on 2 March, and returned from sick leave on her birthday on 16 April.

Margrethe has been a chain smoker and is well known for her tobacco habit. On 23 November 2006, the Danish newspaper &quot;B.T.&quot; printed an announcement from the Royal Court that the Queen would henceforth smoke only in private.

In September 2024, she was hospitalised after falling in Fredensborg Castle.

==Public image and style==
Margrethe wears designs by former Pierre Balmain designer Erik Mortensen, Jørgen Bender, and Birgitte Taulow. In March 2013, &quot;The Guardian&quot; listed her as one of the fifty best-dressed over 50s. In connection with her 80th birthday, British &quot;Vogue&quot; published an article calling her &quot;An Unsung Style Heroine.&quot;

A 2012 poll showed support for the monarchy in Denmark remained consistently high at around 82%, compared to less than half when she ascended the throne in 1972.

The Queen has been depicted on the annual Christmas seal twice—as a child in 1942 and following her accession to the throne in 1972. 

Margrethe was included in Andy Warhol&#x27;s portrait series in 1985 as one of four &quot;Reigning Queens&quot;, along with queens Ntfombi of Eswatini, Elizabeth II and Beatrix of the Netherlands.

==Personal interests==
===Archaeology===

Margrethe is known for her strong archaeological passion and has participated in several excavations, including in Italy, Egypt, Denmark and South America. She shared this interest with her grandfather, Gustaf VI Adolf of Sweden, with whom she spent some time unearthing artefacts near Etruria in 1962.

===Church textiles===

Since the 1970s, Margrethe has designed and embroidered several vestments and church textiles for churches in Denmark, Greenland, Germany and England. She has designed a chasuble for Fredensborg Palace Church which was since embroidered by her mother, Queen Ingrid, and appliquéd by her sister, Princess Benedikte. The textile was presented to the church on its 250th anniversary in 1976. In 1989, Margrethe designed the bishop&#x27;s robe for the Diocese of Viborg. In 2017, she designed the antependium for the All Saints&#x27; Church in Wittenberg, Germany. In 2020, she designed the chasuble for the Danish Church of St Katharine in Camden, London.

In addition to the church textiles, Margrethe has various other things, including an altarpiece for Skei Mountain Church in Norway, a Christmas spoon, the annual Danish Christmas seals in 1970, 2003 and 2015, and Greenland&#x27;s Christmas seal in 1983.

===Découpage===

Since the mid-1970s, Margrethe has been using the découpage technique, which involves combining clippings from periodicals and books for new motifs. This technique is used in auction catalogues, home magazines, and furniture decorations. The découpage often references literary, mythological, or art-historical topics, and is often displayed in royal palaces, particularly Christian VII&#x27;s Palace at Amalienborg. Sealed with a protective lacquer, the Queen&#x27;s découpage works generally have references to literary, mythological or art-historical topics.

Margrethe&#x27;s découpage works have also been used in various books and films, including Prince Henrik&#x27;s poetry collections &quot;Cantabile&quot; (2000) and &quot;Frihjul&quot; (2010). 81 découpages she designed were the basis for the sets of the 2023 film &quot;&quot;.

===Embroidery===

As a child, Margrethe preferred drawing rather than needlework, but since 1960, numerous embroideries have been presented as gifts or used in the Queen&#x27;s own rooms. The embroideries are made from patterns that Margrethe herself creates on graph paper, which includes twining shapes and the recipient&#x27;s monogram. The Queen has designed several embroideries for the Danish Handcraft Guild, including patterns for calendars, cushion covers and dinner mats. Margrethe has also designed evening bags and spectacle cases for friends and family members, including Christmas calendars for all of the grandchildren, cushion covers and furniture covers for the palaces, and fireplace screens for Fredensborg Palace.

The Queen&#x27;s private embroideries were exhibited at Koldinghus Castle in 2021.

===Films===

The Queen has worked as a screenwriter alongside Per Brink Abrahamsen on the two Hans Christian Andersen adaptations from 2000 and from 2009. Additionally, she narrated the former and made an uncredited acting cameo as a &quot;member of the mob&quot; in the latter.

Using decoupage as her primary craft, she has also been a set designer for:

* &quot; (2000)
* &quot; (2009)
* &quot;&quot; (2023)

For her work on &quot;Ehrengard: The Art of Seduction&quot;, Margrethe won the Robert Award for Best Costume Design at the 41st Robert Awards on 3 February 2024. She was also nominated in the category Best Production Design.

===Monograms===

In 2004, Margrethe designed the official monogram of her second cousin twice removed, Princess Ingrid Alexandra of Norway. She has also designed her own personal monogram; the personal monograms of her son Frederik X, daughter-in-law Mary and grandson Christian; as well as the joint monograms of the Danish Crown Prince couple as well as the Norwegian Crown Prince couple, her godson Haakon, Crown Prince of Norway, and his wife Mette-Marit.

===Scenography and costume design===

Over the years, Margrethe has become involved in ballet as a scenographer and costume designer. She designed the costumes for the Royal Danish Ballet&#x27;s production of &quot;A Folk Tale&quot; and for the 2009 Peter Flinth film, &quot;De vilde svaner&quot; (&quot;The Wild Swans&quot;). She also designs her own clothes and is known for her colourful and sometimes eccentric clothing choices. The Queen designed 51 costumes for the 2023 film &quot;&quot; as well as 81 decoupages that were the basis for the sets.

Margrethe has designed sets and costumes for numerous ballets. Since 2001, she has worked with the Tivoli Ballet Theatre:

* 1991: &quot;A Folk Tale&quot;, Royal Danish Theatre
* 2005 &amp; 2011: &quot;Thumbelina&quot;, Pantomimeteatret
* 2007, 2013 &amp; 2018: &quot;The Tinderbox&quot;, Pantomimeteatret
* 2009: &quot;The Swineherd&quot;, Pantomimeteatret
* 2012, 2014, 2016, 2018 &amp; 2022: &quot;The Nutcracker&quot;, Tivoli Concert Hall
* 2013: &quot;The Steadfast Tin Soldier&quot;, Pantomimeteatret
* 2016: &quot;Cinderella&quot;, Pantomimeteatret
* 2019, 2021 &amp; 2023: &quot;The Snow Queen&quot;, Tivoli Concert Hall
* 2024: &quot;Blockhead Hans&quot;, Pantomimeteatret (upcoming)

===Visual art===


Margrethe is an accomplished painter and has exhibited many of her works over the years. In 2000, she illustrated Prince Henrik&#x27;s poetry collection &quot;Cantabile&quot;. Under the title &quot;From mountains to coast&quot;, she and her close friend, Queen Sonja of Norway, exhibited selected works inspired by nature at the Barony Rosendal in 2015.

Under the pseudonym &quot;Ingahild Grathmer&quot; (the latter being an anagram for Margrethe and the former made up of her secondary names Ingrid, Alexandrine and Þórhildur), her illustrations were used for Danish editions of &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;, which she was encouraged to illustrate in the early 1970s. She sent them to J. R. R. Tolkien, who was struck by the similarity of her drawings to his own style. 

==Honours==
===National===
** 20 April 1947: Knight of the Order of the Elephant (R.E.)
*** 14 January 1972 – 14 January 2024: Sovereign of the Order of the Elephant
** 14 January 1972: Grand Commander of the Order of the Dannebrog (S.Kmd.)
*** 14 January 1972 – 14 January 2024: Sovereign of the Order of the Dannebrog
** Knight of the Decoration of the Cross of Honour of the Dannebrog (D.Ht.)
** Homeguard Medal of Merit
** 25 years of Homeguard Service Medal
** Medal of Honour of the League of Civil Defence
** Medal of Honour of the Reserve Officers League
** 100th Anniversary Medal of the Birth of King Christian X
** 50th Anniversary Medal of the arrival of Queen Ingrid to Denmark
** 100th Anniversary Medal of the Birth of King Frederik IX
** Queen Ingrid Commemorative Medal
** Nersornaat Medal for Meritorious Service, 1st Class

===Foreign===
===Awards===

* 2004: The Hans Christian Andersen Award Committee&#x27;s Honorary Award
* 2022: Foreningen Norden&#x27;s Nordic Language Prize
* 2024: Robert Award for Best Costume Design at the 41st Robert Awards
* 2024: Honorary Award

===Honorific eponyms===

====Awards====

* : (2015)

====Geographic locations====

* : (1979)
* : Queen Margrethe II Land in Northeast Greenland was named in her honour on 16 April 1990 on the occasion of her 50th birthday

====Objects====

* : designed by her uncle, Sigvard Bernadotte, for in 1947

====Structures====

* : in Valby (1968)

===Honorary military appointments===
* 1972–1992: Colonel-in-Chief of the Queen&#x27;s Regiment
* 1992–1997: Allied Colonel-in-Chief (with Diana, Princess of Wales) of the Princess of Wales&#x27;s Royal Regiment
* 1997–2024: Colonel-in-Chief of the Princess of Wales&#x27;s Royal Regiment

==See also==

* Descendants of Christian IX of Denmark – Lists other members of European royalty who share a common ancestor with Margrethe II
* List of monarchs who abdicated
* Monarchy of Denmark
* Queen Margrethe&#x27;s and Prince Henrik&#x27;s Foundation

==References==
==Bibliography==
*
*
*
*
*


==External links==
* Queen Margrethe&#x27;s Homepage
* Tapestries for HM The Queen of Denmark</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q102139" start="0" end="12" title="Margrethe II" label="Margrethe II"/>
<link wikidata="Q723890" start="95" end="114" title="Danish royal family" label="Danish royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273134" start="130" end="146" title="Queen of Denmark" label="Queen of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q124058909" start="174" end="188" title="Abdication of Margrethe II" label="her abdication"/>
<link wikidata="Q153586" start="303" end="315" title="Christian IV" label="Christian IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q155616" start="412" end="431" title="House of Glücksburg" label="House of Glücksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057658" start="435" end="447" title="cadet branch" label="cadet branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q155594" start="455" end="473" title="House of Oldenburg" label="House of Oldenburg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="521" end="537" title="King Christian X" label="King Christian X"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="566" end="582" title="King Frederik IX" label="King Frederik IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q163010" start="587" end="599" title="Queen Ingrid" label="Queen Ingrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370385" start="612" end="628" title="heir presumptive" label="heir presumptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219680" start="657" end="683" title="Act of Succession (Denmark)" label="a constitutional amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389258" start="742" end="770" title="Henri de Laborde de Monpezat" label="Henri de Laborde de Monpezat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004037" start="800" end="808" title="Frederik X" label="Frederik"/>
<link wikidata="Q159101" start="813" end="820" title="Prince Joachim of Denmark" label="Joachim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707485" start="912" end="924" title="scenographer" label="scenographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16331597" start="928" end="942" title="costume design" label="costume design"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="953" end="993" title="Illustrating Tolkien#Margrethe II of Denmark" label="illustrator of works by J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273134" start="1011" end="1030" title="monarchy in Denmark" label="monarchy in Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q25989" start="1305" end="1308" title="Central European Time" label="CET"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1312" end="1339" title="Amalienborg#Frederik VIII&amp;#x27;s Palace" label="Frederik VIII&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q211053" start="1375" end="1386" title="Amalienborg" label="Amalienborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q723890" start="1419" end="1438" title="Danish royal family" label="Danish royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045356" start="1458" end="1473" title="Frederiksstaden" label="Frederiksstaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="1485" end="1495" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q151312" start="1524" end="1545" title="Frederik IX" label="Crown Prince Frederik"/>
<link wikidata="Q163010" start="1575" end="1596" title="Ingrid of Sweden" label="Crown Princess Ingrid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1669" end="1685" title="King Christian X" label="King Christian X"/>
<link wikidata="Q52878" start="1742" end="1754" title="Gustaf VI Adolf" label="Gustaf Adolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="1853" end="1865" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q819136" start="1873" end="1894" title="German occupation of Denmark" label="occupation of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308186" start="1909" end="1921" title="German invasion of Denmark (1940)" label="war invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="1947" end="1955" title="baptised" label="baptised"/>
<link wikidata="Q284914" start="1973" end="1986" title="Holmen Church" label="Holmen Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q52878" start="2072" end="2097" title="Crown Prince Gustaf Adolf" label="Crown Prince Gustaf Adolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q52890" start="2142" end="2165" title="King Gustaf V of Sweden" label="King Gustaf V of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q160558" start="2170" end="2217" title="Prince Arthur, Duke of Connaught and Strathearn" label="Prince Arthur, Duke of Connaught and Strathearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q381069" start="2230" end="2252" title="Prince Knud of Denmark" label="Prince Knud of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q347374" start="2257" end="2298" title="Prince Gustaf Adolf, Duke of Västerbotten" label="Prince Gustaf Adolf, Duke of Västerbotten"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004187" start="2343" end="2365" title="Prince Axel of Denmark" label="Prince Axel of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q158173" start="2447" end="2481" title="Princess Margaret of Connaught" label="Crown Princess Margareta of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q57264" start="2540" end="2557" title="Queen Alexandrine" label="Queen Alexandrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q62567" start="2628" end="2643" title="King of Iceland" label="King of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q294" start="2688" end="2697" title="Icelandic language" label="Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q817052" start="2880" end="2889" title="Princess Benedikte of Denmark" label="Benedikte"/>
<link wikidata="Q564889" start="2894" end="2904" title="Queen Anne-Marie of Greece" label="Anne-Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412797" start="3049" end="3067" title="Fredensborg Palace" label="Fredensborg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057468" start="3071" end="3084" title="North Zealand" label="North Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q666117" start="3181" end="3195" title="Gråsten Palace" label="Gråsten Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q329505" start="3199" end="3215" title="Southern Jutland" label="Southern Jutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q10593753" start="3393" end="3415" title="N. Zahle&amp;#x27;s School" label="N. Zahle&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262516" start="3485" end="3505" title="North Foreland Lodge" label="North Foreland Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="3538" end="3547" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="3576" end="3587" title="prehistoric" label="prehistoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="3588" end="3599" title="archaeology" label="archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q797846" start="3603" end="3628" title="Girton College, Cambridge" label="Girton College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="3648" end="3665" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q924265" start="3669" end="3686" title="Aarhus University" label="Aarhus University"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="3723" end="3731" title="University of Paris" label="Sorbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q174570" start="3756" end="3782" title="London School of Economics" label="London School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404101" start="3801" end="3807" title="Fellow" label="Fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417893" start="3815" end="3847" title="Society of Antiquaries of London" label="Society of Antiquaries of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q155616" start="4015" end="4025" title="Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg" label="Glücksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q381069" start="4116" end="4127" title="Prince Knud" label="Prince Knud"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219680" start="4647" end="4664" title="Act of Succession (Denmark)" label="Act of Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q11572907" start="4682" end="4692" title="Order of succession" label="succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q250843" start="4732" end="4770" title="male-preference cognatic primogeniture" label="male-preference cognatic primogeniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370385" start="4885" end="4901" title="heir presumptive" label="heir presumptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359613" start="5133" end="5149" title="Danish Council of State" label="Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266804" start="5273" end="5302" title="Princess Margaretha, Mrs. Ambler" label="Princess Margaretha of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q270685" start="5308" end="5333" title="Princess Astrid of Norway" label="Princess Astrid of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="5421" end="5438" title="Paramount Studios" label="Paramount Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q215359" start="5486" end="5497" title="Dean Martin" label="Dean Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q294927" start="5499" end="5510" title="Jerry Lewis" label="Jerry Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="5515" end="5528" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="5563" end="5576" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389258" start="5738" end="5766" title="Henri de Laborde de Monpezat" label="Henri de Laborde de Monpezat"/>
<link wikidata="Q15623567" start="5802" end="5816" title="Embassy of France, London" label="French Embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q284914" start="5920" end="5933" title="Holmen Church" label="Holmen Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412797" start="5987" end="6005" title="Fredensborg Palace" label="Fredensborg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004037" start="6558" end="6566" title="Frederik X" label="Frederik"/>
<link wikidata="Q159101" start="6610" end="6617" title="Prince Joachim of Denmark" label="Joachim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2968817" start="6679" end="6694" title="Château de Cayx" label="Château de Cayx"/>
<link wikidata="Q23047" start="6719" end="6725" title="Cahors" label="Cahors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237299" start="6729" end="6744" title="Southern France" label="Southern France"/>
<link wikidata="Q11972615" start="6841" end="6846" title="Count of Monpezat" label="Count"/>
<link wikidata="Q11972615" start="6850" end="6870" title="Countess of Monpezat" label="Countess of Monpezat"/>
<link wikidata="Q231895" start="7600" end="7605" title="Princess Marie of Denmark" label="Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q272905" start="7631" end="7640" title="Alexandra, Countess of Frederiksborg" label="Alexandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q241033" start="7663" end="7670" title="Count Nikolai of Monpezat" label="Nikolai"/>
<link wikidata="Q29099" start="7909" end="7918" title="dachshund" label="dachshund"/>
<link wikidata="Q3199047" start="8215" end="8244" title="Copenhagen Municipal Hospital" label="Copenhagen Municipal Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="8276" end="8282" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q940733" start="8503" end="8524" title="Christiansborg Palace" label="Christiansborg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q441330" start="8561" end="8575" title="Jens Otto Krag" label="Jens Otto Krag"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898038" start="8582" end="8595" title="regnal number" label="regnal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q202266" start="8658" end="8667" title="Margaret I of Denmark" label="Margrethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375080" start="8673" end="8678" title="Royal mottos of Danish monarchs" label="motto"/>
<link wikidata="Q756617" start="8838" end="8845" title="Danish Realm" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111770" start="8869" end="8888" title="By the Grace of God" label="By the Grace of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q795477" start="9490" end="9504" title="Prime Minister of Denmark" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866144" start="9513" end="9537" title="Minister of Foreign Affairs (Denmark)" label="foreign affairs minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q756617" start="9614" end="9621" title="Danish Realm" label="kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861458" start="9819" end="9843" title="Danish political parties" label="Danish political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q209151" start="10325" end="10334" title="Folketing" label="Folketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="10592" end="10605" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528244" start="10661" end="10674" title="privy council" label="privy council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503072" start="10849" end="10867" title="Cabinet of Denmark" label="Cabinet of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281546" start="10953" end="10959" title="Levee (ceremony)" label="levées"/>
<link wikidata="Q209151" start="11044" end="11061" title="Danish Parliament" label="Danish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q211053" start="11154" end="11165" title="Amalienborg" label="Amalienborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652019" start="11248" end="11272" title="Supreme Court of Denmark" label="Supreme Court of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186780" start="11298" end="11319" title="Royal Life Guards (Denmark)" label="The Royal Life Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q225959" start="11324" end="11349" title="Guard Hussar Regiment (Denmark)" label="The Guard Hussar Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q940733" start="11374" end="11395" title="Christiansborg Palace" label="Christiansborg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q938711" start="11404" end="11420" title="diplomatic corps" label="diplomatic corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q258417" start="11779" end="11793" title="Aarhus Festuge" label="Aarhus Festuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q296962" start="11795" end="11818" title="ARoS Aarhus Kunstmuseum" label="ARoS Aarhus Kunstmuseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12341903" start="11820" end="11839" title="DaneAge Association" label="DaneAge Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q12307133" start="11841" end="11856" title="Danes Worldwide" label="Danes Worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186756" start="11870" end="11882" title="Den Gamle By" label="Den Gamle By"/>
<link wikidata="Q139673" start="11884" end="11910" title="Det Classenske Fideicommis" label="Det Classenske Fideicommis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11965375" start="11918" end="11941" title="Det Kongelige Vajsenhus" label="Det Kongelige Vajsenhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10470404" start="11943" end="11963" title="Diakonissestiftelsen" label="Diakonissestiftelsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437150" start="11965" end="11982" title="Foreningen Norden" label="Foreningen Norden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478334" start="11984" end="12018" title="Land of Legends (Sagnlandet Lejre)" label="Land of Legends (Sagnlandet Lejre)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219764" start="12020" end="12050" title="M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark" label="M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299384" start="12052" end="12068" title="Moesgaard Museum" label="Moesgaard Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164315" start="12070" end="12132" title="National Olympic Committee and Sports Confederation of Denmark" label="National Olympic Committee and Sports Confederation of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q491297" start="12134" end="12145" title="Nyborg Slot" label="Nyborg Slot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549831" start="12147" end="12167" title="Rebild National Park" label="Rebild National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201057" start="12173" end="12202" title="Royal Danish Academy of Music" label="Royal Danish Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636237" start="12204" end="12248" title="Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters" label="Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q10547581" start="12250" end="12273" title="Royal Danish Yacht Club" label="Royal Danish Yacht Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q12334589" start="12277" end="12299" title="Sankt Lukas Stiftelsen" label="Sankt Lukas Stiftelsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12340497" start="12301" end="12312" title="Vallø stift" label="Vallø stift"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856783" start="12317" end="12327" title="Vemmetofte" label="Vemmetofte"/>
<link wikidata="Q756617" start="12417" end="12429" title="Danish Realm" label="Danish Realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q460238" start="12539" end="12555" title="colonel-in-chief" label="colonel-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403459" start="12563" end="12602" title="Princess of Wales&amp;#x27;s Royal Regiment" label="Princess of Wales&amp;#x27;s Royal Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="12632" end="12644" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="12693" end="12703" title="Edward VII" label="Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q152260" start="12716" end="12736" title="Alexandra of Denmark" label="Alexandra of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q152756" start="12768" end="12792" title="Frederik VIII of Denmark" label="Frederik VIII of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899477" start="12823" end="12855" title="Buffs (Royal East Kent Regiment)" label="Buffs (Royal East Kent Regiment)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304859" start="12861" end="12870" title="sovereign" label="sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324916" start="12903" end="12914" title="state visit" label="state visit"/>
<link wikidata="Q723890" start="12975" end="12991" title="Danish royal family" label="the royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q211053" start="13090" end="13101" title="Amalienborg" label="Amalienborg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13124" end="13150" title="Christian IX&amp;#x27;s Palace" label="Christian IX&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412797" start="13170" end="13188" title="Fredensborg Palace" label="Fredensborg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q27425" start="13194" end="13202" title="Hillerød" label="Hillerød"/>
<link wikidata="Q492981" start="13231" end="13250" title="Marselisborg Palace" label="Marselisborg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q25319" start="13256" end="13262" title="Aarhus" label="Aarhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q666117" start="13267" end="13281" title="Gråsten Palace" label="Gråsten Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q21179" start="13287" end="13297" title="Sønderborg" label="Sønderborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q166005" start="13464" end="13474" title="xenophobia" label="xenophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982832" start="13724" end="13738" title="South Campus (University of Copenhagen)" label="Saxo Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q186285" start="13746" end="13770" title="University of Copenhagen" label="University of Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q912415" start="13957" end="13971" title="Danish culture" label="Danish culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550874" start="14425" end="14439" title="Silver Jubilee" label="Silver Jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16944581" start="14550" end="14562" title="Ruby Jubilee" label="Ruby Jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q940733" start="14696" end="14717" title="Christiansborg Palace" label="Christiansborg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948446" start="14764" end="14778" title="Golden Jubilee" label="Golden Jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14889" end="14916" title="death of Queen Elizabeth II" label="death of Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q19643" start="15232" end="15245" title="queen regnant" label="queen regnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q723890" start="15351" end="15369" title="Danish royal family" label="Danish Royal House"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15453" end="15465" title="Christian IV" label="Christian IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004037" start="16306" end="16316" title="Frederik X" label="Frederik X"/>
<link wikidata="Q62736" start="17161" end="17175" title="osteoarthritis" label="osteoarthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q160105" start="17206" end="17221" title="cervical cancer" label="cervical cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478321" start="17276" end="17291" title="spinal stenosis" label="spinal stenosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="17390" end="17398" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q113846055" start="17658" end="17687" title="Death and state funeral of Elizabeth II" label="state funeral of Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357360" start="17913" end="17927" title="Rigshospitalet" label="Rigshospitalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435005" start="18231" end="18243" title="chain smoker" label="chain smoker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412797" start="18502" end="18520" title="Fredensborg Castle" label="Fredensborg Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q551674" start="18584" end="18598" title="Pierre Balmain" label="Pierre Balmain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12320717" start="18624" end="18637" title="Jørgen Bender" label="Jørgen Bender"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="18681" end="18693" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6351976" start="18792" end="18817" title="British Vogue" label="British &amp;quot;Vogue&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273134" start="18924" end="18943" title="monarchy in Denmark" label="monarchy in Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q16323809" start="19094" end="19108" title="Julemærkefonden" label="Christmas seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603" start="19213" end="19224" title="Andy Warhol" label="Andy Warhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q65069446" start="19277" end="19292" title="Reigning Queens" label="Reigning Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q444261" start="19318" end="19337" title="Ntfombi of Eswatini" label="Ntfombi of Eswatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="19339" end="19351" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q29574" start="19356" end="19382" title="Beatrix of the Netherlands" label="Beatrix of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="19461" end="19475" title="archaeological" label="archaeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q959782" start="19516" end="19527" title="excavations" label="excavations"/>
<link wikidata="Q52878" start="19630" end="19655" title="Gustaf VI Adolf of Sweden" label="Gustaf VI Adolf of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q220659" start="19698" end="19707" title="Artifact (archaeology)" label="artefacts"/>
<link wikidata="Q206730" start="19713" end="19720" title="Etruria" label="Etruria"/>
<link wikidata="Q215172" start="19924" end="19932" title="chasuble" label="chasuble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412797" start="19937" end="19955" title="Fredensborg Palace" label="Fredensborg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q621642" start="20024" end="20033" title="Appliqué" label="appliquéd"/>
<link wikidata="Q877839" start="20202" end="20219" title="Diocese of Viborg" label="Diocese of Viborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q572024" start="20247" end="20258" title="antependium" label="antependium"/>
<link wikidata="Q661752" start="20267" end="20290" title="All Saints&amp;#x27; Church, Wittenberg" label="All Saints&amp;#x27; Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837" start="20294" end="20304" title="Wittenberg" label="Wittenberg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20358" end="20387" title="Nordic churches in London#Danish Church" label="Danish Church of St Katharine"/>
<link wikidata="Q202088" start="20391" end="20397" title="London Borough of Camden" label="Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q840430" start="20730" end="20739" title="découpage" label="découpage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5673" start="22435" end="22458" title="Hans Christian Andersen" label="Hans Christian Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q840430" start="22627" end="22636" title="decoupage" label="decoupage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475536" start="22832" end="22868" title="Robert Award for Best Costume Design" label="Robert Award for Best Costume Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q16324366" start="22954" end="22976" title="Robert Award for Best Production Design" label="Best Production Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q165249" start="23082" end="23117" title="Princess Ingrid Alexandra of Norway" label="Princess Ingrid Alexandra of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23202" end="23212" title="Frederik X" label="Frederik X"/>
<link wikidata="Q208615" start="23230" end="23234" title="Queen Mary of Denmark" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q160495" start="23248" end="23257" title="Christian, Crown Prince of Denmark" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q165241" start="23381" end="23411" title="Haakon, Crown Prince of Norway" label="Haakon, Crown Prince of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q470362" start="23426" end="23437" title="Mette-Marit" label="Mette-Marit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252864" start="23608" end="23627" title="Royal Danish Ballet" label="Royal Danish Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656821" start="23655" end="23666" title="A Folk Tale" label="A Folk Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074912" start="23690" end="23702" title="Peter Flinth" label="Peter Flinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q110289" start="24094" end="24100" title="Tivoli Gardens" label="Tivoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656821" start="24132" end="24143" title="A Folk Tale" label="A Folk Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q607681" start="24151" end="24171" title="Royal Danish Theatre" label="Royal Danish Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11870" start="24197" end="24207" title="Thumbelina" label="Thumbelina"/>
<link wikidata="Q955226" start="24215" end="24231" title="Pantomimeteatret" label="Pantomimeteatret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167862" start="24263" end="24276" title="The Tinderbox" label="The Tinderbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q955226" start="24284" end="24300" title="Pantomimeteatret" label="Pantomimeteatret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196800" start="24315" end="24328" title="The Swineherd" label="The Swineherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q955226" start="24336" end="24352" title="Pantomimeteatret" label="Pantomimeteatret"/>
<link wikidata="Q193705" start="24396" end="24410" title="The Nutcracker" label="The Nutcracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q9108317" start="24418" end="24437" title="Tivoli Concert Hall" label="Tivoli Concert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11872" start="24452" end="24477" title="The Steadfast Tin Soldier" label="The Steadfast Tin Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q955226" start="24485" end="24501" title="Pantomimeteatret" label="Pantomimeteatret"/>
<link wikidata="Q11841" start="24516" end="24526" title="Cinderella" label="Cinderella"/>
<link wikidata="Q955226" start="24534" end="24550" title="Pantomimeteatret" label="Pantomimeteatret"/>
<link wikidata="Q11880" start="24582" end="24596" title="The Snow Queen" label="The Snow Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9108317" start="24604" end="24623" title="Tivoli Concert Hall" label="Tivoli Concert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927270" start="24638" end="24652" title="Blockhead Hans" label="Blockhead Hans"/>
<link wikidata="Q955226" start="24660" end="24676" title="Pantomimeteatret" label="Pantomimeteatret"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033513" start="24843" end="24882" title="Cantabile (book)" label="poetry collection &amp;quot;Cantabile&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q131045" start="24963" end="24984" title="Queen Sonja of Norway" label="Queen Sonja of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q808714" start="25037" end="25052" title="Barony Rosendal" label="Barony Rosendal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="25295" end="25316" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25400" end="25416" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q976544" start="25546" end="25567" title="Order of the Elephant" label="Order of the Elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q20872" start="25696" end="25718" title="Order of the Dannebrog" label="Order of the Dannebrog"/>
<link wikidata="Q4564349" start="25824" end="25874" title="Dannebrogordenens Hæderstegn" label="Decoration of the Cross of Honour of the Dannebrog"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25886" end="25910" title="List of orders, decorations, and medals of the Kingdom of Denmark#Royally Approved Orders and Medals" label="Homeguard Medal of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215436" start="25914" end="25949" title="Long Service Awards (Denmark)" label="25 years of Homeguard Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470346" start="25953" end="25999" title="Badge of Honor of the League of Civil Defense" label="Medal of Honour of the League of Civil Defence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26003" end="26049" title="List of orders, decorations, and medals of the Kingdom of Denmark#Royally Approved Orders and Medals" label="Medal of Honour of the Reserve Officers League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855165" start="26053" end="26109" title="List of orders, decorations, and medals of the Kingdom of Denmark" label="100th Anniversary Medal of the Birth of King Christian X"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855165" start="26113" end="26177" title="List of orders, decorations, and medals of the Kingdom of Denmark" label="50th Anniversary Medal of the arrival of Queen Ingrid to Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855165" start="26181" end="26237" title="List of orders, decorations, and medals of the Kingdom of Denmark" label="100th Anniversary Medal of the Birth of King Frederik IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855165" start="26241" end="26273" title="List of orders, decorations, and medals of the Kingdom of Denmark" label="Queen Ingrid Commemorative Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604535" start="26277" end="26328" title="Nersornaat" label="Nersornaat Medal for Meritorious Service, 1st Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437150" start="26440" end="26457" title="Foreningen Norden" label="Foreningen Norden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475536" start="26495" end="26531" title="Robert Award for Best Costume Design" label="Robert Award for Best Costume Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q21857443" start="26680" end="26703" title="Queen Margrethe II Land" label="Queen Margrethe II Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="26717" end="26726" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q447209" start="26850" end="26868" title="Sigvard Bernadotte" label="Sigvard Bernadotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270088" start="26998" end="27019" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Regiment" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q9685" start="27063" end="27087" title="Diana, Princess of Wales" label="Diana, Princess of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403459" start="27096" end="27135" title="Princess of Wales&amp;#x27;s Royal Regiment" label="Princess of Wales&amp;#x27;s Royal Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403459" start="27173" end="27212" title="Princess of Wales&amp;#x27;s Royal Regiment" label="Princess of Wales&amp;#x27;s Royal Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27230" end="27268" title="Descendants of Christian IX of Denmark" label="Descendants of Christian IX of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q23096958" start="27359" end="27389" title="List of monarchs who abdicated" label="List of monarchs who abdicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273134" start="27392" end="27411" title="Monarchy of Denmark" label="Monarchy of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q22666782" start="27414" end="27472" title="Queen Margrethe&amp;#x27;s and Prince Henrik&amp;#x27;s Foundation" label="Queen Margrethe&amp;#x27;s and Prince Henrik&amp;#x27;s Foundation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58926" wikidata="Q1192203" url="?curid=58926" title="Presbyterian polity">
<text>Presbyterian (or presbyteral) polity is a method of church governance (&quot;ecclesiastical polity&quot;) typified by the rule of assemblies of presbyters, or elders. Each local church is governed by a body of elected elders usually called the session (or consistory), though other terms, such as &quot;church board&quot;, may apply. Groups of local churches are governed by a higher assembly of elders known as the [[Presbyterian polity#Presbytery|presbytery]] or classis; presbyteries can be grouped into a synod, and presbyteries and synods nationwide often join together in a general assembly. Responsibility for conduct of church services is reserved to an ordained minister or pastor known as a &quot;teaching elder&quot;, or a &quot;minister of the word and sacrament.&quot;

Presbyterian polity was developed as a rejection of governance by hierarchies of single bishops (episcopal polity), but also differs from the congregationalist polity in which each congregation is independent. In contrast to the other two forms, authority in the presbyterian polity flows both from the top down (as higher assemblies exercise limited but important authority over individual congregations, e.g., only the presbytery can ordain ministers, install pastors, and start up, close, and approve relocating a congregation) and from the bottom up (e.g., the moderator and officers are not appointed from above but are rather elected by and from among the members of the assembly). This theory of governance developed in Geneva under John Calvin and was introduced to Scotland by John Knox after his period of exile in Geneva. It is strongly associated with French, Dutch, Swiss and Scottish Reformation movements, and the Reformed and Presbyterian churches.

==History==

Among the early church fathers, it was noted that the offices of elder and bishop were identical, and were not differentiated until later, and that plurality of elders was the norm for church government. St. Jerome (347–420) &quot;In Epistle Titus&quot;, vol. iv, said, &quot;Elder is identical with bishop; and before the urging of the devil gave rise to factionalism in religion, so much that it was being said among the people, &#x27;I am of Paul, I of Apollos, I of Cephas&#x27;, the churches were governed by a joint council of elders. After it was... decreed throughout the world that one chosen from among the presbyters should be placed over the others.&quot; This observation was also made by Chrysostom (349–407) in &quot;Homilia i, in Phil. i, 1&quot; and Theodoret (393–457) in &quot;Interpret ad. Phil. iii&quot;, 445.

Aerius of Sebaste also attacked the episcopal polity in the 4th century.

Presbyterianism was first described in detail by Martin Bucer of Strasbourg, who believed that the early Christian church implemented presbyterian polity. The first modern implementation was by the Geneva church under the leadership of John Calvin in 1541.

In the early days of the Scottish Reformation there were Superintendents. There were also Tulchan Bishops and Archbishops. Much of the history of the Church of Scotland and the nation itself is bound up with the relation between Episcopalianism, which the Protestant monarchs favoured, and the Presbyterianism of the reformers. In the Hungarian Reformed Church there remain bishops who have a superintending role.

==Basis==
Presbyterian polity is constructed on specific assumptions about the form of the government intended by the Bible:
* &quot;Bishop&quot; (Koine Greek &quot;episkopos&quot;) and &quot;elder&quot; (Koine Greek &quot;presbyteros&quot;) are (in this view) synonymous terms. &quot;Episkopos&quot; means literally &quot;overseer&quot; and describes the function of the elder, rather than the maturity of the officer. A bishop holds the highest office of the church (there is no Patriarch, Prelate or Pope over bishops).
* Preaching (the ministry of the Word) and the administration of the sacraments is ordinarily entrusted to specially trained elders (known as ministers of the Word and Sacrament, sometimes called &quot;teaching elders&quot;) in each local , approved for these tasks by a governing presbytery, or classis, and called by the local congregation.
* In addition to these ministers, there are also &quot;others … with gifts for government … commonly call[ed] &quot;elders&quot; or &quot;ruling elders&quot;.
* Pastoral care, church discipline, leadership and legislation are committed to the care of ruling assemblies of presbyters among whom the ministers and &quot;ruling elders&quot; are equal participants.
* All Christian people together are the priesthood (see priesthood of all believers), on behalf of whom the elders are called to serve by the consent of the congregation.

Presbyterianism uses a conciliar method of church government (that is, leadership by the group or council). Thus, the ministers and &quot;elders&quot; govern together as a group, and at all times the office is for the service of the congregation, to pray for them and to encourage them in the faith. The elders together exercise oversight (episcopacy) over the local congregation, with superior groups of elders gathered on a regional basis exercising wider oversight.

Presbyterians typically have viewed this method of government as approximating that of the New Testament and earliest churches.

Presbyterianism is also distinct from congregationalism, in that individual congregations are not independent, but are answerable to the wider church, through its governing bodies (presbyteries, synods and assemblies). Moreover, the ordained ministry possesses a distinct responsibility for preaching and sacraments. Congregational churches are sometimes called &quot;Presbyterian&quot; if they are governed by a council of elders; but the difference is that every local congregation is independent, and its elders are accountable to its members, and congregationalism&#x27;s wider assemblies are not ordinarily empowered to enforce discipline. Thus, these are ruled by elders only at the level of the congregations, which are united with one another by covenants of trust.

==Offices==

===Elder===

There are two types of elder; the &quot;teaching elder&quot; (see &quot;Minister&quot; below) and the &quot;ruling elder&quot;.
An excerpt from Miller (1831) expands this.

Depending upon the specific denomination, teaching elders may also be referred to with terms such as &quot;Minister of Word and Sacrament&quot;.

The elders are persons chosen from among the congregation and ordained for this service. Beyond that, practices vary: sometimes elders are elected by the congregation, sometimes appointed by the session, in some denominations elders serve for life, others have fixed terms, and some churches appoint elders on a rotation from among willing members in good standing in the church. However, in many churches, ruling elders retain their ordination for life, even though they serve fixed terms. Even after the end of their terms, they may be active in presbyteries or other bodies, and may serve communion.

In addition to sitting on the session and other church courts, ruling elders have duties as individuals. Again, Miller (1831) explains,


===Minister===
In some denominations they are called &quot;Ministers of Word and Sacrament&quot;, and in others they are called &quot;Teaching Elders&quot;. Ministers called to a particular congregation are called &quot;pastors&quot;, and serve a function analogous to clergy in other denominations. (Because ruling elders are often ordained in a fashion nearly identical to teaching elders, the distinction between lay and clergy is not as clear under the Presbyterian system as in others). The terms &#x27;lay&#x27; and &#x27;clergy&#x27; are not properly used in presbyterian polity.

Ministers may be considered equal in status with the other elders, but they have a distinct ordination and distinct function. They are the primary preachers and teachers, celebrants of sacraments. There are sometimes further distinctions between the minister and the other elders. Some Presbyterian denominations enroll ministers as members of their respective congregations, while others enroll the minister as a member of the regional presbytery. The presbyteries are responsible for the ordination of the ministers.

Until the 20th century, only men had been eligible for ordination as elders or ministers of the word and sacrament.
This is widely not the case any longer, although it is usually considered a demarcation issue, distinguishing &quot;liberal&quot; from &quot;conservative&quot; Presbyterian denominations. In North America, the Reformed Church in America, Christian Reformed Church in North America (both of Dutch Reformed heritage), Cumberland Presbyterian Church, ECO: A Covenant Order of Evangelical Presbyterians, Evangelical Presbyterian Church, Presbyterian Church in Canada, and Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) are denominations with presbyterian polity which allow for the ordination of women.

The general assembly of a denomination often decides on what grounds a person may be ordained, but the ordination of ministers is the right of the presbytery or classis, and the right to extend a call to a minister is the privilege of the members of the parish or congregation.

===Deacon===

The office of deacon has different meanings among different presbyterian churches. In some churches, deacons exercise responsibility for practical matters of finance and fabric, either separately or together with the elders.
In some cases deacons administer the welfare matters of the congregation, while a separate board of management or trustees administers the other material business (temporalities) of the congregation, such as its endowments, salaries and buildings.

==Governing bodies==
===Session===
A session is a corporate body of teaching and ruling elders elected by a particular church. &quot;sessio&quot; from &quot;sedere&quot; &quot;to sit&quot;), sometimes the &quot;Kirk session&quot;, &quot;church session,&quot; or (in Continental Reformed usage) &quot;consistory&quot;. In some Continental Reformed churches, deacons are members of the consistory; others, such as the Christian Reformed Church in North America, distinguish between the consistory, comprising the pastor and elders, and the council, which comprises the pastor(s), the elders, and the deacons.

In most denominations the pastor serves as Moderator and presides over the session (primus inter pares), in which all elders have an equal vote. In some denominations, the pastor is not given a vote; however, in a sitting body of an even number or with a quorum of the session counted they can break a tie by a casting vote.

In the Polity of the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.), the pastor and associate pastor(s), if elected by the congregation and &quot;installed&quot; to a permanent pastorate by the presbytery, have votes as members of the session on any and all matters; however, often they refrain from voting except in tie situations. The Pastor is not a voting member of the congregation.

With the Session there is one person, usually an elder but not always, who will be given the title, &quot;Clerk of Session&quot;. This person is more or less the secretary for Session. They take notes on each meeting and are responsible for records of the congregation. In addition they find a wide area of responsibility, including responsibility for conduct of worship should a minister suddenly not be available. 
Although it is the responsibility of the Moderator (minister), Session Clerks often have the ability to assist in keeping meetings on track due to skills which are received from experience and the Holy Spirit.

===Presbytery===
In presbyterianism, congregations are united in accountability to a regional body called the &quot;presbytery, &quot;or, in Continental Reformed terminology, the &quot;classis&quot;, which comes from the Latin word for &quot;fleet&quot;. Presbyteries are made up of all the teaching and ruling elders in a particular geographic region. In some Dutch Reformed bodies, a classis serves as a delegated body, which ceases to exist in between meetings, whereas a presbytery exists perpetually.

The officers of a presbytery are a moderator and a stated or principal clerk. The moderator acts as chair of presbytery meetings. As with the moderators of synods and assemblies, the moderatorship is a primus inter pares position appointed by the presbytery itself. The moderator is addressed as &quot;moderator&quot; during meetings, but their position has no bearing outside of the presbytery meeting and affords him/her no special place in other courts, although typically the moderator (especially if a member of the clergy) will conduct worship and oversee ordinations and installations of ministers as a &quot;liturgical&quot; bishop, and other ordinances which are seen as acts of the presbytery.

The stated or principal clerk takes minutes and deals with the correspondence of the presbytery, and is often appointed for an indefinite term. Presbytery Clerks are the ecclesiastical administrators and generally regarded as substantially influential due to their greater experience of the governance of the church and their ordering of the business of the presbytery. They are thus very much more than secretaries and often in fact are the lynch pin of the organisation.

Presbyteries meet at a regularity between monthly and quarterly, some half-yearly.

===Synod===
In denominations too large for all the work of the denomination to be done by a single presbytery, the parishes may be divided into several presbyteries under &quot;synods&quot; and &quot;general assemblies&quot;, the synod being the lower court of the two. In the United Church of Canada, this is referred to as &quot;conferences&quot; and &quot;General Council&quot;. However, the United Church of Canada does not bear the formal ecclesiastical structure of classic Presbyterianism.

Often all members of the constituent presbyteries are members of the synod. Like the commissioners to presbyteries, the commissioners to synods do not act on instruction from their congregations or presbyteries, but exercise their own judgement. A synod also has a moderator and clerk, and generally meet less often than the presbytery.

Some presbyterian churches, like the Church of Scotland, Orthodox Presbyterian Church and Presbyterian Church in America have no intermediate court between the presbytery and the general assembly.

===General assembly===
The &quot;general assembly&quot; (or general synod) is the highest court of presbyterian polity. Each presbytery selects a number of its members to be commissioners to the general assembly. The general assembly is chaired by its own moderator, who is usually elected to a single term. He or she is addressed as moderator during meetings, but like the other moderators, their position has no bearing outside of the assembly meeting and affords him/her no special place in other courts. He or she presides over meetings of the assembly, and may be called on in a representative function for the remainder of the year.

The stated clerk and deputy clerk of the general assembly administer the minutes, correspondence, and business of the assembly. In some cases a separate business convenor is appointed to deal with the agenda. General assemblies meet less regularly than their subordinate courts, often annually, or in the case of the Presbyterian Church (USA), every other year.

The General Assembly also has members serve as Advisory Delegates. There are four different types of advisory delegates, each with a focus on a different area in the Presbyterian Church like young adult, theological student, missionary and ecumenical. The role of an advisory delegate is to speak about issues or topics that commissioners would usually not worry about or care to speak about during a General Assembly meeting. Advisory Delegates may not present motions or vote in meetings of the General Assembly.

The powers of the general assembly are usually wide-ranging. However, they may be limited by some form of external review. For example, the rules of the Church of Scotland include the Barrier Act, which requires that certain major changes to the polity of the church be referred to the presbyteries, before being enacted by the general assembly.

There may be issues arising between annual General Assemblies which require urgent attention. In these cases some presbyterian churches have a &#x27;commission of assembly&#x27; who will deal with the issue and refer it to the next General Assembly for homologation.

== Regions ==
=== British Isles ===

The word &quot;Presbyterianism&quot;, when capitalized, often refers specifically to churches founded on principles of presbyterian polity in the British Isles and their derivatives in other countries.

=== France ===

In France, presbyterianism was represented by the Église réformée de France. There are also Lutherans and Evangelicals. The logo is a Huguenot Cross (&quot;Croix huguenote&quot;) with the burning bush.

=== Italy ===

The origins of the Waldensian Evangelical Church lie in the medieval Waldensian movement for religious reform. The Waldensians adopted Calvinist theology during the Reformation and became the Italian branch of the Reformed churches. In 1975 the Waldensian Church joined with the Italian Methodist Church to form the Union of Waldensian and Methodist Churches, which is a member of the World Council of Churches, the World Communion of Reformed Churches, and the World Methodist Council.

==Cultural references==
*Robert Burns published a brief irreverent poem, &quot;On A Celebrated Ruling Elder&quot;, as an elegy for a Scottish Presbyterian.

==See also==

*Christian federalism
*Presbyterianism
*Reformed churches
*Congregational church
*Moderators and clerks in the Church of Scotland
**General Assembly of the Church of Scotland
**Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland
*Presbyterian Historical Society
*For a full list of individual denominations see List of Christian denominations#Reformed and List of Christian denominations#Presbyterianism

==References==
Notes
Citations
==Sources==
* 
*
*
*
*

==External links==
*World Alliance of Reformed Churches
*Catholic Encyclopedia 1914, &quot;Presbyterianism&quot; by J. A. MCHUGH. Online edition
*Samuel Miller, 1831. &quot;An Essay, on the Warrant, Nature and Duties of the Office of the Ruling Elder, in the Presbyterian Church&quot; (New York). Book in the public domain, available online at The Internet Archive and CRTA.
*Westminster Assembly, 1645 &quot;The Form of Presbyterial Church-Government&quot; online at reformed.org
*audio version of Historical Theology, audio version of William Cunningham&#x27;s Historical Theology</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1192203" start="0" end="12" title="Presbyterian polity" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192203" start="17" end="28" title="Presbyterian polity" label="presbyteral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192203" start="30" end="36" title="Presbyterian polity" label="polity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526886" start="52" end="69" title="Ecclesiastical polity" label="church governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526886" start="77" end="98" title="ecclesiastical polity" label="ecclesiastical polity"/>
<link wikidata="Q831474" start="144" end="153" title="presbyter" label="presbyter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497539" start="244" end="251" title="Session (Presbyterianism)" label="session"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="256" end="266" title="Consistory (Protestantism)#Reformed usage" label="consistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192203" start="416" end="461" title="Presbyterian polity" label="[[Presbyterian polity#Presbytery|presbytery]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192203" start="465" end="472" title="Presbyterian polity" label="classis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192203" start="509" end="514" title="Presbyterian polity" label="synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192203" start="580" end="596" title="Presbyterian polity" label="general assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347378" start="880" end="896" title="episcopal polity" label="episcopal polity"/>
<link wikidata="Q960252" start="925" end="949" title="congregationalist polity" label="congregationalist polity"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="1510" end="1516" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q37577" start="1523" end="1534" title="John Calvin" label="John Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="1557" end="1565" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q189937" start="1569" end="1578" title="John Knox" label="John Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="1647" end="1653" title="Huguenot" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q4393843" start="1655" end="1660" title="History of religion in the Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q671922" start="1662" end="1667" title="Reformation in Switzerland" label="Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532351" start="1672" end="1692" title="Scottish Reformation" label="Scottish Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="1712" end="1720" title="Reformed churches" label="Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="1725" end="1744" title="Presbyterian church" label="Presbyterian church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526886" start="1910" end="1919" title="Plurality (church governance)" label="plurality"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="1966" end="1976" title="St. Jerome" label="St. Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q43706" start="2464" end="2474" title="Chrysostom" label="Chrysostom"/>
<link wikidata="Q317029" start="2529" end="2538" title="Theodoret" label="Theodoret"/>
<link wikidata="Q786963" start="2595" end="2612" title="Aerius of Sebaste" label="Aerius of Sebaste"/>
<link wikidata="Q318622" start="2718" end="2730" title="Martin Bucer" label="Martin Bucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="2734" end="2744" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q37577" start="2905" end="2916" title="John Calvin" label="John Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851986" start="3017" end="3032" title="Tulchan Bishops" label="Tulchan Bishops"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="3077" end="3095" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="3156" end="3171" title="Episcopalianism" label="Episcopalianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q116" start="3194" end="3202" title="monarchs" label="monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q921579" start="3262" end="3287" title="Reformed Church in Hungary" label="Hungarian Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296367" start="3320" end="3334" title="Superintendent (ecclesiastical)" label="superintending"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="3460" end="3465" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="3475" end="3481" title="Bishop" label="Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="3489" end="3500" title="Koine Greek" label="Koine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="3764" end="3770" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q49703" start="4033" end="4042" title="Sacrament" label="Sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q733981" start="4384" end="4401" title="church discipline" label="church discipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156551" start="4626" end="4653" title="priesthood of all believers" label="priesthood of all believers"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="4742" end="4757" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="5303" end="5316" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q960252" start="5379" end="5396" title="Congregationalist polity" label="congregationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="5658" end="5679" title="Congregational church" label="Congregational church"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6214" end="6222" title="#Minister" label="Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q152002" start="7423" end="7429" title="pastor" label="pastor"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="7472" end="7478" title="clergy" label="clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136834" start="8637" end="8663" title="Reformed Church in America" label="Reformed Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q533493" start="8665" end="8707" title="Christian Reformed Church in North America" label="Christian Reformed Church in North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143703" start="8743" end="8773" title="Cumberland Presbyterian Church" label="Cumberland Presbyterian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415669" start="8775" end="8825" title="ECO (denomination)" label="ECO: A Covenant Order of Evangelical Presbyterians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559237" start="8827" end="8858" title="Evangelical Presbyterian Church (United States)" label="Evangelical Presbyterian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586082" start="8860" end="8889" title="Presbyterian Church in Canada" label="Presbyterian Church in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149100" start="8895" end="8923" title="Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.)" label="Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.)"/>
<link wikidata="Q161944" start="9316" end="9322" title="deacon" label="deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047357" start="9641" end="9648" title="trustee" label="trustee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698941" start="9691" end="9704" title="temporalities" label="temporalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q49830" start="10042" end="10062" title="Continental Reformed church" label="Continental Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q533493" start="10192" end="10234" title="Christian Reformed Church in North America" label="Christian Reformed Church in North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q309477" start="10468" end="10486" title="primus inter pares" label="primus inter pares"/>
<link wikidata="Q526999" start="10639" end="10645" title="quorum" label="quorum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12251" end="12260" title="Moderators and clerks in the Church of Scotland#Moderators" label="moderator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12267" end="12292" title="Moderators and clerks in the Church of Scotland#Clerks" label="stated or principal clerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q309477" start="12418" end="12436" title="primus inter pares" label="primus inter pares"/>
<link wikidata="Q198745" start="13756" end="13779" title="United Church of Canada" label="United Church of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="14352" end="14370" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q782613" start="14372" end="14400" title="Orthodox Presbyterian Church" label="Orthodox Presbyterian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555519" start="14405" end="14435" title="Presbyterian Church in America" label="Presbyterian Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2208855" start="14573" end="14586" title="General Synod" label="general synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q65241330" start="14769" end="14778" title="Moderator of the General Assembly" label="moderator"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="16185" end="16203" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863582" start="16216" end="16227" title="Barrier Act" label="Barrier Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="16699" end="16714" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="16830" end="16843" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="16906" end="16912" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780186" start="16953" end="16978" title="Reformed Church of France" label="Église réformée de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="17037" end="17045" title="Huguenot" label="Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131615" start="17140" end="17169" title="Waldensian Evangelical Church" label="Waldensian Evangelical Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q201620" start="17236" end="17247" title="Waldensians" label="Waldensians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005586" start="17437" end="17479" title="Union of Waldensian and Methodist Churches" label="Union of Waldensian and Methodist Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q283639" start="17506" end="17531" title="World Council of Churches" label="World Council of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246720" start="17537" end="17573" title="World Communion of Reformed Churches" label="World Communion of Reformed Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641470" start="17583" end="17606" title="World Methodist Council" label="World Methodist Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q81960" start="17634" end="17646" title="Robert Burns" label="Robert Burns"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17781" end="17801" title="Federalism#Christian Church" label="Christian federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="17803" end="17818" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="17820" end="17837" title="Reformed churches" label="Reformed churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="17839" end="17860" title="Congregational church" label="Congregational church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888527" start="17862" end="17909" title="Moderators and clerks in the Church of Scotland" label="Moderators and clerks in the Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4135340" start="17912" end="17954" title="General Assembly of the Church of Scotland" label="General Assembly of the Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888514" start="17957" end="18016" title="Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland" label="Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240776" start="18018" end="18049" title="Presbyterian Historical Society" label="Presbyterian Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18099" end="18139" title="List of Christian denominations#Reformed" label="List of Christian denominations#Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18144" end="18191" title="List of Christian denominations#Presbyterianism" label="List of Christian denominations#Presbyterianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q302556" start="18305" end="18326" title="Catholic Encyclopedia" label="Catholic Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412190" start="18394" end="18407" title="Samuel Miller (theologian)" label="Samuel Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="18557" end="18570" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886961" start="18624" end="18644" title="Westminster Assembly" label="Westminster Assembly"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58928" wikidata="Q103646" url="?curid=58928" title="Ron Howard">
<text>Ronald William Howard (born March 1, 1954) is an American director, producer, screenwriter, and actor. Howard started his career as a child actor before transitioning to directing films. Over his six-decade career, Howard has received multiple accolades, including two Academy Awards, six Emmy Awards, two Golden Globe Awards, and a Grammy Award. He was awarded the National Medal of Arts in 2003 and was inducted into the Television Hall of Fame in 2013. He has two stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his contributions in film and television.

Howard first came to prominence as a child actor, acting in several television series before gaining national attention for playing young Opie Taylor, the son of Sheriff Andy Taylor (played by Andy Griffith) in the sitcom &quot;The Andy Griffith Show&quot; from 1960 through 1968. During this time, he also appeared in the musical film &quot;The Music Man&quot; (1962), a critical and commercial success. Howard was cast in one of the lead roles in the influential coming-of-age film &quot;American Graffiti&quot; (1973), and became a household name for playing Richie Cunningham in the sitcom &quot;Happy Days&quot; (1974–1980). He starred in the films &quot;The Spikes Gang&quot; (1974), &quot;The Shootist&quot; (1976), and &quot;Grand Theft Auto&quot; (1977), the latter being his directorial film debut. 

In 1980, Howard left &quot;Happy Days&quot; to focus on directing, producing, and sometimes writing a variety of films and television series. His films included the comedies &quot;Night Shift&quot; (1982), &quot;Splash&quot; (1984), and &quot;Cocoon&quot; (1985) as well as the fantasy &quot;Willow&quot; (1988), the thriller &quot;Backdraft&quot; (1991), and the newspaper comedy-drama film &quot;The Paper&quot; (1994). Howard went on to win the Academy Award for Best Director and Academy Award for Best Picture for &quot;A Beautiful Mind&quot; (2001) and was nominated again for the same awards for &quot;Frost/Nixon&quot; (2008). Howard also directed other historical dramas such as &quot;Apollo 13&quot; (1995), &quot;Cinderella Man&quot; (2005), &quot;Rush&quot; (2013), &quot;In the Heart of the Sea&quot; (2015), and &quot;Thirteen Lives&quot; (2022).

He also directed the children&#x27;s fantasy film &quot;How the Grinch Stole Christmas&quot; (2000), the comedy &quot;The Dilemma&quot; (2011), and &quot;&quot; (2018), as well as the Robert Langdon film series: &quot;The Da Vinci Code&quot; (2006), &quot;Angels &amp; Demons&quot; (2009), and &quot;Inferno&quot; (2016). Howard has gained recognition for directing numerous documentary films such as &quot;The Beatles: Eight Days a Week&quot; (2016), &quot;Pavarotti&quot; (2019), and &quot;We Feed People&quot; (2022).

==Early life==
Ron Howard was born on March 1, 1954, in Duncan, Oklahoma, the elder of the two sons of Rance Howard, a director, writer, and actor and Jean Speegle, an actress. He is of German, English, Scottish, Irish, and Dutch ancestry. His father was born with the surname &quot;Beckenholdt&quot; and took the stage name &quot;Howard&quot; in 1948 for his acting career. Rance Howard was serving three years in the United States Air Force at the time of Ron&#x27;s birth.

Howard was tutored at Desilu Studios in his younger years but continued his schooling at Robert Louis Stevenson Elementary and David Starr Jordan Junior High in Burbank, California when not working in television, eventually graduating from Burbank&#x27;s John Burroughs High School. He later attended the University of Southern California&#x27;s School of Cinematic Arts but did not graduate. Howard has said he knew from a young age he might want to go into directing, thanks to his early experience as an actor.

==Acting career==

In 1959, Howard had his first credited film role in &quot;The Journey&quot;. He appeared in June Allyson&#x27;s CBS anthology series &quot;The DuPont Show with June Allyson&quot; in the episode &quot;Child Lost&quot;; in &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; episode &quot;Walking Distance&quot;; a few episodes of the first season of the sitcom &quot;Dennis the Menace&quot;, as Stewart, one of Dennis&#x27;s friends; and several first- and second-season episodes of &quot;The Many Loves of Dobie Gillis&quot;. Howard played &quot;Timmy&quot; (uncredited) in &quot;Counterfeit Gun&quot;, Season 4, Episode 2 (1960) of the TV series, &quot;Cheyenne&quot;.

===&quot;The Andy Griffith Show&quot; (1960–1968)===
In 1960, Howard was cast as Opie Taylor in &quot;The Andy Griffith Show&quot;. Credited as &quot;Ronny Howard&quot;, he portrayed the son of the main character (played by Andy Griffith) for all eight seasons of the show. Recalling his experiences as a child actor on set, he commented

The sitcom was known for its old-fashioned wholesome quality. Even though it was set in a contemporary time period it evoked a mood of a different era from that of the 1960s. The series also starred Don Knotts, Frances Bavier and Jim Nabors. It received numerous nominations for the Primetime Emmy Awards including three Outstanding Comedy Series nominations which it lost to &quot;The Jack Benny Show&quot; in 1961, &quot;The Bob Newhart Show&quot; in 1962, and &quot;The Monkees&quot; in 1967.

===&quot;Happy Days&quot; (1974–1984)===

A role in an installment of series &quot;Love, American Style&quot;, titled &quot;Love and the Television Set&quot;, led to his being cast as Richie Cunningham in the TV series &quot;Happy Days&quot; (for syndication, the segment was re-titled &quot;Love and the Happy Days&quot;). Beginning in 1974, he played the likable &quot;buttoned-down&quot; boy, in contrast to Henry Winkler&#x27;s &quot;greaser&quot; Arthur &quot;Fonzie&quot;/&quot;The Fonz&quot; Fonzarelli. On the &quot;Happy Days&quot; set, he developed an on- and off-screen chemistry with Winkler. Howard left &quot;Happy Days&quot; to become a film director just before the start of its eighth season in 1980, but returned for guest appearances in the show&#x27;s eleventh season (1983–1984).

===Additional acting roles===
In the 1962 film version of &quot;The Music Man&quot;, Howard played Winthrop Paroo, the child with the lisp; the film starred Robert Preston, Shirley Jones, and Buddy Hackett. The film was based on the 1957 musical of the same name by Meredith Willson. The film was directed by Morton DaCosta who previously helmed the 1958 film &quot;Auntie Mame&quot; starring Rosalind Russell. The film was a critical and commercial success becoming the third highest-grossing film of that year. The film went on to receive six Academy Award nominations including for Best Picture.

He also starred in the 1963 film &quot;The Courtship of Eddie&#x27;s Father&quot; with Glenn Ford and Jones. He guest-starred as Tommy in the twelfth episode of the first season of &quot;The Big Valley&quot; and he appeared as Barry Stewart on &quot;The Eleventh Hour&quot; in 1965; on &quot;I Spy&quot; in the 1966 episode &quot;Little Boy Lost&quot;; as Henry Fonda&#x27;s son in an ABC series, &quot;The Smith Family&quot;, in 1968; as Jodah in &quot;Land of the Giants&quot; in 1969; as a boy whose father was shot on &quot;Daniel Boone&quot; in 1971–72; and as an underage Marine on &quot;M*A*S*H&quot; in the episode &quot;Sometimes You Hear the Bullet&quot; in 1973. In the 1970s, he appeared in at least one episode of &quot;The Bold Ones&quot;, as a teenage tennis player with an illness.

Howard appeared on the 1969 Disneyland Records album &quot;The Story and Song from the Haunted Mansion&quot;. It featured the story of two teenagers, Mike (Howard) and Karen (Robie Lester), who get trapped inside the Haunted Mansion. Thurl Ravenscroft plays the Narrator, Pete Reneday plays the Ghost Host, and Eleanor Audley plays Madame Leota. Some of the effects and ideas that were planned but never permanently made it to the attraction are mentioned here: the Raven speaks in the Stretching Room, and the Hatbox Ghost is mentioned during the Attic scene. It was reissued in 1998 as a cassette tape titled &quot;A Spooky Night in Disney&#x27;s Haunted Mansion&quot; and on CD in 2009.

Howard played Steve Bolander in George Lucas&#x27;s coming-of-age film &quot;American Graffiti&quot; in 1973, which was the inspiration for the sitcom &quot;Happy Days&quot; starring Howard. Howard starred in the film alongside Richard Dreyfus, Charles Martin Smith, and Harrison Ford. Critic Roger Ebert of the &quot;Chicago Sun-Times&quot; praised the film in his four star review writing, &quot;&quot;American Graffiti&quot; is not only a great movie but a brilliant work of historical fiction; no sociological treatise could duplicate the movie&#x27;s success in remembering exactly how it was to be alive at that cultural instant.&quot; Howard reprised his role in the sequel &quot;More American Graffiti&quot; (1979).

In 1974, Howard guest-starred as Seth Turner, the best friend of Jason Walton (Jon Walmsley), in &quot;The Waltons&quot; episode, &quot;The Gift&quot;. Featured in the cast as Dr. McIvers is Ron Howard&#x27;s father Rance Howard. In 1976, Howard starred alongside John Wayne and Lauren Bacall in Don Siegel&#x27;s &quot;The Shootist&quot;, the story of a Western gunfighter dying of cancer. (The movie was Wayne&#x27;s last.)

Howard was the narrator for &quot;Arrested Development&quot; and also appeared as a cameo in later seasons.

==Directing==
===1977–1992: Rise to prominence===
Before leaving &quot;Happy Days&quot; in 1980, Howard made his directing debut with the 1977 low-budget comedy/action film &quot;Grand Theft Auto&quot;, based on a script he co-wrote with his father, Rance. This came after cutting a deal with Roger Corman, wherein Corman let Howard direct a film in exchange for Howard starring in &quot;Eat My Dust!&quot;, with Christopher Norris. Howard went on to direct several TV movies for NBC between 1978 and 1982, including the 1980 TV movie, &quot;Skyward&quot;, starring Bette Davis. His big directorial break came in 1982, with &quot;Night Shift&quot;, featuring Michael Keaton, Shelley Long, and Howard&#x27;s &quot;Happy Days&quot; co-star Henry Winkler.

Following &quot;Night Shift&quot;, Howard directed a number of major films, including the fantasy romantic comedy &quot;Splash&quot; (1984) starring Tom Hanks, Daryl Hannah, Eugene Levy, and John Candy. The film was a box office and critical success. He also directed the science fiction comedy drama &quot;Cocoon&quot; (1985) starring Don Ameche, Hume Cronyn, Wilford Brimley, and Brian Dennehy. This film was also a critical and financial hit and won a Best Supporting Actor award for Don Ameche. In 1988, he reunited with George Lucas on the high fantasy adventure film &quot;Willow&quot; starring Val Kilmer and Warwick Davis. Howard&#x27;s final work as a director for the 1980s was the family comedy film &quot;Parenthood&quot; (1989) starring an ensemble cast that includes Steve Martin, Tom Hulce, Rick Moranis, Martha Plimpton, Joaquin Phoenix, Keanu Reeves, Jason Robards, Mary Steenburgen, and Dianne Wiest. The film opened at in its opening weekend, earning $10million. It eventually grossed over $100million domestically and $126million worldwide. The film was a critical hit and received two Academy Award nominations.
Howard continued directing through the 1990s, including the American drama &quot;Backdraft&quot; revolving around firefighters. The film starred Kurt Russell, Donald Sutherland, and Robert De Niro. Film critics Gene Siskel of the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; and Roger Ebert of the &quot;Chicago Sun-Times&quot; gave the film a positive review. In 1992, he directed the western film epic &quot;Far and Away&quot; starring Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman. Despite receiving mixed reviews from critics the film was a financial success, earning 137 million against its budget of 60 million. In 1994, Howard directed the newspaper comedy drama &quot;The Paper&quot; with an ensemble starring Michael Keaton, Glenn Close, Marisa Tomei, Jason Alexander, Jason Robards, and Robert Duvall. The film received rave reviews with many praising Keaton&#x27;s leading performance.

===1995–2008: Historical dramas and acclaim===
Howard&#x27;s direction for the 1995 docudrama film &quot;Apollo 13&quot; received praise from critics. The film stars Tom Hanks, Kevin Bacon, and Bill Paxton as the three astronauts members of the Apollo 13 flight crew, with supporting performances from Gary Sinise, Ed Harris, and Kathleen Quinlan. The film was a massive financial success earning $335 million off a budget of $52 million. The film received widespread critical acclaim with Roger Ebert of the &quot;Chicago Sun-Times&quot; praising the film in his review saying: &quot;A powerful story, one of the year&#x27;s best films, told with great clarity and remarkable technical detail, and acted without pumped-up histrionics.&quot; The film went on to receive nine Academy Award nominations including Best Picture.

In 2000, he directed the live action children&#x27;s fantasy film, &quot;How the Grinch Stole Christmas&quot; based on the Dr. Seuss children&#x27;s book. The film starred Jim Carrey as the titular character and featured performances from Jeffrey Tambor, Christine Baranski, and Molly Shannon, with Anthony Hopkins serving as the film&#x27;s narrator. Despite the film receiving mixed reviews from critics, it was a financial success and earned $345 million at the box office. Howard&#x27;s followup film was the biographical drama film &quot;A Beautiful Mind&quot; starring Russell Crowe as the American mathematician John Nash who struggled with paranoid schizophrenia. The film featured performances from Jennifer Connelly, Ed Harris, Josh Lucas, and Christopher Plummer. The film received positive reviews from critics who praised Crowe&#x27;s and Connelly&#x27;s performances. The film went on to receive eight Academy Award nominations including a win for Best Picture and a nomination and win for Howard as Best Director. Howard was nominated alongside Robert Altman, David Lynch, Ridley Scott, and Peter Jackson.

In 2005, Howard directed the biographical sports drama &quot;Cinderella Man&quot; based on the true story of heavyweight boxing champion James J. Braddock played by Russell Crowe. The film also starred Renée Zellweger as his wife Mae Braddock, and Paul Giamatti as his trainer Joe Gould. Rotten Tomatoes gave it an approval rating of 80% based on reviews from 214 critics with an average score of 7.4/10. Its consensus states, &quot;With grittiness and an evocative sense of time and place, &quot;Cinderella Man&quot; is a powerful underdog story. And Ron Howard and Russell Crowe prove to be a solid combination.&quot; Howard is also known for directing the Robert Langdon films. The series began with &quot;The Da Vinci Code&quot; (2006) with Tom Hanks as Langdon, featuring performances by Audrey Tautou, Ian McKellen, and Alfred Molina. The sequel was &quot;Angels &amp; Demons&quot; (2009) with Hanks reprising his role and performances by Ewan McGregor and Stellan Skarsgård. In 2016, &quot;Inferno&quot; was released with Hanks continuing the role with performances by Felicity Jones, Irrfan Khan, and Omar Sy. All three films received mixed reviews but were popular among audiences.

Howard showcased the world premiere of his historical drama film &quot;Frost/Nixon&quot; at the London Film Festival in October 2008. The film is based on the taped conversations known as the Frost/Nixon interviews between former United States President Richard Nixon and British talk show host David Frost. Frank Langella portrayed Nixon opposite Michael Sheen as Frost. The film was based on the play of the same name by Peter Morgan. The film also featured performances from Mathew Macfadyen, Sam Rockwell, Rebecca Hall, Oliver Platt, Toby Jones, and Kevin Bacon. Despite losing money at the box office, the film was a critical success with website Rotten Tomatoes giving the film an approval rating of 93% with the critical consensus reading, &quot;&quot;Frost/Nixon&quot; is weighty and eloquent; a cross between a boxing match and a ballet with Oscar worthy performances.&quot; Metacritic gives the film an average score of 80 out of 100, based on 38 critics, indicating &quot;generally favorable reviews&quot;. The film received five Academy Award nominations with Howard receiving a nomination for Best Director. &quot;The Guardian&quot; praised the film declaring, &quot;Frost/Nixon is a riveting film, sharper, more intense than the play&quot;. Howard was the recipient of the Austin Film Festival&#x27;s 2009 Extraordinary Contribution to Filmmaking Award. Michael Keaton presented him the Award.

===2009–present===
In 2013, Howard directed sports drama &quot;Rush&quot;, based on the Hunt–Lauda rivalry between two Formula One drivers, the British James Hunt and the Austrian Niki Lauda during the 1976 Formula 1 motor-racing season. It was written by Peter Morgan and starred Chris Hemsworth as Hunt, Daniel Brühl as Lauda, and Olivia Wilde as Suzy Miller. The film premiered at the 2013 Toronto International Film Festival and received positive reviews from critics. In 2015, Howard directed the film &quot;In the Heart of the Sea&quot; about the sinking of the American whaling ship Essex in 1820, an event that inspired Herman Melville&#x27;s 1851 novel &quot;Moby-Dick&quot;. The film featured performances by Chris Hemsworth, Cillian Murphy, Tom Holland, Ben Whishaw, and Brendan Gleeson. The film was a financial failure and received mixed reviews.
Howard took over directing duties on &quot;&quot;, a film featuring &quot;Star Wars&quot; character Han Solo in his younger years. The film was released on May 23, 2018. Howard officially replaced directors Phil Lord and Christopher Miller on June 22, 2017; they were let go from their position two days earlier, reportedly due to their refusal to compromise with Lucasfilm over the direction of the film; reportedly the directors encouraged significant improvisations by the actors, which was believed by some at Lucasfilm to be &quot;shifting the story off-course&quot;. At the time, the film was nearly completed, with three and a half weeks left to film and another five weeks of reshoots scheduled. Howard posted on Twitter, &quot;I&#x27;m beyond grateful to add my voice to the &quot;Star Wars&quot; Universe after being a fan since 5/25/77. I hope to honor the great work already done &amp; help deliver on the promise of a Han Solo film.&quot;

In November 2017, Howard announced that he would be teaching his first directing class. On November 24, 2020, Howard&#x27;s drama film &quot;Hillbilly Elegy&quot; was released on Netflix. The film is based on the memoir of the same name by JD Vance and was adapted for the screen by Vanessa Taylor. The film stars Academy Award nominees Glenn Close and Amy Adams. The film has received widespread negative reception from critics.

In March 2021, Howard began filming the survival drama &quot;Thirteen Lives&quot;, a film based on the Tham Luang cave rescue in 2018. It was released in select theaters on July 29, 2022, by United Artists Releasing, and began streaming on Prime Video on August 5, 2022. The film received generally positive reviews from critics. In 2022, Netflix acquired from Paramount Pictures &quot;The Shrinking of Treehorn&quot;, which will mark Howard&#x27;s first time directing an animated feature. and survival thriller &quot;Eden&quot; starting Jude Law and Ana de Amas.

==Imagine Entertainment==
Howard is a co-chairman, with Brian Grazer, of Imagine Entertainment, a film and television production company. Imagine has produced several films including &quot;Friday Night Lights,&quot; &quot;8 Mile,&quot; and &quot;Inside Deep Throat,&quot; as well as the television series &quot;24,&quot; &quot;Felicity,&quot; &quot;The PJs,&quot; and &quot;Arrested Development&quot; which Howard also narrated and later appeared in as himself.

In July 2012, it was announced that Imagine had put into development &quot;Conquest&quot; for Showtime, a period drama based on the 16th century conquest of the Aztecs by Spanish Conquistadors. To be directed by Howard, the series was originally planned as a feature film before it was decided that the project was more suited to television.

As part of Imagine Entertainment, he appeared in a 1997 print ad for Milk - Where&#x27;s &quot;your&quot; mustache?, in which he wore a cap for Imagine Entertainment and sported a milk mustache. Earlier versions show a younger Ronny Howard on the other side. In 2009, he appeared in the Jamie Foxx music video &quot;Blame It&quot;.

==Personal life==
Howard married Cheryl Alley (born December 23, 1953) on June 7, 1975. They have four children, including Bryce Dallas Howard and Paige Howard.

==Filmography==


==Awards and nominations==

Directed Academy Award performances
==See also==
* Ron Howard&#x27;s unrealized projects

==References==
==Bibliography==
* John Holmstrom. &quot;The Moving Picture Boy: An International Encyclopaedia from 1895 to 1995.&quot; Norwich, Michael Russell, 1996, p. 304-305.
* Ron Howard and Clint Howard. &quot;The Boys: A Memoir of Hollywood and Family.&quot; William Morrow, 2021. 

==Further reading==
* 

==External links==

* 2002 Commencement Address (USC School of Cinema-Television) (archived)
* Encyclopedia of Oklahoma History and Culture – Ron Howard (archived)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q103646" start="0" end="21" title="Ron Howard" label="Ronald William Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q970153" start="134" end="145" title="child actor" label="child actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q39087387" start="235" end="253" title="List of awards and nominations received by Ron Howard" label="multiple accolades"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="269" end="283" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="289" end="300" title="Emmy Awards" label="Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="306" end="325" title="Golden Globe Awards" label="Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="333" end="345" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789030" start="366" end="388" title="National Medal of Arts" label="National Medal of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696954" start="423" end="446" title="Television Hall of Fame" label="Television Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="480" end="502" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6599440" start="688" end="699" title="Opie Taylor" label="Opie Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761382" start="720" end="731" title="Andy Taylor (The Andy Griffith Show)" label="Andy Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q312252" start="743" end="756" title="Andy Griffith" label="Andy Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q526035" start="778" end="800" title="The Andy Griffith Show" label="The Andy Griffith Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q762649" start="892" end="905" title="The Music Man (1962 film)" label="The Music Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q375855" start="1040" end="1057" title="American Graffiti" label="American Graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934789" start="1112" end="1129" title="Richie Cunningham" label="Richie Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q518589" start="1150" end="1160" title="Happy Days" label="Happy Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747271" start="1210" end="1225" title="The Spikes Gang" label="The Spikes Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199406" start="1246" end="1258" title="The Shootist" label="The Shootist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747227" start="1283" end="1299" title="Grand Theft Auto (film)" label="Grand Theft Auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q997228" start="1541" end="1552" title="Night Shift (1982 film)" label="Night Shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127184" start="1573" end="1579" title="Splash (film)" label="Splash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105463" start="1604" end="1610" title="Cocoon (film)" label="Cocoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q515931" start="1653" end="1659" title="Willow (1988 film)" label="Willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q499371" start="1693" end="1702" title="Backdraft (film)" label="Backdraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q859369" start="1735" end="1752" title="comedy-drama film" label="comedy-drama film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747211" start="1759" end="1768" title="The Paper (film)" label="The Paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="1809" end="1840" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Academy Award for Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="1845" end="1875" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Academy Award for Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q164103" start="1886" end="1902" title="A Beautiful Mind (film)" label="A Beautiful Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q691672" start="1970" end="1981" title="Frost/Nixon (film)" label="Frost/Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q106428" start="2055" end="2064" title="Apollo 13 (film)" label="Apollo 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q647546" start="2085" end="2099" title="Cinderella Man" label="Cinderella Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768437" start="2120" end="2124" title="Rush (2013 film)" label="Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q15079316" start="2145" end="2168" title="In the Heart of the Sea (film)" label="In the Heart of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q105962844" start="2193" end="2207" title="Thirteen Lives" label="Thirteen Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q157394" start="2260" end="2272" title="fantasy film" label="fantasy film"/>
<link wikidata="Q131864" start="2279" end="2309" title="How the Grinch Stole Christmas (2000 film)" label="How the Grinch Stole Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210206" start="2341" end="2352" title="The Dilemma" label="The Dilemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q27962582" start="2407" end="2433" title="Robert Langdon (film series)" label="Robert Langdon film series"/>
<link wikidata="Q160560" start="2441" end="2458" title="The Da Vinci Code (film)" label="The Da Vinci Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q192934" start="2479" end="2498" title="Angels &amp;amp; Demons (film)" label="Angels &amp;amp; Demons"/>
<link wikidata="Q18192306" start="2523" end="2530" title="Inferno (2016 film)" label="Inferno"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2630" end="2660" title="The Beatles: Eight Days a Week" label="The Beatles: Eight Days a Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738400" start="2681" end="2690" title="Pavarotti (film)" label="Pavarotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q116979470" start="2715" end="2729" title="We Feed People" label="We Feed People"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041247" start="2801" end="2817" title="Duncan, Oklahoma" label="Duncan, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004409" start="2848" end="2860" title="Rance Howard" label="Rance Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249301" start="2896" end="2908" title="Jean Speegle Howard" label="Jean Speegle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="3164" end="3187" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699365" start="3244" end="3258" title="Desilu Studios" label="Desilu Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q39561" start="3383" end="3402" title="Burbank, California" label="Burbank, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6224023" start="3477" end="3503" title="John Burroughs High School" label="John Burroughs High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="3527" end="3560" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583249" start="3568" end="3592" title="USC School of Cinematic Arts" label="School of Cinematic Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136724" start="3814" end="3825" title="The Journey (1959 film)" label="The Journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q232863" start="3848" end="3860" title="June Allyson" label="June Allyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="3868" end="3871" title="Columbia Broadcasting System" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q23653" start="3872" end="3888" title="anthology series" label="anthology series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3811248" start="3895" end="3928" title="The DuPont Show with June Allyson" label="The DuPont Show with June Allyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q14329491" start="3983" end="4000" title="The Twilight Zone" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744666" start="4021" end="4037" title="Walking Distance" label="Walking Distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107839" start="4100" end="4117" title="Dennis the Menace (1959 TV series)" label="Dennis the Menace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033276" start="4222" end="4252" title="The Many Loves of Dobie Gillis" label="The Many Loves of Dobie Gillis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071394" start="4388" end="4396" title="Cheyenne (TV series)" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6599440" start="4486" end="4497" title="Opie Taylor" label="Opie Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q526035" start="4507" end="4529" title="The Andy Griffith Show" label="The Andy Griffith Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q312252" start="4629" end="4642" title="Andy Griffith" label="Andy Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q555236" start="4943" end="4953" title="Don Knotts" label="Don Knotts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281170" start="4955" end="4969" title="Frances Bavier" label="Frances Bavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q963787" start="4974" end="4984" title="Jim Nabors" label="Jim Nabors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="5027" end="5048" title="Primetime Emmy Awards" label="Primetime Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110156" start="5065" end="5090" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Comedy Series" label="Outstanding Comedy Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565777" start="5126" end="5145" title="The Jack Benny Show" label="The Jack Benny Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718958" start="5167" end="5187" title="The Bob Newhart Show (1961 TV series)" label="The Bob Newhart Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031053" start="5213" end="5224" title="The Monkees (TV series)" label="The Monkees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249367" start="5324" end="5344" title="Love, American Style" label="Love, American Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934789" start="5425" end="5442" title="Richie Cunningham" label="Richie Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q518589" start="5466" end="5476" title="Happy Days" label="Happy Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q343983" start="5652" end="5665" title="Henry Winkler" label="Henry Winkler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2726691" start="5679" end="5686" title="greaser (subculture)" label="greaser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435927" start="5693" end="5750" title="Fonzie" label="Arthur &amp;quot;Fonzie&amp;quot;/&amp;quot;The Fonz&amp;quot; Fonzarelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q762649" start="6107" end="6120" title="The Music Man (1962 film)" label="The Music Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457220" start="6142" end="6156" title="Winthrop Paroo" label="Winthrop Paroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q451811" start="6200" end="6214" title="Robert Preston (actor)" label="Robert Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q230218" start="6216" end="6229" title="Shirley Jones" label="Shirley Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q558333" start="6235" end="6248" title="Buddy Hackett" label="Buddy Hackett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457220" start="6276" end="6305" title="The Music Man" label="1957 musical of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281750" start="6309" end="6325" title="Meredith Willson" label="Meredith Willson"/>
<link wikidata="Q731760" start="6352" end="6366" title="Morton DaCosta" label="Morton DaCosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219582" start="6409" end="6420" title="Auntie Mame (film)" label="Auntie Mame"/>
<link wikidata="Q233854" start="6436" end="6452" title="Rosalind Russell" label="Rosalind Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q753339" start="6514" end="6554" title="1962 in film" label="third highest-grossing film of that year"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="6588" end="6601" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="6628" end="6640" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q530679" start="6682" end="6718" title="The Courtship of Eddie&amp;#x27;s Father (film)" label="The Courtship of Eddie&amp;#x27;s Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q212048" start="6730" end="6740" title="Glenn Ford" label="Glenn Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q582053" start="6830" end="6844" title="The Big Valley" label="The Big Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4004618" start="6893" end="6910" title="The Eleventh Hour (1962 TV series)" label="The Eleventh Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249413" start="6935" end="6940" title="I Spy (1965 TV series)" label="I Spy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19155" start="6999" end="7010" title="Henry Fonda" label="Henry Fonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747260" start="7046" end="7062" title="The Smith Family (TV series)" label="The Smith Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247632" start="7097" end="7115" title="Land of the Giants" label="Land of the Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="7221" end="7227" title="United States Marine Corps" label="Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q494244" start="7237" end="7244" title="M*A*S*H (TV series)" label="M*A*S*H"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560314" start="7272" end="7301" title="Sometimes You Hear the Bullet" label="Sometimes You Hear the Bullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719042" start="7376" end="7389" title="The Bold Ones" label="The Bold Ones"/>
<link wikidata="Q54860" start="7470" end="7488" title="Disneyland Records" label="Disneyland Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352187" start="7617" end="7629" title="Robie Lester" label="Robie Lester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030983" start="7659" end="7674" title="The Haunted Mansion" label="Haunted Mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090787" start="7676" end="7693" title="Thurl Ravenscroft" label="Thurl Ravenscroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="8165" end="8177" title="George Lucas" label="George Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q375855" start="8210" end="8227" title="American Graffiti" label="American Graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q518589" start="8290" end="8300" title="Happy Days" label="Happy Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q181799" start="8361" end="8376" title="Richard Dreyfus" label="Richard Dreyfus"/>
<link wikidata="Q730100" start="8378" end="8398" title="Charles Martin Smith" label="Charles Martin Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q81328" start="8404" end="8417" title="Harrison Ford" label="Harrison Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="8426" end="8437" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q577417" start="8451" end="8468" title="Chicago Sun-Times" label="Chicago Sun-Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747296" start="8820" end="8842" title="More American Graffiti" label="More American Graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q466463" start="8937" end="8949" title="Jon Walmsley" label="Jon Walmsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q48777" start="8961" end="8972" title="The Waltons" label="The Waltons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004409" start="9074" end="9086" title="Rance Howard" label="Rance Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q40531" start="9122" end="9132" title="John Wayne" label="John Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q104000" start="9137" end="9150" title="Lauren Bacall" label="Lauren Bacall"/>
<link wikidata="Q358322" start="9154" end="9164" title="Don Siegel" label="Don Siegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199406" start="9178" end="9190" title="The Shootist" label="The Shootist"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="9213" end="9220" title="Western (genre)" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q11598" start="9319" end="9339" title="Arrested Development" label="Arrested Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320115" start="9537" end="9547" title="low-budget film" label="low-budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747227" start="9573" end="9589" title="Grand Theft Auto (film)" label="Grand Theft Auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q318292" start="9687" end="9699" title="Roger Corman" label="Roger Corman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3576864" start="9782" end="9794" title="Eat My Dust!" label="Eat My Dust!"/>
<link wikidata="Q530672" start="9807" end="9825" title="Christopher Norris (actress)" label="Christopher Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q20649252" start="9936" end="9943" title="Skyward (film)" label="Skyward"/>
<link wikidata="Q71206" start="9960" end="9971" title="Bette Davis" label="Bette Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q997228" start="10024" end="10035" title="Night Shift (1982 film)" label="Night Shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q138005" start="10053" end="10067" title="Michael Keaton" label="Michael Keaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q232951" start="10069" end="10081" title="Shelley Long" label="Shelley Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q343983" start="10132" end="10145" title="Henry Winkler" label="Henry Winkler"/>
<link wikidata="Q860626" start="10246" end="10261" title="romantic comedy" label="romantic comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127184" start="10268" end="10274" title="Splash (film)" label="Splash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263" start="10297" end="10306" title="Tom Hanks" label="Tom Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q207596" start="10308" end="10320" title="Daryl Hannah" label="Daryl Hannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q312129" start="10322" end="10333" title="Eugene Levy" label="Eugene Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q218532" start="10339" end="10349" title="John Candy" label="John Candy"/>
<link wikidata="Q859369" start="10436" end="10448" title="comedy drama" label="comedy drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105463" start="10455" end="10461" title="Cocoon (film)" label="Cocoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q310413" start="10484" end="10494" title="Don Ameche" label="Don Ameche"/>
<link wikidata="Q395205" start="10496" end="10507" title="Hume Cronyn" label="Hume Cronyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q712180" start="10509" end="10524" title="Wilford Brimley" label="Wilford Brimley"/>
<link wikidata="Q313545" start="10530" end="10543" title="Brian Dennehy" label="Brian Dennehy"/>
<link wikidata="Q326439" start="10693" end="10705" title="high fantasy" label="high fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q319221" start="10706" end="10715" title="Adventure film" label="adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q515931" start="10727" end="10733" title="Willow (1988 film)" label="Willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q191084" start="10749" end="10759" title="Val Kilmer" label="Val Kilmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q108270" start="10764" end="10777" title="Warwick Davis" label="Warwick Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137831" start="10865" end="10875" title="Parenthood (film)" label="Parenthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q16473" start="10929" end="10941" title="Steve Martin" label="Steve Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q315039" start="10943" end="10952" title="Tom Hulce" label="Tom Hulce"/>
<link wikidata="Q336282" start="10954" end="10966" title="Rick Moranis" label="Rick Moranis"/>
<link wikidata="Q267383" start="10968" end="10983" title="Martha Plimpton" label="Martha Plimpton"/>
<link wikidata="Q185140" start="10985" end="11000" title="Joaquin Phoenix" label="Joaquin Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q43416" start="11002" end="11014" title="Keanu Reeves" label="Keanu Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q296630" start="11016" end="11029" title="Jason Robards" label="Jason Robards"/>
<link wikidata="Q108935" start="11031" end="11047" title="Mary Steenburgen" label="Mary Steenburgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q217573" start="11053" end="11065" title="Dianne Wiest" label="Dianne Wiest"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="11254" end="11267" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q499371" start="11362" end="11371" title="Backdraft (film)" label="Backdraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q103157" start="11426" end="11438" title="Kurt Russell" label="Kurt Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q103784" start="11440" end="11457" title="Donald Sutherland" label="Donald Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="11463" end="11477" title="Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q969105" start="11492" end="11503" title="Gene Siskel" label="Gene Siskel"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="11517" end="11532" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="11543" end="11554" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q577417" start="11568" end="11585" title="Chicago Sun-Times" label="Chicago Sun-Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q839341" start="11674" end="11686" title="Far and Away" label="Far and Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q37079" start="11702" end="11712" title="Tom Cruise" label="Tom Cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q37459" start="11717" end="11730" title="Nicole Kidman" label="Nicole Kidman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747211" start="11923" end="11932" title="The Paper (film)" label="The Paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q138005" start="11965" end="11979" title="Michael Keaton" label="Michael Keaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q372311" start="11981" end="11992" title="Glenn Close" label="Glenn Close"/>
<link wikidata="Q191828" start="11994" end="12006" title="Marisa Tomei" label="Marisa Tomei"/>
<link wikidata="Q311754" start="12008" end="12023" title="Jason Alexander" label="Jason Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q296630" start="12025" end="12038" title="Jason Robards" label="Jason Robards"/>
<link wikidata="Q171736" start="12044" end="12057" title="Robert Duvall" label="Robert Duvall"/>
<link wikidata="Q622370" start="12229" end="12238" title="docudrama" label="docudrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q106428" start="12250" end="12259" title="Apollo 13 (film)" label="Apollo 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263" start="12311" end="12320" title="Tom Hanks" label="Tom Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454165" start="12322" end="12333" title="Kevin Bacon" label="Kevin Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q110374" start="12339" end="12350" title="Bill Paxton" label="Bill Paxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631" start="12364" end="12373" title="astronaut" label="astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q182252" start="12390" end="12399" title="Apollo 13" label="Apollo 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q180272" start="12447" end="12458" title="Gary Sinise" label="Gary Sinise"/>
<link wikidata="Q104791" start="12460" end="12469" title="Ed Harris" label="Ed Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q236696" start="12475" end="12491" title="Kathleen Quinlan" label="Kathleen Quinlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="12635" end="12646" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q577417" start="12660" end="12677" title="Chicago Sun-Times" label="Chicago Sun-Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="12920" end="12933" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q131864" start="13044" end="13074" title="How the Grinch Stole Christmas (2000 film)" label="How the Grinch Stole Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q298685" start="13094" end="13103" title="Dr. Seuss" label="Dr. Seuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q40504" start="13143" end="13153" title="Jim Carrey" label="Jim Carrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q320204" start="13210" end="13224" title="Jeffrey Tambor" label="Jeffrey Tambor"/>
<link wikidata="Q229134" start="13226" end="13244" title="Christine Baranski" label="Christine Baranski"/>
<link wikidata="Q239145" start="13250" end="13263" title="Molly Shannon" label="Molly Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q65932" start="13270" end="13285" title="Anthony Hopkins" label="Anthony Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q645928" start="13484" end="13502" title="biographical drama" label="biographical drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q164103" start="13514" end="13530" title="A Beautiful Mind (film)" label="A Beautiful Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q129817" start="13546" end="13559" title="Russell Crowe" label="Russell Crowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q128736" start="13590" end="13599" title="John Forbes Nash Jr." label="John Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="13619" end="13641" title="schizophrenia" label="paranoid schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q103343" start="13679" end="13696" title="Jennifer Connelly" label="Jennifer Connelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q104791" start="13698" end="13707" title="Ed Harris" label="Ed Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q53651" start="13709" end="13719" title="Josh Lucas" label="Josh Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q190523" start="13725" end="13744" title="Christopher Plummer" label="Christopher Plummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="13887" end="13900" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="13933" end="13945" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="13985" end="13998" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q55163" start="14031" end="14044" title="Robert Altman" label="Robert Altman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071" start="14046" end="14057" title="David Lynch" label="David Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q56005" start="14059" end="14071" title="Ridley Scott" label="Ridley Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q4465" start="14077" end="14090" title="Peter Jackson" label="Peter Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339864" start="14135" end="14147" title="sports drama" label="sports drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q647546" start="14154" end="14168" title="Cinderella Man" label="Cinderella Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q281678" start="14202" end="14213" title="heavyweight" label="heavyweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570736" start="14214" end="14229" title="List of world heavyweight boxing champions" label="boxing champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q317017" start="14230" end="14247" title="James J. Braddock" label="James J. Braddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q122614" start="14295" end="14310" title="Renée Zellweger" label="Renée Zellweger"/>
<link wikidata="Q208649" start="14341" end="14354" title="Paul Giamatti" label="Paul Giamatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5766101" start="14370" end="14379" title="Joe Gould (boxing)" label="Joe Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="14381" end="14396" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q27962582" start="14752" end="14772" title="Robert Langdon (film series)" label="Robert Langdon films"/>
<link wikidata="Q160560" start="14802" end="14819" title="The Da Vinci Code (film)" label="The Da Vinci Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263" start="14838" end="14847" title="Tom Hanks" label="Tom Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q304123" start="14886" end="14899" title="Audrey Tautou" label="Audrey Tautou"/>
<link wikidata="Q170510" start="14901" end="14913" title="Ian McKellen" label="Ian McKellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q296028" start="14919" end="14932" title="Alfred Molina" label="Alfred Molina"/>
<link wikidata="Q192934" start="14955" end="14974" title="Angels &amp;amp; Demons (film)" label="Angels &amp;amp; Demons"/>
<link wikidata="Q165518" start="15038" end="15051" title="Ewan McGregor" label="Ewan McGregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q208667" start="15056" end="15073" title="Stellan Skarsgård" label="Stellan Skarsgård"/>
<link wikidata="Q18192306" start="15090" end="15097" title="Inferno (2016 film)" label="Inferno"/>
<link wikidata="Q234447" start="15169" end="15183" title="Felicity Jones" label="Felicity Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q360927" start="15185" end="15196" title="Irrfan Khan" label="Irrfan Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q357387" start="15202" end="15209" title="Omar Sy" label="Omar Sy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168625" start="15328" end="15344" title="historical drama" label="historical drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q691672" start="15356" end="15367" title="Frost/Nixon (film)" label="Frost/Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323689" start="15381" end="15401" title="London Film Festival" label="London Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3800671" start="15477" end="15488" title="Nixon interviews" label="Frost/Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="15539" end="15552" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q380865" start="15580" end="15591" title="David Frost" label="David Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q310944" start="15593" end="15607" title="Frank Langella" label="Frank Langella"/>
<link wikidata="Q298276" start="15633" end="15646" title="Michael Sheen" label="Michael Sheen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568542" start="15683" end="15704" title="Frost/Nixon (play)" label="play of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q948122" start="15708" end="15720" title="Peter Morgan" label="Peter Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q314954" start="15763" end="15779" title="Mathew Macfadyen" label="Mathew Macfadyen"/>
<link wikidata="Q316446" start="15781" end="15793" title="Sam Rockwell" label="Sam Rockwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q230534" start="15795" end="15807" title="Rebecca Hall" label="Rebecca Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q343510" start="15809" end="15821" title="Oliver Platt" label="Oliver Platt"/>
<link wikidata="Q342419" start="15823" end="15833" title="Toby Jones" label="Toby Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454165" start="15839" end="15850" title="Kevin Bacon" label="Kevin Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="15937" end="15952" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="16169" end="16179" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="16326" end="16339" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="16412" end="16424" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823084" start="16572" end="16592" title="Austin Film Festival" label="Austin Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q138005" start="16653" end="16667" title="Michael Keaton" label="Michael Keaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768437" start="16757" end="16761" title="Rush (2013 film)" label="Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q16596992" start="16782" end="16800" title="Hunt–Lauda rivalry" label="Hunt–Lauda rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q172853" start="16813" end="16832" title="Formula One drivers" label="Formula One drivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q140393" start="16846" end="16856" title="James Hunt" label="James Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q78489" start="16874" end="16884" title="Niki Lauda" label="Niki Lauda"/>
<link wikidata="Q69387" start="16896" end="16910" title="1976 Formula One season" label="1976 Formula 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q948122" start="16950" end="16962" title="Peter Morgan" label="Peter Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q54314" start="16975" end="16990" title="Chris Hemsworth" label="Chris Hemsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q58592" start="17000" end="17012" title="Daniel Brühl" label="Daniel Brühl"/>
<link wikidata="Q200355" start="17027" end="17039" title="Olivia Wilde" label="Olivia Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q16770428" start="17043" end="17054" title="Suzy Miller" label="Suzy Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q14326096" start="17082" end="17122" title="2013 Toronto International Film Festival" label="2013 Toronto International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q15079316" start="17207" end="17230" title="In the Heart of the Sea (film)" label="In the Heart of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q973740" start="17271" end="17283" title="whaler" label="whaling ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368833" start="17284" end="17289" title="Essex (whaleship)" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985" start="17322" end="17337" title="Herman Melville" label="Herman Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q174596" start="17362" end="17371" title="Moby-Dick" label="Moby-Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q54314" start="17413" end="17428" title="Chris Hemsworth" label="Chris Hemsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q202589" start="17430" end="17444" title="Cillian Murphy" label="Cillian Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023710" start="17446" end="17457" title="Tom Holland (actor)" label="Tom Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q342617" start="17459" end="17470" title="Ben Whishaw" label="Ben Whishaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q206659" start="17476" end="17491" title="Brendan Gleeson" label="Brendan Gleeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="17628" end="17637" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q51802" start="17654" end="17662" title="Han Solo" label="Han Solo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182133" start="17761" end="17793" title="Phil Lord and Christopher Miller" label="Phil Lord and Christopher Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q242446" start="17918" end="17927" title="Lucasfilm" label="Lucasfilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q17738" start="18393" end="18400" title="Star Wars (film)" label="5/25/77"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090738" start="18648" end="18663" title="Hillbilly Elegy (film)" label="Hillbilly Elegy"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="18686" end="18693" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q27536725" start="18707" end="18743" title="Hillbilly Elegy" label="based on the memoir of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q28935729" start="18747" end="18755" title="JD Vance" label="JD Vance"/>
<link wikidata="Q15710074" start="18790" end="18804" title="Vanessa Taylor" label="Vanessa Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q372311" start="18844" end="18855" title="Glenn Close" label="Glenn Close"/>
<link wikidata="Q481832" start="18860" end="18869" title="Amy Adams" label="Amy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q105962844" start="18999" end="19013" title="Thirteen Lives" label="Thirteen Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q55301634" start="19041" end="19063" title="Tham Luang cave rescue" label="Tham Luang cave rescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q119348733" start="19129" end="19153" title="United Artists Releasing" label="United Artists Releasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740856" start="19178" end="19189" title="Prime Video" label="Prime Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="19277" end="19284" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="19299" end="19317" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19324" end="19349" title="The Shrinking of Treehorn (film)" label="The Shrinking of Treehorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q320025" start="19560" end="19572" title="Brian Grazer" label="Brian Grazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q511731" start="19577" end="19598" title="Imagine Entertainment" label="Imagine Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156648" start="19693" end="19712" title="Friday Night Lights (film)" label="Friday Night Lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q196665" start="19726" end="19732" title="8 Mile (film)" label="8 Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664537" start="19750" end="19768" title="Inside Deep Throat" label="Inside Deep Throat"/>
<link wikidata="Q56194" start="19815" end="19817" title="24 (TV series)" label="24"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141890" start="19831" end="19839" title="Felicity (TV series)" label="Felicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083436" start="19853" end="19860" title="The PJs" label="The PJs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11598" start="19878" end="19898" title="Arrested Development (TV series)" label="Arrested Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q23589" start="20061" end="20069" title="Showtime (TV channel)" label="Showtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q828435" start="20099" end="20134" title="Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire" label="16th century conquest of the Aztecs"/>
<link wikidata="Q126236" start="20146" end="20158" title="Conquistador" label="Conquistador"/>
<link wikidata="Q513278" start="20379" end="20425" title="Got Milk?" label="Milk - Where&amp;#x27;s &amp;quot;your&amp;quot; mustache?"/>
<link wikidata="Q171905" start="20597" end="20607" title="Jamie Foxx" label="Jamie Foxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924703" start="20626" end="20634" title="Blame It (song)" label="Blame It"/>
<link wikidata="Q229775" start="20766" end="20785" title="Bryce Dallas Howard" label="Bryce Dallas Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11836555" start="20790" end="20802" title="Paige Howard" label="Paige Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q123907456" start="20902" end="20939" title="Ron Howard&amp;#x27;s unrealized projects" label="Ron Howard&amp;#x27;s unrealized projects"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58929" wikidata="Q188494" url="?curid=58929" title="Witch hunt">
<text>A witch hunt, or a witch purge, is a search for people who have been labeled witches or a search for evidence of witchcraft. Practicing evil spells or incantations was proscribed and punishable in early human civilizations in the Middle East. In medieval Europe, witch-hunts often arose in connection to charges of heresy from Christianity. An intensive period of witch-hunts occurring in Early Modern Europe and to a smaller extent Colonial America, took place from about 1450 to 1750, spanning the upheavals of the Counter Reformation and the Thirty Years&#x27; War, resulting in an estimated 35,000 to 60,000 executions. The last executions of people convicted as witches in Europe took place in the 18th century. In other regions, like Africa and Asia, contemporary witch-hunts have been reported from sub-Saharan Africa and Papua New Guinea, and official legislation against witchcraft is still found in Saudi Arabia, Cameroon and South Africa today.

In current language, &quot;witch-hunt&quot; metaphorically means an investigation that is usually conducted with much publicity, supposedly to uncover subversive activity, disloyalty, and so on, but with the real purpose of harming opponents. It can also involve elements of moral panic, as well as mass hysteria.

==Anthropological causes==

The wide distribution of the practice of witch hunts in geographically and culturally separated societies (Europe, Africa, New Guinea) since the 1960s has triggered interest in the anthropological background of this behaviour. The belief in magic and divination, and attempts to use magic to influence personal well-being (to increase life, win love, etc.) are universal across human cultures.

Belief in witchcraft has been shown to have similarities in societies throughout the world. It presents a framework to explain the occurrence of otherwise random misfortunes such as sickness or death, and the witch sorcerer provides an image of evil. Reports on indigenous practices in the Americas, Asia and Africa collected during the early modern Age of Exploration have been taken to suggest that not just the belief in witchcraft but also the periodic outbreak of witch-hunts are a human cultural universal.

One study finds that witchcraft beliefs are associated with antisocial attitudes: lower levels of trust, charitable giving and group participation. Another study finds that income shocks (caused by extreme rainfall) lead to a large increase in the murder of &quot;witches&quot; in Tanzania.

==History==
===Ancient Near East===
Punishment for malevolent magic is addressed in the earliest law codes which were preserved, in both ancient Egypt and Babylonia, where it played a conspicuous part. The Code of Hammurabi (18th century BC short chronology) prescribes that

The Hebrew Bible condemns sorcery. Deuteronomy 18:10–12 states: &quot;No one shall be found among you who makes a son or daughter pass through fire, who practices divination, or is a soothsayer, or an augur, or a sorcerer, or one that casts spells, or who consults ghosts or spirits, or who seeks oracles from the dead. For whoever does these things is abhorrent to the Lord&quot;; and Exodus 22:18 prescribes: &quot;thou shalt not suffer a witch to live&quot;. Tales like that of 1 Samuel 28, reporting how Saul &quot;hath cut off those that have familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land&quot;, suggest that in practice sorcery could at least lead to exile.

In the Judaean Second Temple period, Rabbi Simeon ben Shetach in the 1st century BC is reported to have sentenced to death eighty women who had been charged with witchcraft on a single day in Ascalon. Later the women&#x27;s relatives took revenge by bringing false witnesses against Simeon&#x27;s son and causing him to be executed in turn.

===Ancient Greco-Roman world===
No laws concerning magic survive from Classical Athens. However, cases concerning the harmful effects of &quot;pharmaka&quot; – an ambiguous term that might mean &quot;poison&quot;, &quot;medicine&quot;, or &quot;magical drug&quot; – do survive, especially those where the drug caused injury or death. Antiphon&#x27;s speech &quot;Against the Stepmother for Poisoning&quot; tells of the case of a woman accused of plotting to murder her husband with a &quot;pharmakon&quot;; a slave had previously been executed for the crime, but the son of the victim claimed that the death had been arranged by his stepmother. The most detailed account of a trial for witchcraft in Classical Greece is the story of Theoris of Lemnos, who was executed along with her children some time before 338 BC, supposedly for casting incantations and using harmful drugs.
During the pagan era of ancient Rome, there were laws against harmful magic. According to Pliny, the 5th century BC laws of the Twelve Tables laid down penalties for uttering harmful incantations and for stealing the fruitfulness of someone else&#x27;s crops by magic. The only recorded trial involving this law was that of Gaius Furius Cresimus.

The Classical Latin word meant both poisoning and causing harm by magic (such as magic potions), although ancient people would not have distinguished between the two. In 331 BC, a deadly epidemic hit Rome and at least 170 women were executed for causing it by &quot;veneficium&quot;. In 184–180 BC, another epidemic hit Italy, and about 5,000 people were brought to trial and executed for &quot;veneficium&quot;. If the reports are accurate, writes Hutton, &quot;then the Republican Romans hunted witches on a scale unknown anywhere else in the ancient world&quot;.

Under the &quot;Lex Cornelia de sicariis et veneficis&quot; of 81 BC, killing by &quot;veneficium&quot; carried the death penalty. This law banned the trading and possession of harmful drugs and poisons, possession of magical books and other occult paraphernalia. Emperor Augustus strengthened laws to curb these practices, for instance in 31 BC, by burning over 2,000 magical books in Rome, except for certain portions of the hallowed Sibylline Books. While Tiberius Claudius was emperor, 85 women and 45 men accused of sorcery were executed. By the 3rd century AD, the &quot;Lex Cornelia&quot; had begun to be used more broadly against other kinds of magic deemed harmful. The magicians were to be burnt at the stake.

Persecution of witches continued in the Roman Empire until the late 4th century AD and abated only after the introduction of Christianity as the Roman state religion in the 390s.

===Middle Ages===
====Christianisation in the Early Middle Ages====
The German author Wilhelm Gottlieb Soldan argued in &quot;History of the Witchcraft Trials&quot; that the philosopher and mathematician Hypatia, murdered by a mob in 415 AD for threatening the influence of Cyril of Alexandria, may have been, in effect, the first famous &quot;witch&quot; to be punished by Christian authorities. Cyril&#x27;s alleged role in her murder, however, was already controversial among contemporary sources, and the surviving primary account by Socrates Scholasticus makes no mention of religious motivations.

The 6th century AD &quot;Getica&quot; of Jordanes records a persecution and expulsion of witches among the Goths in a mythical account of the origin of the Huns. The ancient fabled King Filimer is said to have

The Councils of Elvira (306 AD), Ancyra (314 AD), and Trullo (692 AD) imposed certain ecclesiastical penances for devil-worship. This mild approach represented the view of the Church for many centuries. The general desire of the Catholic Church&#x27;s clergy to check fanaticism about witchcraft and necromancy is shown in the decrees of the Council of Paderborn, which, in 785 AD, explicitly outlawed condemning people as witches and condemned to death anyone who burnt a witch. The Lombard code of 643 AD states:

This conforms to the teachings of the Canon Episcopi of circa 900 AD (alleged to date from 314 AD), which, stated that witchcraft did not exist and that to teach that it was a reality was, itself, false and heterodox teaching. Other examples include an Irish synod in 800 AD, and a sermon by Agobard of Lyons (810 AD).

King Kálmán (Coloman) of Hungary, in Decree 57 of his First Legislative Book (published in 1100), banned witch-hunting because he said, &quot;witches do not exist&quot;. The &quot;Decretum&quot; of Burchard, Bishop of Worms (about 1020), and especially its 19th book, often known separately as the &quot;Corrector&quot;, is another work of great importance. Burchard was writing against the superstitious belief in magical potions, for instance, that may produce impotence or abortion. These were also condemned by several Church Fathers. But he altogether rejected the possibility of many of the alleged powers with which witches were popularly credited. Such, for example, were nocturnal riding through the air, the changing of a person&#x27;s disposition from love to hate, the control of thunder, rain, and sunshine, the transformation of a man into an animal, the intercourse of incubi and succubi with human beings, and other such superstitions. Not only the attempt to practice such things, but the very belief in their possibility, is treated by Burchard as false and superstitious.

Pope Gregory VII, in 1080, wrote to King Harald III of Denmark forbidding witches to be put to death upon being suspected of having caused storms or failure of crops or pestilence. There were many such efforts to prevent unjust treatment of innocent people. On many occasions, ecclesiastics who spoke with authority did their best to disabuse the people of their superstitious belief in witchcraft. A comparable situation in Russia is suggested in a sermon by Serapion of Vladimir (written in 1274~1275), where the popular superstition of witches causing crop failures is denounced.

Condemnations of witchcraft are nevertheless found in the writings of Augustine of Hippo and early theologians, who made little distinction between witchcraft and the practices of pagan religions. Many believed witchcraft did not exist in a philosophical sense: Witchcraft was based on illusions and powers of evil, which Augustine likened to darkness, a non-entity representing the absence of light. Augustine and his adherents like Saint Thomas Aquinas nevertheless promulgated elaborate demonologies, including the belief that humans could enter pacts with demons, which became the basis of future witch hunts. Ironically, many clerics of the Middle Ages openly or covertly practiced goetia, believing that as Christ granted his disciples power to command demons, to summon and control demons was not, therefore, a sin.

Whatever the position of individual clerics, witch-hunting seems to have persisted as a cultural phenomenon. Throughout the early medieval period, notable rulers prohibited both witchcraft and pagan religions, often on pain of death. Under Charlemagne, for example, Christians who practiced witchcraft were enslaved by the Church, while those who worshiped the Devil (Germanic gods) were killed outright. Witch-hunting also appears in period literature. According to Snorri Sturluson, King Olaf Trygvasson furthered the Christian conversion of Norway by luring pagan magicians to his hall under false pretenses, barring the doors and burning them alive. Some who escaped were later captured and drowned.

Early secular laws against witchcraft include those promulgated by King Athelstan (924–939):

In some prosecutions for witchcraft, torture (permitted by the Roman civil law) apparently took place. However, Pope Nicholas I (866 AD), prohibited the use of torture altogether, and a similar decree may be found in the Pseudo-Isidorian Decretals.

====Later Middle Ages====

The manuals of the Roman Catholic Inquisition remained highly skeptical of witch accusations, although there was sometimes an overlap between accusations of heresy and of witchcraft, particularly when, in the 13th century, the newly formed Inquisition was commissioned to deal with the Cathars of Southern France, whose teachings were charged with including witchcraft and magic. Although it has been proposed that the witch-hunt developed in Europe from the early 14th century, after the Cathars and the Knights Templar were suppressed, this hypothesis has been rejected independently by virtually all academic historians (Cohn 1975; Kieckhefer 1976).

In 1258, Pope Alexander IV declared that Inquisition would not deal with cases of witchcraft unless they were related to heresy. Although Pope John XXII had later authorized the Inquisition to prosecute sorcerers in 1320, inquisitorial courts rarely dealt with witchcraft save incidentally when investigating heterodoxy.

In the case of the Madonna Oriente, the Inquisition of Milan was not sure what to do with two women who, in 1384, confessed to have participated in the society around Signora Oriente or Diana. Through their confessions, both of them conveyed the traditional folk beliefs of white magic. The women were accused again in 1390, and condemned by the inquisitor. They were eventually executed by the secular arm.

In a notorious case in 1425, Hermann II, Count of Celje accused his daughter-in-law Veronika of Desenice of witchcraft – and, though she was acquitted by the court, he had her murdered by drowning. The accusations of witchcraft are, in this case, considered to have been a pretext for Hermann to get rid of an &quot;unsuitable match,&quot; Veronika being born into the lower nobility and thus &quot;unworthy&quot; of his son.

A Catholic figure who preached against witchcraft was popular Franciscan preacher Bernardino of Siena (1380–1444). Bernardino&#x27;s sermons reveal both a phenomenon of superstitious practices and an over-reaction against them by the common people. However, it is clear that Bernardino had in mind not merely the use of spells and enchantments and such like fooleries but much more serious crimes, chiefly murder and infanticide. This is clear from his much-quoted sermon of 1427, in which he says:
One of them told and confessed, without any pressure, that she had killed thirty children by bleeding them ... [and] she confessed more, saying she had killed her own son ... Answer me: does it really seem to you that someone who has killed twenty or thirty little children in such a way has done so well that when finally they are accused before the Signoria you should go to their aid and beg mercy for them?
Perhaps the most notorious witch trial in history was the trial of Joan of Arc. Although the trial was politically motivated, and the verdict later overturned, the position of Joan as a woman and an accused witch became significant factors in her execution. Joan&#x27;s punishment of being burned alive (victims were usually strangled before burning) was reserved solely for witches and heretics, the implication being that a burned body could not be resurrected on Judgment Day.

====Transition to the early modern witch-hunts====
The resurgence of witch-hunts at the end of the medieval period, taking place with at least partial support or at least tolerance on the part of the Church, was accompanied with a number of developments in Christian doctrine, for example, the recognition of the existence of witchcraft as a form of Satanic influence and its classification as a heresy. As Renaissance occultism gained traction among the educated classes, the belief in witchcraft, which in the medieval period had been part of the folk religion of the uneducated rural population at best, was incorporated into an increasingly comprehensive theology of Satan as the ultimate source of all &quot;maleficium&quot;. These doctrinal shifts were completed in the mid-15th century, specifically in the wake of the Council of Basel and centered on the Duchy of Savoy in the western Alps, leading to an early series of witch trials by both secular and ecclesiastical courts in the second half of the 15th century.

In 1484, Pope Innocent VIII issued &quot;Summis desiderantes affectibus&quot;, a Papal bull authorizing the &quot;correcting, imprisoning, punishing and chastising&quot; of devil-worshippers who have &quot;slain infants&quot;, among other crimes. He did so at the request of inquisitor Heinrich Kramer, who had been refused permission by the local bishops in Germany to investigate. However, historians such as Ludwig von Pastor insist that the bull neither allowed anything new, nor was necessarily binding on Catholic consciences. Three years later in 1487, Kramer published the notorious &quot;Malleus Maleficarum&quot; (lit., &#x27;Hammer against the Evildoers&#x27;) which, because of the newly invented printing presses, enjoyed a wide readership. It was reprinted in 14 editions by 1520 and became unduly influential in the secular courts.

In Europe, the witch-hunt craze was negligible in Spain, Poland, and Eastern Europe; conversely, it was intense in Germany, Switzerland, and France.

===Early Modern Europe and Colonial America===
The witch trials in Early Modern Europe came in waves and then subsided. There were trials in the 15th and early 16th centuries, but then the witch scare went into decline, before becoming a major issue again and peaking in the 17th century; particularly during the Thirty Years&#x27; War. What had previously been a belief that some people possessed supernatural abilities (which were sometimes used to protect the people), now became a sign of a pact between the people with supernatural abilities and the devil. To justify the killings, some Christians of the time and their proxy secular institutions deemed witchcraft as being associated to wild Satanic ritual parties in which there was naked dancing and cannibalistic infanticide. It was also seen as heresy for going against the first of the Ten Commandments (&quot;You shall have no other gods before me&quot;) or as violating majesty, in this case referring to the divine majesty, not the worldly. Further scripture was also frequently cited, especially the Exodus decree that &quot;thou shalt not suffer a witch to live&quot; (Exodus 22:18), which many supported.
Witch-hunts were seen across early modern Europe, but the most significant area of witch-hunting in modern Europe is often considered to be central and southern Germany. Germany was a late starter in terms of the numbers of trials, compared to other regions of Europe. Witch-hunts first appeared in large numbers in southern France and Switzerland during the 14th and 15th centuries. The peak years of witch-hunts in southwest Germany were from 1561 to 1670. The first major persecution in Europe, when witches were caught, tried, convicted, and burned in the imperial lordship of Wiesensteig in southwestern Germany, is recorded in 1563 in a pamphlet called &quot;True and Horrifying Deeds of 63 Witches&quot;. Witchcraft persecution spread to all areas of Europe. Learned European ideas about witchcraft and demonological ideas, strongly influenced the hunt for witches in the North. These witch-hunts were at least partly driven by economic factors since a significant relationship between economic pressure and witch hunting activity can be found for regions such as Bavaria and Scotland.

In Denmark, the burning of witches increased following the reformation of 1536. Christian IV of Denmark, in particular, encouraged this practice, and hundreds of people were convicted of witchcraft and burnt. In the district of Finnmark, northern Norway, severe witchcraft trials took place during the period 1600–1692. A memorial of international format, &quot;Steilneset Memorial&quot;, has been built to commemorate the victims of the Finnmark witchcraft trials. In England, the Witchcraft Act 1541 regulated the penalties for witchcraft. In the North Berwick witch trials in Scotland, over 70 people were accused of witchcraft on account of bad weather when James VI of Scotland, who shared the Danish king&#x27;s interest in witch trials, sailed to Denmark in 1590 to meet his betrothed Anne of Denmark. According to a widely circulated pamphlet, &quot;Newes from Scotland,&quot; James VI personally presided over the torture and execution of Doctor Fian. Indeed, James published a witch-hunting manual, Daemonologie, which contains the famous dictum: &quot;Experience daily proves how loath they are to confess without torture.&quot; Later, the Pendle witch trials of 1612 joined the ranks of the most famous witch trials in English history.

In England, witch-hunting would reach its apex in 1644 to 1647 due to the efforts of Puritan Matthew Hopkins. Although operating without an official Parliament commission, Hopkins (calling himself Witchfinder General) and his accomplices charged hefty fees to towns during the English Civil War. Hopkins&#x27; witch-hunting spree was brief but significant: 300 convictions and deaths are attributed to his work. Hopkins wrote a book on his methods, describing his fortuitous beginnings as a witch-hunter, the methods used to extract confessions, and the tests he employed to test the accused: stripping them naked to find the Witches&#x27; mark, the &quot;swimming&quot; test, and pricking the skin. The swimming test, which included throwing a witch, who was strapped to a chair, into a bucket of water to see if she floated, was discontinued in 1645 due to a legal challenge. The 1647 book, &quot;The Discovery of Witches&quot;, soon became an influential legal text. The book was used in the American colonies as early as May 1647, when Margaret Jones was executed for witchcraft in Massachusetts, the first of 17 people executed for witchcraft in the Colonies from 1647 to 1663.

Witch-hunts began to occur in North America while Hopkins was hunting witches in England. In 1645, forty-six years before the notorious Salem witch trials, Springfield, Massachusetts experienced America&#x27;s first accusations of witchcraft when husband and wife Hugh and Mary Parsons accused each other of witchcraft. In America&#x27;s first witch trial, Hugh was found innocent, while Mary was acquitted of witchcraft but she was still sentenced to be hanged as punishment for the death of her child. She died in prison. About eighty people throughout England&#x27;s Massachusetts Bay Colony were accused of practicing witchcraft; thirteen women and two men were executed in a witch-hunt that occurred throughout New England and lasted from 1645 to 1663. The Salem witch trials followed in 1692–1693.

Once a case was brought to trial, the prosecutors hunted for accomplices. The use of magic was considered wrong, not because it failed, but because it worked effectively for the wrong reasons. Witchcraft was a normal part of everyday life. Witches were often called for, along with religious ministers, to help the ill or deliver a baby. They held positions of spiritual power in their communities. When something went wrong, no one questioned either the ministers or the power of the witchcraft. Instead, they questioned whether the witch intended to inflict harm or not.

Current scholarly estimates of the number of people who were executed for witchcraft vary from about 35,000 to 60,000. The total number of witch trials in Europe which are known to have ended in executions is around 12,000. Prominent contemporaneous critics of witch-hunts included Gianfrancesco Ponzinibio (fl. 1520), Johannes Wier (1515–1588), Reginald Scot (1538–1599), Cornelius Loos (1546–1595), Anton Praetorius (1560–1613), Alonso Salazar y Frías (1564–1636), Friedrich Spee (1591–1635), and Balthasar Bekker (1634–1698). Among the largest and most notable of these trials were the Trier witch trials (1581–1593), the Fulda witch trials (1603–1606), the Würzburg witch trial (1626–1631) and the Bamberg witch trials (1626–1631).

In addition to known witch trials, witch hunts were often conducted by vigilantes, who may or may not have executed their victims. In Scotland, for example, cattle murrains were blamed on witches, usually peasant women, who were duly punished. A popular method called &quot;scoring above the breath&quot; meant slashing across a woman&#x27;s forehead in order to remove the power of her magic. This was seen as a kind of emergency procedure which could be performed in absence of judicial authorities.
Another important element of the persecution of witches were denunciations. &quot;In England, most of the accusers and those making written complaints against witches were women.&quot; Informers did not have to be revealed to the accused, which was important for the success of the witch trials. In practice, appeals were made to other witnesses to the crimes, so that the first informer was followed by others. In the event of a conviction, the informer sometimes received a third of the accused&#x27;s assets, but at least 2 guilders. A well-known and well-documented example is the case of Katharina Kepler, the mother of the astronomer Johannes Kepler, for being in a pact with the devil and using witchcraft. In 1615, she was called a witch by a female neighbor in the duchy of Württemberg following a dispute with her of having given her a bitter drink that had made her ill. She was held captive for over a year and threatened with torture, but was finally acquitted thanks to her son&#x27;s efforts.

====Execution statistics====
Modern scholarly estimates place the total number of executions for witchcraft in the 300-year period of European witch-hunts in the five digits, mostly at roughly between 35,000 and 60,000 (see table below for details), The majority of those accused were from the lower economic classes in European society, although in rarer cases high-ranking individuals were accused as well. On the basis of this evidence, Scarre and Callow asserted that the &quot;typical witch was the wife or widow of an agricultural labourer or small tenant farmer, and she was well known for a quarrelsome and aggressive nature.&quot;

According to Julian Goodare, in Europe, the overall proportion of women who were persecuted as witches was 80%, although there were countries and regions like Estonia, Normandy and Iceland, that targeted men more. In Iceland 92% of the accused were men, in Estonia 60%, and in Moscow two-thirds of those accused were male. In Finland, a total of more than 100 death row inmates were roughly equal in both men and women, but all Ålanders sentenced to witchcraft were only women.

At one point during the Würzburg trials of 1629, children made up 60% of those accused, although this had declined to 17% by the end of the year. Rapley (1998) claims that &quot;75 to 80 percent&quot; of a total of &quot;40,000 to 50,000&quot; victims were women. The claim that &quot;millions of witches&quot; (often: &quot;nine million witches&quot;) were killed in Europe is spurious, even though it is occasionally found in popular literature, and it is ultimately due to a 1791 pamphlet by Gottfried Christian Voigt.
===End of European witch-hunts in the 18th century===
In England and Scotland between 1542 and 1735, a series of Witchcraft Acts enshrined into law the punishment (often with death, sometimes with incarceration) of individuals practising or claiming to practice witchcraft and magic. The last executions for witchcraft in England had taken place in 1682, when Temperance Lloyd, Mary Trembles, and Susanna Edwards were executed at Exeter. In 1711, Joseph Addison published an article in the highly respected &quot;The Spectator&quot; journal (No. 117) criticizing the irrationality and social injustice in treating elderly and feeble women (dubbed &quot;Moll White&quot;) as witches. Jane Wenham was among the last subjects of a typical witch trial in England in 1712, but was pardoned after her conviction and set free. Janet Horne was executed for witchcraft in Scotland in 1727. The final act, the Witchcraft Act 1735, led to prosecution for fraud rather than witchcraft since it was no longer believed that the individuals had actual supernatural powers or traffic with Satan. The 1735 act continued to be used until the 1940s to prosecute individuals such as spiritualists and gypsies. The act was finally repealed in 1951.

The last execution of a witch in the Dutch Republic was probably in 1613. In Denmark, this took place in 1693 with the execution of Anna Palles and in Norway the last witch execution was of Johanne Nilsdatter in 1695, and in Sweden Anna Eriksdotter in 1704. In other parts of Europe, the practice died down later. In France the last person to be executed for witchcraft was Louis Debaraz in 1745. 

In Croatia the last person condemned for witchcraft to the death penalty was Magda Logomer in 1758. She was acquitted by Maria Theresa in 1758, putting an end to the witch trials in Croatia.

In Germany the last death sentence was that of Anna Schwegelin in Kempten in 1775 (although not carried out). 

The last known official witch-trial was the Doruchów witch trial in Poland in 1783. The result of the trial is questioned by Prof. Janusz Tazbir in his book. No reliable sources had been found confirming any executions after the trial. In 1793, two unnamed women were executed in proceedings of dubious legitimacy in Poznań, Poland.

Anna Göldi was executed in Glarus, Switzerland in 1782 and Barbara Zdunk in Prussia in 1811. Both women have been identified as the last women executed for witchcraft in Europe, but in both cases, the official verdict did not mention witchcraft, as this had ceased to be recognized as a criminal offense.

===India===
There is no documented evidence of witch-hunting in India before 1792.
The earliest evidence of witch-hunts in India can be found in the Santhal Witch Trials in 1792. In the Singhbhum District of the Chota Nagpur Division in Company-ruled India, not only were those accused of being witches murdered, but also those related to the accused to ensure that they would not avenge the deaths (Roy Choudhary 1958: 88). The Chhotanagpur region was majorly populated by an adivasi population called the Santhals. The existence of witches was a belief central to the Santhals. Witches were feared and were supposed to be engaged in anti-social activities. They were also supposed to have the power to kill people by feeding on their entrails, and causing fevers in cattle among other evils. Therefore, according to the adivasi population the cure to their disease and sickness was the elimination of these witches who were seen as the cause.

The practice of witch-hunt among Santhals was more brutal than that in Europe. Unlike Europe, where witches were strangulated before being burnt, the santhals forced them &quot;..to eat human excreta and drink blood before throwing them into the flames.&quot;

The East India Company (EIC) banned the persecution of witches in Gujarat, Rajputana and Chota Nagpur Division in the 1840s–1850s. Despite the ban, very few cases were reported as witch-hunting was not seen as a crime. The Santhals believed that the ban in fact allowed the activities of witches to flourish. Thus, the effect of the ban was contrary to what the EIC had intended. During 1857–58, there was a surge in witch-hunting; coinciding during the period of the Indian Rebellion of 1857, which has led some scholars to see the resurgence of the activity as a form of resistance to Company rule.

==Modern cases==

Witch-hunts still occur today in societies where belief in magic is prevalent. In most cases, these are instances of lynching and burnings, reported with some regularity from much of Sub-Saharan Africa, from Saudi Arabia and from Papua New Guinea. In addition, there are some countries that have legislation against the practice of sorcery. The only country where witchcraft remains legally punishable by death is Saudi Arabia.

Witch-hunts in modern times are continuously reported by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees as a massive violation of human rights. Most of the accused are women and children but can also be elderly people or marginalised groups of the community such as albinos and the HIV-infected. These victims are often considered burdens to the community, and as a result are often driven out, starved to death, or killed violently, sometimes by their own families in acts of social cleansing. The causes of witch-hunts include poverty, epidemics, social crises and lack of education. The leader of the witch-hunt, often a prominent figure in the community or a &quot;witch doctor&quot;, may also gain economic benefit by charging for an exorcism or by selling body parts of the murdered.

===Middle East===
====Levant====
On 29 and 30 June 2015, militants of the terrorist group ISIS beheaded two couples on accusations of sorcery and using &quot;magic for medicine&quot; in Deir ez-Zor province. Earlier on, the ISIL militants beheaded several &quot;magicians&quot; and street illusionists in Syria, Iraq and Libya.

====Saudi Arabia====
Witchcraft or sorcery remains a criminal offense in Saudi Arabia, although the precise nature of the crime is undefined.

The frequency of prosecutions for this in the country as whole is unknown. However, in November 2009, it was reported that 118 people had been arrested in the province of Makkah that year for practicing magic and &quot;using the Book of Allah in a derogatory manner&quot;, 74% of them being female. According to Human Rights Watch in 2009, prosecutions for witchcraft and sorcery are proliferating and &quot;Saudi courts are sanctioning a literal witch hunt by the religious police.&quot;

In 2006, an illiterate Saudi woman, Fawza Falih, was convicted of practising witchcraft, including casting an impotence spell, and sentenced to death by beheading, after allegedly being beaten and forced to fingerprint a false confession that had not been read to her. After an appeal court had cast doubt on the validity of the death sentence because the confession had been retracted, the lower court reaffirmed the same sentence on a different basis.

In 2007, Mustafa Ibrahim, an Egyptian national, was executed, having been convicted of using sorcery in an attempt to separate a married couple, as well as of adultery and of desecrating the Quran.

Also in 2007, Abdul Hamid Bin Hussain Bin Moustafa al-Fakki, a Sudanese national, was sentenced to death after being convicted of producing a spell that would lead to the reconciliation of a divorced couple.

In 2009, Ali Sibat, a Lebanese television presenter who had been arrested whilst on a pilgrimage in Saudi Arabia, was sentenced to death for witchcraft arising out of his fortune-telling on an Arab satellite channel. His appeal was accepted by one court, but a second in Medina upheld his death sentence again in March 2010, stating that he deserved it as he had publicly practised sorcery in front of millions of viewers for several years. In November 2010, the Supreme Court refused to ratify the death sentence, stating that there was insufficient evidence that his actions had harmed others.

On 12 December 2011, Amina bint Abdulhalim Nassar was beheaded in Al Jawf Province after being convicted of practicing witchcraft and sorcery. Another very similar situation occurred to Muree bin Ali bin Issa al-Asiri and he was beheaded on 19 June 2012 in the Najran Province.

===Oceania===
====Papua New Guinea====

Though the practice of &quot;white&quot; magic (such as faith healing) is legal in Papua New Guinea, the 1976 Sorcery Act imposed a penalty of up to 2 years in prison for the practice of &quot;black&quot; magic, until the Act was repealed in 2013. In 2009, the government reports that extrajudicial torture and murder of alleged witches – usually lone women – are spreading from the highland areas to cities as villagers migrate to urban areas. For example, in June 2013, four women were accused of witchcraft because the family &quot;had a &#x27;permanent house&#x27; made of wood, and the family had tertiary educations and high social standing&quot;. All of the women were tortured and Helen Rumbali was beheaded. Helen Hakena, chairwoman of the North Bougainville Human Rights Committee, said that the accusations started because of economic jealousy born of a mining boom.

Reports by U.N. agencies, Amnesty International, Oxfam and anthropologists show that &quot;attacks on accused sorcerers and witches – sometimes men, but most commonly women – are frequent, ferocious and often fatal.&quot; It&#x27;s estimated about 150 cases of violence and killings are occurring each year in just the province of Simbu in Papua New Guinea alone. Reports indicate this practice of witch-hunting has in some places evolved into &quot;something more malignant, sadistic and voyeuristic.&quot; One woman who was attacked by young men from a nearby village &quot;had her genitals burned and fused beyond functional repair by the repeated intrusions of red-hot irons.&quot; Few incidents are ever reported, according to the 2012 Law Reform Commission which concluded that they have increased since the 1980s.

===Indian Subcontinent===
====India====
Some people in India, mostly in villages, have the belief that witchcraft and black magic are effective. On one hand, people may seek advice from witch doctors for health, financial or marital problems. On the other hand, people, especially women, are accused of witchcraft and attacked, occasionally killed. It has been reported that mostly widows or divorcees are targeted to rob them of their property. Reportedly, revered village witch-doctors are paid to brand specific persons as witches (dayan), so that they can be killed without repercussions. The existing laws have been considered ineffective in curbing the murders. In June 2013, National Commission for Women (NCW) reported that according to National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) statistics, 768 women had been murdered for allegedly practising witchcraft since 2008 and announced plans for newer laws.

=====Recent cases=====
Between 2001 and 2006, an estimated 300 people were killed in the state of Assam. Between 2005 and 2010, about 35 witchcraft related murders reportedly took place in Odisha&#x27;s Sundergarh district. In October 2003, three women were branded as witch and humiliated, afterwards they all committed suicide in Kamalpura village in Muzaffarpur district in Bihar. In August 2013, a couple were hacked to death by a group of people in Kokrajhar district in Assam. In September 2013, in the Jashpur district of Chhattisgarh, a woman was murdered and her daughter was raped on the allegation that they were practising black magic.

A 2010 estimate places the number of women killed as witches in India at between 150 and 200 per year, or a total of 2,500 in the period of 1995 to 2009. The lynchings are particularly common in the poor northern states of Jharkhand, Bihar and the central state of Chhattisgarh.
Witch hunts are also taking place among the tea garden workers in Jalpaiguri district, West Bengal. The witch hunts in Jalpaiguri are less known, but are motivated by the stress in the tea industry on the lives of the Adivasi (tribal) workers.

In India, labeling a woman as a witch is a common ploy to grab land, settle scores or even to punish her for turning down sexual advances. In a majority of the cases, it is difficult for the accused woman to reach out for help and she is forced to either abandon her home and family or driven to commit suicide. Most cases are not documented because it is difficult for poor and illiterate women to travel from isolated regions to file police reports. Less than 2 percent of those accused of witch-hunting are actually convicted, according to a study by the Free Legal Aid Committee, a group that works with victims in the state of Jharkhand.

====Nepal====

Witch-hunts in Nepal are common, and are targeted especially against low-caste women. The main causes of witchcraft-related violence include widespread belief in superstition, lack of education, lack of public awareness, illiteracy, caste system, male domination, and economic dependency of women on men. The victims of this form of violence are often beaten, tortured, publicly humiliated, and murdered. Sometimes, the family members of the accused are also assaulted.
In 2010, Sarwa Dev Prasad Ojha, Minister for Women and Social Welfare, said, &quot;Superstitions are deeply rooted in our society, and the belief in witchcraft is one of the worst forms of this.&quot;

===Sub-Saharan Africa===
In many societies of Sub-Saharan Africa, the fear of witches drives periodic witch-hunts during which specialist witch-finders identify suspects, with death by lynching often the result. Countries particularly affected by this phenomenon include South Africa, Cameroon, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Gambia, Ghana, Kenya, Sierra Leone, Tanzania, and Zambia.

Witch-hunts against children were reported by the BBC in 1999 in the Congo and in Tanzania, where the government responded to attacks on women accused of being witches for having red eyes. A lawsuit was launched in 2001 in Ghana, where witch-hunts are also common, by a woman accused of being a witch. Witch-hunts in Africa are often led by relatives seeking the property of the accused victim.

Audrey I. Richards, in the journal &quot;Africa&quot;, relates in 1935 an instance when a new wave of witchfinders, the &quot;Bamucapi&quot;, appeared in the villages of the Bemba people of Zambia. They dressed in European clothing, and would summon the headman to prepare a ritual meal for the village. When the villagers arrived they would view them all in a mirror, and claimed they could identify witches with this method. These witches would then have to &quot;yield up his horns&quot;; i.e. give over the horn containers for curses and evil potions to the witch-finders. The bamucapi then made all drink a potion called &quot;kucapa&quot; which would cause a witch to die and swell up if he ever tried such things again.

The villagers related that the witch-finders were always right because the witches they found were always the people whom the village had feared all along. The bamucapi utilised a mixture of Christian and native religious traditions to account for their powers and said that God (not specifying which God) helped them to prepare their medicine. In addition, all witches who did not attend the meal to be identified would be called to account later on by their master, who had risen from the dead, and who would force the witches by means of drums to go to the graveyard, where they would die. Richards noted that the bamucapi created the sense of danger in the villages by rounding up &quot;all&quot; the horns in the village, whether they were used for anti-witchcraft charms, potions, snuff or were indeed receptacles of black magic.

The Bemba people believed misfortunes such as wartings, hauntings and famines to be just actions sanctioned by the High-God Lesa. The only agency which caused unjust harm was a witch, who had enormous powers and was hard to detect. After white rule of Africa, beliefs in sorcery and witchcraft grew, possibly because of the social strain caused by new ideas, customs and laws, and also because the courts no longer allowed witches to be tried.

Amongst the Bantu tribes of Southern Africa, the witch smellers were responsible for detecting witches. In parts of Southern Africa, several hundred people have been killed in witch-hunts since 1990.

Cameroon has re-established witchcraft-accusations in courts after its independence in 1967.

It was reported on 21 May 2008 that in Kenya a mob had burnt to death at least 11 people accused of witchcraft.

In March 2009, Amnesty International reported that up to 1,000 people in the Gambia had been abducted by government-sponsored &quot;witch doctors&quot; on charges of witchcraft, and taken to detention centers where they were forced to drink poisonous concoctions. On 21 May 2009, &quot;The New York Times&quot; reported that the alleged witch-hunting campaign had been sparked by the Gambian President, Yahya Jammeh.

In Sierra Leone, the witch-hunt is an occasion for a sermon by the &quot;kɛmamɔi&quot; (native Mende witch-finder) on social ethics : &quot;Witchcraft ... takes hold in people&#x27;s lives when people are less than fully open-hearted. All wickedness is ultimately because people hate each other or are jealous or suspicious or afraid. These emotions and motivations cause people to act antisocially&quot;. The response by the populace to the &quot;kɛmamɔi&quot; is that &quot;they valued his work and would learn the lessons he came to teach them, about social responsibility and cooperation.&quot;
==Use of the term in other contexts==
The term &#x27;witch-hunt&#x27; can be used in contexts other than witchcraft, to describe an irrational search for alleged offenders who then become the victims of the witch-hunt. Examples include Stalinist witch-hunts and McCarthyite witch-hunts. Researcher James Morone wrote that &quot;What makes a witch hunt is not the witches (or the communists or the child molesters). Rather, it is the hunters&#x27; willingness to toss aside the normal rules of justice.&quot;

In politics, the term may be used to suggest that a person or group is being oppressed or ostracised. &quot;The Telegraph&quot; has compared cancel culture to &quot;modern-day witch trials&quot;. 45th and current U.S. President Donald Trump frequently used the term on Twitter, referring to various investigations and the impeachment proceedings against him as witch-hunts. During his presidency he used the phrase over 330 times. The National Rifle Association of America used the term in an unsuccessful bid to dismiss the New York attorney general&#x27;s lawsuit against the organization for alleged fraud.

== List of witch trials ==

* Aberdeen witch trials of 1596–1597

* Akershus witch trials

* Amersfoort and Utrecht witch trials
* Baden-Baden witch trials
* Basque witch trials
* Bideford witch trial
* Bo&#x27;ness witches
* Bredevoort witch trials
* Bury St Edmunds witch trials
* Channel Islands Witch Trials
* Copenhagen witch trials
* Derenburg witch trials
* Doruchów witch trial
* Eichstätt witch trials
* Ellwangen witch trial
* Esslingen witch trials
* Fulda witch trials
* Fürsteneck witch trial
* Geneva witch trials
* Great Scottish Witch Hunt of 1597
* Great Scottish witch hunt of 1649–50
* Great Scottish Witch Hunt of 1661–62
* Islandmagee witch trial
* Kasina Wielka witch trial
* Kastelholm witch trials
* Katarina witch trials
* Kirkjuból witch trial
* Liechtenstein witch trials
* Lisbon witch trial
* Lukh witch trials
* Mergentheim witch trials
* Mirandola witch trials
* Mora witch trial
* Newcastle witch trials
* Nogaredo witch trial
* North Berwick witch trials
* Northamptonshire witch trials
* Northern Moravia witch trials
* Orkney witch trials
* Paisley witches
* Pappenheimer witch trial
* Pittenweem witches
* Pendle witches
* Põlula witch trials
* Ramsele witch trial
* Roermond witch trial
* Rosborg witch trials
* Rottenburg witch trials
* Rottweil Witch Trials
* Rugård witch trials
* Salem witch trials
* Spa witch trial
* St Osyth Witches
* Szeged witch trials
* Terrassa witch trials
* Thisted witch trial
* Torsåker witch trials
* Trier witch trials
* Valais witch trials
* Val Camonica witch trials
* Vardø witch trials (1621)
* Vardø witch trials (1651–1653)
* Vardø witch trials (1662–1663) as part of the Christianization of the Sámi people
* Wiesensteig witch trial
* Witches of Warboys
* Würzburg witch trials
== See also ==
==Footnotes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* Andreassen, Reidun Laura and Liv Helene Willumsen (eds.), &quot;Steilneset Memorial. Art Architecture History&quot;. Stamsund: Orkana, 2014. 
* Behringer, Wolfgang. &quot;Witches and Witch Hunts: A Global History.&quot; Malden Massachusetts: Polity Press, 2004.
* Briggs, K.M. &quot;Pale Hecate&#x27;s Team, an Examination of the Beliefs on Witchcraft and Magic among Shakespeare&#x27;s Contemporaries and His Immediate Successors&quot;. New York: The Humanities Press, 1962.
* Briggs, Robin. &#x27;Many reasons why&#x27;: witchcraft and the problem of multiple explanation, in &quot;Witchcraft in Early Modern Europe. Studies in Culture and Belief&quot;, ed. Jonathan Barry, Marianne Hester, and Gareth Roberts, Cambridge University Press, 1996.
* Burns, William E. &quot;Witch hunts in Europe and America: an encyclopedia&quot; (2003)
* Cohn, Norman. &quot;Europe&#x27;s Inner Demons: An Enquiry Inspired by the Great Witch-Hunt&quot; (1975), Revised Edition: &quot;Europe&#x27;s Inner Demons: The Demonization of Christians in Medieval Christendom,&quot; Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1993.
* Durrant, Jonathan B. &quot;Witchcraft, Gender, and Society in Early Modern Germany&quot;, Leiden: Brill, 2007.
* Golden, William, ed. &quot;Encyclopedia of Witchcraft: The Western Tradition&quot; (4 vol. 2006) 1270pp; 758 short essays by scholars.
* Gouges, Linnea de, &quot;Witch hunts and State Building in Early Modern Europe&quot; (2018)
* Klaits, Joseph. &quot;Servants of Satan: The Age of the Witch Hunts.&quot; Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1985
* Levack, Brian P. &quot;The Great Scottish Witch Hunt of 1661–1662&quot;, The Journal of British Studies, Vol. 20, No, 1. (Autumn, 1980), pp. 90–108.
* Levack, Brian P. &quot;The witch hunt in early modern Europe&quot;, 3rd ed., London and New York: Longman, 2006.
* Macfarlane, Alan. &quot;Witchcraft in Tudor and Stuart England: A regional and Comparative Study&quot;. New York and Evanston: Harper &amp; Row Publishers, 1970.
* Midlefort, Erick H.C. &quot;Witch Hunting in Southeastern Germany 1562–1684: The Social and Intellectual Foundation.&quot; California: Stanford University Press, 1972. 
* Oberman, H. A., J. D. Tracy, Thomas A. Brady (eds.), &quot;Handbook of European History, 1400–1600: Visions, Programs, Outcomes&quot; (1995) 
* Oldridge, Darren (ed.), &quot;The Witchcraft Reader&quot; (2002) 
* Poole, Robert. &quot;The Lancashire Witches: Histories and Stories&quot; (2002) 
* Purkiss, Diane. &quot;A Holocaust of One&#x27;s Own: The Myth of the Burning Times.&quot; Chapter in &quot;The Witch and History: Early Modern and Twentieth Century Representatives&quot; New York: Routledge, 1996, pp. 7–29.
* Robisheaux, Thomas. &quot;The Last Witch of Langenburg: Murder in a German Village.&quot; New York: W.W. Norton &amp; Co. (2009) 
* Sagan, Carl. &quot;The Demon-Haunted World&quot;, Random House, 1996. 
* David W. Thompson, &quot;Sister Witch: The Life of Moll Dyer&quot; (2017 Solstice Publishing) 
* Thurston, Robert. &quot;The Witch Hunts: A History of the Witch Persecutions in Europe and North America&quot;. Pearson/Longman, 2007.
* Purkiss, Diane. &quot;The Bottom of the Garden, Dark History of Fairies, Hobgoblins, and Other Troublesome Things.&quot; Chapter 3 &quot;Brith and Death: Fairies in Scottish Witch-trials&quot; New York: New York University Press, 2000, pp. 85–115.
* West, Robert H. &quot;Reginald Scot and Renaissance Writings&quot;. Boston: Twayne Publishers, 1984.
* Willumsen, Liv Helene. &quot;The Witchcraft Trials in Finnmark, Northern Norway&quot;. Bergen: Skald, 2010. 
* Willumsen, Liv Helene. &quot;Witches of the North:Scotland and Finnmark&quot;. Leiden: Brill, 2013. . E-
* Winkler, Albert (2023) &quot;Judicial Murder: The Witch-Craze in Germany and Switzerland,&quot; &quot;Swiss American Historical Society Review&quot;, Vol. 59: No. 1, Available at: https://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/sahs_review/vol59/iss1/2

==External links==
* 1913 &quot;Catholic Encyclopedia&quot; entry on &quot;Witchcraft&quot;
* Douglas Linder (2005), A Brief History of Witchcraft Persecutions before Salem</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188494" start="2" end="12" title="Witch hunt" label="witch hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q188494" start="19" end="30" title="Witch hunt" label="witch purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="113" end="123" title="witchcraft" label="witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999796" start="151" end="163" title="Incantation" label="incantations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="230" end="241" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="246" end="261" title="medieval Europe" label="medieval Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="315" end="321" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147871" start="344" end="375" title="Witch trials in the early modern period" label="intensive period of witch-hunts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483107" start="389" end="408" title="Early Modern Europe" label="Early Modern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="433" end="449" title="European Colonization of the Americas" label="Colonial America"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="517" end="536" title="Counter Reformation" label="Counter Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="545" end="567" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="740" end="746" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="751" end="755" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="806" end="824" title="sub-Saharan Africa" label="sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="829" end="845" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="909" end="921" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="923" end="931" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="936" end="948" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914277" start="1232" end="1243" title="moral panic" label="moral panic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4532199" start="1256" end="1269" title="mass hysteria" label="mass hysteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="1481" end="1496" title="anthropological" label="anthropological"/>
<link wikidata="Q136783" start="1541" end="1546" title="magical thinking" label="magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043197" start="1551" end="1561" title="divination" label="divination"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="2045" end="2063" title="age of exploration" label="Age of Exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="2563" end="2568" title="Magic (paranormal)" label="magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q922203" start="2598" end="2606" title="law code" label="law code"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="2646" end="2651" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="2656" end="2665" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q93304" start="2707" end="2724" title="Code of Hammurabi" label="Code of Hammurabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q600281" start="2742" end="2758" title="short chronology" label="short chronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="2781" end="2793" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q42614" start="2812" end="2823" title="Deuteronomy" label="Deuteronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q215909" start="2978" end="2983" title="augur" label="augur"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="2990" end="2998" title="Magician (paranormal)" label="sorcerer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9190" start="3163" end="3169" title="Book of Exodus" label="Exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q181620" start="3258" end="3266" title="1 Samuel" label="1 Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q28730" start="3285" end="3289" title="Saul" label="Saul"/>
<link wikidata="Q4205363" start="3462" end="3482" title="Second Temple Judaism" label="Second Temple period"/>
<link wikidata="Q338378" start="3490" end="3508" title="Simeon ben Shetach" label="Simeon ben Shetach"/>
<link wikidata="Q104664899" start="3639" end="3646" title="Ascalon" label="Ascalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q335560" start="4123" end="4131" title="Antiphon (orator)" label="Antiphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25327034" start="4152" end="4188" title="Against the Stepmother for Poisoning" label="Against the Stepmother for Poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q29526216" start="4522" end="4539" title="Theoris of Lemnos" label="Theoris of Lemnos"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="4679" end="4684" title="Ancient Roman religion" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="4692" end="4704" title="ancient Rome" label="ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="4758" end="4763" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny"/>
<link wikidata="Q25339" start="4769" end="4783" title="5th century BC" label="5th century BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q203686" start="4796" end="4809" title="Twelve Tables" label="Twelve Tables"/>
<link wikidata="Q98398735" start="4992" end="5013" title="Gaius Furius Cresimus" label="Gaius Furius Cresimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q253854" start="5020" end="5035" title="Classical Latin" label="Classical Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087695" start="5465" end="5471" title="Ronald Hutton" label="Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="5488" end="5505" title="Roman Republic" label="Republican Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q10317764" start="5599" end="5636" title="Lex Cornelia de sicariis et veneficis" label="Lex Cornelia de sicariis et veneficis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="5855" end="5863" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q664251" start="6019" end="6034" title="Sibylline Books" label="Sibylline Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="6344" end="6356" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6429" end="6441" title="Early centers of Christianity#Rome" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11903" start="6688" end="6695" title="Hypatia" label="Hypatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44079" start="6758" end="6777" title="Cyril of Alexandria" label="Cyril of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q336198" start="7022" end="7043" title="Socrates Scholasticus" label="Socrates Scholasticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250583" start="7113" end="7119" title="Getica" label="Getica"/>
<link wikidata="Q131548" start="7129" end="7137" title="Jordanes" label="Jordanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="7195" end="7200" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="7244" end="7248" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413462" start="7274" end="7281" title="Filimer" label="Filimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262455" start="7315" end="7321" title="Synod of Elvira" label="Elvira"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985432" start="7332" end="7338" title="Synod of Ancyra" label="Ancyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q862495" start="7353" end="7359" title="Quinisext Council" label="Trullo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="7528" end="7543" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q337935" start="7599" end="7609" title="necromancy" label="necromancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176473" start="7641" end="7661" title="Council of Paderborn" label="Council of Paderborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033567" start="7853" end="7867" title="Canon Episcopi" label="Canon Episcopi"/>
<link wikidata="Q395171" start="8107" end="8123" title="Agobard" label="Agobard of Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q83066" start="8135" end="8167" title="Coloman, King of Hungary" label="King Kálmán (Coloman) of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q62668" start="8333" end="8358" title="Burchard, Bishop of Worms" label="Burchard, Bishop of Worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249918" start="8558" end="8564" title="potion" label="potion"/>
<link wikidata="Q378070" start="9019" end="9025" title="incubi" label="incubi"/>
<link wikidata="Q715822" start="9030" end="9037" title="succubi" label="succubi"/>
<link wikidata="Q133063" start="9227" end="9243" title="Pope Gregory VII" label="Pope Gregory VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q225212" start="9268" end="9289" title="Harald III of Denmark" label="Harald III of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q573211" start="9652" end="9658" title="Christianization of Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918826" start="9687" end="9707" title="Serapion of Vladimir" label="Serapion of Vladimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="9881" end="9899" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="10245" end="10265" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Saint Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540656" start="10498" end="10504" title="goetia" label="goetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q102323" start="11102" end="11118" title="Snorri Sturluson" label="Snorri Sturluson"/>
<link wikidata="Q213801" start="11125" end="11140" title="Olaf Tryggvason" label="Olaf Trygvasson"/>
<link wikidata="Q170017" start="11412" end="11421" title="Athelstan" label="Athelstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="11497" end="11512" title="Roman civil law" label="Roman civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q170503" start="11546" end="11561" title="Pope Nicholas I" label="Pope Nicholas I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760625" start="11655" end="11681" title="Pseudo-Isidorian Decretals" label="Pseudo-Isidorian Decretals"/>
<link wikidata="Q43173" start="11745" end="11756" title="Inquisition" label="Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q43173" start="11951" end="11962" title="Inquisition" label="Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q161696" start="11997" end="12004" title="Cathars" label="Cathars"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="12216" end="12231" title="Knights Templar" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q169915" start="12374" end="12391" title="Pope Alexander IV" label="Pope Alexander IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="12503" end="12517" title="Pope John XXII" label="Pope John XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128765" start="12706" end="12721" title="Madonna Oriente" label="Madonna Oriente"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="12742" end="12747" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q132543" start="12873" end="12878" title="Diana (mythology)" label="Diana"/>
<link wikidata="Q290705" start="13125" end="13151" title="Hermann II, Count of Celje" label="Hermann II, Count of Celje"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922527" start="13180" end="13200" title="Veronika of Desenice" label="Veronika of Desenice"/>
<link wikidata="Q316295" start="13605" end="13624" title="Bernardino of Siena" label="Bernardino of Siena"/>
<link wikidata="Q4201115" start="14491" end="14511" title="trial of Joan of Arc" label="trial of Joan of Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821239" start="14899" end="14911" title="Last Judgment" label="Judgment Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312469" start="15321" end="15342" title="Renaissance magic" label="Renaissance occultism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068640" start="15463" end="15476" title="folk religion" label="folk religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q321032" start="15740" end="15756" title="Council of Basel" label="Council of Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q426025" start="15777" end="15791" title="Duchy of Savoy" label="Duchy of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q161351" start="15948" end="15966" title="Pope Innocent VIII" label="Pope Innocent VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064618" start="15980" end="16010" title="Summis desiderantes affectibus" label="Summis desiderantes affectibus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="16020" end="16030" title="Papal bull" label="Papal bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q61019" start="16225" end="16240" title="Heinrich Kramer" label="Heinrich Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q64162" start="16350" end="16367" title="Ludwig von Pastor" label="Ludwig von Pastor"/>
<link wikidata="Q208556" start="16536" end="16555" title="Malleus Maleficarum" label="Malleus Maleficarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483107" start="17004" end="17023" title="Early Modern Europe" label="Early Modern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="17250" end="17272" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="17529" end="17539" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q133363" start="17635" end="17642" title="Satanism" label="Satanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061047" start="17695" end="17720" title="Blood libel" label="cannibalistic infanticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="17742" end="17748" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34623" start="17784" end="17800" title="Ten Commandments" label="Ten Commandments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134057" start="17860" end="17877" title="Lèse majesté" label="violating majesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q10531945" start="18572" end="18595" title="Wiesensteig witch trial" label="first major persecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="19262" end="19273" title="Protestant Reformation" label="reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q153586" start="19283" end="19306" title="Christian IV of Denmark" label="Christian IV of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="19390" end="19400" title="witchcraft" label="witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364941" start="19685" end="19704" title="Witchcraft Act 1541" label="Witchcraft Act 1541"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491168" start="19752" end="19778" title="North Berwick witch trials" label="North Berwick witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="19865" end="19885" title="James I of England" label="James VI of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q158248" start="19995" end="20010" title="Anne of Denmark" label="Anne of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3011799" start="20212" end="20224" title="Daemonologie" label="Daemonologie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044650" start="20354" end="20373" title="Pendle witch trials" label="Pendle witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239699" start="20545" end="20560" title="Matthew Hopkins" label="Matthew Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="20729" end="20746" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q942936" start="21078" end="21096" title="Witches&amp;#x27; mark" label="Witches&amp;#x27; mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q461943" start="21098" end="21127" title="Cucking stool" label="the &amp;quot;swimming&amp;quot; test"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242689" start="21133" end="21150" title="Pricking" label="pricking the skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="21447" end="21464" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="American colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759570" start="21492" end="21506" title="Margaret Jones (Puritan midwife)" label="Margaret Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="21538" end="21551" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q219698" start="21772" end="21790" title="Salem witch trials" label="Salem witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="21792" end="21818" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="21867" end="21877" title="witchcraft" label="witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079909" start="22206" end="22230" title="Province of Massachusetts Bay" label="Massachusetts Bay Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007213" start="22352" end="22363" title="New England Colonies" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q219698" start="22398" end="22416" title="Salem witch trials" label="Salem witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q719711" start="23334" end="23347" title="Johannes Wier" label="Johannes Wier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138020" start="23361" end="23374" title="Reginald Scot" label="Reginald Scot"/>
<link wikidata="Q96008" start="23388" end="23402" title="Cornelius Loos" label="Cornelius Loos"/>
<link wikidata="Q57337" start="23416" end="23432" title="Anton Praetorius" label="Anton Praetorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734513" start="23446" end="23468" title="Alonso Salazar y Frías" label="Alonso Salazar y Frías"/>
<link wikidata="Q77283" start="23482" end="23496" title="Friedrich Spee" label="Friedrich Spee"/>
<link wikidata="Q805597" start="23514" end="23530" title="Balthasar Bekker" label="Balthasar Bekker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841446" start="23604" end="23622" title="Trier witch trials" label="Trier witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507833" start="23640" end="23658" title="Fulda witch trials" label="Fulda witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q322741" start="23676" end="23696" title="Würzburg witch trial" label="Würzburg witch trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853364" start="23717" end="23737" title="Bamberg witch trials" label="Bamberg witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189956" start="24315" end="24327" title="denunciation" label="denunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q203607" start="24781" end="24788" title="guilder" label="guilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q67158" start="24847" end="24863" title="Katharina Kepler" label="Katharina Kepler"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963" start="24894" end="24909" title="Johannes Kepler" label="Johannes Kepler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227570" start="25028" end="25048" title="duchy of Württemberg" label="duchy of Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689" start="26332" end="26337" title="Åland" label="Åland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18156897" start="26708" end="26728" title="nine million witches" label="nine million witches"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588016" start="26878" end="26903" title="Gottfried Christian Voigt" label="Gottfried Christian Voigt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364941" start="27018" end="27033" title="Witchcraft Acts" label="Witchcraft Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q841236" start="27102" end="27115" title="incarceration" label="incarceration"/>
<link wikidata="Q206384" start="27352" end="27366" title="Joseph Addison" label="Joseph Addison"/>
<link wikidata="Q16206712" start="27588" end="27599" title="Jane Wenham (alleged witch)" label="Jane Wenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6153399" start="27725" end="27736" title="Janet Horne" label="Janet Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027891" start="27805" end="27824" title="Witchcraft Act 1735" label="Witchcraft Act 1735"/>
<link wikidata="Q35230" start="27978" end="27983" title="Satan" label="Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q829348" start="28068" end="28081" title="Spiritualism (movement)" label="spiritualists"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28086" end="28093" title="Names of the Romani people#Gypsy and gipsy" label="gypsies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768708" start="28266" end="28277" title="Anna Palles" label="Anna Palles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956804" start="28324" end="28342" title="Johanne Nilsdatter" label="Johanne Nilsdatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766988" start="28366" end="28382" title="Anna Eriksdotter" label="Anna Eriksdotter"/>
<link wikidata="Q98648488" start="28508" end="28521" title="Louis Debaraz" label="Louis Debaraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q109943207" start="28610" end="28623" title="Magda Logomer" label="Magda Logomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q87150" start="28772" end="28787" title="Anna Maria Schwegelin" label="Anna Schwegelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q543840" start="28791" end="28798" title="Imperial Ducal Abbey of Kempten" label="Kempten"/>
<link wikidata="Q15214805" start="28881" end="28901" title="Doruchów witch trial" label="Doruchów witch trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q268" start="29154" end="29160" title="Poznań" label="Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q123561" start="29171" end="29181" title="Anna Göldi" label="Anna Göldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q63912" start="29198" end="29204" title="Glarus" label="Glarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q276500" start="29230" end="29243" title="Barbara Zdunk" label="Barbara Zdunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q116675949" start="29524" end="29546" title="witch-hunting in India" label="witch-hunting in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523493" start="29663" end="29681" title="Singhbhum" label="Singhbhum District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105374" start="29689" end="29710" title="Chota Nagpur Division" label="Chota Nagpur Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001966" start="29714" end="29733" title="Company rule in India" label="Company-ruled India"/>
<link wikidata="Q357670" start="29954" end="29961" title="adivasi" label="adivasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260346" start="29984" end="29992" title="Santhals" label="Santhals"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="30688" end="30706" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747293" start="30750" end="30757" title="History of Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604565" start="30759" end="30768" title="Rajputana Agency" label="Rajputana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105374" start="30773" end="30794" title="Chota Nagpur Division" label="Chota Nagpur Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q129864" start="31152" end="31176" title="Indian Rebellion of 1857" label="Indian Rebellion of 1857"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="31363" end="31368" title="magic (paranormal)" label="magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q486775" start="31421" end="31429" title="lynching" label="lynching"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="31487" end="31505" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="31512" end="31524" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="31709" end="31714" title="death penalty" label="death"/>
<link wikidata="Q132551" start="31794" end="31839" title="United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees" label="United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q81867" start="32002" end="32008" title="albino" label="albino"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="32018" end="32021" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582471" start="32213" end="32229" title="social cleansing" label="social cleansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q172663" start="32475" end="32483" title="exorcism" label="exorcism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="32617" end="32621" title="ISIS" label="ISIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q239097" start="32713" end="32724" title="Deir ez-Zor" label="Deir ez-Zor"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="32929" end="32941" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="33311" end="33329" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117217" start="33525" end="33536" title="Fawza Falih" label="Fawza Falih"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724877" start="34361" end="34370" title="Ali Hussain Sibat" label="Ali Sibat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471266" start="35015" end="35031" title="Al Jawf Province" label="Al Jawf Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q464718" start="35210" end="35225" title="Najran Province" label="Najran Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420463" start="35324" end="35337" title="faith healing" label="faith healing"/>
<link wikidata="Q690768" start="35455" end="35478" title="black magic" label="&amp;quot;black&amp;quot; magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="37024" end="37029" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="37072" end="37082" title="witchcraft" label="witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q690768" start="37087" end="37098" title="black magic" label="black magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728601" start="37504" end="37509" title="Dayan (witch)" label="dayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595491" start="37651" end="37680" title="National Commission for Women" label="National Commission for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971999" start="37714" end="37743" title="National Crime Records Bureau" label="National Crime Records Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="37973" end="37978" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="38064" end="38070" title="Odisha" label="Odisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296047" start="38078" end="38097" title="Sundergarh district" label="Sundergarh district"/>
<link wikidata="Q77731" start="38228" end="38248" title="Muzaffarpur district" label="Muzaffarpur district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="38252" end="38257" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q42618" start="38329" end="38347" title="Kokrajhar district" label="Kokrajhar district"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577551" start="38384" end="38400" title="Jashpur district" label="Jashpur district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168" start="38404" end="38416" title="Chhattisgarh" label="Chhattisgarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058785" start="38728" end="38743" title="North India" label="northern states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184" start="38747" end="38756" title="Jharkhand" label="Jharkhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="38758" end="38763" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q29024970" start="38772" end="38785" title="Central India" label="central state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168" start="38789" end="38801" title="Chhattisgarh" label="Chhattisgarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351487" start="38869" end="38888" title="Jalpaiguri district" label="Jalpaiguri district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="38890" end="38901" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q357670" start="39021" end="39028" title="Adivasi" label="Adivasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="39722" end="39727" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q118169" start="39940" end="39952" title="Caste system in Nepal" label="caste system"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="40425" end="40443" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q486775" start="40564" end="40572" title="lynching" label="lynching"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="40650" end="40662" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="40664" end="40672" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="40678" end="40710" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005" start="40716" end="40722" title="Gambia" label="Gambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="40724" end="40729" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="40731" end="40736" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="40738" end="40750" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="40752" end="40760" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="40766" end="40772" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q548029" start="41171" end="41189" title="Audrey I. Richards" label="Audrey I. Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q644450" start="41345" end="41357" title="Bemba people" label="Bemba people"/>
<link wikidata="Q35197" start="41532" end="41538" title="mirror" label="mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q65284752" start="41682" end="41686" title="horn (anatomy)" label="horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q109411" start="41702" end="41707" title="curse" label="curse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249918" start="41718" end="41724" title="potion" label="potion"/>
<link wikidata="Q101971" start="42782" end="42786" title="wart" label="wart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396560" start="42792" end="42800" title="haunting" label="haunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="42806" end="42812" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q173371" start="43193" end="43198" title="Bantu peoples" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027873" start="43230" end="43243" title="witch smeller" label="witch smeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="43382" end="43390" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q468455" start="43531" end="43545" title="burnt to death" label="burnt to death"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="43875" end="43893" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q57356" start="43992" end="44004" title="Yahya Jammeh" label="Yahya Jammeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262400" start="44102" end="44107" title="Mende people" label="Mende"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="44842" end="44851" title="Stalinist" label="Stalinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q207066" start="44868" end="44879" title="McCarthyite" label="McCarthyite"/>
<link wikidata="Q186240" start="45205" end="45215" title="Ostracism" label="ostracised"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="45223" end="45236" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q60297962" start="45256" end="45270" title="cancel culture" label="cancel culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="45343" end="45355" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q132736414" start="45381" end="45391" title="Twitter use by Donald Trump" label="on Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q863259" start="45550" end="45587" title="National Rifle Association of America" label="National Rifle Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013056" start="45640" end="45665" title="New York attorney general" label="New York attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="Q122810708" start="45756" end="45790" title="Aberdeen witch trials of 1596–1597" label="Aberdeen witch trials of 1596–1597"/>
<link wikidata="Q106606915" start="45794" end="45815" title="Akershus witch trials" label="Akershus witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841151" start="45819" end="45854" title="Amersfoort and Utrecht witch trials" label="Amersfoort and Utrecht witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q123196024" start="45857" end="45881" title="Baden-Baden witch trials" label="Baden-Baden witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822327" start="45884" end="45903" title="Basque witch trials" label="Basque witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904100" start="45906" end="45926" title="Bideford witch trial" label="Bideford witch trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q106040751" start="45929" end="45949" title="Bo&amp;#x27;ness witches" label="Bo&amp;#x27;ness witches"/>
<link wikidata="Q13723773" start="45952" end="45975" title="Bredevoort witch trials" label="Bredevoort witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406530" start="45978" end="46006" title="Bury St Edmunds witch trials" label="Bury St Edmunds witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072411" start="46009" end="46037" title="Channel Islands Witch Trials" label="Channel Islands Witch Trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q106519056" start="46040" end="46063" title="Copenhagen witch trials" label="Copenhagen witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q15815515" start="46066" end="46088" title="Derenburg witch trials" label="Derenburg witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q15214805" start="46091" end="46111" title="Doruchów witch trial" label="Doruchów witch trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q14538006" start="46114" end="46136" title="Eichstätt witch trials" label="Eichstätt witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q875525" start="46139" end="46160" title="Ellwangen witch trial" label="Ellwangen witch trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q30055920" start="46163" end="46185" title="Esslingen witch trials" label="Esslingen witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507833" start="46188" end="46206" title="Fulda witch trials" label="Fulda witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616823" start="46209" end="46231" title="Fürsteneck witch trial" label="Fürsteneck witch trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q106676445" start="46234" end="46253" title="Geneva witch trials" label="Geneva witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737928" start="46256" end="46289" title="Great Scottish Witch Hunt of 1597" label="Great Scottish Witch Hunt of 1597"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840272" start="46292" end="46328" title="Great Scottish witch hunt of 1649–50" label="Great Scottish witch hunt of 1649–50"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737930" start="46331" end="46367" title="Great Scottish Witch Hunt of 1661–62" label="Great Scottish Witch Hunt of 1661–62"/>
<link wikidata="Q6083679" start="46370" end="46393" title="Islandmagee witch trial" label="Islandmagee witch trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q60761876" start="46396" end="46421" title="Kasina Wielka witch trial" label="Kasina Wielka witch trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q10531947" start="46424" end="46447" title="Kastelholm witch trials" label="Kastelholm witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q18290825" start="46450" end="46471" title="Katarina witch trials" label="Katarina witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q10531934" start="46474" end="46495" title="Kirkjuból witch trial" label="Kirkjuból witch trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544053" start="46498" end="46524" title="Liechtenstein witch trials" label="Liechtenstein witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q25036174" start="46527" end="46545" title="Lisbon witch trial" label="Lisbon witch trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q106510637" start="46548" end="46565" title="Lukh witch trials" label="Lukh witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q30055778" start="46568" end="46592" title="Mergentheim witch trials" label="Mergentheim witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q61717757" start="46595" end="46617" title="Mirandola witch trials" label="Mirandola witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908907" start="46620" end="46636" title="Mora witch trial" label="Mora witch trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q131008106" start="46639" end="46661" title="Newcastle witch trials" label="Newcastle witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406532" start="46664" end="46684" title="Nogaredo witch trial" label="Nogaredo witch trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491168" start="46687" end="46713" title="North Berwick witch trials" label="North Berwick witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057685" start="46716" end="46745" title="Northamptonshire witch trials" label="Northamptonshire witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616830" start="46748" end="46777" title="Northern Moravia witch trials" label="Northern Moravia witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46780" end="46799" title="Witchcraft in Orkney#Early trials" label="Orkney witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q7125224" start="46802" end="46817" title="Paisley witches" label="Paisley witches"/>
<link wikidata="Q367436" start="46820" end="46844" title="Pappenheimer witch trial" label="Pappenheimer witch trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q29586951" start="46847" end="46865" title="Pittenweem witches" label="Pittenweem witches"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044650" start="46868" end="46882" title="Pendle witches" label="Pendle witches"/>
<link wikidata="Q28755582" start="46885" end="46904" title="Põlula witch trials" label="Põlula witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q7290177" start="46907" end="46926" title="Ramsele witch trial" label="Ramsele witch trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464478" start="46929" end="46949" title="Roermond witch trial" label="Roermond witch trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q10531946" start="46952" end="46972" title="Rosborg witch trials" label="Rosborg witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q31898428" start="46975" end="46998" title="Rottenburg witch trials" label="Rottenburg witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q65117521" start="47001" end="47022" title="Rottweil Witch Trials" label="Rottweil Witch Trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378634" start="47025" end="47044" title="Rugård witch trials" label="Rugård witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q219698" start="47047" end="47065" title="Salem witch trials" label="Salem witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572163" start="47068" end="47083" title="Spa witch trial" label="Spa witch trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595028" start="47086" end="47102" title="St Osyth Witches" label="St Osyth Witches"/>
<link wikidata="Q7664530" start="47105" end="47124" title="Szeged witch trials" label="Szeged witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814119" start="47127" end="47148" title="Terrassa witch trials" label="Terrassa witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786479" start="47151" end="47170" title="Thisted witch trial" label="Thisted witch trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359120" start="47173" end="47194" title="Torsåker witch trials" label="Torsåker witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841446" start="47197" end="47215" title="Trier witch trials" label="Trier witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382293" start="47218" end="47237" title="Valais witch trials" label="Valais witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q3975974" start="47240" end="47265" title="Val Camonica witch trials" label="Val Camonica witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915579" start="47268" end="47293" title="Vardø witch trials (1621)" label="Vardø witch trials (1621)"/>
<link wikidata="Q106401851" start="47296" end="47326" title="Vardø witch trials (1651–1653)" label="Vardø witch trials (1651–1653)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915577" start="47329" end="47359" title="Vardø witch trials (1662–1663)" label="Vardø witch trials (1662–1663)"/>
<link wikidata="Q56300360" start="47375" end="47410" title="Christianization of the Sámi people" label="Christianization of the Sámi people"/>
<link wikidata="Q10531945" start="47413" end="47436" title="Wiesensteig witch trial" label="Wiesensteig witch trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027923" start="47439" end="47457" title="Witches of Warboys" label="Witches of Warboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q322741" start="47460" end="47481" title="Würzburg witch trials" label="Würzburg witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412083" start="48407" end="48478" title="Europe&amp;#x27;s Inner Demons" label="Europe&amp;#x27;s Inner Demons: An Enquiry Inspired by the Great Witch-Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294876" start="49198" end="49224" title="Journal of British Studies" label="Journal of British Studies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58930" wikidata="Q986141" url="?curid=58930" title="Timeline of Solar System astronomy">
<text>The following is a timeline of Solar System astronomy and science. It includes the advances in the knowledge of the Earth at planetary scale, as part of it.
==Direct observation==

Humans (&quot;Homo sapiens&quot;) have inhabited the Earth in the last 300,000 years at least, and they had witnessed directly observable astronomical and geological phenomena. For millennia, these have arose admiration and curiosity, being admitted as of nature and scale. Multiple imaginative interpretations were being fixed in oral traditions of difficult dating, and incorporated into a variety of belief systems, as animism, shamanism, mythology, religion and/or philosophy.

Although such phenomena are not &quot;discoveries&quot; &quot;per se&quot;, as they are part of the common human experience, their observation shape the knowledge and comprehension of the world around us, and about its position in the observable universe, in which the Sun plays a role of outmost importance for us. What today is known to be the Solar System was regarded for generations as the contents of the &quot;whole universe&quot;.

The most relevant phenomena of these kind are:

* Basic gravity. Following the trajectory of free falling objects, the Earth is &quot;below&quot; us and the sky is &quot;above&quot; us.
* Characterization of the terrestrial surface, in four main types of terrain: lands covered with vegetation; dry deserts; bodies of liquid water, both salted (seas and oceans) and fresh (rivers and lakes); and frozen landscapes (glaciars, polar ice caps). Recognition of emerged lands and submerged ones. Recognition of mountain ranges and cavities (grottos and caverns).
* Characterization of the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere and its associated meteorological phenomena: clouds, rain, hail and snow; wind, storms and thunderstorms, tornadoes and hurricanes/cyclones/typhoons; fluvial floods, deluges and landslides; rainbows and halos; mirages; glacial ages.
* Diurnal apparent movement of the Sun: sunrise, noon and sunset. Recognition of the four cardinal points: north, south, east, and west.
* Nightly apparent movement of the celestial sphere with its main features regarded as &quot;fixed&quot;: stars, the brightest of them forming casual groupings known as constellations, under different names and shapes in many cultures. Different constellations are viewed in different seasons and latitudes. Along with the faint strip of the Milky Way, they altogether conform the idea of the firmament, which as viewed from Earth it seems to be a consistent, solid unit rotating smooth and uniformly. This leads to the intuitive idea of a geocentric universe.
* Presence of the Moon, with its phases. Tides. Recognition of meteorological phenomena as sub-lunar.
* Yearly apparent transit of the Sun through the constellations of the zodiac. Recognition of the lunar cycle as a (lunar) month, and the solar cycle as the (solar) year, the basis for calendars.
* Observation of non-fixed or &quot;wandering&quot; objects in the night sky: the five classical planets; shooting stars and meteor showers; bolides; comets; auroras; zodiacal light.
* Solar and lunar eclipses. Planetary conjunctions.
* Identification of the frigid, temperate and torrid zones of the Earth by latitude. Equator and Tropics. Four seasons in temperate zones: spring, summer, autumn and winter. Equinoxes and solstices. Monsoons. Midnight sun.
* Telluric phenomena: seismic (earthquakes and seaquakes; tsunamis). Geysers. Volcanoes.

Along with an indeterminate number of unregistered sightings of rare events: meteor impacts; novae and supernovae.

==Antiquity==

* 2nd millennium BCE – Earliest possible date for the composition of the Babylonian Venus tablet of Ammisaduqa, a 7th-century BC copy of a list of observations of the motions of the planet Venus, and the oldest planetary table currently known.
* 2nd millennium BCE – Babylonian astronomers identify the inner planets Mercury and Venus and the outer planets Mars, Jupiter and Saturn, which would remain the only known planets until the invention of the telescope in early modern times.
* Late 2nd millennium BCE – Chinese astronomers record a solar eclipse during the reign of Zhong Kang, described as part of the document &quot;Punitive Expedition of Yin&quot; in the &quot;Book of Documents&quot;.
* Late 2nd millennium BCE – Chinese established their timing cycle of 12 Earthly Branches based on the approximate number of years (11.86) it takes Jupiter to complete a single revolution in the sky.
* 1200 BCE – Earliest Babylonian star catalogues.
* 1100 BCE – Chinese first determine the spring equinox. 
* 750 BCE – During the reign of Nabonassar (747–733 BC), the systematic records of ominous phenomena in Babylonian astronomical diaries that began at this time allowed for the discovery of a repeating 18-year cycle of lunar eclipses.
* 776 BCE – Chinese make the earliest reliable record of a solar eclipse.
* 687 BCE – Chinese make earliest known record of meteor shower.
* 7th century BCE – Egyptian astronomers alleged to have predicted a solar eclipse. 
* 613 BCE – A comet, possibly Comet Halley, is recorded in &quot;Spring and Autumn Annals&quot; by the Chinese.
* 586 BCE – Thales of Miletus alleged to have predicted a solar eclipse.
* 560 BCE – Anaximander is arguably the first to conceive a mechanical model of the world, although highly inaccurate: a cylindrical Earth floats freely in space surrounded by three concentric wheels turning at different distances: the closest for the stars and planets, the second for the Moon and the farthest for the Sun, all conceived not as bodies but as &quot;fire seen thru holes&quot; in every wheel. But he starts to feed the idea of celestial mechanics as different of the notion of planets being heavenly deities, leaving mythology aside.
* 475 BCE – Parmenides is credited to be the first Greek who declared that the Earth is spherical and is situated in the centre of the universe, believed to have been the first to detect the identity of Hesperus, the evening-star, and Phosphorus, the morning-star (Venus), and by some, the first to claim that moonlight is a reflection of sunlight.
* 450 BCE – Anaxagoras shows that the Moon shines by reflected sunlight: the phases of the Moon are caused by the illumination of its sphere by the Sun in different angles along the lunar month. He was also the first to give a correct explanation of eclipses, by asserting that the Moon is rocky, thus opaque, and closer to the Earth than the Sun.
* 400 BCE – Philolaus and other Pythagoreans propose a model in which the Earth and the Sun revolve around an invisible &quot;Central Fire&quot; (not the Sun), and the Moon and the planets orbit the Earth. Due to philosophical concerns about the number 10, they also added a tenth &quot;hidden body&quot; or Counter-Earth (&quot;Antichthon&quot;), always in the opposite side of the invisible Central Fire and therefore also invisible from Earth.
* 360 BCE – Plato claims in his &quot;Timaeus&quot; that circles and spheres are the preferred shape of the universe and that the Earth is at the centre. These circles are the orbits of the heavenly bodies, varying in size for every of them. He arranged these celestial orbs, in increasing order from the Earth: Moon, Sun, Venus, Mercury, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, and the fixed stars located on the celestial sphere forming the outermost shell.
* 360 BCE – Eudoxus of Cnidus proposes for first time a purely geometric-mathematical, geocentric model of the planetary movements, including that of the Sun and the Moon.
* 350 BCE – Aristotle argues for a spherical Earth using lunar eclipses and other observations. Also, he asserts his conception of the heavenly spheres, and of an outer space fulfilled with aether.
* 330 BCE – Heraclides Ponticus is said to be the first Greek who proposes that the Earth rotates on its axis, from west to east, once every 24 hours, contradicting Aristotle&#x27;s teachings. Simplicius says that Heraclides proposed that the irregular movements of the planets can be explained if the Earth moves while the Sun stays still, but these statements are disputed.
* 280 BCE – Aristarchus of Samos offers the first definite discussion of the possibility of a heliocentric cosmos, and uses the size of the Earth&#x27;s shadow on the Moon to estimate the Moon&#x27;s orbital radius at 60 Earth radii, and its physical radius as one-third that of the Earth. He also makes an inaccurate attempt to measure the distance to the Sun.
* 250 BCE – Following the heliocentric ideas of Aristarcus, Archimedes in his work &quot;The Sand Reckoner&quot; computes the diameter of the universe centered around the Sun to be about 1014 stadia (in modern units, about 2 light years, , ).
* 210 BCE – Apollonius of Perga shows the equivalence of two descriptions of the apparent retrograde planet motions (assuming the geocentric model), one using eccentrics and another deferent and epicycles.
* 200 BCE – Eratosthenes determines that the radius of the Earth is roughly .
* 150 BCE – According to Strabo (1.1.9), Seleucus of Seleucia is the first to state that the tides are due to the attraction of the Moon, and that the height of the tides depends on the Moon&#x27;s position relative to the Sun.
* 150 BCE – Hipparchus uses parallax to determine that the distance to the Moon is roughly .
* 134 BCE – Hipparchus discovers the precession of the equinoxes.
* 87 BCE – The Antikythera mechanism, the earliest known computer, is built. It is an extremely complex astronomical computer designed to predict solar and lunar eclipses accurately and track the movements of the planets and the Sun. It could also calculate the differences in the apsidial and axial precession of heavenly bodies with extreme degree of accuracy.
* 28 BCE – Chinese history book &quot;Book of Han&quot; makes earliest known dated record of sunspot.
* 150 CE – Claudius Ptolemy completes his work &quot;Almagest&quot;, that codifies the astronomical knowledge of his time and cements the geocentric model in the West, and it remained the most authoritative text on astronomy for more than 1,500 years. The &quot;Almagest&quot; put forward extremely complex and accurate methods to determine the position and structure of planets, stars (including some objects as nebulae, supernovas and galaxies then regarded as stars also) and heavenly bodies. It includes a catalogue of 1,022 stars (largely based on a previous one by Hipparchus of about 850 entries) and a large amount of constellations, comets and other astronomical phenomena. Following a long astrological tradition, he arranged the heavenly spheres ordering them (from Earth outward): Moon, Mercury, Venus, Sun, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn and fixed stars.

==Middle Ages==
* 420 – Martianus Capella describes a modified geocentric model, in which the Earth is at rest in the center of the universe and circled by the Moon, the Sun, three planets and the stars, while Mercury and Venus circle the Sun.
* 500 – Indian mathematician-astronomer Aryabhata accurately computes the solar and lunar eclipses, and the length of Earth&#x27;s revolution around the Sun.
* 500 – Aryabhata discovers the oblique motion of the apsidial precession of the Sun and notes that it is changing with respect to the motion of stars and Earth.
* 500 – Aryabhata discovers the rotation of the Earth by conducting experiments and giving empirical examples for his theories. He also explains the cause of day and night through the diurnal rotation of the Earth. He also developed highly accurate models for the orbital motion of the Moon, Mercury and Mars. He also developed a geocentric model of the universe.
* 620 – Indian mathematician-astronomer Brahmagupta describe gravity as a attractive force by the term guruvatkarshan.
* 628 – Brahmagupta gives methods for calculations of the motions and places of various planets, their rising and setting, conjunctions, and calculations of the solar and lunar eclipses.
* 820 – Persian astronomer, Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi, composes his Zij astronomical tables, utilising Arabic numerals and the Hindu–Arabic numeral system in his calculations. He also translates Aryabhata&#x27;s astronomical and mathematical treatises into Arabic.
* 850 – Al-Farghani (Alfraganus) translated and wrote commentary on Ptolemy&#x27;s &quot;Almagest&quot; and gave values for the motion of the ecliptic, and the precessional movement of the heavenly bodies based on the values given by Ptolemy and Hipparchus.
* 1019 – Al-Biruni observes and describes the lunar eclipse on September 17 in detail and gives the exact latitudes of the stars during it.
* 1030 – In his major astronomical work, the &quot;Mas&#x27;ud Canon&quot;, Al-Biruni observed that, contrary to Ptolemy, the Sun&#x27;s apogee (highest point in the heavens) was mobile, not fixed.
* 1031 – Chinese astronomer and scientist Shen Kuo calculates the distance between the Earth and the Sun in his mathematical treatises.
* 1054 – Chinese astronomers record the sighting of the Crab Nebula as a &quot;guest star&quot;, and they record several other supernovae during the 10th and 11th centuries.
* 1060 – Andalusi astronomer Al-Zarqali corrects geographical data from Ptolemy and Al-Khwarizmi, specifically by correcting Ptolemy&#x27;s estimate of the longitude of the Mediterranean Sea from 62 degrees to the correct value of 42 degrees. He was the first to demonstrate the motion of the solar apogee relative to the fixed background of the stars, measuring its rate of motion as 12.9 seconds per year, which is remarkably close to the modern calculation of 11.77 seconds. Al-Zarqālī also contributed to the famous &quot;Tables of Toledo&quot;.
* 1175 – Gerard of Cremona translates Ptolemy&#x27;s &quot;Almagest&quot; from Arabic into Latin.
* 1180s (decade) – Robert Grosseteste described the birth of the Universe in an explosion and the crystallisation of matter. He also put forward several new ideas such as rotation of the Earth around its axis and the cause of day and night. His treatise &quot;De Luce&quot; is the first attempt to describe the heavens and Earth using a single set of physical laws.
* 1200 – Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, in dealing with his conception of physics and the physical world, rejected the Aristotelian and Avicennian view of a single world, but instead proposed that there are &quot;a thousand thousand worlds (&quot;alfa alfi &#x27;awalim&quot;) beyond this world such that each one of those worlds be bigger and more massive than this world as well as having the like of what this world has.&quot;

* 1252 – Alfonso X of Castile sponsored the creation and compilation of the &quot;Alfonsine Tables&quot; by scholars he assemble in the Toledo School of Translators in Toledo, Spain. These astronomical tables were used and updated during the following three centuries, as the main source of astronomical data, mainly to calculate ephemerides (which were in turn used by astrologers to cast horoscopes).
* 1300 – Jewish astronomer Levi ben Gershon (Gersonides) recognized that the stars are much larger than the planets. Gersonides appears to be among the few astronomers before modern times, along Aristarcus, to have surmized that the fixed stars are much further away than the planets. While all other astronomers put the fixed stars on a rotating sphere just beyond the outer planets, Gersonides estimated the distance to the fixed stars to be no less than 159,651,513,380,944 Earth radii, or about 100,000 light-years in modern units.
* 1350 – Ibn al-Shatir anticipates Copernicus by abandoning the equant of Ptolemy in his calculations of planetary motion, and he provides a proto empirical model of lunar motion which accurately matches observations.
* 1350 – Nicole Oresme put forward several revolutionary theories like mean speed theorem, which he used in calculating the position and shape of the planetary orbits, measuring the apsidial and axial precession of the lunar and solar orbits, measuring the angles and distance between ecliptics and calculating stellar and planetary distances. In his &quot;Livre du Ciel et du Monde&quot;, Oresme discussed a range of evidence for the daily rotation of the Earth on its axis.
* 1440 – Nicholas of Cusa proposes that the Earth rotates on its axis in his book, &quot;On Learned Ignorance&quot;. Like Oresme, he also wrote about the possibility of the plurality of worlds.

== 16th century ==

* 1501 – Indian astronomer Nilakantha Somayaji proposes a universe in which the planets orbit the Sun, but the Sun orbits the Earth.
* 1514 – Nicolaus Copernicus states his heliocentric theory in &quot;Commentariolus&quot;.
* 1522 – First circumnavigation of the world by Magellan-Elcano expedition shows that the Earth is, in effect, a sphere.
* 1543 – Copernicus publishes his heliocentric theory in &quot;De revolutionibus orbium coelestium&quot;.
* 1576 – Tycho Brahe founds the first modern astronomical observatory in modern Europe, Uraniborg.
* 1577 – Tycho Brahe records the position of the Great Comet of that year as viewed from Uraniborg (in the island Hven, near Copenhagen) and compares it with that observed by Thadaeus Hagecius from Prague at the same time, giving deliberate consideration to the movement of the Moon. It was discovered that, while the comet was in approximately the same place for both of them, the Moon was not, and this meant that the comet was much further out, contrary to what was previously conceived as an atmospheric phenomenon.
* 1582 – Pope Gregory XIII introduces the Gregorian calendar, an enhanced solar calendar more accurate than the previous Roman Julian calendar. The principal change was to space leap years differently so as to make the average calendar year 365.2425 days long, more closely approximating the 365.2422-day &#x27;tropical&#x27; or &#x27;solar&#x27; year that is determined by the Earth&#x27;s revolution around the Sun. The reform advanced the date by 10 days: Thursday 4 October 1582 was followed by Friday 15 October 1582. The Gregorian calendar is still in use today.
* 1584 – Giordano Bruno published two important philosophical dialogues (&quot;La Cena de le Ceneri&quot; and &quot;De l&#x27;infinito universo et mondi&quot;) in which he argued against the planetary spheres and affirmed the Copernican principle. Bruno&#x27;s infinite universe was filled with a substance—a &quot;pure air&quot;, aether, or &quot;spiritus&quot;—that offered no resistance to the heavenly bodies which, in Bruno&#x27;s view, rather than being fixed, moved under their own impetus (momentum). Most dramatically, he completely abandoned the idea of a hierarchical universe. Bruno&#x27;s cosmology distinguishes between &quot;suns&quot; which produce their own light and heat, and have other bodies moving around them; and &quot;earths&quot; which move around suns and receive light and heat from them. Bruno suggested that some, if not all, of the objects classically known as fixed stars are in fact suns, so he was arguably the first person to grasp that &quot;stars are other suns with their own planets.&quot; Bruno wrote that other worlds &quot;have no less virtue nor a nature different from that of our Earth&quot; and, like Earth, &quot;contain animals and inhabitants&quot;.
* 1588 – Tycho Brahe publishes his own Tychonic system, a blend between Ptolemy&#x27;s classical geocentric model and Copernicus&#x27; heliocentric model, in which the Sun and the Moon revolve around the Earth, in the center of universe, and all other planets revolve around the Sun.

== 17th century ==
* 1600 – William Gilbert with his model called the terrella, shows the Earth behaves like a huge but low intensity magnet with its own magnetic field, which explains the behaviour of the compass pointing to the magnetic poles.
* 1604 – Galileo Galilei correctly hypothesized that the distance of a falling object is proportional to the square of the time elapsed.
* 1609 – Johannes Kepler states his first two empirical laws of planetary motion, stating that the orbits of the planets around the Sun are elliptical rather than circular, and thus resolving many ancient problems with planetary models, without the need of any epicycle.
* 1609 – Galileo Galilei starts to make telescopes with about 3x up to 30x magnification, based only on descriptions of the first practical telescope which Hans Lippershey tried to patent in the Netherlands in 1608. With a Galilean telescope, the observer could see magnified, upright images on the Earth—what is commonly known as a &quot;spyglass&quot;—but also it can be used to observe the sky, a key tool for further astronomical discoveries.
* 1609 – Galileo Galilei aimed his telescope at the Moon. While not being the first person to observe the Moon through a telescope (English mathematician Thomas Harriot had done it four months before but only saw a &quot;strange spottednesse&quot;), Galileo was the first to deduce the cause of the uneven waning as light occlusion from lunar mountains and craters. He also estimated the heights of that mountains. The Moon was not what was long thought to have been a translucent and perfect sphere, as Aristotle claimed, and hardly the first &quot;planet&quot;.
* 1610 – Galileo Galilei observes the four main moons of Jupiter: Callisto, Europa, Ganymede, and Io; sees Saturn&#x27;s planetary rings (but does not recognize that they are rings), and observes the phases of Venus, disproving the Ptolemaic system though not the geocentric model.
* 1619 – Johannes Kepler states his third empirical law of planetary motion, which relates the distance and period of the planetary orbits.
* 1631 – Pierre Gassendi is the first to observe the transit of Mercury. He was surprised by the small size of the planet compared to the Sun.
* 1632 – Galileo Galilei is sometimes credited with the discovery of the lunar libration in latitude, although Thomas Harriot or William Gilbert might have done so before.
* 1639 – Jeremiah Horrocks and his friend and correspondent William Crabtree are the first astronomers known to observe and record a transit of Venus.
* 1643 – Evangelista Torricelli, disciple of Galileo, builds an elementary barometer, which shows that the air weighs, and incidentally creating the first artificial vacuum in a laboratory.
* 1648 – Johannes Hevelius discovers the lunar libration in longitude. It can reach 7°54′ in amplitude.
* 1648 – Blaise Pascal, aided by his brother-in-law Florin Périer at mount Puy de Dôme, shows that air pressure on a high mountain is less than at a lower altitude, proving his idea that, as air has a finite weight, Earth&#x27;s atmosphere must have a maximum height.
* 1655 – Giovanni Domenico Cassini and Robert Hooke separately discover Jupiter&#x27;s Great Red Spot.
* 1656 – Christiaan Huygens identifies Saturn&#x27;s rings as rings and discovers its moon Titan.
* 1659 – Huygens estimated a value of about 24,000 Earth radii for the distance Earth-Sun, remarkably close to modern values but he was based on many unproven (and incorrect) assumptions; the accuracy of his value seems to be based more on luck than good measurement, with his various errors cancelling each other out.
* 1665 – Cassini determines the rotational speeds of Jupiter, Mars, and Venus.
* 1668 – Isaac Newton builds his own reflecting telescope, the first fully functional of this kind, and a landmark for future developings as it reduces spherical aberration with no chromatic aberration.
* 1672 – Cassini discovers Saturn&#x27;s moons Iapetus and Rhea.
* 1672 – Jean Richer and Cassini measure the Earth-Sun distance, the astronomical unit, to be about 138,370,000 km.
* 1675 – Ole Rømer uses the orbital mechanics of Jupiter&#x27;s moons to estimate that the speed of light is about 227,000 km/s.
* 1675 – Cassini discovers the main division in the rings of Saturn, named after him, the Cassini Division.
* 1686 – Cassini discovers Saturn&#x27;s moons Tethys and Dione.
* 1687 – Isaac Newton publishes his law of universal gravitation in his work &quot;Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica&quot;.
* 1690 – Cassini observes differential rotation within Jupiter&#x27;s atmosphere.

==18th century==

* 1704 – John Locke enters the term &quot;Solar System&quot; in the English language, when he used it to refer to the Sun, planets, and comets as a whole.
* 1705 – Edmond Halley publicly predicts the periodicity of the comet of 1682 and computes its expected path of return in 1757.
* 1715 – Edmond Halley calculates the shadow path of a solar eclipse.
* 1716 – Edmond Halley suggests a high-precision measurement of the Sun-Earth distance by timing the transit of Venus.
* 1718 – Edmond Halley discovers proper motion of stars, dispelling the concept of the &quot;fixed stars&quot;.
* 1729 – James Bradley determines the cause of the aberration of starlight, providing the first direct evidence of the Earth&#x27;s motion, and a more accurate method to compute the speed of light.
* 1735–1739 – The French Academy of Sciences sends two expeditions to measure the oblateness of the Earth by measuring the length of a degree of latitude at two locations: one to Lapland, close to the Arctic Circle and other to the Equator, the French Geodesic Mission. Their measurements show that the Earth is an oblate spheroid flattened at the poles.
* 1749 – Pierre Bouguer, part of French Geodesic Mission, publish that he and Charles Marie de La Condamine had been able to detect a deflection of a pendulum&#x27;s plumb-bob of 8 seconds of arc in the proximity of the volcano Chimborazo. Although not enough to measure the value of the gravitational constant accurately, the experiment had at least proved that the Earth could not be a hollow shell, as some thinkers of the day had suggested.
* 1750 – The three collinear Lagrange points (L1, L2, L3) were discovered by Leonhard Euler, a decade before Joseph-Louis Lagrange discovered the remaining two.
* 1752 – Benjamin Franklin conducts his kite experiment, successfully extracting sparks from a cloud, showing that lightning bolts are huge natural electrical discharges.
* 1755 – Immanuel Kant first formulates the nebular hypothesis of Solar System formation.
* 1758 – Johann Palitzsch observes the return of the comet that Edmond Halley had anticipated in 1705. The gravitational attraction of Jupiter had slowed the return by 618 days. Parisian astronomer La Caille suggests it should be named &quot;Halley&#x27;s Comet&quot;.
* 1761 – Mikhail Lomonosov is the first to discover and appreciate the atmosphere of Venus during his observation of the transit of Venus.
* 1766 – Johann Titius finds the Titius-Bode rule for planetary distances.
* 1772 – Johann Bode publishes the Titius-Bode rule for planetary distances.
* 1772–1775 – The second voyage of James Cook definitively disproves the existence of the hypothesized Southern continent of Terra Australis.
* 1775 – Charles Hutton, based on his analysis of the Schiehallion experiment, shows the Earth has a density of at least and suggests that it has a planetary core made of metal. (In comparison with the modern accepted figure of , the density of the Earth had been computed with an error of less than 20%.)
* 1781 – William Herschel discovers a seventh planet, Uranus, during a telescopic survey of the Northern sky.
* 1781 – Charles Messier and his assistant Pierre Méchain publish the first catalogue of 110 nebulae and star clusters, the most prominent deep-sky objects that can easily be observed from Earth&#x27;s Northern Hemisphere, in order not to be confused with ordinary Solar System&#x27;s comets.
* 1787 – Herschel discovers Uranus&#x27;s moons Titania and Oberon.
* 1789 – Herschel discovers Saturn&#x27;s moons Enceladus and Mimas.
* 1796 – Pierre Laplace re-states the nebular hypothesis for the formation of the Solar System from a spinning nebula of gas and dust.
* 1798 – Henry Cavendish accurately measures the gravitational constant in the laboratory, which allows the mass of the Earth to be derived, and hence the masses of all bodies in the Solar System.

==19th century==
* 1801 – Giuseppe Piazzi discovers Ceres, a body that filled a gap between Mars and Jupiter following the Titius-Bode rule. At first, it was regarded as a new planet.
* 1802 – Heinrich Wilhelm Olbers discovers Pallas, at roughly the same distance to the Sun than Ceres. He proposed that the two objects were the remnants of a destroyed planet, and predicted that more of these pieces would be found.
* 1802 – Due their star-like apparience, William Herschel suggested Ceres and Pallas, and similar objects if found, be placed into a separate category, named asteroids, although they were still counted among the planets for some decades.
* 1804 – Karl Ludwig Harding discovers the asteroid Juno.
* 1807 – Olbers discovers the asteroid Vesta.
* 1821 – Alexis Bouvard detects irregularities in the orbit of Uranus.
* 1825 – Pierre Laplace completes his study of gravitation, the stability of the Solar System, tides, the precession of the equinoxes, the libration of the Moon, and Saturn&#x27;s rings in his work &quot;Traité de mécanique céleste&quot; (&quot;Treatise of celestial mechanics&quot;).
* 1833 – Thomas Henderson successfully measures the stellar parallax of alpha Centauri, being then regarded as the Sun&#x27;s closest star, but delayed the publication until 1839.
* 1838 – Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel measures the parallax of the star 61 Cygni, refuting one of the oldest arguments against heliocentrism.
* 1840 – John W. Draper takes a daguerreotype of the Moon, the first astronomical photograph.
* 1845 – John Adams predicts the existence and location of an eighth planet from irregularities in the orbit of Uranus.
* 1845 – Karl Ludwig Hencke discovers a fifth body between Mars and Jupiter, Astraea and, shortly thereafter, new objects were found there at an accelerating rate. Counting them among the planets became increasingly cumbersome. Eventually, they were dropped from the planet list (as first suggested by Alexander von Humboldt in the early 1850s) and Herschel&#x27;s coinage, &quot;asteroids&quot;, gradually came into common use. Since then, the region they occupy between Mars and Jupiter is known as the asteroid belt.
* 1846 – Urbain Le Verrier predicts the existence and location of an eighth planet from irregularities in the orbit of Uranus.
* 1846 – Johann Galle discovers the eighth planet, Neptune, following the predicted position gave to him by Le Verrier.
* 1846 – William Lassell discovers Neptune&#x27;s moon Triton, just seventeen days later of planet&#x27;s discovery.
* 1848 – Lassell, William Cranch Bond and George Phillips Bond discover Saturn&#x27;s moon Hyperion.
* 1849 – Édouard Roche finds the limiting radius of tidal destruction and tidal creation for a body held together only by its own gravity, called the Roche limit, and uses it to explain why Saturn&#x27;s rings do not condense into a satellite.
* 1849 – Annibale de Gasparis discovers the asteroid Hygiea, the fourth largest asteroid in the Solar System by both volume and mass.
* 1851 – Lassell discovers Uranus&#x27;s moons Ariel and Umbriel.
* 1856 – James Clerk Maxwell demonstrates that a solid ring around Saturn would be torn apart by gravitational forces and argues that Saturn&#x27;s rings consist of a multitude of tiny satellites.
* 1859 – Robert Bunsen and Gustav Kirchhoff develop the spectroscope, which they used to pioneer the identification of the chemical elements in the Sun, showing that the Sun contains mainly hydrogen, and also sodium.
* 1862 – By analysing the spectroscopic signature of the Sun and comparing it to those of other stars, Father Angelo Secchi determines that the Sun is itself a star.
* 1866 – Giovanni Schiaparelli realizes that meteor streams occur when the Earth passes through the orbit of a comet that has left debris along its path.
* 1868 – Jules Janssen observes a bright yellow line with a wavelength of 587.49 nanometers in the spectrum of the chromosphere of the Sun, during a total solar eclipse in Guntur, India. Later in the same year, Norman Lockyer observed the same line in the solar spectrum, and concluded that it was caused by an element in the Sun unknown on Earth. This element is helium, which currently comprises 23.8% of the mass in the solar photosphere.
* 1877 – Asaph Hall discovers Mars&#x27;s moons Deimos and Phobos.
* 1887 – The Michelson–Morley experiment, intended to measure the relative motion of Earth through the (assumed) stationary luminiferous aether, got no results. This put an end to the centuries-old idea of the aether, dating back to Aristotle, and with it all the contemporary aether theories.
* 1892 – Edward Emerson Barnard discovers Jupiter&#x27;s moon Amalthea.
* 1895 – Percival Lowell starts publishing books about his observations of features in the surface on Mars that he claimed as artificial Martian canals (due to a mistranslation of a previous paper by Schiaparelli on the subject), popularizing the long-held belief that these markings showed that Mars harbors intelligent life forms.
* 1897 – William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin, based on the thermal radiation rate and the gravitational contraction forces, argues the age of the Sun to be no more than 20 million years – unless some energy source beyond what was then known was found.
* 1899 – William Henry Pickering discovers Saturn&#x27;s moon Phoebe.

==1900–1957==

* 1904 – Ernest Rutherford argues, in a lecture attended by Kelvin, that radioactive decay releases heat, providing the unknown energy source Kelvin had suggested, and ultimately leading to radiometric dating of rocks which reveals ages of billions of years for the Solar System bodies.
* 1906 – Max Wolf discovers the Trojan asteroid Achilles.
* 1908 – A meteor air burst occurs near Tunguska in Siberia, Russia. It is the largest impact event on Earth in recorded history to date.
* 1909 – Andrija Mohorovičić discovers the Moho discontinuity, the boundary between the Earth&#x27;s crust and the mantle.
* 1912 – Alfred Wegener suggests the continental drift hypothesis, that the continents are slowly drifting around the Earth.
* 1915 – Robert Innes discovers Proxima Centauri, the closest star to Earth after the Sun.
* 1919 – Arthur Stanley Eddington uses a solar eclipse to successfully test Albert Einstein&#x27;s General Theory of Relativity, which in turn explains the observed irregularities in the orbital motion of Mercury, and disproves the existence of the hypothesized inner planet Vulcan.
* 1920 – In the Great Debate between Harlow Shapley and Heber Curtis, galaxies are finally recognized as objects beyond the Milky Way, and the Milky Way as a galaxy proper. Within it lies the Solar System.
* 1930 – Clyde Tombaugh discovers Pluto. It was regarded for decades as the ninth planet of the Solar System.

* 1930 – Seth Nicholson and Edison Pettit measure the surface temperature of the Moon.
* 1932 – Karl Guthe Jansky recognizes received radio signals coming from outer space as extrasolar, coming mainly from Sagittarius. They are the first evidence of the center of the Milky Way, and the firsts experiences that founded the discipline of radio astronomy.
* 1935 – The &quot;Explorer II&quot; balloon reached a record altitude of 22,066 m (72,395 ft), enabling its occupants to photograph the curvature of the Earth for the first time.
* 1938 – Hans Bethe calculates the details of the two main energy-producing nuclear reactions that power the Sun.
* 1944 – Gerard Kuiper discovers that the satellite Titan has a substantial atmosphere.
* 1946 – American launch of a camera-equipped V-2 rocket provides the first image of the Earth from space.
* 1949 – Gerard Kuiper discovers Uranus&#x27;s moon Miranda and Neptune&#x27;s moon Nereid.
* 1950 – Jan Oort suggests the presence of a cometary reservoir in the outer limits of the Solar System, the Oort cloud.
* 1951 – Gerard Kuiper argues for an annular reservoir of comets between 40 and 100 astronomical units from the Sun having formed early in the Solar System&#x27;s evolution, but he did not think that such a belt still existed today. Decades later, this region was named after him, the Kuiper belt.

==1958–1976==

* 1958 – Under supervision of James Van Allen, &quot;Explorer 1&quot; and &quot;Explorer 3&quot; confirmed the existence of the Earth&#x27;s magnetosphere radiation belts, named after him.
* 1959 – &quot;Explorer 6&quot; sends the first image of the entire Earth from space.
* 1959 – Luna 3 sends the first images of another celestial body, the Moon, from space, including its unseen far side.
* 1962 – &quot;Mariner 2&quot; Venus flyby performs the first closeup observations of another planet.
* 1964 – &quot;Mariner 4&quot; spacecraft provides the first detailed images of the surface of Mars.
* 1966 – Luna 9 Moon lander provides the first images from the surface of another celestial body.
* 1967 – &quot;Venera 4&quot; provides the first information on Venus&#x27;s dense atmosphere.
* 1968 – Apollo 8 becomes the first crewed lunar mission, providing historic images of the whole Earth.
* 1969 – Apollo 11 mission landed on the Moon, first humans walking upon it. They return the first lunar samples back to Earth.
* 1970 – &quot;Venera 7&quot; Venus lander sends back the first information successfully obtained from the surface of another planet.
* 1971 – &quot;Mariner 9&quot; Mars spacecraft becomes the first to successfully orbit another planet. It provides the first detailed maps of the Martian surface, discovering much of the planet&#x27;s topography, including the volcano Olympus Mons and the canyon system Valles Marineris, which is named in its honor.
* 1971 – &quot;Mars 3&quot; lands on Mars, and transmits the first partial image from the surface of another planet.
* 1973 – Skylab astronauts discover the Sun&#x27;s coronal holes.
* 1973 – &quot;Pioneer 10&quot; flies by Jupiter, providing the first closeup images of the planet and revealing its intense radiation belts.
* 1973 – &quot;Mariner 10&quot; provides the first closeup images of the clouds of Venus.
* 1974 – &quot;Mariner 10&quot; provides the first closeup images of the surface of Mercury.
* 1975 – &quot;Venera 9&quot; becomes the first probe to successfully transmit images from the surface of Venus.
* 1976 – &quot;Viking 1&quot; and &quot;2&quot; become the first probes to send images (in color) from the surface of Mars, as well as to perform &quot;in situ&quot; biological experiments with the Martian soil.

==1977–2000==

* 1977 – James Elliot discovers the rings of Uranus during a stellar occultation experiment on the Kuiper Airborne Observatory.
* 1977 – Charles Kowal discovers Chiron, the first centaur.
* 1978 – James Christy discovers Charon, the large moon of Pluto.
* 1978 – The &quot;Pioneer Venus&quot; probe maps the surface of Venus.
* 1978 – Peter Goldreich and Scott Tremaine present a Boltzmann equation model of planetary-ring dynamics for indestructible spherical ring particles that do not self-gravitate, and they find a stability requirement relation between ring optical depth and particle normal restitution coefficient.
* 1979 – &quot;Pioneer 11&quot; flies by Saturn, providing the first ever closeup images of the planet and its rings. It discovers the planet&#x27;s F ring and determines that its moon Titan has a thick atmosphere.
* 1979 – Goldreich and Tremaine postulate that Saturn&#x27;s F ring is maintained by shepherd moons, a prediction that would be confirmed by observations.
* 1979 – &quot;Voyager 1&quot; flies by Jupiter and discovers its faint ring system, as well as volcanoes on Io, the innermost of its Galilean moons.
* 1979 – &quot;Voyager 2&quot; flies by Jupiter and discovers evidence of an ocean under the surface of its moon Europa.
* 1980 – &quot;Voyager 1&quot; flies by Saturn and takes the first images of Titan. However, its atmosphere is opaque to visible light, so its surface remains obscured.
* 1982 – &quot;Venera 13&quot; lands on Venus, sends the first photographs in color of its surface, and records atmospheric wind noises, the first sounds heard from another planet.
* 1986 – &quot;Voyager 2&quot; provides the first ever detailed images of Uranus, its moons and rings.
* 1986 – The &quot;Giotto&quot; probe, part of an international effort known as the &quot;Halley Armada&quot;, provides the first ever close up images of a comet, the Halley&#x27;s Comet.
* 1988 – Martin Duncan, Thomas Quinn, and Scott Tremaine demonstrate that short-period comets come primarily from the Kuiper Belt and not the Oort cloud.
* 1989 – &quot;Voyager 2&quot; provides the first ever detailed images of Neptune, its moons and rings.
* 1990 – The Hubble Space Telescope is launched. Aimed primarily at deep-space objects, it is also used to observe faint objects in the Solar System.
* 1990 – &quot;Voyager 1&quot; is turned around to take the &quot;Portrait of the Planets&quot; of the Solar System, source of the &quot;Pale Blue Dot&quot; image of the Earth.
* 1991 – The &quot;Magellan&quot; spacecraft maps the surface of Venus.
* 1991 – The &quot;Galileo&quot;, while en route to Jupiter, encounters asteroid Gaspra, which became the first asteroid imaged by a spacecraft.
* 1992 – David Jewitt and Jane Luu of the University of Hawaii discover Albion, the first object deemed to be a member of the Kuiper belt.
* 1993 – Asteroid Ida is visited by the &quot;Galileo&quot; before heading to Jupiter. Mission member Ann Harch discovers its natural satellite Dactyl in images returned by the spacecraft, the first asteroid moon discovered.
* 1994 – Comet Shoemaker–Levy collides with Jupiter, providing the first direct observation of an extraterrestrial collision of Solar System objects.
* 1995 – The &quot;Galileo&quot; becomes the first spacecraft to orbit Jupiter. Its atmospheric entry probe provides the first data taken within the planet itself.
* 1997 – &quot;Mars Pathfinder&quot; deploys on Mars the first rover to operate outside the Earth–Moon system, the &quot;Sojourner&quot;, which conducts many experiments on the Martian surface, both teleoperated and semi-autonomous.
* 2000 – &quot;NEAR Shoemaker&quot; probe provides the first detailed images of a near-Earth asteroid, Eros.

==2001–present==
* 2002 – Chad Trujillo and Michael Brown of Caltech at the Palomar Observatory discover the minor planet Quaoar in the Kuiper belt.
* 2003 – M. Brown, C. Trujillo, and David Rabinowitz discover Sedna, a large trans-Neptunian object (TNO) with an unprecedented 12,000-year orbit.
* 2003 – &quot;Voyager 1&quot; enters the termination shock, the point where the solar wind slows to subsonic speeds.
* 2004 – &quot;Voyager 1&quot; sends back the first data ever obtained from within the Solar System&#x27;s heliosheath.
* 2004 – M. Brown, C. Trujillo, and D. Rabinowitz discover the TNO Orcus.
* 2004 – M. Brown, C. Trujillo, and D. Rabinowitz discover the Kuiper Belt Object (KBO) Haumea. A second team led by José Luis Ortiz Moreno also claims the discovery.
* 2004 – The &quot;Cassini–Huygens&quot; spacecraft becomes the first to orbit Saturn. It discovers complex motions in the rings, several new small moons and cryovolcanism on the moon Enceladus, studies the Saturn&#x27;s hexagon, and provides the first images from the surface of Titan.
* 2005 – M. Brown, C. Trujillo, and D. Rabinowitz discover Eris, a TNO more massive than Pluto, and later, by other team led by Brown, also its moon, Dysnomia. Eris was first imaged in 2003, and is the most massive object discovered in the Solar System since Neptune&#x27;s moon Triton in 1846.
* 2005 – M. Brown, C. Trujillo, and D. Rabinowitz discover another notable KBO, Makemake.
* 2005 – The &quot;Mars Exploration Rovers&quot; perform the first astronomical observations ever taken from the surface of another planet, imaging an eclipse by Mars&#x27;s moon Phobos.

* 2005 – &quot;Hayabusa&quot; spacecraft lands on asteroid Itokawa and collect samples. It returned the samples to Earth in 2010.
* 2006 – The 26th General Assembly of the IAU voted in favor of a revised definition of a planet and officially declared Ceres, Pluto, and Eris dwarf planets.
* 2007 – Dwarf planet Gonggong, a large KBO, was discovered by Megan Schwamb, M. Brown, and D. Rabinowitz.
* 2008 – The IAU declares Makemake and Haumea dwarf planets.
* 2011 – &quot;Dawn&quot; spacecraft enters orbit around the large asteroid Vesta making detailed measurements.
* 2012 – Saturn&#x27;s moon Methone is imaged up close by the &quot;Cassini&quot; spacecraft, revealing a remarkably smooth surface.
* 2012 – &quot;Dawn&quot; spacecraft breaks orbit of Vesta and heads for Ceres.
* 2013 – &quot;MESSENGER&quot; spacecraft provides the first ever complete map of the surface of Mercury.
* 2013 – A team led by Felipe Braga Ribas discover a ring system around the minor planet and centaur Chariklo, the first of this kind ever detected.
* 2014 – &quot;Rosetta&quot; spacecraft becomes the first comet orbiter (around 67P/Churyumov–Gerasimenko), and deploys on it the first comet lander &quot;Philae&quot; that collected close-up data from the comet&#x27;s surface.
* 2015 – &quot;Dawn&quot; spacecraft enters orbit around the dwarf planet Ceres making detailed measurements.
* 2015 – &quot;New Horizons&quot; spacecraft flies by Pluto, providing the first ever sharp images of its surface, and its largest moon Charon.
* 2017 – &#x27;Oumuamua, the first known interstellar object crossing the Solar System, is identified.
* 2019 – Closest approach of &quot;New Horizons&quot; to Arrokoth, a KBO farther than Pluto.
* 2019 – 2I/Borisov, the first interstellar comet and second interstellar object, is discovered.
* 2022 – The &quot;Double Asteroid Redirection Test&quot; (DART) spacecraft mission intentionally crashed into Dimorphos, the minor-planet moon of the asteroid Didymos, deviating (slightly) the orbit of a Solar System body for the first time ever. While DART hosted no scientific payload, its camera took closeup photos of the two objects, and a secondary spacecraft, the LICIACube, also gathered related scientific data.

==See also==
* Discovery and exploration of the Solar System
* Timeline of discovery of Solar System planets and their moons
* Timeline of Solar System exploration
* Timeline of first images of Earth from space
* List of former planets
* List of hypothetical Solar System objects in astronomy
* Historical models of the Solar System
* History of astronomy
* Timeline of cosmological theories

The number of currently known, or observed, objects of the Solar System are in the hundreds of thousands. Many of them are listed in the following articles:

* List of Solar System objects
* List of gravitationally rounded objects of the Solar System
* List of natural satellites
* List of possible dwarf planets
* List of minor planets (numbered) and List of unnumbered minor planets
* List of trans-Neptunian objects (numbered) and List of unnumbered trans-Neptunian objects
* Lists of comets

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q186117" start="19" end="27" title="timeline" label="timeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="31" end="43" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="44" end="53" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="58" end="65" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="116" end="121" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q104499" start="125" end="140" title="Planetary science" label="planetary scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="181" end="186" title="Human" label="Human"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="234" end="239" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="319" end="331" title="Astronomy" label="astronomical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="336" end="346" title="Geology" label="geological"/>
<link wikidata="Q209815" start="512" end="526" title="oral tradition" label="oral tradition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="584" end="597" title="Belief#Belief systems" label="belief system"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="603" end="610" title="animism" label="animism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="612" end="621" title="shamanism" label="shamanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="623" end="632" title="mythology" label="mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="634" end="642" title="religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="650" end="660" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12772819" start="701" end="712" title="Discovery (observation)" label="discoveries"/>
<link wikidata="Q221392" start="898" end="917" title="observable universe" label="observable universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="932" end="935" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="1009" end="1021" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="1086" end="1094" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="1159" end="1166" title="gravity" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q193139" start="1182" end="1192" title="trajectory" label="trajectory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="1222" end="1227" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q527" start="1260" end="1263" title="sky" label="sky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1315" end="1334" title="Earth#Surface" label="terrestrial surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q186131" start="1358" end="1365" title="terrain" label="terrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q187997" start="1386" end="1396" title="vegetation" label="vegetation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="1402" end="1408" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="1428" end="1433" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q165" start="1448" end="1451" title="sea" label="sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="1457" end="1462" title="ocean" label="ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="1476" end="1481" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="1487" end="1491" title="lake" label="lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="1518" end="1525" title="glaciar" label="glaciar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286914" start="1528" end="1541" title="polar ice cap" label="polar ice cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246517" start="1578" end="1587" title="Underwater" label="submerged"/>
<link wikidata="Q46831" start="1609" end="1623" title="mountain range" label="mountain range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131329" start="1639" end="1645" title="grotto" label="grotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q35509" start="1651" end="1657" title="cavern" label="cavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q8104" start="1700" end="1710" title="atmosphere" label="atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q25261" start="1730" end="1744" title="Meteorology" label="meteorological"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074" start="1756" end="1761" title="cloud" label="cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925" start="1764" end="1768" title="rain" label="rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q37602" start="1770" end="1774" title="hail" label="hail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561" start="1779" end="1783" title="snow" label="snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8094" start="1785" end="1789" title="wind" label="wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q81054" start="1791" end="1797" title="storms" label="storms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857578" start="1802" end="1814" title="thunderstorm" label="thunderstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081" start="1817" end="1824" title="tornado" label="tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="1831" end="1858" title="Hurricane" label="hurricanes/cyclones/typhoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="1861" end="1874" title="Flood" label="fluvial flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3612702" start="1877" end="1883" title="Deluge (prehistoric)" label="deluge"/>
<link wikidata="Q167903" start="1889" end="1898" title="landslide" label="landslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052" start="1901" end="1908" title="rainbow" label="rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q186310" start="1914" end="1918" title="Halo (optical phenomenon)" label="halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q308762" start="1921" end="1927" title="mirage" label="mirage"/>
<link wikidata="Q602963" start="1930" end="1941" title="glacial age" label="glacial age"/>
<link wikidata="Q573" start="1946" end="1953" title="Day" label="Diurnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q193294" start="1984" end="1991" title="sunrise" label="sunrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q168182" start="1993" end="1997" title="noon" label="noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q166564" start="2002" end="2008" title="sunset" label="sunset"/>
<link wikidata="Q23718" start="2034" end="2048" title="cardinal point" label="cardinal point"/>
<link wikidata="Q659" start="2051" end="2056" title="north" label="north"/>
<link wikidata="Q667" start="2058" end="2063" title="south" label="south"/>
<link wikidata="Q684" start="2065" end="2069" title="east" label="east"/>
<link wikidata="Q679" start="2075" end="2079" title="west" label="west"/>
<link wikidata="Q575" start="2083" end="2088" title="Night" label="Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q12134" start="2116" end="2132" title="celestial sphere" label="celestial sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q430297" start="2174" end="2179" title="Fixed stars" label="fixed"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="2187" end="2191" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q8928" start="2250" end="2263" title="constellation" label="constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="2378" end="2386" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="2423" end="2432" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708714" start="2474" end="2483" title="firmament" label="firmament"/>
<link wikidata="Q165800" start="2621" end="2640" title="geocentric universe" label="geocentric universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="2660" end="2664" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26388" start="2675" end="2680" title="Phases of the Moon" label="phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="2683" end="2687" title="Tide" label="Tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q577" start="2746" end="2750" title="Year" label="Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q40540" start="2815" end="2821" title="zodiac" label="zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151" start="2867" end="2872" title="month" label="month"/>
<link wikidata="Q12132" start="2929" end="2937" title="calendar" label="calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153471" start="3007" end="3016" title="night sky" label="night sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135397" start="3027" end="3043" title="classical planet" label="classical planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q131136" start="3046" end="3059" title="shooting star" label="shooting star"/>
<link wikidata="Q105000" start="3065" end="3078" title="meteor shower" label="meteor shower"/>
<link wikidata="Q317167" start="3081" end="3087" title="bolide" label="bolide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="3090" end="3095" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q40609" start="3098" end="3104" title="aurora" label="aurora"/>
<link wikidata="Q204079" start="3107" end="3121" title="zodiacal light" label="zodiacal light"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887" start="3125" end="3130" title="Solar eclipse" label="Solar"/>
<link wikidata="Q44235" start="3135" end="3148" title="lunar eclipse" label="lunar eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q191536" start="3151" end="3172" title="Planetary conjunction" label="Planetary conjunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299642" start="3199" end="3232" title="Geographical zone" label="frigid, temperate and torrid zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="3260" end="3267" title="Equator" label="Equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="3272" end="3278" title="Tropic" label="Tropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q24384" start="3286" end="3292" title="season" label="season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312" start="3314" end="3320" title="Spring (season)" label="spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313" start="3322" end="3328" title="summer" label="summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314" start="3330" end="3336" title="autumn" label="autumn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311" start="3341" end="3347" title="winter" label="winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315" start="3349" end="3356" title="Equinox" label="Equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q123524" start="3363" end="3371" title="solstice" label="solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="3374" end="3381" title="Monsoon" label="Monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q774621" start="3384" end="3396" title="Midnight sun" label="Midnight sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q83371" start="3420" end="3427" title="seismic" label="seismic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="3429" end="3439" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2799675" start="3445" end="3453" title="seaquake" label="seaquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="3456" end="3463" title="tsunami" label="tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q83471" start="3467" end="3473" title="Geyser" label="Geyser"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="3476" end="3483" title="Volcano" label="Volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q463796" start="3565" end="3578" title="meteor impact" label="meteor impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458" start="3581" end="3586" title="novae" label="novae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="3591" end="3601" title="supernovae" label="supernovae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309635" start="3703" end="3729" title="Venus tablet of Ammisaduqa" label="Venus tablet of Ammisaduqa"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="3808" end="3813" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q787929" start="3886" end="3908" title="Babylonian astronomy" label="Babylonian astronomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q308" start="3936" end="3943" title="Mercury (planet)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="3976" end="3980" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="3982" end="3989" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="3994" end="4000" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="4071" end="4080" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268276" start="4132" end="4151" title="Chinese astronomy" label="Chinese astronomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887" start="4161" end="4174" title="solar eclipse" label="solar eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195050" start="4195" end="4205" title="Zhong Kang" label="Zhong Kang"/>
<link wikidata="Q875313" start="4293" end="4310" title="Book of Documents" label="Book of Documents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072961" start="4391" end="4407" title="Earthly Branches" label="Earthly Branches"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="4466" end="4473" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q787929" start="4540" end="4550" title="Mesopotamian astronomy" label="Babylonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4450794" start="4551" end="4566" title="Babylonian star catalogues" label="star catalogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q12889843" start="4609" end="4623" title="spring equinox (Northern Hemisphere)" label="spring equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q443902" start="4658" end="4668" title="Nabonassar" label="Nabonassar"/>
<link wikidata="Q751861" start="4730" end="4761" title="Babylonian astronomical diaries" label="Babylonian astronomical diaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q44235" start="4844" end="4857" title="lunar eclipse" label="lunar eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q105000" start="4984" end="4997" title="meteor shower" label="meteor shower"/>
<link wikidata="Q751843" start="5019" end="5039" title="Egyptian astronomy" label="Egyptian astronomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="5098" end="5103" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q23054" start="5114" end="5126" title="Comet Halley" label="Comet Halley"/>
<link wikidata="Q747720" start="5149" end="5173" title="Spring and Autumn Annals" label="Spring and Autumn Annals"/>
<link wikidata="Q36303" start="5208" end="5225" title="Thales of Miletus" label="Thales of Miletus"/>
<link wikidata="Q537110" start="5242" end="5251" title="Eclipse of Thales" label="predicted"/>
<link wikidata="Q42458" start="5281" end="5292" title="Anaximander" label="Anaximander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5315" end="5326" title="Anaximander#Cosmology" label="to conceive"/>
<link wikidata="Q34132" start="5390" end="5401" title="Cylinder" label="cylindrical"/>
<link wikidata="Q184274" start="5712" end="5731" title="celestial mechanics" label="celestial mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q178885" start="5785" end="5792" title="deity" label="deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="5802" end="5811" title="Greek mythology" label="mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q125551" start="5831" end="5841" title="Parmenides" label="Parmenides"/>
<link wikidata="Q59697" start="6022" end="6030" title="Hesperus" label="Hesperus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775444" start="6054" end="6064" title="Phosphorus (morning star)" label="Phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83041" start="6180" end="6190" title="Anaxagoras" label="Anaxagoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="6206" end="6210" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="6458" end="6463" title="Rock (geology)" label="rocky"/>
<link wikidata="Q691914" start="6470" end="6476" title="Opacity (optics)" label="opaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q212338" start="6528" end="6537" title="Philolaus" label="Philolaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q191359" start="6548" end="6560" title="Pythagoreanism" label="Pythagoreans"/>
<link wikidata="Q15097867" start="6569" end="6576" title="Pythagorean astronomical system" label="a model"/>
<link wikidata="Q609359" start="6752" end="6771" title="Tetractys" label="about the number 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140990" start="6824" end="6837" title="Counter-Earth" label="Counter-Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="6975" end="6980" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q371884" start="7001" end="7008" title="Timaeus (dialogue)" label="Timaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119786" start="7020" end="7039" title="Celestial spheres" label="circles and spheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q430297" start="7333" end="7344" title="fixed stars" label="fixed stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q12134" start="7360" end="7376" title="celestial sphere" label="celestial sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q185150" start="7418" end="7435" title="Eudoxus of Cnidus" label="Eudoxus of Cnidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="7469" end="7491" title="Geometry" label="geometric-mathematical"/>
<link wikidata="Q165800" start="7493" end="7503" title="Geocentrism" label="geocentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158346" start="7504" end="7536" title="Concentric spheres" label="model of the planetary movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="7590" end="7599" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q44235" start="7635" end="7648" title="lunar eclipse" label="lunar eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119786" start="7713" end="7729" title="Celestial spheres" label="heavenly spheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q4169" start="7741" end="7752" title="outer space" label="outer space"/>
<link wikidata="Q381913" start="7768" end="7774" title="Aether (classical element)" label="aether"/>
<link wikidata="Q316334" start="7788" end="7807" title="Heraclides Ponticus" label="Heraclides Ponticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q244743" start="7860" end="7873" title="rotation of the Earth" label="Earth rotates"/>
<link wikidata="Q351518" start="7969" end="7979" title="Simplicius of Cilicia" label="Simplicius"/>
<link wikidata="Q140188" start="8164" end="8184" title="Aristarchus of Samos" label="Aristarchus of Samos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091541" start="8196" end="8221" title="On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus)" label="first definite discussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q103983" start="8246" end="8265" title="Heliocentrism" label="heliocentric cosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q160020" start="8305" end="8311" title="shadow" label="shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="8319" end="8323" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8739" start="8574" end="8584" title="Archimedes" label="Archimedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364277" start="8603" end="8620" title="The Sand Reckoner" label="The Sand Reckoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645966" start="8706" end="8712" title="Stadion (unit)" label="stadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="8739" end="8749" title="light year" label="light year"/>
<link wikidata="Q180109" start="8769" end="8788" title="Apollonius of Perga" label="Apollonius of Perga"/>
<link wikidata="Q15354235" start="8838" end="8857" title="Apparent retrograde motion" label="apparent retrograde"/>
<link wikidata="Q961202" start="8939" end="8960" title="deferent and epicycle" label="deferent and epicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q43182" start="8975" end="8987" title="Eratosthenes" label="Eratosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="9066" end="9072" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q139798" start="9082" end="9102" title="Seleucus of Seleucia" label="Seleucus of Seleucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="9134" end="9138" title="tide" label="tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q159905" start="9281" end="9291" title="Hipparchus" label="Hipparchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q165074" start="9297" end="9305" title="parallax" label="parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q104225" start="9399" end="9409" title="precession" label="precession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315" start="9417" end="9424" title="equinox" label="equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q182324" start="9443" end="9464" title="Antikythera mechanism" label="Antikythera mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q846905" start="9829" end="9840" title="Book of Han" label="Book of Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582994" start="9884" end="9891" title="sunspot" label="sunspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="9904" end="9920" title="Claudius Ptolemy" label="Claudius Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q155952" start="9946" end="9954" title="Almagest" label="Almagest"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="10108" end="10117" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="10273" end="10277" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="10315" end="10324" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q8928" start="10519" end="10532" title="constellation" label="constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="10535" end="10540" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q348408" start="10777" end="10794" title="Martianus Capella" label="Martianus Capella"/>
<link wikidata="Q11359" start="11037" end="11046" title="Aryabhata" label="Aryabhata"/>
<link wikidata="Q101965" start="11385" end="11395" title="experiment" label="experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q83021" start="11408" end="11417" title="Empirical evidence" label="empirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469559" start="11501" end="11508" title="Diurnal cycle" label="diurnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q202943" start="11721" end="11732" title="Brahmagupta" label="Brahmagupta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887" start="11961" end="11966" title="Solar eclipse" label="solar"/>
<link wikidata="Q44235" start="11971" end="11984" title="lunar eclipse" label="lunar eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255366" start="11995" end="12013" title="Astronomy in medieval Islam" label="Persian astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9038" start="12015" end="12045" title="Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi" label="Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658115" start="12060" end="12063" title="Zij" label="Zij"/>
<link wikidata="Q29961325" start="12095" end="12110" title="Arabic numerals" label="Arabic numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059346" start="12119" end="12146" title="Hindu–Arabic numeral system" label="Hindu–Arabic numeral system"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="12204" end="12216" title="Astronomy" label="astronomical"/>
<link wikidata="Q336550" start="12265" end="12276" title="Al-Farghani" label="Al-Farghani"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="12325" end="12339" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q83094" start="12417" end="12429" title="axial precession" label="precessional"/>
<link wikidata="Q6999" start="12446" end="12461" title="Astronomical object" label="heavenly bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11826" start="12524" end="12533" title="Al-Biruni" label="Al-Biruni"/>
<link wikidata="Q44235" start="12561" end="12574" title="lunar eclipse" label="lunar eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="12792" end="12798" title="apogee" label="apogee"/>
<link wikidata="Q270085" start="12895" end="12903" title="Shen Kuo" label="Shen Kuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268276" start="12998" end="13017" title="Chinese astronomy" label="Chinese astronomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q10934" start="13045" end="13056" title="Crab Nebula" label="Crab Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q31759" start="13068" end="13078" title="Guest star (astronomy)" label="guest star"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="13116" end="13125" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="13172" end="13180" title="Al-Andalus" label="Andalusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11133" start="13192" end="13202" title="Al-Zarqali" label="Al-Zarqali"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="13235" end="13242" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9038" start="13247" end="13259" title="Al-Khwarizmi" label="Al-Khwarizmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="13336" end="13353" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="13456" end="13468" title="apsis" label="solar apogee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472565" start="13689" end="13705" title="Tables of Toledo" label="Tables of Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q367240" start="13722" end="13739" title="Gerard of Cremona" label="Gerard of Cremona"/>
<link wikidata="Q155952" start="13772" end="13780" title="Almagest" label="Almagest"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="13792" end="13798" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="13804" end="13809" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q256541" start="13830" end="13848" title="Robert Grosseteste" label="Robert Grosseteste"/>
<link wikidata="Q179745" start="14015" end="14019" title="Axial tilt" label="axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q333703" start="14186" end="14206" title="Fakhr al-Din al-Razi" label="Fakhr al-Din al-Razi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174339" start="14254" end="14272" title="Islamic cosmology" label="the physical world"/>
<link wikidata="Q263307" start="14287" end="14299" title="Aristotelianism" label="Aristotelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874323" start="14304" end="14314" title="Avicennism" label="Avicennian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47595" start="14608" end="14628" title="Alfonso X of Castile" label="Alfonso X of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q622577" start="14681" end="14697" title="Alfonsine Tables" label="Alfonsine Tables"/>
<link wikidata="Q69199" start="14735" end="14763" title="Toledo School of Translators" label="Toledo School of Translators"/>
<link wikidata="Q5836" start="14767" end="14780" title="Toledo, Spain" label="Toledo, Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q120200" start="14929" end="14940" title="ephemerides" label="ephemerides"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="14969" end="14980" title="astrology" label="astrologers"/>
<link wikidata="Q188518" start="14989" end="14999" title="horoscopes" label="horoscopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="15011" end="15017" title="Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q353633" start="15029" end="15045" title="Gersonides" label="Levi ben Gershon"/>
<link wikidata="Q718169" start="15547" end="15560" title="Ibn al-Shatir" label="Ibn al-Shatir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965418" start="15602" end="15608" title="equant" label="equant"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="15612" end="15619" title="Claudius Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83021" start="15685" end="15694" title="empirical" label="empirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="15704" end="15709" title="Moon" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q193181" start="15742" end="15753" title="observation" label="observation"/>
<link wikidata="Q310777" start="15765" end="15778" title="Nicole Oresme" label="Nicole Oresme"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803664" start="15827" end="15845" title="mean speed theorem" label="mean speed theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q83094" start="15951" end="15967" title="axial precession" label="axial precession"/>
<link wikidata="Q94921" start="15975" end="15980" title="Lunar distance (astronomy)" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="15991" end="15996" title="orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q104499" start="16079" end="16088" title="Planetary science" label="planetary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="16213" end="16218" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q179745" start="16226" end="16230" title="Axial tilt" label="axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q154751" start="16241" end="16257" title="Nicholas of Cusa" label="Nicholas of Cusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548030" start="16474" end="16493" title="Nilakantha Somayaji" label="Nilakantha Somayaji"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="16589" end="16608" title="Nicolaus Copernicus" label="Nicolaus Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q103983" start="16620" end="16632" title="Heliocentrism" label="heliocentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q675765" start="16649" end="16663" title="Commentariolus" label="Commentariolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225170" start="16686" end="16715" title="Magellan&amp;#x27;s circumnavigation" label="circumnavigation of the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496" start="16719" end="16727" title="Ferdinand Magellan" label="Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q201510" start="16728" end="16734" title="Juan Sebastián Elcano" label="Elcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q437882" start="16784" end="16790" title="Figure of the Earth" label="sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q845981" start="16855" end="16890" title="De revolutionibus orbium coelestium" label="De revolutionibus orbium coelestium"/>
<link wikidata="Q36620" start="16907" end="16918" title="Tycho Brahe" label="Tycho Brahe"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="16978" end="16984" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q79220" start="16986" end="16995" title="Uraniborg" label="Uraniborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194959" start="17046" end="17070" title="Great Comet of 1577" label="Great Comet of that year"/>
<link wikidata="Q509682" start="17111" end="17115" title="Hven" label="Hven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="17122" end="17132" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355663" start="17172" end="17189" title="Hagecius" label="Thadaeus Hagecius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="17195" end="17201" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q83029" start="17531" end="17543" title="Pope Gregory XIII" label="Gregory XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="17559" end="17577" title="Gregorian calendar" label="Gregorian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="17644" end="17659" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q19828" start="17695" end="17704" title="leap year" label="leap year"/>
<link wikidata="Q189607" start="17822" end="17863" title="Tropical year" label="&amp;#x27;tropical&amp;#x27; or &amp;#x27;solar&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q36330" start="18095" end="18109" title="Giordano Bruno" label="Giordano Bruno"/>
<link wikidata="Q381913" start="18417" end="18423" title="Aether (classical element)" label="aether"/>
<link wikidata="Q525491" start="18575" end="18582" title="Impetus (mechanics)" label="impetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q430297" start="18978" end="18989" title="fixed stars" label="fixed stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861183" start="19324" end="19339" title="Tychonic system" label="Tychonic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q192706" start="19598" end="19613" title="William Gilbert (physician)" label="William Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q39555" start="19640" end="19648" title="terrella" label="terrella"/>
<link wikidata="Q11421" start="19704" end="19710" title="magnet" label="magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500960" start="19724" end="19738" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q34735" start="19776" end="19783" title="compass" label="compass"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19800" end="19814" title="Poles of astronomical bodies#Magnetic poles" label="magnetic poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="19825" end="19840" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo Galilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q111124" start="19925" end="19931" title="Square (algebra)" label="square"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963" start="19962" end="19977" title="Johannes Kepler" label="Johannes Kepler"/>
<link wikidata="Q83219" start="20009" end="20033" title="Kepler&amp;#x27;s laws of planetary motion" label="laws of planetary motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="20264" end="20273" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q76468" start="20380" end="20395" title="Hans Lippershey" label="Hans Lippershey"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="20419" end="20430" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20447" end="20465" title="Refracting telescope#Galilean telescope" label="Galilean telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="20723" end="20727" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q315402" start="20825" end="20839" title="Thomas Harriot" label="Thomas Harriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="21028" end="21034" title="Impact crater" label="crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="21175" end="21184" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203" start="21273" end="21282" title="Galilean moons" label="four main"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946" start="21283" end="21299" title="moons of Jupiter" label="moons of Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134" start="21301" end="21309" title="Callisto (moon)" label="Callisto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143" start="21311" end="21317" title="Europa (moon)" label="Europa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3169" start="21319" end="21327" title="Ganymede (moon)" label="Ganymede"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123" start="21333" end="21335" title="Io (moon)" label="Io"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="21342" end="21348" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q28951811" start="21356" end="21370" title="planetary ring" label="planetary ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132911" start="21435" end="21450" title="phases of Venus" label="phases of Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q165800" start="21467" end="21483" title="Ptolemaic system" label="Ptolemaic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q165800" start="21499" end="21515" title="geocentric model" label="geocentric model"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21553" end="21558" title="Kepler&amp;#x27;s laws of planetary motion#Third law" label="third"/>
<link wikidata="Q192315" start="21666" end="21681" title="Pierre Gassendi" label="Pierre Gassendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q247899" start="21710" end="21728" title="transit of Mercury" label="transit of Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21873" end="21900" title="Libration#Lunar libration" label="lunar libration in latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q192706" start="21929" end="21944" title="William Gilbert (physician)" label="William Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q354631" start="21981" end="21998" title="Jeremiah Horrocks" label="Jeremiah Horrocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142007" start="22032" end="22048" title="William Crabtree" label="William Crabtree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537644" start="22084" end="22102" title="1639 transit of Venus" label="observe and record"/>
<link wikidata="Q185203" start="22105" end="22121" title="transit of Venus" label="transit of Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q102490" start="22132" end="22154" title="Evangelista Torricelli" label="Evangelista Torricelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q79757" start="22198" end="22207" title="barometer" label="barometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q81809" start="22230" end="22240" title="Atmospheric pressure" label="air weighs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11475" start="22289" end="22295" title="vacuum" label="vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q57963" start="22322" end="22339" title="Johannes Hevelius" label="Johannes Hevelius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22354" end="22382" title="Libration#Lunar libration" label="lunar libration in longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q159190" start="22406" end="22415" title="amplitude" label="amplitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290" start="22426" end="22439" title="Blaise Pascal" label="Blaise Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q607372" start="22492" end="22503" title="Puy de Dôme" label="Puy de Dôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q14279" start="22694" end="22719" title="Giovanni Domenico Cassini" label="Giovanni Domenico Cassini"/>
<link wikidata="Q46830" start="22724" end="22736" title="Robert Hooke" label="Robert Hooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q194256" start="22772" end="22786" title="Great Red Spot" label="Great Red Spot"/>
<link wikidata="Q39599" start="22797" end="22815" title="Christiaan Huygens" label="Christiaan Huygens"/>
<link wikidata="Q194" start="22827" end="22846" title="Rings of Saturn" label="Saturn&amp;#x27;s rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565" start="22879" end="22884" title="Titan (moon)" label="Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="22957" end="22975" title="Astronomical unit" label="distance Earth-Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="23293" end="23305" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020022" start="23313" end="23320" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s reflector" label="his own"/>
<link wikidata="Q35221" start="23321" end="23341" title="reflecting telescope" label="reflecting telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913798" start="23436" end="23456" title="spherical aberration" label="spherical aberration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087688" start="23465" end="23485" title="chromatic aberration" label="chromatic aberration"/>
<link wikidata="Q17958" start="23534" end="23541" title="Iapetus (moon)" label="Iapetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15050" start="23546" end="23550" title="Rhea (moon)" label="Rhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q720451" start="23561" end="23572" title="Jean Richer" label="Jean Richer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="23621" end="23638" title="astronomical unit" label="astronomical unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q160187" start="23677" end="23686" title="Ole Rømer" label="Ole Rømer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537" start="23732" end="23737" title="natural satellite" label="moons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="23759" end="23773" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q194" start="23887" end="23903" title="Cassini Division" label="Cassini Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q15047" start="23952" end="23958" title="Tethys (moon)" label="Tethys"/>
<link wikidata="Q15040" start="23963" end="23968" title="Dione (moon)" label="Dione"/>
<link wikidata="Q134465" start="24006" end="24034" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s law of universal gravitation" label="law of universal gravitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q205921" start="24053" end="24096" title="Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica" label="Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica"/>
<link wikidata="Q59122" start="24130" end="24151" title="differential rotation" label="differential rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="24214" end="24224" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="24247" end="24259" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q47434" start="24369" end="24382" title="Edmond Halley" label="Edmond Halley"/>
<link wikidata="Q23054" start="24424" end="24437" title="Halley&amp;#x27;s Comet" label="comet of 1682"/>
<link wikidata="Q185203" start="24659" end="24675" title="transit of Venus" label="transit of Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193223" start="24710" end="24723" title="proper motion" label="proper motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q430297" start="24770" end="24781" title="fixed stars" label="fixed stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q312278" start="24798" end="24811" title="James Bradley" label="James Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q211728" start="24840" end="24863" title="aberration of starlight" label="aberration of starlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q188771" start="25005" end="25031" title="French Academy of Sciences" label="French Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5700" start="25166" end="25173" title="Lapland (Finland)" label="Lapland"/>
<link wikidata="Q176609" start="25188" end="25201" title="Arctic Circle" label="Arctic Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="25219" end="25226" title="Equator" label="Equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062459" start="25232" end="25255" title="French Geodesic Mission" label="French Geodesic Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q208395" start="25302" end="25317" title="Spheroid" label="oblate spheroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q183273" start="25335" end="25339" title="Geographical pole" label="pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q11065" start="25351" end="25365" title="Pierre Bouguer" label="Pierre Bouguer"/>
<link wikidata="Q26681" start="25420" end="25449" title="Charles Marie de La Condamine" label="Charles Marie de La Condamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q20702" start="25492" end="25500" title="pendulum" label="pendulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12826066" start="25508" end="25517" title="plumb-bob" label="plumb-bob"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="25523" end="25537" title="second of arc" label="seconds of arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q14081" start="25570" end="25580" title="Chimborazo (volcano)" label="Chimborazo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18373" start="25630" end="25652" title="gravitational constant" label="gravitational constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q649143" start="25730" end="25742" title="Hollow Earth" label="hollow shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q190463" start="25816" end="25830" title="Lagrange point" label="Lagrange point"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604" start="25864" end="25878" title="Leonhard Euler" label="Leonhard Euler"/>
<link wikidata="Q80222" start="25896" end="25917" title="Joseph-Louis Lagrange" label="Joseph-Louis Lagrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="25957" end="25974" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25988" end="26003" title="Benjamin Franklin#Kite experiment and lightning rod" label="kite experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q33741" start="26063" end="26072" title="lightning" label="lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="26096" end="26106" title="Electricity" label="electrical"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="26128" end="26141" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q13599969" start="26163" end="26181" title="nebular hypothesis" label="nebular hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q63581" start="26218" end="26234" title="Johann Palitzsch" label="Johann Palitzsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q202703" start="26407" end="26416" title="La Caille" label="La Caille"/>
<link wikidata="Q58720" start="26487" end="26504" title="Mikhail Lomonosov" label="Mikhail Lomonosov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941" start="26549" end="26568" title="atmosphere of Venus" label="atmosphere of Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q375195" start="26626" end="26639" title="Johann Titius" label="Johann Titius"/>
<link wikidata="Q193698" start="26650" end="26661" title="Titius-Bode" label="Titius-Bode"/>
<link wikidata="Q76966" start="26701" end="26712" title="Johann Bode" label="Johann Bode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881842" start="26787" end="26814" title="second voyage of James Cook" label="second voyage of James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q323750" start="26894" end="26909" title="Terra Australis" label="Terra Australis"/>
<link wikidata="Q726736" start="26920" end="26934" title="Charles Hutton" label="Charles Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628445" start="26965" end="26988" title="Schiehallion experiment" label="Schiehallion experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q742129" start="27059" end="27073" title="planetary core" label="planetary core"/>
<link wikidata="Q14277" start="27226" end="27242" title="William Herschel" label="William Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q324" start="27271" end="27277" title="Uranus" label="Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524" start="27336" end="27351" title="Charles Messier" label="Charles Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q311022" start="27370" end="27384" title="Pierre Méchain" label="Pierre Méchain"/>
<link wikidata="Q14530" start="27397" end="27412" title="Messier object" label="first catalogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q42372" start="27420" end="27427" title="nebulae" label="nebulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q168845" start="27432" end="27445" title="star clusters" label="star clusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q249389" start="27466" end="27481" title="deep-sky object" label="deep-sky object"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="27529" end="27548" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="27612" end="27617" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322" start="27668" end="27675" title="Titania (moon)" label="Titania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3332" start="27680" end="27686" title="Oberon (moon)" label="Oberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303" start="27736" end="27745" title="Enceladus (moon)" label="Enceladus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15034" start="27750" end="27755" title="Mimas (moon)" label="Mimas"/>
<link wikidata="Q44481" start="27766" end="27780" title="Pierre Laplace" label="Pierre Laplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q42372" start="27868" end="27874" title="nebula" label="nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q131733" start="27901" end="27916" title="Henry Cavendish" label="Henry Cavendish"/>
<link wikidata="Q18370" start="27928" end="27981" title="Cavendish experiment" label="measures the gravitational constant in the laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q14280" start="28116" end="28131" title="Giuseppe Piazzi" label="Giuseppe Piazzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q596" start="28142" end="28147" title="Ceres (dwarf planet)" label="Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q193698" start="28213" end="28224" title="Titius-Bode" label="Titius-Bode"/>
<link wikidata="Q75828" start="28283" end="28306" title="Heinrich Wilhelm Olbers" label="Heinrich Wilhelm Olbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002" start="28317" end="28323" title="2 Pallas" label="Pallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q114202" start="28433" end="28449" title="Phaeton (hypothetical planet)" label="destroyed planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="28665" end="28673" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q77052" start="28754" end="28773" title="Karl Ludwig Harding" label="Karl Ludwig Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009" start="28797" end="28801" title="3 Juno" label="Juno"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030" start="28842" end="28847" title="4 Vesta" label="Vesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q318601" start="28858" end="28872" title="Alexis Bouvard" label="Alexis Bouvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="28903" end="28908" title="orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="28967" end="28978" title="gravitation" label="gravitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497813" start="28984" end="29013" title="stability of the Solar System" label="stability of the Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q218673" start="29059" end="29068" title="libration" label="libration"/>
<link wikidata="Q48724336" start="29124" end="29151" title="Traité de mécanique céleste" label="Traité de mécanique céleste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334001" start="29214" end="29230" title="Thomas Henderson (astronomer)" label="Thomas Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q906561" start="29257" end="29273" title="stellar parallax" label="stellar parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q12176" start="29277" end="29291" title="alpha Centauri" label="alpha Centauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q75845" start="29394" end="29418" title="Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel" label="Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q249302" start="29453" end="29461" title="61 Cygni" label="61 Cygni"/>
<link wikidata="Q103983" start="29508" end="29521" title="heliocentrism" label="heliocentrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q472490" start="29532" end="29546" title="John W. Draper" label="John W. Draper"/>
<link wikidata="Q179744" start="29555" end="29568" title="daguerreotype" label="daguerreotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q280855" start="29592" end="29615" title="Astrophotography" label="astronomical photograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q20015" start="29626" end="29636" title="John Couch Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q77055" start="29746" end="29764" title="Karl Ludwig Hencke" label="Karl Ludwig Hencke"/>
<link wikidata="Q105328" start="29814" end="29821" title="5 Astraea" label="Astraea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694" start="30039" end="30061" title="Alexander von Humboldt" label="Alexander von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179" start="30242" end="30255" title="asteroid belt" label="asteroid belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q104154" start="30266" end="30283" title="Urbain Le Verrier" label="Urbain Le Verrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q76431" start="30393" end="30405" title="Johann Galle" label="Johann Galle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356165" start="30406" end="30415" title="Discovery of Neptune" label="discovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q332" start="30435" end="30442" title="Neptune" label="Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q110869" start="30513" end="30528" title="William Lassell" label="William Lassell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359" start="30559" end="30565" title="Triton (moon)" label="Triton"/>
<link wikidata="Q314565" start="30639" end="30658" title="William Cranch Bond" label="William Cranch Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q314667" start="30663" end="30683" title="George Phillips Bond" label="George Phillips Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q15037" start="30712" end="30720" title="Hyperion (moon)" label="Hyperion"/>
<link wikidata="Q274223" start="30731" end="30744" title="Édouard Roche" label="Édouard Roche"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="30774" end="30779" title="tide" label="tidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q232086" start="30872" end="30883" title="Roche limit" label="Roche limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q110709" start="30975" end="30995" title="Annibale de Gasparis" label="Annibale de Gasparis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640" start="31019" end="31025" title="10 Hygiea" label="Hygiea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3343" start="31147" end="31152" title="Ariel (moon)" label="Ariel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338" start="31157" end="31164" title="Umbriel" label="Umbriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="31175" end="31194" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q71031" start="31372" end="31385" title="Robert Bunsen" label="Robert Bunsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q60052" start="31390" end="31406" title="Gustav Kirchhoff" label="Gustav Kirchhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868895" start="31419" end="31431" title="History of spectroscopy" label="spectroscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="31486" end="31502" title="chemical element" label="chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="31553" end="31561" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="31572" end="31578" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="31606" end="31619" title="spectroscopic" label="spectroscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q312416" start="31690" end="31703" title="Angelo Secchi" label="Angelo Secchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q14281" start="31755" end="31776" title="Giovanni Schiaparelli" label="Giovanni Schiaparelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q131136" start="31791" end="31797" title="meteor" label="meteor"/>
<link wikidata="Q298581" start="31909" end="31922" title="Jules Janssen" label="Jules Janssen"/>
<link wikidata="Q190003" start="32015" end="32027" title="chromosphere" label="chromosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q127959" start="32111" end="32125" title="Norman Lockyer" label="Norman Lockyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="32264" end="32270" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6372" start="32329" end="32340" title="photosphere" label="photosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q106559" start="32351" end="32361" title="Asaph Hall" label="Asaph Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548" start="32390" end="32396" title="Deimos (moon)" label="Deimos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547" start="32401" end="32407" title="Phobos (moon)" label="Phobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q154844" start="32422" end="32449" title="Michelson–Morley experiment" label="Michelson–Morley experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q192388" start="32475" end="32490" title="relative motion" label="relative motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q208702" start="32533" end="32552" title="luminiferous aether" label="luminiferous aether"/>
<link wikidata="Q381913" start="32619" end="32625" title="Aether (classical element)" label="aether"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="32642" end="32651" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q975357" start="32686" end="32701" title="aether theories" label="aether theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q204999" start="32712" end="32734" title="Edward Emerson Barnard" label="Edward Emerson Barnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257" start="32765" end="32773" title="Amalthea (moon)" label="Amalthea"/>
<link wikidata="Q218575" start="32784" end="32799" title="Percival Lowell" label="Percival Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q875660" start="32912" end="32926" title="Martian canals" label="Martian canals"/>
<link wikidata="Q601319" start="33084" end="33106" title="Life on Mars" label="intelligent life forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q122701" start="33117" end="33150" title="William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin" label="William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q477816" start="33196" end="33221" title="Kelvin–Helmholtz mechanism" label="gravitational contraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q310222" start="33367" end="33390" title="William Henry Pickering" label="William Henry Pickering"/>
<link wikidata="Q17975" start="33420" end="33426" title="Phoebe (moon)" label="Phoebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9123" start="33453" end="33470" title="Ernest Rutherford" label="Ernest Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="33517" end="33534" title="radioactive decay" label="radioactive decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q214753" start="33634" end="33652" title="radiometric dating" label="radiometric dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q76712" start="33740" end="33748" title="Max Wolf" label="Max Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q19635" start="33763" end="33778" title="Trojan asteroid" label="Trojan asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q155704" start="33779" end="33787" title="588 Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628421" start="33800" end="33816" title="meteor air burst" label="meteor air burst"/>
<link wikidata="Q125953" start="33817" end="33837" title="Tunguska event" label="occurs near Tunguska"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="33841" end="33856" title="Siberia" label="Siberia, Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q463796" start="33876" end="33888" title="impact event" label="impact event"/>
<link wikidata="Q243445" start="33936" end="33955" title="Andrija Mohorovičić" label="Andrija Mohorovičić"/>
<link wikidata="Q194259" start="33970" end="33988" title="Mohorovičić discontinuity" label="Moho discontinuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4232578" start="34028" end="34033" title="Crust (geology)" label="crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364434" start="34042" end="34048" title="Mantle (geology)" label="mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q76323" start="34059" end="34073" title="Alfred Wegener" label="Alfred Wegener"/>
<link wikidata="Q178605" start="34087" end="34104" title="continental drift" label="continental drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q363965" start="34184" end="34196" title="Robert T. A. Innes" label="Robert Innes"/>
<link wikidata="Q14266" start="34207" end="34223" title="Proxima Centauri" label="Proxima Centauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q215022" start="34275" end="34299" title="Arthur Stanley Eddington" label="Arthur Stanley Eddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="34342" end="34357" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="34365" end="34393" title="General Theory of Relativity" label="General Theory of Relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q622176" start="34431" end="34467" title="Apsidal precession" label="irregularities in the orbital motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q213636" start="34541" end="34547" title="Vulcan (hypothetical planet)" label="Vulcan"/>
<link wikidata="Q278891" start="34565" end="34577" title="Great Debate (astronomy)" label="Great Debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q281170" start="34586" end="34600" title="Harlow Shapley" label="Harlow Shapley"/>
<link wikidata="Q349821" start="34605" end="34617" title="Heber Curtis" label="Heber Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="34619" end="34627" title="Galaxy" label="galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q190232" start="34764" end="34778" title="Clyde Tombaugh" label="Clyde Tombaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q339" start="34789" end="34794" title="Pluto" label="Pluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2803875" start="34831" end="34843" title="Planets beyond Neptune" label="ninth planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q436047" start="34875" end="34889" title="Seth Nicholson" label="Seth Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284854" start="34894" end="34907" title="Edison Pettit" label="Edison Pettit"/>
<link wikidata="Q319212" start="34962" end="34979" title="Karl Guthe Jansky" label="Karl Guthe Jansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262" start="35000" end="35012" title="radio signal" label="radio signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4169" start="35026" end="35037" title="outer space" label="outer space"/>
<link wikidata="Q8866" start="35072" end="35083" title="Sagittarius (constellation)" label="Sagittarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306" start="35203" end="35218" title="radio astronomy" label="radio astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17075372" start="35239" end="35250" title="Explorer II" label="Explorer II"/>
<link wikidata="Q155794" start="35409" end="35419" title="Hans Bethe" label="Hans Bethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057093" start="35450" end="35458" title="Hydrogen fusion" label="two main"/>
<link wikidata="Q238323" start="35476" end="35492" title="nuclear reaction" label="nuclear reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q192948" start="35523" end="35536" title="Gerard Kuiper" label="Gerard Kuiper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565" start="35566" end="35571" title="Titan (moon)" label="Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q174640" start="35648" end="35658" title="V-2 rocket" label="V-2 rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352" start="35761" end="35768" title="Miranda (moon)" label="Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q16076" start="35793" end="35799" title="Nereid (moon)" label="Nereid"/>
<link wikidata="Q309861" start="35810" end="35818" title="Jan Oort" label="Jan Oort"/>
<link wikidata="Q40864" start="35910" end="35920" title="Oort cloud" label="Oort cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="36006" end="36023" title="astronomical unit" label="astronomical unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q427" start="36207" end="36218" title="Kuiper belt" label="Kuiper belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q271963" start="36266" end="36281" title="James Van Allen" label="James Van Allen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36289" end="36299" title="Explorer 1" label="Explorer 1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36316" end="36326" title="Explorer 3" label="Explorer 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915" start="36377" end="36390" title="magnetosphere" label="magnetosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q188533" start="36391" end="36405" title="Van Allen radiation belt" label="radiation belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384577" start="36440" end="36450" title="Explorer 6" label="Explorer 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q942814" start="36520" end="36526" title="Luna 3" label="Luna 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q816838" start="36620" end="36628" title="Far side of the Moon" label="far side"/>
<link wikidata="Q208984" start="36645" end="36654" title="Mariner 2" label="Mariner 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q203805" start="36747" end="36756" title="Mariner 4" label="Mariner 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159933" start="36842" end="36848" title="Luna 9" label="Luna 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q719613" start="36946" end="36954" title="Venera 4" label="Venera 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q184201" start="37035" end="37043" title="Apollo 8" label="Apollo 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q43653" start="37139" end="37148" title="Apollo 11" label="Apollo 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q318438" start="37229" end="37242" title="Moon rock" label="lunar samples"/>
<link wikidata="Q152800" start="37273" end="37281" title="Venera 7" label="Venera 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q203801" start="37407" end="37416" title="Mariner 9" label="Mariner 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q520" start="37627" end="37639" title="Olympus Mons" label="Olympus Mons"/>
<link wikidata="Q621110" start="37662" end="37678" title="Valles Marineris" label="Valles Marineris"/>
<link wikidata="Q718908" start="37724" end="37730" title="Mars 3" label="Mars 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q190776" start="37835" end="37841" title="Skylab" label="Skylab"/>
<link wikidata="Q127948" start="37877" end="37890" title="coronal holes" label="coronal holes"/>
<link wikidata="Q59103" start="37907" end="37917" title="Pioneer 10" label="Pioneer 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q59131" start="38049" end="38059" title="Mariner 10" label="Mariner 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q728292" start="38232" end="38240" title="Venera 9" label="Venera 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q233708" start="38339" end="38377" title="Viking program" label="&amp;quot;Viking 1&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;2&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7929497" start="38496" end="38540" title="Viking spacecraft biological experiments" label="biological experiments with the Martian soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q470389" start="38567" end="38579" title="James L. Elliot" label="James Elliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q171473" start="38594" end="38609" title="rings of Uranus" label="rings of Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501126" start="38657" end="38684" title="Kuiper Airborne Observatory" label="Kuiper Airborne Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q58963" start="38695" end="38708" title="Charles Kowal" label="Charles Kowal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15611" start="38719" end="38725" title="2060 Chiron" label="Chiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q10734" start="38737" end="38744" title="Centaur (minor planet)" label="centaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q315845" start="38755" end="38768" title="James Christy" label="James Christy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604" start="38779" end="38785" title="Charon (moon)" label="Charon"/>
<link wikidata="Q279148" start="38831" end="38844" title="Pioneer Venus" label="Pioneer Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351673" start="38893" end="38908" title="Peter Goldreich" label="Peter Goldreich"/>
<link wikidata="Q363194" start="38913" end="38927" title="Scott Tremaine" label="Scott Tremaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q891653" start="38938" end="38956" title="Boltzmann equation" label="Boltzmann equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q59113" start="39196" end="39206" title="Pioneer 11" label="Pioneer 11"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39330" end="39336" title="Rings of Saturn#F Ring" label="F ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565" start="39366" end="39371" title="Titan (moon)" label="Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q512492" start="39481" end="39494" title="shepherd moon" label="shepherd moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q48469" start="39566" end="39575" title="Voyager 1" label="Voyager 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3060" start="39623" end="39634" title="Rings of Jupiter" label="ring system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3096" start="39647" end="39662" title="Volcanology of Io" label="volcanoes on Io"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203" start="39685" end="39699" title="Galilean moons" label="Galilean moons"/>
<link wikidata="Q48475" start="39716" end="39725" title="Voyager 2" label="Voyager 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143" start="39814" end="39820" title="Europa (moon)" label="Europa"/>
<link wikidata="Q372064" start="40006" end="40015" title="Venera 13" label="Venera 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q324" start="40246" end="40252" title="Uranus" label="Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q660356" start="40294" end="40300" title="Giotto probe" label="Giotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028332" start="40365" end="40378" title="Halley Armada" label="Halley Armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q23054" start="40442" end="40461" title="Halley&amp;#x27;s Comet" label="Halley&amp;#x27;s Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q332" start="40691" end="40698" title="Neptune" label="Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513" start="40734" end="40756" title="Hubble Space Telescope" label="Hubble Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370491" start="40937" end="40960" title="Portrait of the Planets" label="Portrait of the Planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q474472" start="41008" end="41021" title="Pale Blue Dot" label="Pale Blue Dot"/>
<link wikidata="Q466932" start="41067" end="41075" title="Magellan probe" label="Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q182008" start="41139" end="41146" title="Galileo project" label="Galileo"/>
<link wikidata="Q158244" start="41201" end="41207" title="951 Gaspra" label="Gaspra"/>
<link wikidata="Q382992" start="41274" end="41286" title="David Jewitt" label="David Jewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q197941" start="41291" end="41299" title="Jane Luu" label="Jane Luu"/>
<link wikidata="Q217439" start="41307" end="41327" title="University of Hawaii" label="University of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q140980" start="41337" end="41343" title="15760 Albion" label="Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q427" start="41391" end="41402" title="Kuiper belt" label="Kuiper belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q149012" start="41422" end="41425" title="243 Ida" label="Ida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41548" end="41554" title="243 Ida#Dactyl" label="Dactyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q657829" start="41603" end="41616" title="asteroid moon" label="asteroid moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076" start="41638" end="41658" title="Comet Shoemaker–Levy 9" label="Comet Shoemaker–Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q238053" start="41744" end="41753" title="collision" label="collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q201771" start="41958" end="41973" title="Mars Pathfinder" label="Mars Pathfinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770537" start="42064" end="42073" title="Sojourner (rover)" label="Sojourner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42142" end="42174" title="Sojourner (rover)#Control system" label="teleoperated and semi-autonomous"/>
<link wikidata="Q217188" start="42191" end="42205" title="NEAR Shoemaker" label="NEAR Shoemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q265392" start="42258" end="42277" title="near-Earth asteroid" label="near-Earth asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q16711" start="42279" end="42283" title="433 Eros" label="Eros"/>
<link wikidata="Q499195" start="42312" end="42325" title="Chad Trujillo" label="Chad Trujillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q298913" start="42330" end="42343" title="Michael E. Brown" label="Michael Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="42347" end="42354" title="Caltech" label="Caltech"/>
<link wikidata="Q191684" start="42362" end="42381" title="Palomar Observatory" label="Palomar Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022867" start="42395" end="42407" title="minor planet" label="minor planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q15586" start="42408" end="42414" title="50000 Quaoar" label="Quaoar"/>
<link wikidata="Q427" start="42422" end="42433" title="Kuiper belt" label="Kuiper belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q453758" start="42471" end="42487" title="David L. Rabinowitz" label="David Rabinowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q15610" start="42497" end="42502" title="90377 Sedna" label="Sedna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592" start="42512" end="42534" title="trans-Neptunian object" label="trans-Neptunian object"/>
<link wikidata="Q131687" start="42624" end="42641" title="termination shock" label="termination shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q79833" start="42663" end="42673" title="solar wind" label="solar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q131687" start="42807" end="42818" title="heliosheath" label="heliosheath"/>
<link wikidata="Q15603" start="42887" end="42892" title="90482 Orcus" label="Orcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q601" start="42982" end="42988" title="Haumea" label="Haumea"/>
<link wikidata="Q601340" start="43011" end="43033" title="José Luis Ortiz Moreno" label="José Luis Ortiz Moreno"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166029" start="43039" end="43059" title="Controversy over the discovery of Haumea" label="claims the discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q165585" start="43080" end="43095" title="Cassini–Huygens" label="Cassini–Huygens"/>
<link wikidata="Q478788" start="43219" end="43232" title="cryovolcanism" label="cryovolcanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303" start="43245" end="43254" title="Enceladus (moon)" label="Enceladus"/>
<link wikidata="Q210790" start="43268" end="43289" title="Saturn&amp;#x27;s hexagon" label="Saturn&amp;#x27;s hexagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565" start="43341" end="43346" title="Titan (moon)" label="Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q611" start="43407" end="43411" title="Eris (dwarf planet)" label="Eris"/>
<link wikidata="Q102656" start="43498" end="43506" title="Dysnomia (moon)" label="Dysnomia"/>
<link wikidata="Q604" start="43723" end="43731" title="Makemake" label="Makemake"/>
<link wikidata="Q220827" start="43752" end="43775" title="Mars Exploration Rovers" label="Mars Exploration Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547" start="43912" end="43918" title="Phobos (moon)" label="Phobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q275444" start="43936" end="43944" title="Hayabusa" label="Hayabusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q149374" start="43980" end="43987" title="25143 Itokawa" label="Itokawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="44093" end="44096" title="IAU" label="IAU"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361306" start="44117" end="44147" title="IAU definition of planet" label="revised definition of a planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2199" start="44195" end="44207" title="dwarf planet" label="dwarf planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587" start="44232" end="44240" title="225088 Gonggong" label="Gonggong"/>
<link wikidata="Q12036333" start="44273" end="44286" title="Megan Schwamb" label="Megan Schwamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q48558" start="44393" end="44397" title="Dawn (spacecraft)" label="Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030" start="44454" end="44459" title="4 Vesta" label="Vesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q17782" start="44518" end="44525" title="Methone (moon)" label="Methone"/>
<link wikidata="Q165585" start="44558" end="44565" title="Cassini–Huygens" label="Cassini"/>
<link wikidata="Q596" start="44696" end="44701" title="Ceres (dwarf planet)" label="Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q182539" start="44718" end="44727" title="MESSENGER" label="MESSENGER"/>
<link wikidata="Q15981112" start="44862" end="44873" title="Rings of Chariklo" label="ring system"/>
<link wikidata="Q10734" start="44902" end="44909" title="Centaur (small Solar System body)" label="centaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q11559" start="44910" end="44918" title="Chariklo" label="Chariklo"/>
<link wikidata="Q48572" start="44973" end="44980" title="Rosetta (spacecraft)" label="Rosetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="45016" end="45021" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q844672" start="45038" end="45063" title="67P/Churyumov–Gerasimenko" label="67P/Churyumov–Gerasimenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041962" start="45113" end="45119" title="Philae (spacecraft)" label="Philae"/>
<link wikidata="Q48461" start="45311" end="45323" title="New Horizons" label="New Horizons"/>
<link wikidata="Q42313338" start="45449" end="45463" title="&amp;#x27;Oumuamua" label="&amp;#x27;Oumuamua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441216" start="45481" end="45500" title="interstellar object" label="interstellar object"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45600" end="45608" title="486958 Arrokoth#Exploration" label="Arrokoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q67328765" start="45645" end="45655" title="2I/Borisov" label="2I/Borisov"/>
<link wikidata="Q47482008" start="45752" end="45784" title="Double Asteroid Redirection Test" label="Double Asteroid Redirection Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q25387442" start="45844" end="45853" title="Dimorphos" label="Dimorphos"/>
<link wikidata="Q657829" start="45859" end="45876" title="minor-planet moon" label="minor-planet moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265762" start="45893" end="45900" title="65803 Didymos" label="Didymos"/>
<link wikidata="Q109650148" start="46105" end="46114" title="LICIACube" label="LICIACube"/>
<link wikidata="Q3770855" start="46171" end="46216" title="Discovery and exploration of the Solar System" label="Discovery and exploration of the Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q37642" start="46219" end="46280" title="Timeline of discovery of Solar System planets and their moons" label="Timeline of discovery of Solar System planets and their moons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368937" start="46283" end="46319" title="Timeline of Solar System exploration" label="Timeline of Solar System exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q104861265" start="46322" end="46366" title="Timeline of first images of Earth from space" label="Timeline of first images of Earth from space"/>
<link wikidata="Q30593148" start="46369" end="46391" title="List of former planets" label="List of former planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543149" start="46394" end="46435" title="List of hypothetical Solar System objects" label="List of hypothetical Solar System objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q65085983" start="46451" end="46488" title="Historical models of the Solar System" label="Historical models of the Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q50056" start="46491" end="46511" title="History of astronomy" label="History of astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723682" start="46514" end="46547" title="Timeline of cosmological theories" label="Timeline of cosmological theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q40563" start="46709" end="46737" title="List of Solar System objects" label="List of Solar System objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q955475" start="46740" end="46799" title="List of gravitationally rounded objects of the Solar System" label="List of gravitationally rounded objects of the Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q37638" start="46802" end="46828" title="List of natural satellites" label="List of natural satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q244288" start="46831" end="46861" title="List of possible dwarf planets" label="List of possible dwarf planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q37651" start="46864" end="46885" title="List of minor planets" label="List of minor planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q18715561" start="46901" end="46933" title="List of unnumbered minor planets" label="List of unnumbered minor planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q256564" start="46936" end="46967" title="List of trans-Neptunian objects" label="List of trans-Neptunian objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q48844840" start="46983" end="47025" title="List of unnumbered trans-Neptunian objects" label="List of unnumbered trans-Neptunian objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q121226993" start="47028" end="47043" title="Lists of comets" label="Lists of comets"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58931" wikidata="Q186913" url="?curid=58931" title="Timeline of solar astronomy">
<text>[[Timeline]] of solar [[astronomy]]

==10th century==
* 900–929 — Muhammad ibn Jābir al-Harrānī al-Battānī (Albatenius) discovers that the direction of the Sun&#x27;s eccentricity is changing

==17th century==
* 1613 — Galileo Galilei uses sunspot observations to demonstrate the rotation of the Sun
* 1619 — Johannes Kepler postulates a solar wind to explain the direction of comet tails

==19th century==
* 1802 — William Hyde Wollaston observes dark lines in the solar spectrum
* 1814 — Joseph Fraunhofer systematically studies the dark lines in the solar spectrum
* 1834 — Hermann Helmholtz proposes gravitational contraction as the energy source for the Sun
* 1843 — Heinrich Schwabe announces his discovery of the sunspot cycle and estimates its period to be about a decade
* 1852 — Edward Sabine shows that sunspot number is correlated with geomagnetic field variations
* 1859 — Richard Carrington discovers solar flares
* 1860 — Gustav Kirchhoff and Robert Bunsen discover that each chemical element has its own distinct set of spectral lines
* 1861 — Gustav Spörer discovers the variation of sun-spot latitudes during a solar cycle, explained by Spörer&#x27;s law
* 1863 — Richard Carrington discovers the differential nature of solar rotation
* 1868 — Pierre Janssen and Norman Lockyer discover an unidentified yellow line in solar prominence spectra and suggest it comes from a new element which they name &quot;helium&quot;
* 1893 — Edward Maunder discovers the 1645-1715 Maunder sunspot minimum

==20th century==
* 1904 — Edward Maunder plots the first sunspot &quot;butterfly diagram&quot;
* 1906 — Karl Schwarzschild explains solar limb darkening
* 1908 — George Hale discovers the Zeeman splitting of spectral lines from sunspots
* 1925 — Cecilia Payne proposes hydrogen is the dominant element of the Sun, not iron
* 1929 — Bernard Lyot invents the coronagraph and observes the corona with an &quot;artificial eclipse&quot;
* 1942 — J.S. Hey detects solar radio waves
* 1949 — Herbert Friedman detects solar X-rays
* 1960 — Robert B. Leighton, Robert Noyes, and George Simon discover solar five-minute oscillations by observing the Doppler shifts of solar dark lines
* 1961 — Horace W. Babcock proposes the magnetic coiling sunspot theory
* 1970 — Roger Ulrich, John Leibacher, and Robert F. Stein deduce from theoretical solar models that the interior of the Sun could act as a resonant acoustic cavity
* 1975 — Franz-Ludwig Deubner makes the first accurate measurements of the period and horizontal wavelength of the five-minute solar oscillations
* 1981 — NASA retrieves data from 1978 that shows a comet crashing into the Sun

==21st century==
* 2004 — largest solar flare ever recorded occurs

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q186913" start="0" end="35" title="Timeline of solar astronomy" label="[[Timeline]] of solar [[astronomy]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q11079" start="66" end="106" title="Muhammad ibn Jābir al-Harrānī al-Battānī" label="Muhammad ibn Jābir al-Harrānī al-Battānī"/>
<link wikidata="Q208474" start="167" end="179" title="Orbital eccentricity" label="eccentricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="219" end="234" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo Galilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582994" start="240" end="247" title="sunspot" label="sunspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="296" end="299" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963" start="309" end="324" title="Johannes Kepler" label="Johannes Kepler"/>
<link wikidata="Q79833" start="338" end="348" title="solar wind" label="solar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="377" end="382" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q312975" start="416" end="438" title="William Hyde Wollaston" label="William Hyde Wollaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q133139" start="472" end="480" title="electromagnetic spectrum" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q43948" start="490" end="507" title="Joseph von Fraunhofer" label="Joseph Fraunhofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q60024" start="577" end="594" title="Hermann von Helmholtz" label="Hermann Helmholtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="604" end="615" title="gravitation" label="gravitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q77209" start="672" end="688" title="Heinrich Schwabe" label="Heinrich Schwabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q49385" start="728" end="733" title="Solar cycle" label="cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q39911" start="773" end="779" title="decade" label="decade"/>
<link wikidata="Q311223" start="789" end="802" title="Edward Sabine" label="Edward Sabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500960" start="848" end="865" title="geomagnetic field" label="geomagnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q453690" start="886" end="904" title="Richard Christopher Carrington" label="Richard Carrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q119830" start="915" end="926" title="solar flare" label="solar flare"/>
<link wikidata="Q60052" start="937" end="953" title="Gustav Kirchhoff" label="Gustav Kirchhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q71031" start="958" end="971" title="Robert Bunsen" label="Robert Bunsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="991" end="1007" title="chemical element" label="chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="1036" end="1049" title="spectral line" label="spectral line"/>
<link wikidata="Q60902" start="1060" end="1073" title="Gustav Spörer" label="Gustav Spörer"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="1110" end="1118" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537964" start="1155" end="1172" title="Spörer&amp;#x27;s law" label="Spörer&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q453690" start="1182" end="1200" title="Richard Christopher Carrington" label="Richard Carrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q298581" start="1262" end="1276" title="Pierre Janssen" label="Pierre Janssen"/>
<link wikidata="Q127959" start="1281" end="1295" title="Norman Lockyer" label="Norman Lockyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q221699" start="1336" end="1352" title="solar prominence" label="solar prominence"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="1423" end="1429" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q177186" start="1445" end="1459" title="Edward Maunder" label="Edward Maunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q827568" start="1484" end="1507" title="Maunder sunspot minimum" label="Maunder sunspot minimum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529451" start="1580" end="1597" title="butterfly diagram" label="butterfly diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q57145" start="1613" end="1631" title="Karl Schwarzschild" label="Karl Schwarzschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q772102" start="1641" end="1661" title="Limb darkening" label="solar limb darkening"/>
<link wikidata="Q312288" start="1671" end="1682" title="George Hale" label="George Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q201805" start="1697" end="1713" title="Zeeman effect" label="Zeeman splitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q234909" start="1755" end="1768" title="Cecilia Payne" label="Cecilia Payne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1778" end="1821" title="Cecilia Payne#Doctorate" label="hydrogen is the dominant element of the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q433773" start="1841" end="1853" title="Bernard Lyot" label="Bernard Lyot"/>
<link wikidata="Q835032" start="1866" end="1877" title="coronagraph" label="coronagraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q113000019" start="1895" end="1901" title="solar corona" label="corona"/>
<link wikidata="Q141022" start="1927" end="1934" title="eclipse" label="eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093193" start="1950" end="1958" title="J.S. Hey" label="J.S. Hey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262" start="1973" end="1983" title="radio wave" label="radio wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096312" start="1994" end="2010" title="Herbert Friedman" label="Herbert Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="2025" end="2030" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q934337" start="2041" end="2059" title="Robert B. Leighton" label="Robert B. Leighton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2061" end="2073" title="Robert Noyes" label="Robert Noyes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2079" end="2091" title="George Simon (scientist)" label="George Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727" start="2112" end="2118" title="minute" label="minute"/>
<link wikidata="Q170475" start="2119" end="2130" title="oscillation" label="oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q76436" start="2149" end="2162" title="Doppler shift" label="Doppler shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q712375" start="2193" end="2210" title="Horace W. Babcock" label="Horace W. Babcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036889" start="2224" end="2255" title="Babcock Model" label="magnetic coiling sunspot theory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2265" end="2277" title="Roger Ulrich" label="Roger Ulrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q12799188" start="2279" end="2293" title="John Leibacher" label="John Leibacher"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2299" end="2314" title="Robert F. Stein" label="Robert F. Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q172858" start="2396" end="2404" title="resonance" label="resonant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2405" end="2420" title="acoustic cavity" label="acoustic cavity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2430" end="2450" title="Franz-Ludwig Deubner" label="Franz-Ludwig Deubner"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="2518" end="2528" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="2576" end="2580" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q119830" start="2682" end="2693" title="solar flare" label="solar flare"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58932" wikidata="Q986134" url="?curid=58932" title="Timeline of stellar astronomy">
<text>[[Timeline]] of [[stellar astronomy]]

* 1200 BC — Chinese star names appear on oracle bones used for divination.
* 134 BC — Hipparchus creates the magnitude scale of stellar apparent luminosities
* 185 AD — Chinese astronomers become the first to observe a supernova, the SN 185
* 964 — Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi (Azophi) writes the &quot;Book of Fixed Stars&quot;, in which he makes the first recorded observations of the Andromeda Galaxy and the Large Magellanic Cloud, and lists numerous stars with their positions, magnitudes, brightness, and colour, and gives drawings for each constellation
* 1000s (decade) — The Persian astronomer, Al-Biruni, describes the Milky Way galaxy as a collection of numerous nebulous stars
* 1006 — Ali ibn Ridwan and Chinese astronomers observe the SN 1006, the brightest stellar event ever recorded
* 1054 — Chinese and Arab astronomers observe the SN 1054, responsible for the creation of the Crab Nebula, the only nebula whose creation was observed
* 1181 — Chinese astronomers observe the SN 1181 supernova
* 1580 — Taqi al-Din measures the right ascension of the stars at the Constantinople observatory of Taqi ad-Din using an &quot;observational clock&quot; he invented and which he described as &quot;a mechanical clock with three dials which show the hours, the minutes, and the seconds&quot;
* 1596 — David Fabricius notices that Mira&#x27;s brightness varies
* 1672 — Geminiano Montanari notices that Algol&#x27;s brightness varies
* 1686 — Gottfried Kirch notices that Chi Cygni&#x27;s brightness varies
* 1718 — Edmund Halley discovers stellar proper motions by comparing his astrometric measurements with those of the Greeks
* 1782 — John Goodricke notices that the brightness variations of Algol are periodic and proposes that it is partially eclipsed by a body moving around it
* 1784 — Edward Pigott discovers the first Cepheid variable star
* 1838 — Thomas Henderson, Friedrich Struve, and Friedrich Bessel measure stellar parallaxes
* 1844 — Friedrich Bessel explains the wobbling motions of Sirius and Procyon by suggesting that these stars have dark companions
* 1906 — Arthur Eddington begins his statistical study of stellar motions
* 1908 — Henrietta Leavitt discovers the Cepheid period-luminosity relation
* 1910 — Ejnar Hertzsprung and Henry Norris Russell study the relation between magnitudes and spectral types of stars
* 1924 — Arthur Eddington develops the main sequence mass-luminosity relationship
* 1929 — George Gamow proposes hydrogen fusion as the energy source for stars
* 1938 — Hans Bethe and Carl von Weizsäcker detail the proton–proton chain and CNO cycle in stars
* 1939 — Rupert Wildt realizes the importance of the negative hydrogen ion for stellar opacity
* 1952 — Walter Baade distinguishes between Cepheid I and Cepheid II variable stars
* 1953 — Fred Hoyle predicts a carbon-12 resonance to allow stellar triple alpha reactions at reasonable stellar interior temperatures
* 1961 — Chūshirō Hayashi publishes his work on the Hayashi track of fully convective stars
* 1963 — Fred Hoyle and William A. Fowler conceive the idea of supermassive stars
* 1964 — Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar and Richard Feynman develop a general relativistic theory of stellar pulsations and show that supermassive stars are subject to a general relativistic instability
* 1967 — Eric Becklin and Gerry Neugebauer discover the Becklin-Neugebauer Object at 10 micrometres
* 1977 — (May 25) The &quot;Star Wars&quot; film is released and became a worldwide phenomenon, boosting interests in stellar systems.
* 2012 — (May 2) First visual proof of existence of black-holes. Suvi Gezari&#x27;s team in Johns Hopkins University, using the Hawaiian telescope Pan-STARRS 1, publish images of a supermassive black hole 2.7 million light-years away swallowing a red giant.

==See also==

* Timeline of astronomy

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q986134" start="0" end="37" title="Timeline of stellar astronomy" label="[[Timeline]] of [[stellar astronomy]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q283127" start="80" end="92" title="oracle bone" label="oracle bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q159905" start="125" end="135" title="Hipparchus" label="Hipparchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="148" end="183" title="apparent magnitude" label="magnitude scale of stellar apparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="184" end="196" title="luminosity" label="luminosities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268276" start="208" end="227" title="Chinese astronomy" label="Chinese astronomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="258" end="267" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q28860" start="273" end="279" title="SN 185" label="SN 185"/>
<link wikidata="Q11075" start="288" end="309" title="Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi" label="Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087785" start="336" end="355" title="Book of Fixed Stars" label="Book of Fixed Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="420" end="436" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="Andromeda Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49957" start="445" end="467" title="Large Magellanic Cloud" label="Large Magellanic Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226611" start="473" end="493" title="List of Arabic star names" label="lists numerous stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q8928" start="580" end="593" title="constellation" label="constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255366" start="617" end="635" title="Islamic astronomy" label="Persian astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11826" start="637" end="646" title="Al-Biruni" label="Al-Biruni"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="662" end="671" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="672" end="678" title="galaxy" label="galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42372" start="707" end="715" title="Nebula" label="nebulous"/>
<link wikidata="Q287492" start="731" end="745" title="Ali ibn Ridwan" label="Ali ibn Ridwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q934700" start="782" end="789" title="SN 1006" label="SN 1006"/>
<link wikidata="Q32037" start="883" end="890" title="SN 1054" label="SN 1054"/>
<link wikidata="Q10934" start="928" end="939" title="Crab Nebula" label="Crab Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q42372" start="950" end="956" title="nebula" label="nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545114" start="1026" end="1033" title="SN 1181" label="SN 1181"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379164" start="1053" end="1064" title="Taqi ad-Din Muhammad ibn Ma&amp;#x27;ruf" label="Taqi al-Din"/>
<link wikidata="Q13442" start="1078" end="1093" title="right ascension" label="right ascension"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348357" start="1114" end="1155" title="Constantinople observatory of Taqi ad-Din" label="Constantinople observatory of Taqi ad-Din"/>
<link wikidata="Q376" start="1243" end="1259" title="mechanical clock" label="mechanical clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q60204" start="1343" end="1358" title="David Fabricius" label="David Fabricius"/>
<link wikidata="Q12965" start="1372" end="1376" title="Mira" label="Mira"/>
<link wikidata="Q311823" start="1411" end="1430" title="Geminiano Montanari" label="Geminiano Montanari"/>
<link wikidata="Q13080" start="1444" end="1449" title="Algol" label="Algol"/>
<link wikidata="Q62317" start="1484" end="1499" title="Gottfried Kirch" label="Gottfried Kirch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071564" start="1513" end="1522" title="Chi Cygni" label="Chi Cygni"/>
<link wikidata="Q47434" start="1557" end="1570" title="Edmund Halley" label="Edmund Halley"/>
<link wikidata="Q193223" start="1589" end="1602" title="proper motion" label="proper motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q375172" start="1680" end="1694" title="John Goodricke" label="John Goodricke"/>
<link wikidata="Q535209" start="1835" end="1848" title="Edward Pigott" label="Edward Pigott"/>
<link wikidata="Q188593" start="1869" end="1885" title="Cepheid variable" label="Cepheid variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334001" start="1900" end="1916" title="Thomas James Henderson" label="Thomas Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q57164" start="1918" end="1934" title="Friedrich Struve" label="Friedrich Struve"/>
<link wikidata="Q75845" start="1940" end="1956" title="Friedrich Bessel" label="Friedrich Bessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q165074" start="1973" end="1981" title="parallax" label="parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409" start="2043" end="2049" title="Sirius" label="Sirius"/>
<link wikidata="Q13034" start="2054" end="2061" title="Procyon" label="Procyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q215022" start="2123" end="2139" title="Arthur Eddington" label="Arthur Eddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q110181" start="2197" end="2214" title="Henrietta Leavitt" label="Henrietta Leavitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424054" start="2237" end="2263" title="period-luminosity relation" label="period-luminosity relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q295099" start="2273" end="2290" title="Ejnar Hertzsprung" label="Ejnar Hertzsprung"/>
<link wikidata="Q273159" start="2295" end="2315" title="Henry Norris Russell" label="Henry Norris Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="2358" end="2371" title="spectral type" label="spectral type"/>
<link wikidata="Q215022" start="2391" end="2407" title="Arthur Eddington" label="Arthur Eddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450" start="2421" end="2434" title="main sequence" label="main sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q59478" start="2473" end="2485" title="George Gamow" label="George Gamow"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="2495" end="2503" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="2504" end="2510" title="nuclear fusion" label="fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q155794" start="2551" end="2561" title="Hans Bethe" label="Hans Bethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q65350" start="2566" end="2585" title="Carl von Weizsäcker" label="Carl von Weizsäcker"/>
<link wikidata="Q223073" start="2597" end="2616" title="proton–proton chain" label="proton–proton chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q222971" start="2621" end="2630" title="CNO cycle" label="CNO cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q62808" start="2649" end="2661" title="Rupert Wildt" label="Rupert Wildt"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="2711" end="2714" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q57299" start="2744" end="2756" title="Walter Baade" label="Walter Baade"/>
<link wikidata="Q183397" start="2828" end="2838" title="Fred Hoyle" label="Fred Hoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="2850" end="2856" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q336225" start="2887" end="2909" title="Triple-alpha process" label="triple alpha reactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q511395" start="2963" end="2979" title="Chūshirō Hayashi" label="Chūshirō Hayashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q183397" start="3055" end="3065" title="Fred Hoyle" label="Fred Hoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q46120" start="3070" end="3087" title="William A. Fowler" label="William A. Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q148109" start="3137" end="3163" title="Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar" label="Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q39246" start="3168" end="3183" title="Richard Feynman" label="Richard Feynman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351089" start="3336" end="3348" title="Eric Becklin" label="Eric Becklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q214345" start="3353" end="3369" title="Gerry Neugebauer" label="Gerry Neugebauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348141" start="3383" end="3408" title="Becklin-Neugebauer Object" label="Becklin-Neugebauer Object"/>
<link wikidata="Q17738" start="3455" end="3464" title="Star Wars (film)" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3627" end="3638" title="Suvi Gezari" label="Suvi Gezari"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="3654" end="3678" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075600" start="3709" end="3721" title="Pan-STARRS" label="Pan-STARRS 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q40392" start="3743" end="3766" title="supermassive black hole" label="supermassive black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q50081" start="3809" end="3818" title="red giant" label="red giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966943" start="3837" end="3858" title="Timeline of astronomy" label="Timeline of astronomy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58933" wikidata="Q3138431" url="?curid=58933" title="Timeline of white dwarfs, neutron stars, and supernovae">
<text>[[Timeline]] of [[neutron star]]s, [[pulsar]]s, [[supernova]]e, and [[white dwarf]]s

Note that this list is mainly about the development of knowledge, but also about some supernovae taking place. For a separate list of the latter, see the article List of supernovae. All dates refer to when the supernova was observed on Earth or would have been observed on Earth had powerful enough telescopes existed at the time.

==Timeline==
* 185 – Chinese astronomers become the first to record observations of a supernova, SN 185.
* 1006 – SN 1006, a magnitude −7.5 supernova in the constellation of Lupus, is observed throughout Asia, the Middle East, and Europe.
* 1054 – Astronomers in Asia and the Middle East observe SN 1054, the Crab Nebula supernova explosion.
* 1181 – Chinese astronomers observe the SN 1181 supernova.
* 1572 – Tycho Brahe discovers a supernova (SN 1572) in the constellation Cassiopeia.
* 1604 – Johannes Kepler&#x27;s supernova, SN 1604, in Serpens is observed.
* 1862 – Alvan Graham Clark observes Sirius B.
* 1866 – William Huggins studies the spectrum of a nova and discovers that it is surrounded by a cloud of hydrogen.
* 1885 – A supernova, S Andromedae, is observed in the Andromeda Galaxy leading to recognition of supernovae as a distinct class of novae.
* 1910 – the spectrum of 40 Eridani B is observed, making it the first confirmed white dwarf.
* 1914 – Walter Sydney Adams determines an incredibly high density for Sirius B.
* 1926 – Ralph Fowler uses Fermi–Dirac statistics to explain white dwarf stars.
* 1930 – Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar discovers the white dwarf maximum mass limit.
* 1933 – Fritz Zwicky and Walter Baade propose the neutron star idea and suggest that supernovae might be created by the collapse of normal stars to neutron stars—they also point out that such events can explain the cosmic ray background.
* 1939 – Robert Oppenheimer and George Volkoff calculate the first neutron star models.
* 1942 – J.J.L. Duyvendak, Nicholas Mayall, and Jan Oort deduce that the Crab Nebula is a remnant of the 1054 supernova observed by Chinese astronomers.
* 1958 – Evry Schatzman, Kent Harrison, Masami Wakano, and John Wheeler show that white dwarfs are unstable to inverse beta decay.
* 1962 – Riccardo Giacconi, Herbert Gursky, Frank Paolini, and Bruno Rossi discover Scorpius X-1.
* 1967 – Jocelyn Bell and Antony Hewish discover radio pulses from a pulsar, PSR B1919+21.
* 1967 – J.R. Harries, Kenneth G. McCracken, R.J. Francey, and A.G. Fenton discover the first X-ray transient (Cen X-2).
* 1968 – Thomas Gold proposes that pulsars are rotating neutron stars.
* 1969 – David H. Staelin, Edward C. Reifenstein, William Cocke, Mike Disney, and Donald Taylor discover the Crab Nebula pulsar thus connecting supernovae, neutron stars, and pulsars.
* 1971 – Riccardo Giacconi, Herbert Gursky, Ed Kellogg, R. Levinson, E. Schreier, and H. Tananbaum discover 4.8 second X-ray pulsations from Centaurus X-3.
* 1972 – Charles Kowal discovers the Type Ia supernova SN 1972e in NGC 5253, which would be observed for more than a year and become the basis case for the type,
* 1974 – Russell Hulse and Joseph Taylor discover the binary pulsar PSR B1913+16.
* 1977 – Kip Thorne and Anna Żytkow present a detailed analysis of Thorne–Żytkow objects.
* 1982 – Donald Backer, Shrinivas Kulkarni, Carl Heiles, Michael Davis, and Miller Goss discover the millisecond pulsar PSR B1937+214.
* 1985 – Michiel van der Klis discovers 30 Hz quasi-periodic oscillations in GX 5-1.
* 1987 – Ian Shelton discovers SN 1987A in the Large Magellanic Cloud.
* 2003 – first double binary pulsar, PSR J0737−3039, discovered at Parkes Observatory.
* 2006 – Robert Quimby and P. Mondol discover SN 2006gy (a possible hypernova) in NGC 1260.
* 2017 – first observation of neutron star merger, accompanied with gravitational wave signal GW170817, short gamma-ray bursts GRB 170817A, optical transient AT 2017gfo and other electromagnetic signals.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3138431" start="0" end="84" title="Timeline of white dwarfs, neutron stars, and supernovae" label="[[Timeline]] of [[neutron star]]s, [[pulsar]]s, [[supernova]]e, and [[white dwarf]]s"/>
<link wikidata="Q967576" start="248" end="266" title="List of supernovae" label="List of supernovae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268276" start="439" end="458" title="Chinese astronomy" label="Chinese astronomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="504" end="513" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q28860" start="515" end="521" title="SN 185" label="SN 185"/>
<link wikidata="Q934700" start="532" end="539" title="SN 1006" label="SN 1006"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="543" end="552" title="apparent magnitude" label="magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q10571" start="592" end="597" title="Lupus (constellation)" label="Lupus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255366" start="694" end="705" title="Astronomy in the medieval Islamic world" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q32037" start="714" end="721" title="SN 1054" label="SN 1054"/>
<link wikidata="Q10934" start="727" end="738" title="Crab Nebula" label="Crab Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545114" start="801" end="808" title="SN 1181" label="SN 1181"/>
<link wikidata="Q36620" start="829" end="840" title="Tycho Brahe" label="Tycho Brahe"/>
<link wikidata="Q554280" start="864" end="871" title="SN 1572" label="SN 1572"/>
<link wikidata="Q10464" start="894" end="904" title="Cassiopeia (constellation)" label="Cassiopeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963" start="915" end="930" title="Johannes Kepler" label="Johannes Kepler"/>
<link wikidata="Q320670" start="949" end="956" title="SN 1604" label="SN 1604"/>
<link wikidata="Q8910" start="961" end="968" title="Serpens" label="Serpens"/>
<link wikidata="Q247076" start="991" end="1009" title="Alvan Graham Clark" label="Alvan Graham Clark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1019" end="1027" title="Sirius#Sirius_B" label="Sirius B"/>
<link wikidata="Q160681" start="1038" end="1053" title="William Huggins" label="William Huggins"/>
<link wikidata="Q133139" start="1066" end="1074" title="Electromagnetic spectrum" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458" start="1080" end="1084" title="nova" label="nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="1135" end="1143" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="1156" end="1165" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q546708" start="1167" end="1179" title="S Andromedae" label="S Andromedae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="1200" end="1216" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="Andromeda Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q67622062" start="1309" end="1321" title="40 Eridani B" label="40 Eridani B"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="1365" end="1376" title="white dwarf" label="white dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q312806" start="1387" end="1406" title="Walter Sydney Adams" label="Walter Sydney Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="1437" end="1444" title="density" label="density"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1449" end="1457" title="Sirius#Sirius_B" label="Sirius B"/>
<link wikidata="Q544338" start="1468" end="1480" title="Ralph Fowler" label="Ralph Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q274072" start="1486" end="1508" title="Fermi–Dirac statistics" label="Fermi–Dirac statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="1520" end="1531" title="white dwarf" label="white dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q148109" start="1548" end="1574" title="Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar" label="Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="1589" end="1600" title="white dwarf" label="white dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q115462" start="1630" end="1642" title="Fritz Zwicky" label="Fritz Zwicky"/>
<link wikidata="Q57299" start="1647" end="1659" title="Walter Baade" label="Walter Baade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202" start="1672" end="1684" title="neutron star" label="neutron star"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="1707" end="1716" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="1837" end="1858" title="Cosmic microwave background radiation" label="cosmic ray background"/>
<link wikidata="Q132537" start="1869" end="1887" title="Robert Oppenheimer" label="Robert Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369818" start="1892" end="1906" title="George Volkoff" label="George Volkoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202" start="1927" end="1939" title="neutron star" label="neutron star"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659211" start="1975" end="1990" title="Nicholas Mayall" label="Nicholas Mayall"/>
<link wikidata="Q309861" start="1996" end="2004" title="Jan Oort" label="Jan Oort"/>
<link wikidata="Q10934" start="2021" end="2032" title="Crab Nebula" label="Crab Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q32037" start="2053" end="2067" title="SN 1054" label="1054 supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q984330" start="2110" end="2124" title="Evry Schatzman" label="Evry Schatzman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2126" end="2139" title="Kent Harrison" label="Kent Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2141" end="2154" title="Masami Wakano" label="Masami Wakano"/>
<link wikidata="Q202631" start="2160" end="2172" title="John Archibald Wheeler" label="John Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="2220" end="2230" title="beta decay" label="beta decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q186481" start="2241" end="2258" title="Riccardo Giacconi" label="Riccardo Giacconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5734262" start="2260" end="2274" title="Herbert Gursky" label="Herbert Gursky"/>
<link wikidata="Q993725" start="2295" end="2306" title="Bruno Rossi" label="Bruno Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319794" start="2316" end="2328" title="Scorpius X-1" label="Scorpius X-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q233974" start="2339" end="2351" title="Jocelyn Bell Burnell" label="Jocelyn Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q189990" start="2356" end="2369" title="Antony Hewish" label="Antony Hewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4360" start="2399" end="2405" title="pulsar" label="pulsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319958" start="2407" end="2419" title="PSR B1919+21" label="PSR B1919+21"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390118" start="2444" end="2464" title="Kenneth G. McCracken" label="Kenneth G. McCracken"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="2515" end="2520" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q93562" start="2551" end="2562" title="Thomas Gold" label="Thomas Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q4360" start="2577" end="2583" title="pulsar" label="pulsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202" start="2598" end="2610" title="neutron star" label="neutron star"/>
<link wikidata="Q102277886" start="2622" end="2638" title="David H. Staelin" label="David H. Staelin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2663" end="2676" title="William J. Cocke" label="William Cocke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313281" start="2678" end="2689" title="Mike Disney" label="Mike Disney"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2695" end="2708" title="Donald Taylor (astronomer)" label="Donald Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q10934" start="2722" end="2733" title="Crab Nebula" label="Crab Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="2757" end="2766" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202" start="2769" end="2781" title="neutron star" label="neutron star"/>
<link wikidata="Q4360" start="2788" end="2794" title="pulsar" label="pulsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q186481" start="2806" end="2823" title="Riccardo Giacconi" label="Riccardo Giacconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5734262" start="2825" end="2839" title="Herbert Gursky" label="Herbert Gursky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2841" end="2851" title="Ed Kellogg" label="Ed Kellogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q557473" start="2938" end="2951" title="Centaurus X-3" label="Centaurus X-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q58963" start="2962" end="2975" title="Charles T. Kowal" label="Charles Kowal"/>
<link wikidata="Q582000" start="2990" end="3007" title="Type Ia supernova" label="Type Ia supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q9326646" start="3008" end="3016" title="SN 1972e" label="SN 1972e"/>
<link wikidata="Q618400" start="3020" end="3028" title="NGC 5253" label="NGC 5253"/>
<link wikidata="Q156286" start="3124" end="3137" title="Russell Alan Hulse" label="Russell Hulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q192685" start="3142" end="3155" title="Joseph Hooton Taylor, Jr." label="Joseph Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4360" start="3176" end="3182" title="pulsar" label="pulsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q155920" start="3183" end="3195" title="PSR B1913+16" label="PSR B1913+16"/>
<link wikidata="Q323320" start="3206" end="3216" title="Kip Thorne" label="Kip Thorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q9155513" start="3221" end="3232" title="Anna Żytkow" label="Anna Żytkow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296150" start="3264" end="3284" title="Thorne–Żytkow object" label="Thorne–Żytkow object"/>
<link wikidata="Q4075955" start="3296" end="3309" title="Donald Backer" label="Donald Backer"/>
<link wikidata="Q519988" start="3311" end="3329" title="Shrinivas Kulkarni" label="Shrinivas Kulkarni"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040061" start="3331" end="3342" title="Carl Heiles" label="Carl Heiles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3344" end="3357" title="Michael Davis (astronomer)" label="Michael Davis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3363" end="3374" title="Miller Goss" label="Miller Goss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940232" start="3388" end="3406" title="millisecond pulsar" label="millisecond pulsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107544" start="3407" end="3420" title="PSR B1937+214" label="PSR B1937+214"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045601" start="3431" end="3451" title="Michiel van der Klis" label="Michiel van der Klis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982881" start="3516" end="3527" title="Ian Shelton" label="Ian Shelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q584905" start="3538" end="3546" title="SN 1987A" label="SN 1987A"/>
<link wikidata="Q49957" start="3554" end="3576" title="Large Magellanic Cloud" label="Large Magellanic Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387203" start="3615" end="3629" title="PSR J0737−3039" label="PSR J0737−3039"/>
<link wikidata="Q148044" start="3645" end="3663" title="Parkes Observatory" label="Parkes Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188424" start="3674" end="3687" title="Robert Quimby" label="Robert Quimby"/>
<link wikidata="Q644956" start="3711" end="3720" title="SN 2006gy" label="SN 2006gy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4188" start="3733" end="3742" title="hypernova" label="hypernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q496348" start="3747" end="3755" title="NGC 1260" label="NGC 1260"/>
<link wikidata="Q42266247" start="3787" end="3806" title="neutron star merger" label="neutron star merger"/>
<link wikidata="Q190035" start="3825" end="3843" title="gravitational wave" label="gravitational wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q38080891" start="3851" end="3859" title="GW170817" label="GW170817"/>
<link wikidata="Q22247" start="3867" end="3883" title="gamma-ray bursts" label="gamma-ray bursts"/>
<link wikidata="Q38080891" start="3884" end="3895" title="GRB 170817A" label="GRB 170817A"/>
<link wikidata="Q38080891" start="3915" end="3925" title="AT 2017gfo" label="AT 2017gfo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58934" wikidata="Q7806090" url="?curid=58934" title="Timeline of knowledge about the interstellar and intergalactic medium">
<text>Timeline of knowledge about the interstellar medium and intergalactic medium:

* 1848 — Lord Rosse studies M1 and names it the Crab Nebula. The telescope is much larger than the small refactors typical of this period and it also reveals the spiral nature of M51.
* 1864 — William Huggins studies the spectrum of the Orion Nebula and shows that it is a cloud of gas
* 1904 — Interstellar calcium detected on spectrograph at Potsdam
* 1909 — Slipher confirms Kapteyn&#x27;s theory of interstellar gas
* 1912 — Slipher confirms interstellar dust
* 1927 — Ira Bowen explains unidentified spectral lines from space as forbidden transition lines
* 1930 — Robert Trumpler discovers absorption by interstellar dust by comparing the angular sizes and brightnesses of globular clusters
* 1944 — Hendrik van de Hulst predicts the 21 cm hyperfine line of neutral interstellar hydrogen
* 1951 — Harold I. Ewen and Edward Purcell observe the 21 cm hyperfine line of neutral interstellar hydrogen
* 1956 — Lyman Spitzer predicts coronal gas around the Milky Way
* 1965 — James Gunn and Bruce Peterson use observations of the relatively low absorption of the blue component of the Lyman-alpha line from 3C9 to strongly constrain the density and ionization state of the intergalactic medium
* 1969 — Lewis Snyder, David Buhl, Ben Zuckerman, and Patrick Palmer find interstellar formaldehyde
* 1970 — Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson find interstellar carbon monoxide
* 1970 — George Carruthers observes molecular hydrogen in space
* 1977 — Christopher McKee and Jeremiah Ostriker propose a three component theory of the interstellar medium
* 1990 — Foreground &quot;contamination&quot; data from the COBE spacecraft provides the first all-sky map of the ISM in microwave bands.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q186117" start="0" end="8" title="Timeline" label="Timeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="32" end="51" title="interstellar medium" label="interstellar medium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56" end="76" title="Outer space#Intergalactic space" label="intergalactic medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q310121" start="88" end="98" title="William Parsons, 3rd Earl of Rosse" label="Lord Rosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q14530" start="107" end="109" title="Messier object" label="M1"/>
<link wikidata="Q10934" start="127" end="138" title="Crab Nebula" label="Crab Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q160681" start="272" end="287" title="William Huggins" label="William Huggins"/>
<link wikidata="Q76299" start="300" end="308" title="optical spectrum" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q13903" start="316" end="328" title="Orion Nebula" label="Orion Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q520866" start="552" end="561" title="Ira Sprague Bowen" label="Ira Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="584" end="597" title="spectral line" label="spectral line"/>
<link wikidata="Q932483" start="613" end="638" title="forbidden line" label="forbidden transition line"/>
<link wikidata="Q123963" start="649" end="664" title="Robert Julius Trumpler" label="Robert Trumpler"/>
<link wikidata="Q193384" start="689" end="706" title="interstellar dust" label="interstellar dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q11276" start="758" end="774" title="globular cluster" label="globular cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q437534" start="785" end="805" title="Hendrik C. van de Hulst" label="Hendrik van de Hulst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406191" start="819" end="839" title="21 cm line" label="21 cm hyperfine line"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="864" end="872" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="882" end="896" title="Harold I. Ewen" label="Harold I. Ewen"/>
<link wikidata="Q183270" start="901" end="915" title="Edward Mills Purcell" label="Edward Purcell"/>
<link wikidata="Q105047321" start="934" end="943" title="hyperfine" label="hyperfine"/>
<link wikidata="Q431503" start="991" end="1004" title="Lyman Spitzer" label="Lyman Spitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q221699" start="1014" end="1025" title="Coronal cloud" label="coronal gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="1037" end="1046" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152925" start="1056" end="1066" title="James Gunn (astronomer)" label="James Gunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926465" start="1071" end="1085" title="Bruce Peterson" label="Bruce Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117639" start="1165" end="1181" title="Lyman-alpha line" label="Lyman-alpha line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1187" end="1190" title="3C9" label="3C9"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1283" end="1295" title="Lewis Snyder" label="Lewis Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1297" end="1307" title="David Buhl" label="David Buhl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889443" start="1309" end="1322" title="Benjamin Zuckerman" label="Ben Zuckerman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1328" end="1342" title="Patrick Palmer (astronomer)" label="Patrick Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057123" start="1348" end="1373" title="interstellar formaldehyde" label="interstellar formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q172877" start="1383" end="1395" title="Arno Allan Penzias" label="Arno Penzias"/>
<link wikidata="Q171034" start="1400" end="1413" title="Robert Woodrow Wilson" label="Robert Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="1432" end="1447" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760460" start="1457" end="1474" title="George Robert Carruthers" label="George Carruthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="1484" end="1502" title="molecular hydrogen" label="molecular hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112851" start="1521" end="1538" title="Christopher McKee" label="Christopher McKee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351917" start="1543" end="1560" title="Jeremiah P. Ostriker" label="Jeremiah Ostriker"/>
<link wikidata="Q49445" start="1681" end="1685" title="Cosmic Background Explorer" label="COBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q127995" start="1742" end="1751" title="microwave" label="microwave"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58935" wikidata="Q3138416" url="?curid=58935" title="Timeline of knowledge about galaxies, clusters of galaxies, and large-scale structure">
<text>The following is a timeline of galaxies, clusters of galaxies, and large-scale structure of the universe.

== Pre-20th century ==

* 5th century BC – Democritus proposes that the bright band in the night sky known as the Milky Way might consist of stars.
* 4th century BC – Aristotle believes the Milky Way to be caused by &quot;the ignition of the fiery exhalation of some stars which were large, numerous and close together&quot; and that the &quot;ignition takes place in the upper part of the atmosphere, in the region of the world which is continuous with the heavenly motions&quot;.
* 964 – Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi (Azophi), a Persian astronomer, makes the first recorded observations of the Andromeda Galaxy and the Large Magellanic Cloud in his &quot;Book of Fixed Stars&quot;, and which are the first galaxies other than the Milky Way to be recorded.
* 11th century – Al-Biruni, another Persian astronomer, describes the Milky Way galaxy as a collection of fragments of numerous nebulous stars.
* 11th century – Alhazen (Ibn al-Haytham), an Arabian astronomer, refutes Aristotle&#x27;s theory on the Milky Way by making the first attempt at observing and measuring the Milky Way&#x27;s parallax, and he thus &quot;determined that because the Milky Way had no parallax, it was very remote from the Earth and did not belong to the atmosphere&quot;.
* 12th century – Avempace (Ibn Bajjah) of Islamic Spain proposes the Milky Way to be made up of many stars but that it appears to be a continuous image due to the effect of refraction in the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere.
* 14th century – Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya of Syria proposes the Milky Way galaxy to be &quot;a myriad of tiny stars packed together in the sphere of the fixed stars&quot;, and that these stars are larger than planets.
* 1521 – Ferdinand Magellan observes the Magellanic Clouds during his circumnavigating expedition.
* 1610 – Galileo Galilei uses a telescope to determine that the bright band on the sky, the &quot;Milky Way&quot;, is composed of many faint stars.
* 1612 – Simon Marius using a moderate telescope observes Andromeda and describes as a &quot;flame seen through horn&quot;.
* 1750 – Thomas Wright discusses galaxies and the flattened shape of the Milky Way and speculates nebulae as separate.
* 1755 – Immanuel Kant drawing on Wright&#x27;s work conjectures that our galaxy is a rotating disk of stars held together by gravity, and that the nebulae are separate such galaxies; he calls them &quot;Island Universes&quot;.
* 1774 – Charles Messier releases a preliminary list of 45 Messier objects, three of which turn out to be the galaxies including Andromeda and Triangulum. By 1781 the final published list grows to 103 objects, 34 of which turn out to be galaxies.
* 1785 – William Herschel carried the first attempt to describe the shape of the Milky Way and the position of the Sun in it by carefully counting the number of stars in different regions of the sky. He produced a diagram of the shape of the galaxy with the solar system close to the center.
* 1845 – Lord Rosse discovers a nebula with a distinct spiral shape.

== Early 20th century ==

* 1912 – Vesto Slipher&#x27;s spectrographic studies of spiral nebulae find high Doppler shifts indicating recessional velocity.
*1917 – Heber Curtis finds novae in Andromeda Nebula M31 were ten magnitudes fainter than normal, giving a distance estimate of 150,000 parsecs supporting the &quot;island universes&quot; or independent galaxies hypothesis for spiral nebulae.
*1918 – Harlow Shapley demonstrates that globular clusters are arranged in a spheroid or halo whose center is not the Earth, and hypothesizes, correctly, that its center is the Galactic Center of the galaxy,
* 26 April 1920 – Harlow Shapley and Heber Curtis debate whether Andromeda Nebula is within the Milky Way. Curtis notes dark lanes in Andromeda resembling the dust clouds in the Milky Way, as well as significant Doppler shift.
*1922 – Ernst Öpik distance determination supports Andromeda as extra-galactic object. 
* 1923 – Edwin Hubble resolves the Shapley–Curtis debate by finding Cepheids in the Andromeda Galaxy, definitively proving that there are other galaxies beyond the Milky Way.
* 1930 – Robert Trumpler uses open cluster observations to quantify the absorption of light by interstellar dust in the galactic plane; this absorption had plagued earlier models of the Milky Way.
* 1932 – Karl Guthe Jansky discovers radio noise from the center of the Milky Way.
* 1933 – Fritz Zwicky applies the virial theorem to the Coma Cluster and obtains evidence for unseen mass.
* 1936 – Edwin Hubble introduces the spiral, barred spiral, elliptical, and irregular galaxy classifications.
* 1939 – Grote Reber discovers the radio source Cygnus A.
* 1943 – Carl Keenan Seyfert identifies six spiral galaxies with unusually broad emission lines, named Seyfert galaxies.
* 1949 – J. G. Bolton, G. J. Stanley, and O. B. Slee identify NGC 4486 (M87) and NGC 5128 as extragalactic radio sources.

== Mid-20th century ==

* 1953 – Gérard de Vaucouleurs discovers that the galaxies within approximately 200 million light-years of the Virgo Cluster are confined to a giant supercluster disk.
* 1954 – Walter Baade and Rudolph Minkowski identify the extragalactic optical counterpart of the radio source Cygnus A.
* 1959 – Hundreds of radio sources are detected by the Cambridge Interferometer which produces the 3C catalogue. Many of these are later found to be distant quasars and radio galaxies.
* 1960 – Thomas Matthews determines the radio position of the &quot;3C&quot; source 3C 48 to within 5&quot;.
* 1960 – Allan Sandage optically studies 3C 48 and observes an unusual blue quasistellar object.
* 1962 – Cyril Hazard, M. B. Mackey, and A. J. Shimmins use lunar occultations to determine a precise position for the quasar 3C 273 and deduce that it is a double source.
* 1962 – Olin Eggen, Donald Lynden-Bell, and Allan Sandage theorize galaxy formation by a single (relatively) rapid monolithic collapse, with the halo forming first, followed by the disk.
* 1963 – Maarten Schmidt identifies the redshifted Balmer lines from the quasar 3C 273.
* 1973 – Jeremiah Ostriker and James Peebles discover that the amount of visible matter in the disks of typical spiral galaxies is not enough for Newtonian gravitation to keep the disks from flying apart or drastically changing shape.
* 1973 – Donald Gudehus finds that the diameters of the brightest cluster galaxies have increased due to merging, the diameters of the faintest cluster galaxies have decreased due to tidal distention, and that the Virgo cluster has a substantial peculiar velocity.
* 1974 – B. L. Fanaroff and J. M. Riley distinguish between edge-darkened (FR I) and edge-brightened (FR II) radio sources.
* 1976 – Sandra Faber and Robert Jackson discover the Faber-Jackson relation between the luminosity of an elliptical galaxy and the velocity dispersion in its center. In 1991 the relation is revised by Donald Gudehus.
* 1977 – R. Brent Tully and Richard Fisher publish the Tully–Fisher relation between the luminosity of an isolated spiral galaxy and the velocity of the flat part of its rotation curve.
* 1978 – Steve Gregory and Laird Thompson describe the Coma supercluster.
* 1978 – Donald Gudehus finds evidence that clusters of galaxies are moving at several hundred kilometers per second relative to the cosmic microwave background radiation.
* 1978 – Vera Rubin, Kent Ford, N. Thonnard, and Albert Bosma measure the rotation curves of several spiral galaxies and find significant deviations from what is predicted by the Newtonian gravitation of visible stars.
* 1978 – Leonard Searle and Robert Zinn theorize that galaxy formation occurs through the merger of smaller groups.

== Late 20th century ==
* 1981 – Robert Kirshner, August Oemler, Paul Schechter, and Stephen Shectman find evidence for a giant void in Boötes, 250 to 330 million light years across.
* 1985 – Robert Antonucci and J. Miller discover that the Seyfert II galaxy NGC 1068 has broad lines which can only be seen in polarized reflected light.
* 1986 – Amos Yahil, David Walker, and Michael Rowan-Robinson find that the direction of the IRAS galaxy density dipole agrees with the direction of the cosmic microwave background temperature dipole.
* 1987 – David Burstein, Roger Davies, Alan Dressler, Sandra Faber, Donald Lynden-Bell, R. J. Terlevich, and Gary Wegner claim that a large group of galaxies within about 200 million light years of the Milky Way are moving together towards the &quot;Great Attractor&quot; in the direction of Hydra and Centaurus.
* 1987 – R. Brent Tully discovers the Pisces–Cetus Supercluster Complex, a structure one billion light years long and 150 million light years wide.
* 1989 – Margaret Geller and John Huchra discover the &quot;Great Wall&quot;, a sheet of galaxies more than 500 million light years long and 200 million wide, but only 15 million light years thick.
* 1990 – Michael Rowan-Robinson and Tom Broadhurst discover that the IRAS galaxy IRAS F10214+4724 is the brightest known object in the Universe.
* 1991 – Donald Gudehus discovers a serious systematic bias in certain cluster galaxy data (surface brightness vs. radius parameter, and the formula_1 method) which affect galaxy distances and evolutionary history; he devises a new distance indicator, the reduced galaxian radius parameter, which is free of biases.
* 1992 – First detection of large-scale structure in the cosmic microwave background indicating the seeds of the first clusters of galaxies in the early Universe.
* 1995 – First detection of small-scale structure in the cosmic microwave background.
* 1995 – Hubble Deep Field survey of galaxies in field 144 arc seconds across.
* 1998 – The 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey maps the large-scale structure in a section of the Universe close to the Milky Way.
* 1998 – The Hubble Deep Field South is compiled.
* 1998 – Discovery of accelerating universe.
* 2000 – Data from several cosmic microwave background experiments give strong evidence that the Universe is &quot;flat&quot; (space is not curved, although space-time is), with important implications for the formation of large-scale structure.

== Early 21st century ==

* 2001 – First data release from the ongoing Sloan Digital Sky Survey
* 2004 – The European Southern Observatory discovers Abell 1835 IR1916, the most distant galaxy yet seen from Earth.
* 2004 – The Arcminute Microkelvin Imager begins to map the distribution of distant clusters of galaxies
* 2005 – Spitzer Space Telescope data confirm what had been considered likely since the early 1990s from radio telescope data, i.e., that the Milky Way Galaxy is a barred spiral galaxy.
* 2012 – Astronomers report the discovery of the most distant dwarf galaxy yet found, approximately 10 billion light-years away.
* 2012 – The Huge-LQG, a large quasar group, one of the largest known structures in the universe, is discovered.
* 2013 – The galaxy Z8 GND 5296 is confirmed by spectroscopy to be one of the most distant galaxies found up to this time. Formed just 700 million years after the Big Bang, expansion of the universe has carried it to its current location, about 13 billion light years away from Earth (30 billion light years comoving distance).
* 2013 – The Hercules–Corona Borealis Great Wall, a massive galaxy filament and the largest known structure in the universe, was discovered through gamma-ray burst mapping.
* 2014 – The Laniakea Supercluster, the galaxy supercluster that is home to the Milky Way is defined via a new way of defining superclusters according to the relative velocities of galaxies. The new definition of the local supercluster subsumes the prior defined local supercluster, the Virgo Supercluster, as an appendage.
* 2020 – Astronomers report the discovery of a large cavity in the Ophiuchus Supercluster, first detected in 2016 and originating from a supermassive black hole with the mass of 10 million solar masses. The cavity is a result of the largest known explosion in the Universe. The formerly active galactic nucleus created it by emitting radiation and particle jets, possibly as a result of a spike in supply of gas to the black hole that could have occurred if a galaxy fell into the centre of the cavity.
* 2020 – Astronomers report to have discovered the disk galaxy Wolfe Disk, dating back to when the universe was only 1.5 billion years old, possibly indicating the need to revise theories of galaxy formation and evolution.
* 2020 – The South Pole Wall is a massive cosmic structure formed by a giant wall of galaxies (a galaxy filament) that extends across at least 1.37 billion light-years of space, and is located approximately a half billion light-years away.
* 2020 – After a 20-year-long survey, astrophysicists of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey publish the largest, most detailed 3D map of the universe so far, fill a gap of 11 billion years in its expansion history, and provide data which supports the theory of a flat geometry of the universe and confirms that different regions seem to be expanding at different speeds.
* 2022 – James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) releases the Webb&#x27;s First Deep Field.
* 2022 – JWST detects CEERS-93316, a candidate high-redshift galaxy, with an estimated redshift of approximately z = 16.7, corresponding to 235.8 million years after the Big Bang. If confirmed, it is one of the earliest and most distant known galaxies observed.

==See also==
* Illustris project
* Large-scale structure of the cosmos
* Timeline of astronomical maps, catalogs, and surveys
* Timeline of cosmological theories
* UniverseMachine
* List of largest cosmic structures
* List of the most distant astronomical objects#Timeline of most distant astronomical object recordholders

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="31" end="39" title="galaxy" label="galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q204107" start="41" end="61" title="galaxy cluster" label="clusters of galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67" end="104" title="Observable universe#Large-scale structure" label="large-scale structure of the universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q41980" start="150" end="160" title="Democritus" label="Democritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="221" end="230" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="248" end="252" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="274" end="283" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8104" start="497" end="507" title="atmosphere" label="atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359073" start="516" end="581" title="Sublunary sphere" label="region of the world which is continuous with the heavenly motions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11075" start="597" end="618" title="Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi" label="Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255366" start="631" end="649" title="Astronomy in medieval Islam" label="Persian astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="696" end="712" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="Andromeda Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49957" start="721" end="743" title="Large Magellanic Cloud" label="Large Magellanic Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087785" start="757" end="776" title="Book of Fixed Stars" label="Book of Fixed Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q11826" start="875" end="884" title="Al-Biruni" label="Al-Biruni"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="928" end="937" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q42372" start="986" end="994" title="Nebula" label="nebulous"/>
<link wikidata="Q11104" start="1019" end="1026" title="Alhazen" label="Alhazen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255366" start="1048" end="1066" title="Islamic astronomy" label="Arabian astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q165074" start="1193" end="1201" title="parallax" label="parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q11362" start="1371" end="1379" title="Avempace" label="Avempace"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="1396" end="1409" title="Al-Andalus" label="Islamic Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q72277" start="1527" end="1537" title="refraction" label="refraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="1545" end="1568" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q119679" start="1587" end="1609" title="Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya" label="Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="1613" end="1618" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="1777" end="1783" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496" start="1795" end="1813" title="Ferdinand Magellan" label="Ferdinand Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q50028" start="1827" end="1844" title="Magellanic Clouds" label="Magellanic Clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="1894" end="1909" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo Galilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="1917" end="1926" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q527" start="1968" end="1971" title="sky" label="sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="1983" end="1992" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q460791" start="2166" end="2179" title="Thomas Wright (astronomer)" label="Thomas Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="2190" end="2198" title="galaxy" label="galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="2285" end="2298" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="2402" end="2409" title="gravity" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q42372" start="2424" end="2430" title="nebula" label="nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="2480" end="2496" title="Island universe" label="Island Universes"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524" start="2513" end="2528" title="Charles Messier" label="Charles Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q14530" start="2563" end="2577" title="Messier object" label="Messier object"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="2633" end="2642" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="Andromeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q13724" start="2647" end="2657" title="Triangulum Galaxy" label="Triangulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q14277" start="2760" end="2776" title="William Herschel" label="William Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q310121" start="3052" end="3062" title="William Parsons, 3rd Earl of Rosse" label="Lord Rosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q312248" start="3148" end="3168" title="Vesto Slipher" label="Vesto Slipher&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q76436" start="3220" end="3233" title="Doppler shift" label="Doppler shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q349821" start="3276" end="3288" title="Heber Curtis" label="Heber Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9256" start="3304" end="3313" title="Andromeda (constellation)" label="Andromeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="3321" end="3324" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="M31"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028919" start="3334" end="3344" title="Magnitude (astronomy)" label="magnitudes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12129" start="3404" end="3410" title="parsec" label="parsec"/>
<link wikidata="Q281170" start="3519" end="3533" title="Harlow Shapley" label="Harlow Shapley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11276" start="3552" end="3568" title="globular cluster" label="globular cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q649112" start="3688" end="3703" title="Galactic Center" label="Galactic Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q349821" start="3756" end="3768" title="Heber Curtis" label="Heber Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q278891" start="3769" end="3775" title="Great Debate (astronomy)" label="debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q318126" start="3954" end="3964" title="Ernst Öpik" label="Ernst Öpik"/>
<link wikidata="Q43027" start="4043" end="4055" title="Edwin Hubble" label="Edwin Hubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q278891" start="4069" end="4090" title="Great Debate (astronomy)" label="Shapley–Curtis debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q188593" start="4102" end="4110" title="Cepheid variable" label="Cepheids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="4118" end="4134" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="Andromeda Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q123963" start="4218" end="4233" title="Robert Trumpler" label="Robert Trumpler"/>
<link wikidata="Q11387" start="4239" end="4251" title="open cluster" label="open cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q905921" start="4281" end="4291" title="Absorption (electromagnetic radiation)" label="absorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="4295" end="4300" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q193384" start="4304" end="4321" title="interstellar dust" label="interstellar dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239165" start="4329" end="4343" title="galactic plane" label="galactic plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q319212" start="4415" end="4432" title="Karl Guthe Jansky" label="Karl Guthe Jansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7047674" start="4443" end="4454" title="radio noise" label="radio noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q115462" start="4498" end="4510" title="Fritz Zwicky" label="Fritz Zwicky"/>
<link wikidata="Q620602" start="4523" end="4537" title="virial theorem" label="virial theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q870674" start="4545" end="4557" title="Coma Cluster" label="Coma Cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="4590" end="4594" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q380212" start="4715" end="4726" title="Grote Reber" label="Grote Reber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147716" start="4754" end="4762" title="Cygnus A" label="Cygnus A"/>
<link wikidata="Q453675" start="4773" end="4792" title="Carl Keenan Seyfert" label="Carl Keenan Seyfert"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="4845" end="4858" title="emission line" label="emission line"/>
<link wikidata="Q213930" start="4867" end="4883" title="Seyfert galaxy" label="Seyfert galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q14041" start="4947" end="4955" title="NGC 4486" label="NGC 4486"/>
<link wikidata="Q14041" start="4957" end="4960" title="Elliptical galaxy M87" label="M87"/>
<link wikidata="Q487255" start="4966" end="4974" title="NGC 5128" label="NGC 5128"/>
<link wikidata="Q981340" start="5041" end="5062" title="Gérard de Vaucouleurs" label="Gérard de Vaucouleurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="5124" end="5134" title="light-year" label="light-year"/>
<link wikidata="Q271818" start="5143" end="5156" title="Virgo Cluster" label="Virgo Cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q27521" start="5181" end="5193" title="supercluster" label="supercluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q57299" start="5209" end="5221" title="Walter Baade" label="Walter Baade"/>
<link wikidata="Q213664" start="5226" end="5243" title="Rudolph Minkowski" label="Rudolph Minkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025464" start="5376" end="5400" title="Cambridge Interferometer" label="Cambridge Interferometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q598937" start="5420" end="5432" title="Third Cambridge Catalogue of Radio Sources" label="3C catalogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q18631904" start="5515" end="5530" title="Thomas Matthews (astronomer)" label="Thomas Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q598937" start="5574" end="5576" title="Third Cambridge Catalogue of Radio Sources" label="3C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986936" start="5590" end="5595" title="3C 48" label="3C 48"/>
<link wikidata="Q358253" start="5624" end="5637" title="Allan Sandage" label="Allan Sandage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986936" start="5656" end="5661" title="3C 48" label="3C 48"/>
<link wikidata="Q97738150" start="5721" end="5733" title="Cyril Hazard" label="Cyril Hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q202746" start="5772" end="5789" title="lunar occultation" label="lunar occultation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83373" start="5831" end="5837" title="quasar" label="quasar"/>
<link wikidata="Q229318" start="5838" end="5844" title="3C 273" label="3C 273"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315984" start="5893" end="5903" title="Olin Eggen" label="Olin Eggen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240090" start="5905" end="5923" title="Donald Lynden-Bell" label="Donald Lynden-Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q358253" start="5929" end="5942" title="Allan Sandage" label="Allan Sandage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995140" start="5952" end="5968" title="galaxy formation" label="galaxy formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q547240" start="6081" end="6096" title="Maarten Schmidt" label="Maarten Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q229318" start="6152" end="6158" title="3C 273" label="3C 273"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351917" start="6169" end="6186" title="Jeremiah Ostriker" label="Jeremiah Ostriker"/>
<link wikidata="Q728331" start="6191" end="6204" title="Jim Peebles" label="James Peebles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18201824" start="6669" end="6683" title="Bernie Fanaroff" label="B. L. Fanaroff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6306689" start="6688" end="6699" title="Julia Riley" label="J. M. Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433635" start="6700" end="6711" title="Fanaroff-Riley classification" label="distinguish"/>
<link wikidata="Q266972" start="6793" end="6805" title="Sandra Faber" label="Sandra Faber"/>
<link wikidata="Q433930" start="6810" end="6824" title="Robert Jackson (scientist)" label="Robert Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="6873" end="6883" title="luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11465" start="6916" end="6924" title="velocity" label="velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q535965" start="7011" end="7025" title="R. Brent Tully" label="R. Brent Tully"/>
<link wikidata="Q3156831" start="7030" end="7044" title="J. Richard Fisher" label="Richard Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147069" start="7057" end="7078" title="Tully–Fisher relation" label="Tully–Fisher relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475614" start="7172" end="7186" title="rotation curve" label="rotation curve"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7197" end="7210" title="Steve Gregory (astronomer)" label="Steve Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6474061" start="7215" end="7229" title="Laird A. Thompson" label="Laird Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7271" end="7285" title="Donald Gudehus" label="Donald Gudehus"/>
<link wikidata="Q234888" start="7443" end="7453" title="Vera Rubin" label="Vera Rubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391723" start="7455" end="7464" title="Kent Ford (astronomer)" label="Kent Ford"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7483" end="7495" title="Albert Bosma" label="Albert Bosma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525715" start="7662" end="7676" title="Leonard Searle" label="Leonard Searle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7681" end="7692" title="Robert Zinn" label="Robert Zinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995140" start="7707" end="7723" title="galaxy formation" label="galaxy formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q961809" start="7803" end="7818" title="Robert Kirshner" label="Robert Kirshner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7820" end="7833" title="August Oemler" label="August Oemler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151891" start="7835" end="7849" title="Paul L. Schechter" label="Paul Schechter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7855" end="7871" title="Stephen Shectman" label="Stephen Shectman"/>
<link wikidata="Q520083" start="7892" end="7902" title="Boötes Void" label="giant void"/>
<link wikidata="Q8667" start="7906" end="7912" title="Boötes" label="Boötes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7962" end="7978" title="Robert Antonucci" label="Robert Antonucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q14017" start="8029" end="8037" title="NGC 1068" label="NGC 1068"/>
<link wikidata="Q193760" start="8080" end="8089" title="polarized light" label="polarized"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8116" end="8126" title="Amos Yahil" label="Amos Yahil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8128" end="8140" title="David Walker (astronomer)" label="David Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6834000" start="8146" end="8168" title="Michael Rowan-Robinson" label="Michael Rowan-Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q724913" start="8200" end="8204" title="IRAS" label="IRAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q215589" start="8220" end="8226" title="dipole" label="dipole"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="8260" end="8287" title="cosmic microwave background" label="cosmic microwave background"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8317" end="8331" title="David Burstein" label="David Burstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358074" start="8333" end="8345" title="Roger Davies (astrophysicist)" label="Roger Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706535" start="8347" end="8360" title="Alan Dressler" label="Alan Dressler"/>
<link wikidata="Q266972" start="8362" end="8374" title="Sandra Faber" label="Sandra Faber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240090" start="8376" end="8394" title="Donald Lynden-Bell" label="Donald Lynden-Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524576" start="8417" end="8428" title="Gary A. Wegner" label="Gary Wegner"/>
<link wikidata="Q656857" start="8558" end="8573" title="Great Attractor" label="Great Attractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q10578" start="8600" end="8605" title="Hydra (constellation)" label="Hydra"/>
<link wikidata="Q8844" start="8610" end="8619" title="Centaurus" label="Centaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q535965" start="8630" end="8644" title="R. Brent Tully" label="R. Brent Tully"/>
<link wikidata="Q24571" start="8659" end="8692" title="Pisces–Cetus Supercluster Complex" label="Pisces–Cetus Supercluster Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q266131" start="8778" end="8793" title="Margaret Geller" label="Margaret Geller"/>
<link wikidata="Q205440" start="8798" end="8809" title="John Huchra" label="John Huchra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139177" start="8829" end="8839" title="Great Wall (astronomy)" label="Great Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6834000" start="8976" end="8998" title="Michael Rowan-Robinson" label="Michael Rowan-Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9003" end="9017" title="Tom Broadhurst" label="Tom Broadhurst"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9048" end="9064" title="IRAS F10214+4724" label="IRAS F10214+4724"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9121" end="9135" title="Donald Gudehus" label="Donald Gudehus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="9485" end="9512" title="cosmic microwave background" label="cosmic microwave background"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="9648" end="9675" title="cosmic microwave background" label="cosmic microwave background"/>
<link wikidata="Q741255" start="9686" end="9703" title="Hubble Deep Field" label="Hubble Deep Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815842" start="9769" end="9795" title="2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey" label="2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117262" start="9893" end="9916" title="Hubble Deep Field South" label="Hubble Deep Field South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049613" start="9952" end="9973" title="accelerating universe" label="accelerating universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="10002" end="10029" title="cosmic microwave background" label="cosmic microwave background"/>
<link wikidata="Q840332" start="10292" end="10316" title="Sloan Digital Sky Survey" label="Sloan Digital Sky Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q151991" start="10330" end="10359" title="European Southern Observatory" label="European Southern Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q479962" start="10370" end="10387" title="Abell 1835 IR1916" label="Abell 1835 IR1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787411" start="10447" end="10475" title="Arcminute Microkelvin Imager" label="Arcminute Microkelvin Imager"/>
<link wikidata="Q201953" start="10548" end="10571" title="Spitzer Space Telescope" label="Spitzer Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q184356" start="10644" end="10659" title="radio telescope" label="radio telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="10681" end="10697" title="Milky Way Galaxy" label="Milky Way Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490" start="10703" end="10723" title="barred spiral galaxy" label="barred spiral galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q190438" start="10787" end="10799" title="dwarf galaxy" label="dwarf galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094136" start="10867" end="10875" title="Huge-LQG" label="Huge-LQG"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945326" start="10879" end="10897" title="large quasar group" label="large quasar group"/>
<link wikidata="Q15095226" start="10987" end="10998" title="Z8 GND 5296" label="Z8 GND 5296"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="11015" end="11027" title="spectroscopy" label="spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="11130" end="11138" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092045" start="11275" end="11292" title="comoving distance" label="comoving distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q15241043" start="11308" end="11343" title="Hercules–Corona Borealis Great Wall" label="Hercules–Corona Borealis Great Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133705" start="11355" end="11370" title="galaxy filament" label="galaxy filament"/>
<link wikidata="Q22247" start="11443" end="11458" title="gamma-ray burst" label="gamma-ray burst"/>
<link wikidata="Q17863945" start="11481" end="11502" title="Laniakea Supercluster" label="Laniakea Supercluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="11548" end="11557" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q240105" start="11626" end="11645" title="Radial velocity" label="relative velocities"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="11649" end="11657" title="galaxy" label="galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q175760" start="11755" end="11773" title="Virgo Supercluster" label="Virgo Supercluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q21206789" start="11859" end="11881" title="Ophiuchus Supercluster" label="Ophiuchus Supercluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q40392" start="11929" end="11952" title="supermassive black hole" label="supermassive black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q76789247" start="12021" end="12064" title="Ophiuchus Supercluster explosion" label="the largest known explosion in the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q46587" start="12079" end="12102" title="active galactic nucleus" label="active galactic nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q284657" start="12149" end="12152" title="Relativistic jet" label="jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371025" start="12346" end="12357" title="disk galaxy" label="disk galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149919" start="12358" end="12368" title="Wolfe Disk" label="Wolfe Disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995140" start="12486" end="12516" title="galaxy formation and evolution" label="galaxy formation and evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q97131102" start="12531" end="12546" title="South Pole Wall" label="South Pole Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q840332" start="12819" end="12843" title="Sloan Digital Sky Survey" label="Sloan Digital Sky Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="12856" end="12908" title="cosmology" label="largest, most detailed 3D map of the universe so far"/>
<link wikidata="Q136407" start="12944" end="12965" title="Chronology of the universe" label="its expansion history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647152" start="13020" end="13044" title="shape of the universe" label="geometry of the universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129469" start="13092" end="13101" title="expansion of the universe" label="expanding"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13105" end="13121" title="Hubble&amp;#x27;s law#Measured values of the Hubble constant" label="different speeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q186447" start="13132" end="13158" title="James Webb Space Telescope" label="James Webb Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q113019754" start="13179" end="13207" title="Webb&amp;#x27;s First Deep Field" label="Webb&amp;#x27;s First Deep Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q113420815" start="13231" end="13242" title="CEERS-93316" label="CEERS-93316"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="13270" end="13276" title="galaxy" label="galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q76250" start="13296" end="13304" title="redshift" label="redshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="13379" end="13387" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q18193875" start="13487" end="13504" title="Illustris project" label="Illustris project"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13507" end="13542" title="Observable universe#Large-scale structure" label="Large-scale structure of the cosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806016" start="13545" end="13597" title="Timeline of astronomical maps, catalogs, and surveys" label="Timeline of astronomical maps, catalogs, and surveys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723682" start="13600" end="13633" title="Timeline of cosmological theories" label="Timeline of cosmological theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q85812253" start="13636" end="13651" title="UniverseMachine" label="UniverseMachine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18349003" start="13654" end="13687" title="List of largest cosmic structures" label="List of largest cosmic structures"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13690" end="13794" title="List of the most distant astronomical objects#Timeline of most distant astronomical object recordholders" label="List of the most distant astronomical objects#Timeline of most distant astronomical object recordholders"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58937" wikidata="Q134649" url="?curid=58937" title="Diphtheria">
<text>Diphtheria is an infection caused by the bacterium &quot;Corynebacterium diphtheriae&quot;. Most infections are asymptomatic or have a mild clinical course, but in some outbreaks, the mortality rate approaches 10%. Signs and symptoms may vary from mild to severe, and usually start two to five days after exposure. Symptoms often develop gradually, beginning with a sore throat and fever. In severe cases, a grey or white patch develops in the throat, which can block the airway, and create a barking cough similar to what is observed in croup. The neck may also swell, in part due to the enlargement of the facial lymph nodes. Diphtheria can also involve the skin, eyes, or genitals, and can cause complications, including myocarditis (which in itself can result in an abnormal heart rate), inflammation of nerves (which can result in paralysis), kidney problems, and bleeding problems due to low levels of platelets.

Diphtheria is usually spread between people by direct contact, through the air, or through contact with contaminated objects. Asymptomatic transmission and chronic infection are also possible. Different strains of &quot;C. diphtheriae&quot; are the main cause in the variability of lethality, as the lethality and symptoms themselves are caused by the exotoxin produced by the bacteria. Diagnosis can often be made based on the appearance of the throat with confirmation by microbiological culture. Previous infection may not protect against reinfection.

A diphtheria vaccine is effective for prevention, and is available in a number of formulations. Three or four doses, given along with tetanus vaccine and pertussis vaccine, are recommended during childhood. Further doses of the diphtheria–tetanus vaccine are recommended every ten years. Protection can be verified by measuring the antitoxin level in the blood. Diphtheria can be prevented in those exposed, as well as treated with the antibiotics erythromycin or benzylpenicillin. In severe cases a tracheotomy may be needed to open the airway.

In 2015, 4,500 cases were officially reported worldwide, down from nearly 100,000 in 1980. About a million cases a year are believed to have occurred before the 1980s. Diphtheria currently occurs most often in sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia, and Indonesia. In 2015, it resulted in 2,100 deaths, down from 8,000 deaths in 1990. In areas where it is still common, children are most affected. It is rare in the developed world due to widespread vaccination, but can re-emerge if vaccination rates decrease. In the United States, 57 cases were reported between 1980 and 2004. Death occurs in 5–10% of those diagnosed. The disease was first described in the 5th century BC by Hippocrates. The bacterium was identified in 1882 by Edwin Klebs.

==Signs and symptoms==

The symptoms of diphtheria usually begin two to seven days after infection. They include fever of 38 °C (100.4 °F) or above; chills; fatigue; bluish skin coloration (cyanosis); sore throat; hoarseness; cough; headache; difficulty swallowing; painful swallowing; difficulty breathing; rapid breathing; foul-smelling and bloodstained nasal discharge; and lymphadenopathy. Within two to three days, diphtheria may destroy healthy tissues in the respiratory system. The dead tissue forms a thick, gray coating that can build up in the throat or nose. This thick gray coating is called a &quot;pseudomembrane.&quot; It can cover tissues in the nose, tonsils, voice box, and throat, making it very hard to breathe and swallow. Symptoms can also include cardiac arrhythmias, myocarditis, and cranial and peripheral nerve palsies.

=== Diphtheritic croup ===
Laryngeal diphtheria can lead to a characteristic swollen neck and throat, or &quot;bull neck.&quot; The swollen throat is often accompanied by a serious respiratory condition, characterized by a brassy or &quot;barking&quot; cough, stridor, hoarseness, and difficulty breathing; and historically referred to variously as &quot;diphtheritic croup,&quot; &quot;true croup,&quot; or sometimes simply as &quot;croup.&quot; Diphtheritic croup is extremely rare in countries where diphtheria vaccination is customary. As a result, the term &quot;croup&quot; nowadays most often refers to an unrelated viral illness that produces similar but milder respiratory symptoms.

== Transmission ==
Human-to-human transmission of diphtheria typically occurs through the air when an infected individual coughs or sneezes. Breathing in particles released from the infected individual leads to infection. Contact with any lesions on the skin can also lead to transmission of diphtheria, but this is uncommon. Indirect infections can occur, as well. If an infected individual touches a surface or object, the bacteria can be left behind and remain viable. Also, some evidence indicates diphtheria has the potential to be zoonotic, but this has yet to be confirmed. &quot;Corynebacterium ulcerans&quot; has been found in some animals, which would suggest zoonotic potential.

==Mechanism==
Diphtheria toxin (DT) is produced only by &quot;C. diphtheriae&quot; infected with a certain type of bacteriophage. Toxinogenicity is determined by phage conversion (also called lysogenic conversion); i.e., the ability of the bacterium to make DT changes as a consequence of infection by a particular phage. DT is encoded by the &quot;tox&quot; gene. Strains of corynephage are either &quot;tox&quot;+ (e.g., corynephage β) or &quot;tox&quot;− (e.g., corynephage γ). The &quot;tox&quot; gene becomes integrated into the bacterial genome. The chromosome of &quot;C. diphtheriae&quot; has two different but functionally equivalent bacterial attachment sites (attB) for integration of β prophage into the chromosome.

The diphtheria toxin precursor is a protein of molecular weight 60 kDa. Certain proteases, such as trypsin, selectively cleave DT to generate two peptide chains, amino-terminal fragment A (DT-A) and carboxyl-terminal fragment B (DT-B), which are held together by a disulfide bond. DT-B is a recognition subunit that gains entry of DT into the host cell by binding to the EGF-like domain of heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor on the cell surface. This signals the cell to internalize the toxin within an endosome via receptor-mediated endocytosis. Inside the endosome, DT is split by a trypsin-like protease into DT-A and DT-B. The acidity of the endosome causes DT-B to create pores in the endosome membrane, thereby catalysing the release of DT-A into the cytoplasm.

Fragment A inhibits the synthesis of new proteins in the affected cell by catalyzing ADP-ribosylation of elongation factor EF-2—a protein that is essential to the translation step of protein synthesis. This ADP-ribosylation involves the transfer of an ADP-ribose from NAD+ to a diphthamide (a modified histidine) residue within the EF-2 protein. Since EF-2 is needed for the moving of tRNA from the A-site to the P-site of the ribosome during protein translation, ADP-ribosylation of EF-2 prevents protein synthesis.

ADP-ribosylation of EF-2 is reversed by giving high doses of nicotinamide (a form of vitamin B3), since this is one of the reaction&#x27;s end products, and high amounts drive the reaction in the opposite direction.

==Diagnosis==
The current clinical case definition of diphtheria used by the United States&#x27; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is based on both laboratory and clinical criteria.

===Laboratory criteria===
* Isolation of &quot;C. diphtheriae&quot; from a Gram stain or throat culture from a clinical specimen.
* Histopathologic diagnosis of diphtheria by Albert&#x27;s stain.

===Toxin demonstration===
* In vivo tests (guinea pig inoculation): Subcutaneous and intracutaneous tests.
* In vitro test: Elek&#x27;s gel precipitation test, detection of tox gene by PCR, ELISA, ICA.

===Clinical criteria===
* Upper respiratory tract illness with sore throat.
* Low-grade fever (above is rare).
* An adherent, dense, grey pseudomembrane covering the posterior aspect of the pharynx; in severe cases, it can extend to cover the entire tracheobronchial tree.

===Case classification===
* Probable: a clinically compatible case that is not laboratory-confirmed, and is not epidemiologically linked to a laboratory-confirmed case.
* Confirmed: a clinically compatible case that is either laboratory-confirmed or epidemiologically linked to a laboratory-confirmed case.

Empirical treatment should generally be started in a patient in whom suspicion of diphtheria is high.

==Prevention==

Vaccination against diphtheria is commonly done in infants, and delivered as a combination vaccine, such as a DPT vaccine (diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus). Pentavalent vaccines, which vaccinate against diphtheria and four other childhood diseases simultaneously, are frequently used in disease prevention programs in developing countries by organizations such as UNICEF.

==Treatment==
The disease may remain manageable, but in more severe cases, lymph nodes in the neck may swell, and breathing and swallowing are more difficult. People in this stage should seek immediate medical attention, as obstruction in the throat may require intubation or a tracheotomy. Abnormal cardiac rhythms can occur early in the course of the illness or weeks later, and can lead to heart failure. Diphtheria can also cause paralysis in the eye, neck, throat, or respiratory muscles. Patients with severe cases are put in a hospital intensive care unit, and given diphtheria antitoxin (consisting of antibodies isolated from the serum of horses that have been challenged with diphtheria toxin). Since antitoxin does not neutralize toxin that is already bound to tissues, delaying its administration increases risk of death. Therefore, the decision to administer diphtheria antitoxin is based on clinical diagnosis, and should not await laboratory confirmation.

Antibiotics have not been demonstrated to affect healing of local infection in diphtheria patients treated with antitoxin. Antibiotics are used in patients or carriers to eradicate &quot;C. diphtheriae,&quot; and prevent its transmission to others. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends either:
* Metronidazole
* Erythromycin is given (orally or by injection) for 14 days (40 mg/kg per day with a maximum of 2&quot; &quot;g/d), or
* Procaine penicillin G is given intramuscularly for 14 days (300,000 U/d for patients weighing &lt;10 kg, and 600,000 U/d for those weighing &gt;10 kg); patients with allergies to penicillin G or erythromycin can use rifampin or clindamycin.

In cases that progress beyond a throat infection, diphtheria toxin spreads through the blood, and can lead to potentially life-threatening complications that affect other organs, such as the heart and kidneys. Damage to the heart caused by the toxin affects the heart&#x27;s ability to pump blood, or the kidneys&#x27; ability to clear wastes. It can also cause nerve damage, eventually leading to paralysis. About 40–50% of those left untreated can die.

== Epidemiology ==

Diphtheria is fatal in 5–10% of cases. In children under five years and adults over 40 years, the fatality rate may be as much as 20%. In 2013, it resulted in 3,300 deaths, down from 8,000 deaths in 1990. Better standards of living, mass immunization, improved diagnosis, prompt treatment, and more effective health care have led to a decrease in cases worldwide.

==History==
In 1613, Spain experienced an epidemic of diphtheria, referred to as (The Year of Strangulations).

In 1705, the Mariana Islands experienced an epidemic of diphtheria and typhus simultaneously, reducing the population to about 5,000 people.

In 1735, a diphtheria epidemic swept through New England.

Before 1826, diphtheria was known by different names across the world. In England, it was known as &quot;Boulogne sore throat,&quot; as the illness had spread from France. In 1826, Pierre Bretonneau gave the disease the name &quot;diphthérite&quot; (from Greek διφθέρα, &quot;diphthera&quot; &#x27;leather&#x27;), describing the appearance of pseudomembrane in the throat.

In 1856, Victor Fourgeaud described an epidemic of diphtheria in California.

In 1878, Princess Alice (Queen Victoria&#x27;s second daughter) and her family became infected with diphtheria; Princess Alice and her four-year-old daughter, Princess Marie, both died.

In 1883, Edwin Klebs identified the bacterium causing diphtheria, and named it Klebs–Loeffler bacterium. The club shape of this bacterium helped Edwin to differentiate it from other bacteria. Over time, it has been called &quot;Microsporon diphtheriticum&quot;, &quot;Bacillus diphtheriae&quot;, and &quot;Mycobacterium diphtheriae&quot;. Current nomenclature is &quot;Corynebacterium diphtheriae&quot;.

In 1884, German bacteriologist Friedrich Loeffler became the first person to cultivate &quot;C. diphtheriae&quot;. He used Koch&#x27;s postulates to prove association between &quot;C. diphtheriae&quot; and diphtheria. He also showed that the bacillus produces an exotoxin.

In 1885, Joseph P. O&#x27;Dwyer introduced the O&#x27;Dwyer tube for laryngeal intubation in patients with an obstructed larynx. It soon replaced tracheostomy as the emergency diphtheric intubation method.

In 1888, Emile Roux and Alexandre Yersin showed that a substance produced by &quot;C. diphtheriae&quot; caused symptoms of diphtheria in animals.

In 1890, Shibasaburō Kitasato and Emil von Behring immunized guinea pigs with heat-treated diphtheria toxin. They also immunized goats and horses in the same way, and showed that an &quot;antitoxin&quot; made from serum of immunized animals could cure the disease in non-immunized animals. Behring used this antitoxin (now known to consist of antibodies that neutralize the toxin produced by &quot;C. diphtheriae&quot;) for human trials in 1891, but they were unsuccessful. Successful treatment of human patients with horse-derived antitoxin began in 1894, after production and quantification of antitoxin had been optimized. In 1901, Von Behring won the first Nobel Prize in medicine for his work on diphtheria.

In 1895, H. K. Mulford Company of Philadelphia started production and testing of diphtheria antitoxin in the United States. Park and Biggs described the method for producing serum from horses for use in diphtheria treatment.

In 1897, Paul Ehrlich developed a standardized unit of measure for diphtheria antitoxin. This was the first ever standardization of a biological product, and played an important role in future developmental work on sera and vaccines.

In 1901, 10 of 11 inoculated St. Louis children died from contaminated diphtheria antitoxin. The horse from which the antitoxin was derived died of tetanus. This incident, coupled with a tetanus outbreak in Camden, New Jersey, played an important part in initiating federal regulation of biologic products.

On 7 January 1904, Ruth Cleveland died of diphtheria at the age of 12 years in Princeton, New Jersey. Ruth was the eldest daughter of former President Grover Cleveland and the former First Lady, Frances Folsom.

In 1905, Franklin Royer, from Philadelphia&#x27;s Municipal Hospital, published a paper urging timely treatment for diphtheria and adequate doses of antitoxin. In 1906, Clemens Pirquet and Béla Schick described serum sickness in children receiving large quantities of horse-derived antitoxin.

Between 1910 and 1911, Béla Schick developed the Schick test to detect pre-existing immunity to diphtheria in an exposed person. Only those who had not been exposed to diphtheria were vaccinated. A massive, five-year campaign was coordinated by Dr. Schick. As a part of the campaign, 85 million pieces of literature were distributed by the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, with an appeal to parents to &quot;Save your child from diphtheria.&quot; A vaccine was developed in the next decade, and deaths began declining significantly in 1924.
In 1919, in Dallas, Texas, 10 children were killed and 60 others made seriously ill by toxic antitoxin which had passed the tests of the New York State Health Department. The manufacturer of the antitoxin, the Mulford Company of Philadelphia, paid damages in every case.

During the 1920s, an annual estimate of 100,000 to 200,000 diphtheria cases and 13,000 to 15,000 deaths occurred in the United States. Children represented a large majority of these cases and fatalities. One of the most infamous outbreaks of diphtheria occurred in 1925, in Nome, Alaska; the &quot;Great Race of Mercy&quot; to deliver diphtheria antitoxin is now celebrated by the Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race.

In 1926, Alexander Thomas Glenny increased the effectiveness of diphtheria toxoid (a modified version of the toxin used for vaccination) by treating it with aluminum salts. Vaccination with toxoid was not widely used until the early 1930s. In 1939, Dr. Nora Wattie, who was the Principal Medical Officer (Maternity and Child Welfare) of Glasgow between 1934– 1964, introduced immunisation clinics across Glasgow, and promoted mother and child health education, resulting in virtual eradication of the infection in the city.

Widespread vaccination pushed cases in the United States down from 4.4 per 100,000 inhabitants in 1932 to 2.0 in 1937. In Nazi Germany, where authorities preferred treatment and isolation over vaccination (until about 1939–1941), cases rose over the same period from 6.1 to 9.6 per 100,000 inhabitants.

Between June 1942 and February 1943, 714 cases of diphtheria were recorded at Sham Shui Po Barracks, resulting in 112 deaths because the Imperial Japanese Army did not release supplies of anti-diphtheria serum.

In 1943, diphtheria outbreaks accompanied war and disruption in Europe. The 1 million cases in Europe resulted in 50,000 deaths.

During 1948 in Kyoto, 68 of 606 children died after diphtheria immunization due to improper manufacture of aluminum phosphate toxoid.

In 1974, the World Health Organization included DPT vaccine in their Expanded Programme on Immunization for developing countries.

In 1975, an outbreak of cutaneous diphtheria in Seattle, Washington, was reported.

After the breakup of the former Soviet Union in 1991, vaccination rates in its constituent countries fell so low that an explosion of diphtheria cases occurred. In 1991, 2,000 cases of diphtheria occurred in the USSR. Between 1991 and 1998, as many as 200,000 cases were reported in the Commonwealth of Independent States, and resulted in 5,000 deaths. In 1994, the Russian Federation had 39,703 diphtheria cases. By contrast, in 1990, only 1,211 cases were reported.

In early May 2010, a case of diphtheria was diagnosed in Port-au-Prince, Haiti, after the devastating 2010 Haiti earthquake. The 15-year-old male patient died while workers searched for antitoxin.

In 2013, three children died of diphtheria in Hyderabad, India.

In early June 2015, a case of diphtheria was diagnosed at Vall d&#x27;Hebron University Hospital in Barcelona, Spain. The six-year-old child who died of the illness had not been previously vaccinated due to parental opposition to vaccination. It was the first case of diphtheria in the country since 1986, as reported by the Spanish daily newspaper &quot;El Mundo,&quot; or from 1998, as reported by the WHO.

In March 2016, a three-year-old girl died of diphtheria in the University Hospital of Antwerp, Belgium.

In June 2016, a three-year-old, five-year-old, and seven-year-old girl died of diphtheria in Kedah, Malacca, and Sabah, Malaysia.

In January 2017, more than 300 cases were recorded in Venezuela.

In 2017, outbreaks occurred in a Rohingya refugee camp in Bangladesh, and amongst children unvaccinated due to the Yemeni Civil War.

In November and December 2017, an outbreak of diphtheria occurred in Indonesia, with more than 600 cases found and 38 fatalities.

In November 2019, two cases of diphtheria occurred in the Lothian area of Scotland. Additionally, in November 2019, an unvaccinated 8-year-old boy died of diphtheria in Athens, Greece.

In July 2022, two cases of diphtheria occurred in northern New South Wales, Australia.

In October 2022, there was an outbreak of diphtheria at the former Manston airfield, a former Ministry of Defence (MoD) site in Kent, England, which had been converted to an asylum seeker processing centre. The capacity of the processing centre was 1,000 people, although about 3,000 were living at the site, with some accommodated in tents. The Home Office, the government department responsible for asylum seekers, refused to confirm the number of cases.

In December 2023 there was an outbreak at a school in Luton, in the United Kingdom. UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) issued a statement saying specialists have been providing public health support following confirmation of the diphtheria case at a primary school in Luton. The agency said it is working closely with local and national partners &quot;to ensure all necessary public health measures are implemented&quot; following the discovery of the new case. The statement added: &quot;We have conducted a risk assessment and close contacts of the case have been identified and where appropriate, vaccination and advice will be given to prevent the spread of the infection.&quot;

==References==

==Further reading==
* Hammonds, Evelynn Maxine.  &quot;Childhood&#x27;s Deadly Scourge: The Campaign to Control Diphtheria in New York City, 1880-1930&quot; (1999)
** Hammonds, Evelynn Maxine.   &quot;The search for perfect control: A social history of diphtheria, 1880-1930&quot; (PhD dissertation, Harvard University; ProQuest Dissertations &amp; Theses,  1993. 9318671).
* &quot;Antitoxin dars 1735 and 1740.&quot; &quot;The William and Mary Quarterly&quot;, 3rd Ser., Vol 6, No 2. p. 338.

==External links==
* Mapping diphtheria-pertussis-tetanus vaccine coverage in Africa, 2000–2016: a spatial and temporal modelling study</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q134649" start="0" end="10" title="Diphtheria" label="Diphtheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="17" end="26" title="infection" label="infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="41" end="50" title="bacteria" label="bacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q131649" start="57" end="84" title="Corynebacterium diphtheriae" label="Corynebacterium diphtheriae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178170" start="140" end="155" title="Course (medicine)" label="clinical course"/>
<link wikidata="Q38933" start="382" end="387" title="fever" label="fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q836356" start="538" end="543" title="croup" label="croup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519198" start="608" end="626" title="facial lymph nodes" label="facial lymph nodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q186235" start="724" end="735" title="myocarditis" label="myocarditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q189331" start="770" end="789" title="cardiac arrhythmia" label="abnormal heart rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q945238" start="792" end="814" title="peripheral neuropathy" label="inflammation of nerves"/>
<link wikidata="Q107231" start="836" end="845" title="paralysis" label="paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q570197" start="848" end="863" title="proteinuria" label="kidney problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q585285" start="894" end="917" title="thrombocytopenia" label="low levels of platelets"/>
<link wikidata="Q381481" start="983" end="998" title="airborne disease" label="through the air"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075150" start="1024" end="1044" title="Fomite" label="contaminated objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q408649" start="1272" end="1280" title="exotoxin" label="exotoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125312" start="1394" end="1417" title="microbiological culture" label="microbiological culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4007175" start="1478" end="1496" title="diphtheria vaccine" label="diphtheria vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5861101" start="1610" end="1625" title="tetanus vaccine" label="tetanus vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170955" start="1630" end="1647" title="pertussis vaccine" label="pertussis vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="1912" end="1923" title="antibiotics" label="antibiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q213511" start="1924" end="1936" title="erythromycin" label="erythromycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q258450" start="1940" end="1956" title="benzylpenicillin" label="benzylpenicillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q324921" start="1976" end="1987" title="tracheotomy" label="tracheotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="2233" end="2251" title="sub-Saharan Africa" label="sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="2253" end="2263" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16250842" start="2269" end="2278" title="Health in Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="2431" end="2446" title="developed world" label="developed world"/>
<link wikidata="Q192995" start="2465" end="2476" title="vaccination" label="vaccination"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264" start="2694" end="2705" title="Hippocrates" label="Hippocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q61203" start="2747" end="2758" title="Edwin Klebs" label="Edwin Klebs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9690" start="2918" end="2925" title="Fatigue (medical)" label="fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q192120" start="2951" end="2959" title="cyanosis" label="cyanosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q836379" start="2975" end="2985" title="Dysphonia" label="hoarseness"/>
<link wikidata="Q35805" start="2987" end="2992" title="cough" label="cough"/>
<link wikidata="Q188008" start="3047" end="3067" title="Shortness of breath" label="difficulty breathing"/>
<link wikidata="Q847726" start="3138" end="3153" title="lymphadenopathy" label="lymphadenopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189331" start="3532" end="3550" title="cardiac arrhythmia" label="cardiac arrhythmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q186235" start="3553" end="3564" title="myocarditis" label="myocarditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182126" start="3570" end="3577" title="cranial nerve palsy" label="cranial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3582" end="3606" title="peripheral nerve palsy" label="peripheral nerve palsies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525170" start="3869" end="3876" title="stridor" label="stridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4007175" start="4112" end="4134" title="diphtheria vaccination" label="diphtheria vaccination"/>
<link wikidata="Q836356" start="4177" end="4182" title="croup" label="croup"/>
<link wikidata="Q182672" start="4839" end="4847" title="Zoonosis" label="zoonotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q421580" start="5007" end="5023" title="Diphtheria toxin" label="Diphtheria toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q165028" start="5108" end="5121" title="bacteriophage" label="bacteriophage"/>
<link wikidata="Q184651" start="5123" end="5137" title="Toxin" label="Toxinogenicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148110" start="5185" end="5205" title="Lysogenic cycle" label="lysogenic conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="5758" end="5765" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q182854" start="5769" end="5785" title="molecular mass" label="molecular weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q483261" start="5789" end="5792" title="Dalton (unit)" label="kDa"/>
<link wikidata="Q172847" start="5868" end="5875" title="peptide" label="peptide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230226" start="5987" end="6001" title="disulfide bond" label="disulfide bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914537" start="6112" end="6150" title="heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor" label="heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q824237" start="6229" end="6237" title="endosome" label="endosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135604" start="6242" end="6271" title="receptor-mediated endocytosis" label="receptor-mediated endocytosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q212410" start="6324" end="6332" title="protease" label="protease"/>
<link wikidata="Q79899" start="6483" end="6492" title="cytoplasm" label="cytoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q61420" start="6580" end="6596" title="ADP-ribosylation" label="ADP-ribosylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q126252" start="6600" end="6617" title="elongation factor" label="elongation factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q126252" start="6618" end="6622" title="EF-2" label="EF-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="6625" end="6632" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q61416" start="6747" end="6757" title="ADP-ribose" label="ADP-ribose"/>
<link wikidata="Q12499775" start="6763" end="6767" title="NAD+" label="NAD+"/>
<link wikidata="Q61344" start="6773" end="6784" title="diphthamide" label="diphthamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q485277" start="6797" end="6806" title="histidine" label="histidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q201448" start="6880" end="6884" title="tRNA" label="tRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q42244" start="6922" end="6930" title="ribosome" label="ribosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q192423" start="7074" end="7086" title="nicotinamide" label="nicotinamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394551" start="7256" end="7280" title="clinical case definition" label="clinical case definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="7307" end="7320" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="7327" end="7369" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q908600" start="8633" end="8644" title="DPT vaccine" label="DPT vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q134859" start="8658" end="8667" title="pertussis" label="pertussis"/>
<link wikidata="Q47790" start="8669" end="8676" title="tetanus" label="tetanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18387529" start="8679" end="8698" title="Pentavalent vaccine" label="Pentavalent vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="8840" end="8860" title="developing countries" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="8886" end="8892" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q170758" start="8970" end="8981" title="lymph nodes" label="lymph nodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q939018" start="9157" end="9167" title="intubation" label="intubation"/>
<link wikidata="Q324921" start="9173" end="9184" title="tracheotomy" label="tracheotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="9288" end="9301" title="heart failure" label="heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094647" start="9438" end="9457" title="intensive care unit" label="intensive care unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q584135" start="9480" end="9489" title="antitoxin" label="antitoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="9505" end="9515" title="antibodies" label="antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q110084" start="9534" end="9539" title="Serum (blood)" label="serum"/>
<link wikidata="Q169569" start="10190" end="10203" title="Metronidazole" label="Metronidazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q213511" start="10206" end="10218" title="Erythromycin" label="Erythromycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435660" start="10326" end="10347" title="Procaine penicillin G" label="Procaine penicillin G"/>
<link wikidata="Q422652" start="10542" end="10550" title="rifampin" label="rifampin"/>
<link wikidata="Q422273" start="10554" end="10565" title="clindamycin" label="clindamycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25040337" start="11430" end="11435" title="Health in Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q153732" start="11534" end="11549" title="Mariana Islands" label="Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q160649" start="11592" end="11598" title="typhus" label="typhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="11708" end="11719" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="11796" end="11803" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="11886" end="11892" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004700" start="11903" end="11920" title="Pierre Bretonneau" label="Pierre Bretonneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925904" start="12105" end="12121" title="Victor Fourgeaud" label="Victor Fourgeaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507357" start="12161" end="12171" title="Health in California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q155566" start="12183" end="12197" title="Princess Alice of the United Kingdom" label="Princess Alice"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="12199" end="12213" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208045" start="12333" end="12347" title="Princess Marie of Hesse and by Rhine (1874–1878)" label="Princess Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q61203" start="12370" end="12381" title="Edwin Klebs" label="Edwin Klebs"/>
<link wikidata="Q131649" start="12440" end="12464" title="Corynebacterium diphtheriae" label="Klebs–Loeffler bacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q15816836" start="12782" end="12796" title="bacteriologist" label="bacteriologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q60993" start="12797" end="12815" title="Friedrich Loeffler" label="Friedrich Loeffler"/>
<link wikidata="Q19047" start="12889" end="12911" title="Koch&amp;#x27;s postulates" label="Koch&amp;#x27;s postulates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185426" start="13049" end="13071" title="Joseph O&amp;#x27;Dwyer" label="Joseph P. O&amp;#x27;Dwyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q324921" start="13186" end="13198" title="Tracheotomy" label="tracheostomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q286440" start="13256" end="13266" title="Emile Roux" label="Emile Roux"/>
<link wikidata="Q123920" start="13271" end="13287" title="Alexandre Yersin" label="Alexandre Yersin"/>
<link wikidata="Q442225" start="13403" end="13423" title="Kitasato Shibasaburō" label="Shibasaburō Kitasato"/>
<link wikidata="Q76425" start="13428" end="13444" title="Emil von Behring" label="Emil von Behring"/>
<link wikidata="Q584135" start="13582" end="13591" title="antitoxin" label="antitoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q110084" start="13608" end="13613" title="Serum (blood)" label="serum"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="13737" end="13747" title="Antibody" label="antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="14055" end="14078" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867360" start="14117" end="14138" title="H. K. Mulford Company" label="H. K. Mulford Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="14142" end="14154" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010742" start="14232" end="14236" title="William Hallock Park" label="Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5740531" start="14241" end="14246" title="Hermann Biggs" label="Biggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q57089" start="14343" end="14355" title="Paul Ehrlich" label="Paul Ehrlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="14598" end="14607" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q47790" start="14717" end="14724" title="tetanus" label="tetanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q138367" start="14776" end="14794" title="Camden, New Jersey" label="Camden, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382923" start="14896" end="14910" title="Ruth Cleveland" label="Ruth Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q138518" start="14956" end="14977" title="Princeton, New Jersey" label="Princeton, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="15018" end="15027" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="15028" end="15044" title="Grover Cleveland" label="Grover Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166256" start="15060" end="15070" title="First Lady of the United States" label="First Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q233644" start="15072" end="15086" title="Frances Folsom" label="Frances Folsom"/>
<link wikidata="Q78562" start="15258" end="15273" title="Clemens Pirquet" label="Clemens Pirquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627710" start="15278" end="15289" title="Béla Schick" label="Béla Schick"/>
<link wikidata="Q33121" start="15300" end="15314" title="serum sickness" label="serum sickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985064" start="15432" end="15443" title="Schick test" label="Schick test"/>
<link wikidata="Q607131" start="15723" end="15758" title="Metropolitan Life Insurance Company" label="Metropolitan Life Insurance Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="15940" end="15953" title="Dallas" label="Dallas, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014077" start="16065" end="16097" title="New York State Department of Health" label="New York State Health Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q247489" start="16138" end="16169" title="Merck Sharp &amp;amp; Dohme" label="Mulford Company of Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79996" start="16474" end="16486" title="Nome, Alaska" label="Nome, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070119" start="16492" end="16523" title="1925 serum run to Nome" label="&amp;quot;Great Race of Mercy&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415139" start="16581" end="16609" title="Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race" label="Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q908822" start="16687" end="16693" title="toxoid" label="toxoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q102216256" start="16865" end="16876" title="Nora Wattie" label="Nora Wattie"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089130" start="16890" end="16915" title="Principal Medical Officer" label="Principal Medical Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="17016" end="17023" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="17259" end="17271" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487360" start="17519" end="17540" title="Sham Shui Po Barracks" label="Sham Shui Po Barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="17578" end="17600" title="Imperial Japanese Army" label="Imperial Japanese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q44700" start="17717" end="17723" title="Europe in World War II" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="17798" end="17803" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="17931" end="17956" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q908600" start="17966" end="17977" title="DPT vaccine" label="DPT vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407058" start="17987" end="18021" title="Expanded Programme on Immunization" label="Expanded Programme on Immunization"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="18026" end="18046" title="Developing country" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="18097" end="18116" title="Seattle" label="Seattle, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="18165" end="18177" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="18420" end="18454" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="Commonwealth of Independent States"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="18499" end="18517" title="Russia" label="Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34261" start="18659" end="18673" title="Port-au-Prince" label="Port-au-Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691001" start="18675" end="18680" title="Health in Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q43777" start="18704" end="18725" title="2010 Haiti earthquake" label="2010 Haiti earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361" start="18846" end="18862" title="Hyderabad, India" label="Hyderabad, India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826080" start="18923" end="18961" title="Vall d&amp;#x27;Hebron University Hospital" label="Vall d&amp;#x27;Hebron University Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="18965" end="18974" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="18976" end="18981" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q56641686" start="19081" end="19106" title="vaccine controversies" label="opposition to vaccination"/>
<link wikidata="Q921217" start="19220" end="19228" title="El Mundo (Spain)" label="El Mundo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="19361" end="19368" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q60521365" start="19370" end="19377" title="Health in Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q188947" start="19473" end="19478" title="Kedah" label="Kedah"/>
<link wikidata="Q185221" start="19480" end="19487" title="Malacca" label="Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q179029" start="19493" end="19498" title="Sabah" label="Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905708" start="19500" end="19508" title="Health in Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10368719" start="19565" end="19574" title="Health in Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467243" start="19610" end="19645" title="Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh" label="Rohingya refugee camp in Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686631" start="19692" end="19708" title="Yemeni Civil War (2014–present)" label="Yemeni Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="19780" end="19789" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q642024" start="19900" end="19907" title="Lothian" label="Lothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q24197199" start="19916" end="19924" title="Health in Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="20011" end="20017" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q30588064" start="20019" end="20025" title="Health in Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="20087" end="20102" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q22089870" start="20104" end="20113" title="Health in Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415044" start="20183" end="20199" title="RAF Manston" label="Manston airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143261" start="20210" end="20229" title="Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="20244" end="20248" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q39086049" start="20250" end="20257" title="Health in England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005196" start="20290" end="20321" title="Asylum seekers in the United Kingdom" label="asylum seeker processing centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q763388" start="20462" end="20473" title="Home Office" label="Home Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q203889" start="20628" end="20633" title="Luton" label="Luton"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="20642" end="20656" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q104336949" start="20658" end="20683" title="UK Health Security Agency" label="UK Health Security Agency"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58939" wikidata="Q2723682" url="?curid=58939" title="Timeline of cosmological theories">
<text>This timeline of cosmological theories and discoveries is a chronological record of the development of humanity&#x27;s understanding of the cosmos over the last two-plus millennia. Modern cosmological ideas follow the development of the scientific discipline of physical cosmology.

For millennia, what today is known to be the Solar System was regarded as the contents of the &quot;whole universe&quot;, so advances in the knowledge of both mostly paralleled. Clear distinction was not made until circa mid-17th century. See Timeline of Solar System astronomy for further details on this side.

==Antiquity==

* 16th century BCE – Mesopotamian cosmology has a flat, circular Earth enclosed in a cosmic ocean.
* 15th–11th century BCE – The &quot;Rigveda&quot; of Hinduism has some cosmological hymns, particularly in the late book 10, notably the Nasadiya Sukta which describes the origin of the universe, originating from the monistic &quot;Hiranyagarbha&quot; or &quot;Golden Egg&quot;. Primal matter remains manifest for 311.04 trillion years and unmanifest for an equal length. The universe remains manifest for 4.32 billion years and unmanifest for an equal length. Innumerable universes exist simultaneously. These cycles have and will last forever, driven by desires.

* 15th–6th century BCE – During this period, Zoroastrian Cosmology Develops and defines Creation as a manifestation of a cosmic conflict between existence and non-existence, good and evil, and light and darkness. 
* 6th century BCE – The Babylonian Map of the World shows the Earth surrounded by the cosmic ocean, with seven islands arranged around it so as to form a seven-pointed star. Contemporary Biblical cosmology reflects the same view of a flat, circular Earth swimming on water and overarched by the solid vault of the firmament to which are fastened the stars.
* 6th–4th century BCE – Greek philosophers, as early as Anaximander, introduce the idea of multiple or even infinite universes. Democritus further detailed that these worlds varied in distance, size; the presence, number and size of their suns and moons; and that they are subject to destructive collisions. Also during this time period, the Greeks established that the Earth is spherical rather than flat.
* 6th century BCE – Anaximander conceives a mechanical, non-mythological model of the world: the Earth floats very still in the centre of the infinite, not supported by anything. Its curious shape is that of a cylinder with a height one-third of its diameter. The flat top forms the inhabited world, which is surrounded by a circular oceanic mass. Anaximander considered the Sun as a huge object (larger than the land of Peloponnesus), and consequently, he realized how far from Earth it might be. In his system the celestial bodies turned at different distances. At the origin, after the separation of hot and cold, a ball of flame appeared that surrounded Earth like bark on a tree. This ball broke apart to form the rest of the Universe. It resembled a system of hollow concentric wheels, filled with fire, with the rims pierced by holes like those of a flute. Consequently, the Sun was the fire that one could see through a hole the same size as the Earth on the farthest wheel, and an eclipse corresponded with the occlusion of that hole. The diameter of the solar wheel was twenty-seven times that of the Earth (or twenty-eight, depending on the sources) and the lunar wheel, whose fire was less intense, eighteen (or nineteen) times. Its hole could change shape, thus explaining lunar phases. The stars and the planets, located closer, followed the same model.
* 5th century BCE – Parmenides is credited to be the first Greek who declared that the Earth is spherical and is situated in the centre of the universe.
* 5th century BCE – Pythagoreans as Philolaus believed the motion of planets is caused by an out-of-sight &quot;fire&quot; at the centre of the universe (not the Sun) that powers them, and Sun and Earth orbit that &quot;Central Fire&quot; at different distances. The Earth&#x27;s inhabited side is always opposite to the Central Fire, rendering it invisible to people. They also claimed that the Moon and the planets orbit the Earth. This model depicts a moving Earth, simultaneously self-rotating and orbiting around an external point (but not around the Sun), thus not being geocentrical, contrary to common intuition. Due to philosophical concerns about the number 10 (a &quot;perfect number&quot; for the Pythagorians), they also added a tenth &quot;hidden body&quot; or Counter-Earth (&quot;Antichthon&quot;), always in the opposite side of the invisible Central Fire and therefore also invisible from Earth.
* 4th century BCE – Plato claimed in his &quot;Timaeus&quot; that circles and spheres are the preferred shape of the universe, that the Earth is at the center and is circled by, ordered in-to-outwards: Moon, Sun, Venus, Mercury, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, and finally the fixed stars located on the celestial sphere. In Plato&#x27;s complex cosmogony, the demiurge gave the primacy to the motion of Sameness and left it undivided; but he divided the motion of Difference in six parts, to have seven unequal circles. He prescribed these circles to move in opposite directions, three of them with equal speeds, the others with unequal speeds, but always in proportion. These circles are the orbits of the heavenly bodies: the three moving at equal speeds are the Sun, Venus and Mercury, while the four moving at unequal speeds are the Moon, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn. The complicated pattern of these movements is bound to be repeated again after a period called a &#x27;complete&#x27; or &#x27;perfect&#x27; year. However, others like Philolaus and Hicetas had rejected geocentrism.
* 4th century BCE – Eudoxus of Cnidus devised a geometric-mathematical model for the movements of the planets, the first known effort in this sense, based on (conceptual) concentric spheres centered on Earth. To explain the complexity of the movements of the planets along with that of the Sun and the Moon, Eudoxus thought they move as if they were attached to a number of concentrical, invisible spheres, every of them rotating around its own and different axis and at different paces. His model had twenty-seven homocentric spheres with each sphere explaining a type of observable motion for each celestial object. Eudoxus emphasised that this is a purely mathematical construct of the model in the sense that the spheres of each celestial body do not exist, it just shows the possible positions of the bodies. His model was later refined and expanded by Callippus.

* 4th century BCE – Aristotle follows the Plato&#x27;s Earth-centered universe in which the Earth is stationary and the cosmos (or universe) is finite in extent but infinite in time. He argued for a spherical Earth using lunar eclipses and other observations. Aristotle adopted and expanded even more the previous Eudoxus&#x27; and Callippus&#x27; model, but by supposing the spheres were material and crystalline. Aristotle also tried to determine whether the Earth moves and concluded that all the celestial bodies fall towards Earth by natural tendency and since Earth is the centre of that tendency, it is stationary. Plato seems to have obscurely argued that the universe did have a beginning, but Aristotle and others interpreted his words differently.
* 4th century BCE – &quot;De Mundo&quot; – Five elements, situated in spheres in five regions, the less being in each case surrounded by the greater – namely, earth surrounded by water, water by air, air by fire, and fire by aether – make up the whole Universe.
* 4th century BCE – Heraclides Ponticus is said to be the first Greek who proposes that the Earth rotates on its axis, from west to east, once every 24 hours, contradicting Aristotle&#x27;s teachings. Simplicius says that Heraclides proposed that the irregular movements of the planets can be explained if the Earth moves while the Sun stays still, but these statements are disputed.
* 3rd century BCE – Aristarchus of Samos proposes a Sun-centered universe and Earth&#x27;s rotation in its own axis. He also provides evidences for his theory from his own observations.
* 3rd century BCE – Archimedes in his essay &quot;The Sand Reckoner&quot;, estimates the diameter of the cosmos to be the equivalent in stadia of what would in modern times be called two light years, if Aristarchus&#x27; theories were correct.
* 2nd century BCE – Seleucus of Seleucia elaborates on Aristarchus&#x27; heliocentric universe, using the phenomenon of tides to explain heliocentrism. Seleucus was the first to prove the heliocentric system through reasoning. Seleucus&#x27; arguments for a heliocentric cosmology were probably related to the phenomenon of tides. According to Strabo (1.1.9), Seleucus was the first to state that the tides are due to the attraction of the Moon, and that the height of the tides depends on the Moon&#x27;s position relative to the Sun. Alternatively, he may have proved heliocentricity by determining the constants of a geometric model for it.
* 2nd century BCE – Apollonius of Perga shows the equivalence of two descriptions of the apparent retrograde planet motions (assuming the geocentric model), one using eccentrics and another deferent and epicycles. The latter will be a key feature for future models. The epicycle is described as a small orbit within a greater one, called the &quot;deferent&quot;: as a planet orbits the Earth, it also orbits the original orbit, so its trajectory resembles a curve known as an epitrochoid. This could explain how the planet seems to move as viewed from Earth.
* 2nd century BCE – Eratosthenes determines that the radius of the Earth is roughly 6,400 km.
* 2nd century BCE – Hipparchus uses parallax to determine that the distance to the Moon is roughly 380,000 km. The work of Hipparchus about the Earth-Moon system was so accurate that he could forecast solar and lunar eclipses for the next six centuries. Also, he discovers the precession of the equinoxes, and compiles a star catalog of about 850 entries.
* 2nd century BCE–3rd century CE – In Hindu cosmology, the &quot;Manusmriti&quot; (1.67–80) and Puranas describe time as cyclical, with a new universe (planets and life) created by Brahma every 8.64 billion years. The universe is created, maintained, and destroyed within a &quot;kalpa&quot; (day of Brahma) period lasting for 4.32 billion years, and is followed by a &quot;pralaya&quot; (night) period of partial dissolution equal in duration. In some Puranas (e.g. &quot;Bhagavata Purana&quot;), a larger cycle of time is described where matter (&quot;mahat-tattva&quot; or universal womb) is created from primal matter (&quot;prakriti&quot;) and root matter (&quot;pradhana&quot;) every 622.08 trillion years, from which Brahma is born. The elements of the universe are created, used by Brahma, and fully dissolved within a &quot;maha-kalpa&quot; (life of Brahma; 100 of his 360-day years) period lasting for 311.04 trillion years containing 36,000 &quot;kalpas&quot; (days) and &quot;pralayas&quot; (nights), and is followed by a &quot;maha-pralaya&quot; period of full dissolution equal in duration. The texts also speak of innumerable worlds or universes.
* 2nd century CE – Ptolemy proposes an Earth-centered universe, with the Sun, Moon, and visible planets revolving around the Earth. Based on Apollonius&#x27; epicycles, he calculates the positions, orbits and positional equations of the Heavenly bodies along with instruments to measure these quantities. Ptolemy emphasised that the epicycle motion does not apply to the Sun. His main contribution to the model was the equant points. He also re-arranged the heavenly spheres in a different order than Plato did (from Earth outward): Moon, Mercury, Venus, Sun, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn and fixed stars, following a long astrological tradition and the decreasing orbital periods. His book &quot;The Almagest&quot;, which also cataloged 1,022 stars and other astronomical objects (largely based upon Hipparchus&#x27;), remained the most authoritative text on astronomy and largest astronomical catalogue until the 17th century.

==Middle Ages==
*2nd century CE-5th century CE – Jain cosmology considers the loka, or universe, as an uncreated entity, existing since infinity, the shape of the universe as similar to a man standing with legs apart and arm resting on his waist. This Universe, according to Jainism, is broad at the top, narrow at the middle and once again becomes broad at the bottom.
* 5th century (or earlier) – Buddhist texts speak of &quot;hundreds of thousands of billions, countlessly, innumerably, boundlessly, incomparably, incalculably, unspeakably, inconceivably, immeasurably, inexplicably many worlds&quot; to the east, and &quot;infinite worlds in the ten directions&quot;.
* 5th century Aryabhata writes a treatise on motion of planets, Sun and Moon and stars. Aryabhatta puts forward the theory of rotation of the Earth in its own axis and explained day and night was caused by the diurnal rotation of the Earth. He models a geocentric universe with the sun, moon, and planets following circular and eccentric orbits with epicycles.
* 5th century – The Jewish talmud gives an argument for finite universe theory along with explanation.

* 5th century – Martianus Capella describes a modified geocentric model, in which the Earth is at rest in the center of the universe and circled by the Moon, the Sun, three planets and the stars, while Mercury and Venus circle the Sun, all surrounded by the sphere of fixed stars.
* 6th century – John Philoponus proposes a universe that is finite in time and argues against the ancient Greek notion of an infinite universe
* 7th century – The Quran says in Chapter 21: Verse 30 – &quot;Have those who disbelieved not considered that the Heavens and the Earth were a joined entity, and We separated them&quot;.
* 9th–12th centuries – Al-Kindi (Alkindus), Saadia Gaon (Saadia ben Joseph) and Al-Ghazali (Algazel) support a universe that has a finite past and develop two logical arguments for the notion.
* 12th century – Fakhr al-Din al-Razi discusses Islamic cosmology, rejects Aristotle&#x27;s idea of an Earth-centered universe, and, in the context of his commentary on the Quranic verse, &quot;All praise belongs to God, Lord of the Worlds,&quot; and proposes that the universe has more than &quot;a thousand worlds beyond this world.&quot;
* 12th century – Robert Grosseteste described the birth of the Universe in an explosion and the crystallisation of matter. He also put forward several new ideas such as rotation of the Earth around its axis and the cause of day and night. His treatise &quot;De Luce&quot; is the first attempt to describe the heavens and Earth using a single set of physical laws.
* 14th century – Jewish astronomer Levi ben Gershon (Gersonides) estimates the distance to the outermost orb of the fixed stars to be no less than 159,651,513,380,944 Earth radii, or about 100,000 light-years in modern units.
* 14th century – Several European mathematicians and astronomers develop the theory of Earth&#x27;s rotation including Nicole Oresme. Oresme also give logical reasoning, empirical evidence and mathematical proofs for his notion.
* 15th century – Nicholas of Cusa proposes that the Earth rotates on its axis in his book, &quot;On Learned Ignorance&quot; (1440). Like Oresme, he also wrote about the possibility of the plurality of worlds.

==Renaissance==
* 1501 – Indian astronomer Nilakantha Somayaji proposes a universe in which the planets orbit the Sun, but the Sun orbits the Earth.

* 1543 – Nicolaus Copernicus publishes his heliocentric universe in his .
* 1576 – Thomas Digges modifies the Copernican system by removing its outer edge and replacing the edge with a star-filled unbounded space.
* 1584 – Giordano Bruno proposes a non-hierarchical cosmology, wherein the Copernican Solar System is not the center of the universe, but rather, a relatively insignificant star system, amongst an infinite multitude of others.
* 1588 – Tycho Brahe publishes his own Tychonic system, a blend between Ptolemy&#x27;s classical geocentric model and Copernicus&#x27; heliocentric model, in which the Sun and the Moon revolve around the Earth, in the center of universe, and all other planets revolve around the Sun. It is a geo-heliocentric model similar to that described by Somayaji.
* 1600 – William Gilbert rejects the idea of a limiting sphere of the fixed stars for which no proof has been offered.
* 1609 – Galileo Galilei examines the skies and constellations through a telescope and concluded that the &quot;fixed stars&quot; which had been studied and mapped were only a tiny portion of the massive universe that lay beyond the reach of the naked eye. When in 1610 he aimed his telescope to the faint strip of the Milky Way, he found it resolves into countless white star-like spots, presumably farther stars themselves.
* 1610 – Johannes Kepler uses the dark night sky to argue for a finite universe. Shortly after, it was proved by Kepler himself that the Jupiter&#x27;s moons move around the planet the same way planets orbit the Sun, thus making Kepler&#x27;s laws universal.

==Enlightenment to Victorian Era==
* 1659 – Christiaan Huygens makes precise measurements of the angular distance between the Sun and Venus, which were based on the first absolute measurements of the Astronomical unit.
* 1672 – Jean Richer and Giovanni Domenico Cassini measure the Earth-Sun distance, the astronomical unit, to be about 138,370,000 km. Later it will be refined by others up to the current value of 149,597,870 km.
* 1675 – Ole Rømer uses the orbital mechanics of Jupiter&#x27;s moons to estimate that the speed of light is about 227,000 km/s.
* 1687 – Isaac Newton&#x27;s laws describe large-scale motion throughout the universe. The universal force of gravity suggested that stars could not simply be fixed or at rest, as their gravitational pulls cause &quot;mutual attraction&quot; and therefore cause them to move in relation to each other.
* 1704 – John Locke enters the term &quot;Solar System&quot; in the English language, when he used it to refer to the Sun, planets, and comets as a whole. By then it had been stablished beyond doubt that planets are other worlds, and stars are other distant suns, so the whole Solar System is actually only a small part of an immensely large universe, and definitively something distinct.
* 1718 – Edmund Halley discovers proper motion of stars, dispelling the concept of the &quot;fixed stars&quot;.
* 1720 – Edmund Halley puts forth an early form of Olbers&#x27; paradox (if the universe is infinite, every line of sight would end at a star, thus the night sky would be entirely bright).
* 1729 – James Bradley discovers the aberration of light, which proved the Earth&#x27;s motion around the Sun, and also provides a more accurate method to compute the speed of light closer to its actual value of about 300,000 km/s.
* 1744 – Jean-Philippe de Cheseaux puts forth an early form of Olbers&#x27; paradox.
* 1755 – Immanuel Kant asserts that the nebulae are really galaxies separate from, independent of, and outside the Milky Way Galaxy; he calls them &quot;island universes&quot;.

* 1781 – Charles Messier and his assistant Pierre Méchain publish the first catalogue of 110 nebulae and star clusters, the most prominent deep-sky objects that can easily be observed from Earth&#x27;s Northern Hemisphere, in order not to be confused with ordinary Solar System&#x27;s comets.
* 1785 – William Herschel proposes a heliocentric model of the universe that Earth&#x27;s Sun is at or near the center of the universe, which at the time was assumed to only be the Milky Way Galaxy.
* 1791 – Erasmus Darwin pens the first description of a cyclical expanding and contracting universe in his poem &quot;The Economy of Vegetation&quot;.
* 1796 – Pierre Laplace re-states the nebular hypothesis for the formation of the Solar System from a spinning nebula of gas and dust.
* 1826 – Heinrich Wilhelm Olbers puts forth Olbers&#x27; paradox.
* 1832–1838 – Following over 100 years of unsuccessful attempts, Thomas Henderson, Friedrich Bessel, and Otto Struve measure the parallax of a few nearby stars; these are the first measurements of any distances outside the Solar System.

* 1842 – Christian Doppler proposes the redshift and blueshift effects, based on an analog effect found in sound. Hippolyte Fizeau discovered independently the same phenomenon on electromagnetic waves in 1848.
* 1848 – Edgar Allan Poe offers first correct solution to Olbers&#x27; paradox in &quot;&quot;, an essay that also suggests the expansion and collapse of the universe.
* 1860s – William Huggins develops astronomical spectroscopy; he shows that the Orion nebula is mostly made of gas, while the Andromeda nebula (later called Andromeda Galaxy) is probably dominated by stars.
* 1862 – By analysing the spectroscopic signature of the Sun and comparing it to those of other stars, Father Angelo Secchi determines that the Sun in itself is also a star.
* 1887 – The Michelson–Morley experiment, intended to measure the relative motion of Earth through the (assumed) stationary luminiferous aether, got no results. This put an end to the centuries-old idea of the aether, dating back to Aristotle, and with it all the contemporary aether theories.
* 1897 – J. J. Thomson identifies the electrons as the constituent particles of the cathode rays, leading to the modern atomic model of matter.
* 1897 – William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin, based on the thermal radiation rate and the gravitational contraction forces, argues the age of the Sun to be no more than 20 million years – unless some energy source beyond what was then known was found.

==1901–1950==

* 1904 – Ernest Rutherford argues, in a lecture attended by Kelvin, that radioactive decay releases heat, providing the unknown energy source Kelvin had suggested, and ultimately leading to radiometric dating of rocks which reveals ages of billions of years for the Solar System bodies, hence the Sun and all the stars.
* 1905 – Albert Einstein publishes the Special Theory of Relativity, positing that space and time are not separate continua, and demonstrating that mass and energy are interchangeable.
* 1912 – Henrietta Leavitt discovers the period-luminosity law for Cepheid variable stars, which becomes a crucial step in measuring distances to other galaxies.
* 1913 – Niels Bohr publishes the Bohr model of the atom, which explains the spectral lines, and definitively established the quantum mechanics behaviour of the matter.
* 1915 – Robert Innes discovers Proxima Centauri, the closest star to Earth after the Sun.
* 1915 – Albert Einstein publishes the General Theory of Relativity, showing that an energy density warps spacetime.
* 1917 – Willem de Sitter derives an isotropic static cosmology with a cosmological constant, as well as an empty expanding cosmology with a cosmological constant, termed a de Sitter universe.
* 1918 – Harlow Shapley&#x27;s work on globular clusters showed that the heliocentrism model of cosmology was wrong, and galactocentrism replaced heliocentrism as the dominant model of cosmology.
* 1919 – Arthur Stanley Eddington uses a solar eclipse to successfully test Albert Einstein&#x27;s General Theory of Relativity.
* 1920 – The Shapley-Curtis Debate, on the distances to spiral nebulae, takes place at the Smithsonian.
* 1921 – The National Research Council (NRC) published the official transcript of the Shapley-Curtis Debate. Galaxies are finally recognized as objects beyond the Milky Way, and the Milky Way as a galaxy proper.
* 1922 – Vesto Slipher summarizes his findings on the spiral nebulae&#x27;s systematic redshifts.
* 1922 – Alexander Friedmann finds a solution to the Einstein field equations which suggests a general expansion of space.
* 1923 – Edwin Hubble measures distances to a few nearby spiral nebulae (galaxies), the Andromeda Galaxy (M31), Triangulum Galaxy (M33), and NGC 6822. The distances place them far outside the Milky Way, and implies that fainter galaxies are much more distant, and the universe is composed of many thousands of galaxies.
* 1924 – Louis de Broglie asserts that moderately accelerated electrons must show an associated wave. This was later confirmed by the Davisson–Germer experiment in 1927.
* 1927 – Georges Lemaître discusses the creation event of an expanding universe governed by the Einstein field equations. From its solutions to the Einstein equations, he predicts the distance-redshift relation.
* 1928 – Paul Dirac realises that his relativistic version of the Schrödinger wave equation for electrons predicts the possibility of antielectrons, and hence antimatter. This was confirmed in 1932 by Carl D. Anderson.
* 1928 – Howard P. Robertson briefly mentions that Vesto Slipher&#x27;s redshift measurements combined with brightness measurements of the same galaxies indicate a redshift-distance relation.

* 1929 – Edwin Hubble demonstrates the linear redshift-distance relationship and thus shows the expansion of the universe.
* 1932 – Karl Guthe Jansky recognizes received radio signals coming from outer space as extrasolar, coming mainly from Sagittarius. They are the first evidence of the center of the Milky Way, and the firsts experiences that founded the discipline of radio astronomy.
* 1933 – Edward Milne names and formalizes the cosmological principle.
* 1933 – Fritz Zwicky shows that the Coma cluster of galaxies contains large amounts of dark matter. This result agrees with modern measurements, but is generally ignored until the 1970s.
* 1934 – Georges Lemaître interprets the cosmological constant as due to a vacuum energy with an unusual perfect fluid equation of state.
* 1938 – Hans Bethe calculates the details of the two main energy-producing nuclear reactions that power the stars.
* 1938 – Paul Dirac suggests the large numbers hypothesis, that the gravitational constant may be small because it is decreasing slowly with time.
* 1948 – Ralph Alpher, Hans Bethe (&quot;in absentia&quot;), and George Gamow examine element synthesis in a rapidly expanding and cooling universe, and suggest that the elements were produced by rapid neutron capture.
* 1948 – Hermann Bondi, Thomas Gold, and Fred Hoyle propose steady state cosmologies based on the perfect cosmological principle.
* 1948 – George Gamow predicts the existence of the cosmic microwave background radiation by considering the behavior of primordial radiation in an expanding universe.
* 1950 – Fred Hoyle coins the term &quot;Big Bang&quot;, saying that it was not derisive; it was just a striking image meant to highlight the difference between that and the Steady-State model.

==1951–2000==
* 1961 – Robert Dicke argues that carbon-based life can only arise when the gravitational force is small, because this is when burning stars exist; first use of the weak anthropic principle.
* 1963 – Maarten Schmidt discovers the first quasar; these soon provide a probe of the universe back to substantial redshifts.
* 1965 – Hannes Alfvén proposes the now-discounted concept of ambiplasma to explain baryon asymmetry and supports the idea of an infinite universe.
* 1965 – Martin Rees and Dennis Sciama analyze quasar source count data and discover that the quasar density increases with redshift.
* 1965 – Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson, astronomers at Bell Labs discover the 2.7 K &quot;microwave background radiation&quot;, which earns them the 1978 Nobel Prize in Physics. Robert Dicke, James Peebles, Peter Roll and David Todd Wilkinson interpret it as a relic from the Big Bang.

* 1966 – Stephen Hawking and George Ellis show that any plausible general relativistic cosmology is singular.
* 1966 – James Peebles shows that the hot Big Bang predicts the correct helium abundance.
* 1967 – Andrei Sakharov presents the requirements for baryogenesis, a baryon-antibaryon asymmetry in the universe.
* 1967 – John Bahcall, Wal Sargent, and Maarten Schmidt measure the fine-structure splitting of spectral lines in 3C191 and thereby show that the fine-structure constant does not vary significantly with time.
* 1967 – Robert Wagner, William Fowler, and Fred Hoyle show that the hot Big Bang predicts the correct deuterium and lithium abundances.
* 1968 – Brandon Carter speculates that perhaps the fundamental constants of nature must lie within a restricted range to allow the emergence of life; first use of the strong anthropic principle.
* 1969 – Charles Misner formally presents the Big Bang horizon problem.
* 1969 – Robert Dicke formally presents the Big Bang flatness problem.
* 1970 – Vera Rubin and Kent Ford measure spiral galaxy rotation curves at large radii, showing evidence for substantial amounts of dark matter.
* 1973 – Edward Tryon proposes that the universe may be a large scale quantum mechanical vacuum fluctuation where positive mass-energy is balanced by negative gravitational potential energy.
* 1976 – Alexander Shlyakhter uses samarium ratios from the Oklo prehistoric natural nuclear fission reactor in Gabon to show that some laws of physics have remained unchanged for over two billion years.
* 1977 – Gary Steigman, David Schramm, and James Gunn examine the relation between the primordial helium abundance and number of neutrinos and claim that at most five lepton families can exist.
* 1980 – Alan Guth and Alexei Starobinsky independently propose the inflationary Big Bang universe as a possible solution to the horizon and flatness problems.
* 1981 – Viatcheslav Mukhanov and G. Chibisov propose that quantum fluctuations could lead to large scale structure in an inflationary universe.
* 1982 – The first CfA galaxy redshift survey is completed.
* 1982 – Several groups including James Peebles, J. Richard Bond and George Blumenthal propose that the universe is dominated by cold dark matter.
* 1983–1987  – The first large computer simulations of cosmic structure formation are run by Davis, Efstathiou, Frenk and White. The results show that cold dark matter produces a reasonable match to observations, but hot dark matter does not.

* 1988 – The CfA2 Great Wall is discovered in the CfA2 redshift survey.
* 1988 – Measurements of galaxy large-scale flows provide evidence for the Great Attractor.
* 1990 – The Hubble Space Telescope is launched. It is aimed primarily at deep-space objects.
* 1990 – Preliminary results from NASA&#x27;s COBE mission confirm the cosmic microwave background radiation has a blackbody spectrum to an astonishing one part in 105 precision, thus eliminating the possibility of an integrated starlight model proposed for the background by steady state enthusiasts.
* 1992 – Further COBE measurements discover the very small anisotropy of the cosmic microwave background, providing a &quot;baby picture&quot; of the seeds of large-scale structure when the universe was around 1/1100th of its present size and 380,000 years old.
* 1992 – First planetary system beyond the Solar System detected, around the pulsar PSR B1257+12.
* 1995 – The first planet around a Sun-like star is discovered, in orbit around the star 51 Pegasi.
* 1996 – The first Hubble Deep Field is released, providing a clear view of very distant galaxies when the universe was around one-third of its present age.
* 1998 – Controversial evidence for the fine-structure constant varying over the lifetime of the universe is first published.
* 1998 – The Supernova Cosmology Project and High-Z Supernova Search Team discover cosmic acceleration based on distances to Type Ia supernovae, providing the first direct evidence for a non-zero cosmological constant.
* 1999 – Measurements of the cosmic microwave background radiation with finer resolution than COBE, (most notably by the BOOMERanG experiment see Mauskopf et al., 1999, Melchiorri et al., 1999, de Bernardis et al. 2000) provide evidence for oscillations (the first acoustic peak) in the anisotropy angular spectrum, as expected in the standard model of cosmological structure formation. The angular position of this peak indicates that the geometry of the universe is close to flat.

==2001–present==
* 2001 – The 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey (2dF) by an Australian/British team gave strong evidence that the matter density is near 25% of critical density. Together with the CMB results for a flat universe, this provides independent evidence for a cosmological constant or similar dark energy.
* 2002 – The Cosmic Background Imager (CBI) in Chile obtained images of the cosmic microwave background radiation with the highest angular resolution of 4 arc minutes. It also obtained the anisotropy spectrum at high-resolution not covered before up to l ~ 3000. It found a slight excess in power at high-resolution (l &gt; 2500) not yet completely explained, the so-called &quot;CBI-excess&quot;.
* 2003 – NASA&#x27;s Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) obtained full-sky detailed pictures of the cosmic microwave background radiation. The images can be interpreted to indicate that the universe is 13.7 billion years old (within one percent error), and are very consistent with the Lambda-CDM model and the density fluctuations predicted by inflation.

* 2003 – The Sloan Great Wall is discovered.
* 2004 – The Degree Angular Scale Interferometer (DASI) first obtained the E-mode polarization spectrum of the cosmic microwave background radiation.
* 2004 – &quot;Voyager 1&quot; sends back the first data ever obtained from within the Solar System&#x27;s heliosheath.
* 2005 – The Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) and 2dF redshift surveys both detected the baryon acoustic oscillation feature in the galaxy distribution, a key prediction of cold dark matter models.
* 2006 – Three-year WMAP results are released, confirming previous analysis, correcting several points, and including polarization data.
* 2009–2013 – Planck, a space observatory operated by the European Space Agency (ESA), mapped the anisotropies of the cosmic microwave background radiation, with increased sensitivity and small angular resolution. 
* 2006–2011 – Improved measurements from WMAP, new supernova surveys ESSENCE and SNLS, and baryon acoustic oscillations from SDSS and WiggleZ, continue to be consistent with the standard Lambda-CDM model.
* 2014 – Astrophysicists of the BICEP2 collaboration announce the detection of inflationary gravitational waves in the B-mode power spectrum, which if confirmed, would provide clear experimental evidence for the theory of inflation. However, in June lowered confidence in confirming the cosmic inflation findings was reported.
* 2016 – LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration announce that gravitational waves were directly detected by two LIGO detectors. The waveform matched the prediction of General relativity for a gravitational wave emanating from the inward spiral and merger of a pair of black holes of around 36 and 29 solar masses and the subsequent &quot;ringdown&quot; of the single resulting black hole. The second detection verified that GW150914 is not a fluke, thus opens entire new branch in astrophysics, gravitational-wave astronomy.
* 2019 – The Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration publishes the image of the black hole at the center of the M87 Galaxy. This is the first time astronomers have ever captured an image of a black hole, which once again proves the existence of black holes and thus helps verify Einstein&#x27;s general theory of relativity. This was done by utilising very-long-baseline interferometry.
* 2020 – Physicist Lucas Lombriser of the University of Geneva presents a possible way of reconciling the two significantly different determinations of the Hubble constant by proposing the notion of a surrounding vast &quot;bubble&quot;, 250 million light years in diameter, that is half the density of the rest of the universe.
* 2020 – Scientists publish a study which suggests that the Universe is no longer expanding at the same rate in all directions and that therefore the widely accepted isotropy hypothesis might be wrong. While previous studies already suggested this, the study is the first to examine galaxy clusters in X-rays and, according to Norbert Schartel, has a much greater significance. The study found a consistent and strong directional behavior of deviations – which have earlier been described to indicate a &quot;crisis of cosmology&quot; by others – of the normalization parameter A, or the Hubble constant H0. Beyond the potential cosmological implications, it shows that studies which assume perfect isotropy in the properties of galaxy clusters and their scaling relations can produce strongly biased results.
* 2020 – Scientists report verifying measurements 2011–2014 via ULAS J1120+0641 of what seem to be a spatial variation in four measurements of the fine-structure constant, a basic physical constant used to measure electromagnetism between charged particles, which indicates that there might be directionality with varying natural constants in the Universe which would have implications for theories on the emergence of habitability of the Universe and be at odds with the widely accepted theory of constant natural laws and the standard model of cosmology which is based on an isotropic Universe.
* 2021 – James Webb Space Telescope is launched.
* 2023 – Astrophysicists questioned the overall current view of the universe, in the form of the Standard Model of Cosmology, based on the latest James Webb Space Telescope studies.

==See also==

* Cosmology

===Physical cosmology===
* Chronology of the universe
** Graphical timeline from Big Bang to Heat Death
* List of cosmologists
* Interpretations of quantum mechanics
* Non-standard cosmology

===Historical development of hypotheses===
* Timeline of Solar System astronomy
* Timeline of knowledge about galaxies, clusters of galaxies, and large-scale structure
* Timeline of cosmic microwave background astronomy
* Historical models of the Solar System
* Fixed stars

===Belief systems===
* Buddhist cosmology
* Jain cosmology
* Jainism and non-creationism
* Hindu cosmology
* Maya mythology

===Others===
* Cosmology@Home

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Bunch, Bryan, and Alexander Hellemans, &quot;The History of Science and Technology: A Browser&#x27;s Guide to the Great Discoveries, Inventions, and the People Who Made Them from the Dawn of Time to Today&quot;. 
* P. de Bernardis et al., astro-ph/0004404, Nature 404 (2000) 955–959.
* P. Mauskopf et al., astro-ph/9911444, Astrophys. J. 536 (2000) L59–L62.
* A. Melchiorri et al., astro-ph/9911445, Astrophys. J. 536 (2000) L63–L66.
* A. Readhead et al., Polarization observations with the Cosmic Background Imager, Science 306 (2004), 836–844.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2723682" start="5" end="38" title="Timeline of cosmological theories" label="timeline of cosmological theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q130788" start="60" end="73" title="Chronology" label="chronological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059081" start="140" end="146" title="cosmos" label="cosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="188" end="200" title="Cosmology" label="cosmological"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="237" end="258" title="science" label="scientific discipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346" start="262" end="280" title="physical cosmology" label="physical cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="328" end="340" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="383" end="397" title="Universe" label="whole universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q986141" start="526" end="560" title="Timeline of Solar System astronomy" label="Timeline of Solar System astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q660936" start="661" end="681" title="Flat Earth" label="flat, circular Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174141" start="696" end="708" title="cosmic ocean" label="cosmic ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q727413" start="746" end="753" title="Rigveda" label="Rigveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="763" end="771" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747735" start="826" end="833" title="Mandala 10" label="book 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771674" start="847" end="861" title="Nasadiya Sukta" label="Nasadiya Sukta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="896" end="904" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q178801" start="927" end="935" title="monistic" label="monistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075736" start="942" end="955" title="Hiranyagarbha" label="Hiranyagarbha"/>
<link wikidata="Q920021" start="989" end="1002" title="Prakṛti" label="Primal matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627710" start="1050" end="1060" title="Mahapralaya" label="unmanifest"/>
<link wikidata="Q864326" start="1116" end="1134" title="Kalpa (time)" label="4.32 billion years"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627710" start="1139" end="1149" title="Pralaya" label="unmanifest"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="1321" end="1342" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrian Cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q279559" start="1514" end="1541" title="Babylonian Map of the World" label="Babylonian Map of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566489" start="1677" end="1695" title="Biblical cosmology" label="Biblical cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708714" start="1804" end="1813" title="firmament" label="firmament"/>
<link wikidata="Q42458" start="1903" end="1914" title="Anaximander" label="Anaximander"/>
<link wikidata="Q41980" start="1975" end="1985" title="Democritus" label="Democritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42458" start="2274" end="2285" title="Anaximander" label="Anaximander"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="2675" end="2687" title="Peloponnesus" label="Peloponnesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q202746" start="3274" end="3283" title="Occultation" label="occlusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q26388" start="3540" end="3551" title="lunar phase" label="lunar phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q125551" start="3642" end="3652" title="Parmenides" label="Parmenides"/>
<link wikidata="Q165800" start="3747" end="3773" title="Geocentrism" label="the centre of the universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q191359" start="3795" end="3807" title="Pythagoreanism" label="Pythagoreans"/>
<link wikidata="Q212338" start="3811" end="3820" title="Philolaus" label="Philolaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15097867" start="3834" end="3861" title="Pythagorean astronomical system" label="motion of planets is caused"/>
<link wikidata="Q189222" start="4385" end="4394" title="intuition" label="intuition"/>
<link wikidata="Q609359" start="4455" end="4469" title="Tetractys" label="perfect number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140990" start="4550" end="4563" title="Counter-Earth" label="Counter-Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="4709" end="4714" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q371884" start="4736" end="4743" title="Timaeus (dialogue)" label="Timaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119786" start="4755" end="4774" title="Celestial spheres" label="circles and spheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q165800" start="4821" end="4847" title="Geocentrism" label="the Earth is at the center"/>
<link wikidata="Q430297" start="4957" end="4968" title="fixed stars" label="fixed stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q12134" start="4984" end="5000" title="celestial sphere" label="celestial sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q170835" start="5026" end="5035" title="cosmogony" label="cosmogony"/>
<link wikidata="Q183488" start="5041" end="5049" title="demiurge" label="demiurge"/>
<link wikidata="Q10862179" start="5671" end="5695" title="Platonic year" label="&amp;#x27;perfect&amp;#x27; year"/>
<link wikidata="Q212338" start="5718" end="5727" title="Philolaus" label="Philolaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185150" start="5786" end="5803" title="Eudoxus of Cnidus" label="Eudoxus of Cnidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158346" start="5937" end="5955" title="concentric spheres" label="concentric spheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q15354235" start="5990" end="6032" title="Apparent retrograde motion" label="complexity of the movements of the planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158346" start="6140" end="6171" title="Concentric spheres" label="concentrical, invisible spheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q471218" start="6624" end="6633" title="Callippus" label="Callippus"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="6656" end="6665" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q165800" start="6691" end="6714" title="Geocentric model" label="Earth-centered universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059081" start="6756" end="6762" title="cosmos" label="cosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q44235" start="6857" end="6870" title="lunar eclipse" label="lunar eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302782" start="7421" end="7429" title="De Mundo" label="De Mundo"/>
<link wikidata="Q188520" start="7438" end="7451" title="Classical elements" label="Five elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q381913" start="7620" end="7626" title="Aether (classical element)" label="aether"/>
<link wikidata="Q316334" start="7677" end="7696" title="Heraclides Ponticus" label="Heraclides Ponticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q244743" start="7749" end="7762" title="rotation of the Earth" label="Earth rotates"/>
<link wikidata="Q351518" start="7858" end="7868" title="Simplicius of Cilicia" label="Simplicius"/>
<link wikidata="Q140188" start="8061" end="8081" title="Aristarchus of Samos" label="Aristarchus of Samos"/>
<link wikidata="Q103983" start="8093" end="8114" title="Heliocentrism" label="Sun-centered universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091541" start="8166" end="8184" title="On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus)" label="provides evidences"/>
<link wikidata="Q8739" start="8247" end="8257" title="Archimedes" label="Archimedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364277" start="8277" end="8294" title="The Sand Reckoner" label="The Sand Reckoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645966" start="8363" end="8369" title="Stadion (unit of length)" label="stadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="8414" end="8424" title="light year" label="light year"/>
<link wikidata="Q139798" start="8491" end="8511" title="Seleucus of Seleucia" label="Seleucus of Seleucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="8591" end="8595" title="tide" label="tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q180109" start="9135" end="9154" title="Apollonius of Perga" label="Apollonius of Perga"/>
<link wikidata="Q15354235" start="9204" end="9223" title="Apparent retrograde motion" label="apparent retrograde"/>
<link wikidata="Q961202" start="9305" end="9326" title="deferent and epicycle" label="deferent and epicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088210" start="9592" end="9603" title="epitrochoid" label="epitrochoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q43182" start="9695" end="9707" title="Eratosthenes" label="Eratosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q159905" start="9789" end="9799" title="Hipparchus" label="Hipparchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q165074" start="9805" end="9813" title="parallax" label="parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q104225" start="10046" end="10056" title="precession" label="precession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315" start="10064" end="10071" title="equinox" label="equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q850950" start="10090" end="10102" title="star catalog" label="star catalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680907" start="10163" end="10178" title="Hindu cosmology" label="Hindu cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q321526" start="10190" end="10200" title="Manusmriti" label="Manusmriti"/>
<link wikidata="Q188602" start="10221" end="10228" title="Puranas" label="Puranas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="10267" end="10275" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11389" start="10306" end="10312" title="Brahma" label="Brahma"/>
<link wikidata="Q864326" start="10405" end="10410" title="Kalpa (aeon)" label="kalpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11389" start="10425" end="10431" title="Brahma" label="Brahma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627710" start="10499" end="10506" title="pralaya" label="pralaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q682958" start="10598" end="10614" title="Bhagavata Purana" label="Bhagavata Purana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813329" start="10679" end="10691" title="Tattva" label="mahat-tattva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075736" start="10701" end="10715" title="Hiranyagarbha" label="universal womb"/>
<link wikidata="Q920021" start="10754" end="10762" title="Prakṛti" label="prakriti"/>
<link wikidata="Q17014354" start="10793" end="10801" title="pradhana" label="pradhana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11389" start="10849" end="10855" title="Brahma" label="Brahma"/>
<link wikidata="Q11389" start="10984" end="10990" title="Brahma" label="Brahma"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="11306" end="11313" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135397" start="11360" end="11390" title="Classical planet" label="Sun, Moon, and visible planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="11485" end="11490" title="orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6999" start="11524" end="11539" title="Astronomical object" label="Heavenly bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965418" start="11706" end="11712" title="equant" label="equant"/>
<link wikidata="Q155952" start="11977" end="11989" title="The Almagest" label="The Almagest"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="12024" end="12028" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="12040" end="12052" title="Astronomy" label="astronomical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="12297" end="12305" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="12485" end="12492" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11359" start="12896" end="12905" title="Aryabhata" label="Aryabhata"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="12946" end="12949" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="12954" end="12958" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q573" start="13060" end="13063" title="day" label="day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="13116" end="13121" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="13270" end="13276" title="talmud" label="talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q348408" start="13363" end="13380" title="Martianus Capella" label="Martianus Capella"/>
<link wikidata="Q317632" start="13644" end="13659" title="John Philoponus" label="John Philoponus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="13698" end="13702" title="time" label="time"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="13791" end="13796" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q179759" start="13981" end="13989" title="Al-Kindi" label="Al-Kindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q328748" start="14002" end="14013" title="Saadia Gaon" label="Saadia Gaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9546" start="14038" end="14048" title="Al-Ghazali" label="Al-Ghazali"/>
<link wikidata="Q333703" start="14168" end="14188" title="Fakhr al-Din al-Razi" label="Fakhr al-Din al-Razi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174339" start="14199" end="14216" title="Islamic cosmology" label="Islamic cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="14324" end="14329" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q256541" start="14509" end="14527" title="Robert Grosseteste" label="Robert Grosseteste"/>
<link wikidata="Q179745" start="14694" end="14698" title="Axial tilt" label="axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="14873" end="14879" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q353633" start="14891" end="14907" title="Levi ben Gershon" label="Levi ben Gershon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155470" start="15023" end="15034" title="Earth radius" label="Earth radii"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="15053" end="15063" title="light-year" label="light-year"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="15116" end="15129" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="15135" end="15145" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q310777" start="15201" end="15214" title="Nicole Oresme" label="Nicole Oresme"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="15275" end="15287" title="Mathematics" label="mathematical"/>
<link wikidata="Q154751" start="15328" end="15344" title="Nicholas of Cusa" label="Nicholas of Cusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548030" start="15564" end="15583" title="Nilakantha Somayaji" label="Nilakantha Somayaji"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="15680" end="15699" title="Nicolaus Copernicus" label="Nicolaus Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984081" start="15714" end="15735" title="Copernican heliocentrism" label="heliocentric universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q531345" start="15754" end="15767" title="Thomas Digges" label="Thomas Digges"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984081" start="15781" end="15798" title="Copernican heliocentrism" label="Copernican system"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="15856" end="15860" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q36330" start="15894" end="15908" title="Giordano Bruno" label="Giordano Bruno"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="15971" end="15983" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q595871" start="16058" end="16069" title="star system" label="star system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861183" start="16151" end="16166" title="Tychonic system" label="Tychonic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q192706" start="16475" end="16490" title="William Gilbert (physician)" label="William Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q430297" start="16522" end="16547" title="Fixed stars" label="sphere of the fixed stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="16594" end="16609" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo Galilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="16658" end="16667" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q430297" start="16697" end="16708" title="fixed stars" label="fixed stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="16904" end="16913" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963" start="17020" end="17035" title="Johannes Kepler" label="Johannes Kepler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946" start="17148" end="17168" title="Jupiter&amp;#x27;s moons" label="Jupiter&amp;#x27;s moons"/>
<link wikidata="Q83219" start="17240" end="17258" title="Kepler&amp;#x27;s laws" label="Kepler&amp;#x27;s laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q39599" start="17315" end="17333" title="Christiaan Huygens" label="Christiaan Huygens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="17471" end="17488" title="Astronomical unit" label="Astronomical unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q720451" start="17499" end="17510" title="Jean Richer" label="Jean Richer"/>
<link wikidata="Q14279" start="17515" end="17540" title="Giovanni Domenico Cassini" label="Giovanni Domenico Cassini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="17577" end="17594" title="astronomical unit" label="astronomical unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q160187" start="17711" end="17720" title="Ole Rømer" label="Ole Rømer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537" start="17766" end="17771" title="natural satellite" label="moons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="17793" end="17807" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="17840" end="17852" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q408891" start="17860" end="17864" title="Physical law" label="laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q134465" start="17922" end="17948" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s law of universal gravitation" label="universal force of gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="18142" end="18152" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="18175" end="18187" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q47434" start="18531" end="18544" title="Edmund Halley" label="Edmund Halley"/>
<link wikidata="Q193223" start="18555" end="18568" title="proper motion" label="proper motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q430297" start="18615" end="18626" title="fixed stars" label="fixed stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q33558" start="18685" end="18705" title="Olbers&amp;#x27; paradox" label="Olbers&amp;#x27; paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q312278" start="18832" end="18845" title="James Bradley" label="James Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q211728" start="18860" end="18879" title="aberration of light" label="aberration of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="18990" end="19004" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q123931" start="19064" end="19089" title="Jean-Philippe de Cheseaux" label="Jean-Philippe de Cheseaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="19149" end="19162" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q42372" start="19180" end="19187" title="nebulae" label="nebulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="19199" end="19207" title="galaxy" label="galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="19255" end="19271" title="Milky Way Galaxy" label="Milky Way Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="19293" end="19308" title="island universe" label="island universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524" start="19327" end="19342" title="Charles Messier" label="Charles Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q311022" start="19361" end="19375" title="Pierre Méchain" label="Pierre Méchain"/>
<link wikidata="Q14530" start="19388" end="19403" title="Messier object" label="first catalogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q42372" start="19411" end="19418" title="nebulae" label="nebulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q168845" start="19423" end="19436" title="star clusters" label="star clusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q249389" start="19457" end="19472" title="deep-sky object" label="deep-sky object"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="19520" end="19539" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="19603" end="19608" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q14277" start="19620" end="19636" title="William Herschel" label="William Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19646" end="19682" title="heliocentrism#William Herschel&amp;#x27;s heliocentrism" label="a heliocentric model of the universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="19792" end="19808" title="Milky Way Galaxy" label="Milky Way Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q234050" start="19819" end="19833" title="Erasmus Darwin" label="Erasmus Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719466" start="19928" end="19953" title="The Botanic Garden" label="The Economy of Vegetation"/>
<link wikidata="Q44481" start="19970" end="19984" title="Pierre Laplace" label="Pierre Laplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q42372" start="20072" end="20078" title="nebula" label="nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q75828" start="20105" end="20128" title="Heinrich Wilhelm Olbers" label="Heinrich Wilhelm Olbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q33558" start="20140" end="20160" title="Olbers&amp;#x27; paradox" label="Olbers&amp;#x27; paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334001" start="20227" end="20243" title="Thomas Henderson (astronomer)" label="Thomas Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q75845" start="20245" end="20261" title="Friedrich Bessel" label="Friedrich Bessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q58847" start="20267" end="20278" title="Otto Wilhelm von Struve" label="Otto Struve"/>
<link wikidata="Q906561" start="20291" end="20299" title="Stellar parallax" label="parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q84284" start="20409" end="20426" title="Christian Doppler" label="Christian Doppler"/>
<link wikidata="Q76250" start="20440" end="20462" title="Redshift" label="redshift and blueshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q76436" start="20484" end="20497" title="Doppler effect" label="analog effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="20507" end="20512" title="sound" label="sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q216814" start="20514" end="20530" title="Hippolyte Fizeau" label="Hippolyte Fizeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="20579" end="20599" title="electromagnetic wave" label="electromagnetic wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="20619" end="20634" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q160681" start="20788" end="20803" title="William Huggins" label="William Huggins"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="20826" end="20838" title="spectroscopy" label="spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13903" start="20858" end="20870" title="Orion nebula" label="Orion nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="20935" end="20951" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="Andromeda Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="21011" end="21024" title="spectroscopic" label="spectroscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q312416" start="21095" end="21108" title="Angelo Secchi" label="Angelo Secchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q154844" start="21172" end="21199" title="Michelson–Morley experiment" label="Michelson–Morley experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q192388" start="21225" end="21240" title="relative motion" label="relative motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q208702" start="21283" end="21302" title="luminiferous aether" label="luminiferous aether"/>
<link wikidata="Q381913" start="21369" end="21375" title="Aether (classical element)" label="aether"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="21392" end="21401" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q975357" start="21436" end="21451" title="aether theories" label="aether theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q47285" start="21462" end="21475" title="J. J. Thomson" label="J. J. Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="21491" end="21499" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q207340" start="21537" end="21549" title="cathode rays" label="cathode rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q210553" start="21573" end="21585" title="atomic model" label="atomic model"/>
<link wikidata="Q122701" start="21606" end="21639" title="William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin" label="William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q477816" start="21685" end="21710" title="Kelvin–Helmholtz mechanism" label="gravitational contraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q9123" start="21872" end="21889" title="Ernest Rutherford" label="Ernest Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="21936" end="21953" title="radioactive decay" label="radioactive decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q214753" start="22053" end="22071" title="radiometric dating" label="radiometric dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="22192" end="22207" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11455" start="22222" end="22250" title="Special relativity" label="Special Theory of Relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="22266" end="22280" title="Spacetime" label="space and time"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="22331" end="22335" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="22340" end="22346" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35875" start="22351" end="22366" title="Mass-energy equivalence" label="interchangeable"/>
<link wikidata="Q110181" start="22377" end="22394" title="Henrietta Leavitt" label="Henrietta Leavitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q188593" start="22435" end="22451" title="Cepheid variable" label="Cepheid variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085" start="22539" end="22549" title="Niels Bohr" label="Niels Bohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q172948" start="22564" end="22574" title="Bohr model" label="Bohr model"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="22607" end="22621" title="spectral lines" label="spectral lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="22656" end="22673" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q363965" start="22708" end="22720" title="Robert T. A. Innes" label="Robert Innes"/>
<link wikidata="Q14266" start="22731" end="22747" title="Proxima Centauri" label="Proxima Centauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="22829" end="22857" title="General Theory of Relativity" label="General Theory of Relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="22896" end="22905" title="spacetime" label="spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q313059" start="22916" end="22932" title="Willem de Sitter" label="Willem de Sitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q59151" start="22978" end="22999" title="cosmological constant" label="cosmological constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129469" start="23021" end="23040" title="metric expansion of space" label="expanding cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036474" start="23080" end="23098" title="de Sitter universe" label="de Sitter universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q281170" start="23109" end="23123" title="Harlow Shapley" label="Harlow Shapley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11276" start="23139" end="23156" title="globular clusters" label="globular clusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q103983" start="23173" end="23186" title="heliocentrism" label="heliocentrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517816" start="23221" end="23236" title="galactocentrism" label="galactocentrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q215022" start="23305" end="23329" title="Arthur Stanley Eddington" label="Arthur Stanley Eddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="23372" end="23387" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="23395" end="23423" title="General Theory of Relativity" label="General Theory of Relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q278891" start="23438" end="23459" title="Shapley-Curtis Debate" label="Shapley-Curtis Debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="23516" end="23527" title="Smithsonian" label="Smithsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233780" start="23542" end="23567" title="United States National Research Council" label="National Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q278891" start="23615" end="23636" title="Shapley-Curtis Debate" label="Shapley-Curtis Debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="23638" end="23646" title="Galaxy" label="Galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q312248" start="23750" end="23763" title="Vesto Slipher" label="Vesto Slipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="23795" end="23809" title="galaxy" label="spiral nebulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q76250" start="23828" end="23836" title="redshift" label="redshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q205981" start="23848" end="23867" title="Alexander Friedmann" label="Alexander Friedmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q273711" start="23892" end="23915" title="Einstein field equation" label="Einstein field equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43027" start="23971" end="23983" title="Edwin Hubble" label="Edwin Hubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="24050" end="24066" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="Andromeda Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13724" start="24074" end="24091" title="Triangulum Galaxy" label="Triangulum Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q622789" start="24103" end="24111" title="NGC 6822" label="NGC 6822"/>
<link wikidata="Q83331" start="24291" end="24307" title="Louis de Broglie" label="Louis de Broglie"/>
<link wikidata="Q193068" start="24367" end="24382" title="wave–particle duality" label="associated wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q902785" start="24416" end="24442" title="Davisson–Germer experiment" label="Davisson–Germer experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q12998" start="24461" end="24477" title="Georges Lemaître" label="Georges Lemaître"/>
<link wikidata="Q47480" start="24673" end="24683" title="Paul Dirac" label="Paul Dirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q272621" start="24702" end="24722" title="Dirac equation" label="relativistic version"/>
<link wikidata="Q165498" start="24730" end="24755" title="Schrödinger equation" label="Schrödinger wave equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229" start="24798" end="24810" title="antielectron" label="antielectron"/>
<link wikidata="Q83197" start="24823" end="24833" title="antimatter" label="antimatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q169366" start="24865" end="24881" title="Carl David Anderson" label="Carl D. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356879" start="24892" end="24911" title="Howard P. Robertson" label="Howard P. Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q179916" start="25115" end="25152" title="Hubble&amp;#x27;s law" label="linear redshift-distance relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q319212" start="25208" end="25225" title="Karl Guthe Jansky" label="Karl Guthe Jansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262" start="25246" end="25258" title="radio signal" label="radio signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4169" start="25272" end="25283" title="outer space" label="outer space"/>
<link wikidata="Q8866" start="25318" end="25329" title="Sagittarius (constellation)" label="Sagittarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306" start="25449" end="25464" title="radio astronomy" label="radio astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q441192" start="25475" end="25487" title="Edward Arthur Milne" label="Edward Milne"/>
<link wikidata="Q319903" start="25513" end="25535" title="cosmological principle" label="cosmological principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q115462" start="25546" end="25558" title="Fritz Zwicky" label="Fritz Zwicky"/>
<link wikidata="Q870674" start="25574" end="25586" title="Coma cluster" label="Coma cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q12998" start="25734" end="25750" title="Georges Lemaître" label="Georges Lemaître"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143773" start="25800" end="25813" title="vacuum energy" label="vacuum energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q214967" start="25844" end="25861" title="equation of state" label="equation of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q155794" start="25872" end="25882" title="Hans Bethe" label="Hans Bethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057093" start="25913" end="25921" title="Hydrogen fusion" label="two main"/>
<link wikidata="Q238323" start="25939" end="25955" title="nuclear reaction" label="nuclear reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q47480" start="25988" end="25998" title="Paul Dirac" label="Paul Dirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370759" start="26012" end="26036" title="Dirac large numbers hypothesis" label="large numbers hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q142049" start="26135" end="26147" title="Ralph Alpher" label="Ralph Alpher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166490" start="26161" end="26184" title="Alpher-Bethe-Gamov paper" label="&amp;quot;in absentia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q59478" start="26191" end="26203" title="George Gamow" label="George Gamow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="26328" end="26335" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q380235" start="26354" end="26367" title="Hermann Bondi" label="Hermann Bondi"/>
<link wikidata="Q93562" start="26369" end="26380" title="Thomas Gold" label="Thomas Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q183397" start="26386" end="26396" title="Fred Hoyle" label="Fred Hoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q272612" start="26405" end="26417" title="steady state theory" label="steady state"/>
<link wikidata="Q59478" start="26484" end="26496" title="George Gamow" label="George Gamow"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="26527" end="26564" title="cosmic microwave background radiation" label="cosmic microwave background radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183397" start="26652" end="26662" title="Fred Hoyle" label="Fred Hoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q504473" start="26861" end="26873" title="Robert Dicke" label="Robert Dicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="26886" end="26892" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3" start="26899" end="26903" title="life" label="life"/>
<link wikidata="Q240581" start="27022" end="27041" title="anthropic principle" label="anthropic principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q547240" start="27052" end="27067" title="Maarten Schmidt" label="Maarten Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q83373" start="27088" end="27094" title="quasar" label="quasar"/>
<link wikidata="Q54945" start="27179" end="27192" title="Hannes Alfvén" label="Hannes Alfvén"/>
<link wikidata="Q2189517" start="27232" end="27242" title="ambiplasma" label="ambiplasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q809677" start="27254" end="27270" title="baryon asymmetry" label="baryon asymmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q335213" start="27327" end="27338" title="Martin Rees" label="Martin Rees"/>
<link wikidata="Q284336" start="27343" end="27356" title="Dennis Sciama" label="Dennis Sciama"/>
<link wikidata="Q83373" start="27365" end="27371" title="quasar" label="quasar"/>
<link wikidata="Q172877" start="27461" end="27473" title="Arno Penzias" label="Arno Penzias"/>
<link wikidata="Q171034" start="27478" end="27491" title="Robert Woodrow Wilson" label="Robert Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="27508" end="27517" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="27607" end="27618" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q504473" start="27631" end="27643" title="Robert Dicke" label="Robert Dicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q728331" start="27645" end="27658" title="Jim Peebles" label="James Peebles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176864" start="27675" end="27695" title="David Todd Wilkinson" label="David Todd Wilkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17714" start="27749" end="27764" title="Stephen Hawking" label="Stephen Hawking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387629" start="27769" end="27781" title="George Francis Rayner Ellis" label="George Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q201721" start="27840" end="27848" title="gravitational singularity" label="singular"/>
<link wikidata="Q728331" start="27859" end="27872" title="Jim Peebles" label="James Peebles"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="27892" end="27900" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q997" start="27949" end="27964" title="Andrei Sakharov" label="Andrei Sakharov"/>
<link wikidata="Q790454" start="27995" end="28007" title="baryogenesis" label="baryogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q159731" start="28011" end="28017" title="baryon" label="baryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q83197" start="28018" end="28028" title="antimatter" label="antibaryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q752641" start="28029" end="28038" title="asymmetry" label="asymmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q710842" start="28065" end="28077" title="John Bahcall" label="John Bahcall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795596" start="28079" end="28090" title="Wal Sargent" label="Wal Sargent"/>
<link wikidata="Q547240" start="28096" end="28111" title="Maarten Schmidt" label="Maarten Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="28152" end="28165" title="spectral line" label="spectral line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5997" start="28202" end="28225" title="fine-structure constant" label="fine-structure constant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28274" end="28287" title="Robert Wagner (physicist)" label="Robert Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q46120" start="28289" end="28303" title="William Alfred Fowler" label="William Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q102296" start="28368" end="28377" title="deuterium" label="deuterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q568" start="28382" end="28389" title="lithium" label="lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q898131" start="28411" end="28425" title="Brandon Carter" label="Brandon Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q364238" start="28607" end="28621" title="Charles Misner" label="Charles Misner"/>
<link wikidata="Q590581" start="28653" end="28668" title="horizon problem" label="horizon problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q234888" start="28750" end="28760" title="Vera Rubin" label="Vera Rubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q79925" start="28873" end="28884" title="dark matter" label="dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345651" start="28895" end="28907" title="Edward Tryon" label="Edward Tryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="28956" end="28974" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193821" start="28975" end="28993" title="quantum fluctuation" label="vacuum fluctuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297853" start="29045" end="29075" title="gravitational energy" label="gravitational potential energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647873" start="29086" end="29106" title="Alexander Shlyakhter" label="Alexander Shlyakhter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819" start="29112" end="29120" title="samarium" label="samarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q26761" start="29137" end="29141" title="Oklo" label="Oklo"/>
<link wikidata="Q64470499" start="29154" end="29185" title="natural nuclear fission reactor" label="natural nuclear fission reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000" start="29189" end="29194" title="Gabon" label="Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q63928611" start="29290" end="29303" title="Gary Steigman" label="Gary Steigman"/>
<link wikidata="Q260040" start="29305" end="29318" title="David Schramm (astrophysicist)" label="David Schramm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152925" start="29324" end="29334" title="James Gunn (astronomer)" label="James Gunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q82586" start="29448" end="29454" title="lepton" label="lepton"/>
<link wikidata="Q323316" start="29484" end="29493" title="Alan Guth" label="Alan Guth"/>
<link wikidata="Q273508" start="29543" end="29555" title="cosmic inflation" label="inflationary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1844592" start="29644" end="29664" title="Viatcheslav Mukhanov" label="Viatcheslav Mukhanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q273508" start="29757" end="29769" title="cosmic inflation" label="inflationary"/>
<link wikidata="Q728331" start="29874" end="29887" title="Jim Peebles" label="James Peebles"/>
<link wikidata="Q79925" start="29974" end="29985" title="dark matter" label="dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139177" start="30244" end="30259" title="CfA2 Great Wall" label="CfA2 Great Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q656857" start="30378" end="30393" title="Great Attractor" label="Great Attractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513" start="30408" end="30430" title="Hubble Space Telescope" label="Hubble Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="30523" end="30527" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q49445" start="30535" end="30539" title="Cosmic Background Explorer" label="COBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="30560" end="30597" title="cosmic microwave background radiation" label="cosmic microwave background radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q161424" start="30604" end="30613" title="blackbody" label="blackbody"/>
<link wikidata="Q49445" start="30808" end="30812" title="Cosmic Background Explorer" label="COBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q466686" start="30850" end="30860" title="anisotropy" label="anisotropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="30868" end="30895" title="cosmic microwave background" label="cosmic microwave background"/>
<link wikidata="Q206717" start="31068" end="31084" title="planetary system" label="planetary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4360" start="31130" end="31136" title="pulsar" label="pulsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q528" start="31137" end="31149" title="PSR B1257+12" label="PSR B1257+12"/>
<link wikidata="Q14265" start="31240" end="31249" title="51 Pegasi" label="51 Pegasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q741255" start="31270" end="31287" title="Hubble Deep Field" label="Hubble Deep Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q5997" start="31448" end="31471" title="fine-structure constant" label="fine-structure constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273477" start="31547" end="31574" title="Supernova Cosmology Project" label="Supernova Cosmology Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135350" start="31579" end="31607" title="High-Z Supernova Search Team" label="High-Z Supernova Search Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343" start="31617" end="31636" title="dark energy" label="cosmic acceleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q582000" start="31659" end="31676" title="Type Ia supernova" label="Type Ia supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q59151" start="31730" end="31751" title="cosmological constant" label="cosmological constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="31782" end="31819" title="cosmic microwave background radiation" label="cosmic microwave background radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q796870" start="31874" end="31894" title="BOOMERanG experiment" label="BOOMERanG experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q466686" start="32040" end="32050" title="anisotropy" label="anisotropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815842" start="32267" end="32293" title="2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey" label="2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q59151" start="32500" end="32521" title="cosmological constant" label="cosmological constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343" start="32533" end="32544" title="dark energy" label="dark energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3982934" start="32559" end="32583" title="Cosmic Background Imager" label="Cosmic Background Imager"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="32593" end="32598" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q274106" start="32965" end="33001" title="Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe" label="Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe"/>
<link wikidata="Q692197" start="33238" end="33254" title="Lambda-CDM model" label="Lambda-CDM model"/>
<link wikidata="Q273508" start="33297" end="33306" title="cosmic inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q497745" start="33322" end="33338" title="Sloan Great Wall" label="Sloan Great Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q48469" start="33519" end="33528" title="Voyager 1" label="Voyager 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q131687" start="33611" end="33622" title="heliosheath" label="heliosheath"/>
<link wikidata="Q840332" start="33637" end="33661" title="Sloan Digital Sky Survey" label="Sloan Digital Sky Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815842" start="33673" end="33676" title="2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey" label="2dF"/>
<link wikidata="Q809676" start="33712" end="33739" title="baryon acoustic oscillation" label="baryon acoustic oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q79925" start="33801" end="33812" title="dark matter" label="dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q274106" start="33841" end="33845" title="WMAP" label="WMAP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33939" end="33951" title="Cosmic microwave background radiation#Polarization" label="polarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q725309" start="33972" end="33978" title="Planck (spacecraft)" label="Planck"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="34016" end="34037" title="European Space Agency" label="European Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="34076" end="34113" title="cosmic microwave background radiation" label="cosmic microwave background radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q274106" start="34214" end="34218" title="WMAP" label="WMAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q840332" start="34298" end="34302" title="Sloan Digital Sky Survey" label="SDSS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34307" end="34314" title="Astronomical survey#List of sky surveys" label="WiggleZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q692197" start="34360" end="34376" title="Lambda-CDM model" label="Lambda-CDM model"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835636" start="34410" end="34416" title="BICEP and Keck Array" label="BICEP2"/>
<link wikidata="Q190035" start="34470" end="34489" title="gravitational waves" label="gravitational waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="34497" end="34503" title="B-modes" label="B-mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331626" start="34504" end="34518" title="power spectrum" label="power spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q273508" start="34590" end="34609" title="Inflation (cosmology)" label="theory of inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q273508" start="34665" end="34681" title="cosmic inflation" label="cosmic inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458663" start="34714" end="34743" title="LIGO Scientific Collaboration" label="LIGO Scientific Collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063130" start="34748" end="34767" title="Virgo interferometer" label="Virgo Collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q22683173" start="34807" end="34824" title="First observation of gravitational waves" label="directly detected"/>
<link wikidata="Q255371" start="34832" end="34836" title="LIGO" label="LIGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165717" start="34852" end="34860" title="waveform" label="waveform"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="34887" end="34905" title="General relativity" label="General relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="34988" end="34998" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q180892" start="35020" end="35030" title="solar mass" label="solar mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q24641210" start="35113" end="35129" title="GW151226" label="second detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392871" start="35215" end="35243" title="gravitational-wave astronomy" label="gravitational-wave astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3944788" start="35254" end="35281" title="Event Horizon Telescope" label="The Event Horizon Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q14041" start="35355" end="35365" title="Messier 87" label="M87 Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="35390" end="35400" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="35435" end="35445" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="35522" end="35530" title="Albert Einstein" label="Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="35538" end="35566" title="General relativity" label="general theory of relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148351" start="35595" end="35628" title="very-long-baseline interferometry" label="very-long-baseline interferometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q87721113" start="35649" end="35664" title="Lucas Lombriser" label="Lucas Lombriser"/>
<link wikidata="Q503473" start="35672" end="35692" title="University of Geneva" label="University of Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q179916" start="35786" end="35801" title="Hubble constant" label="Hubble constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653949" start="35843" end="35866" title="Hubble bubble (astronomy)" label="vast &amp;quot;bubble&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129469" start="36041" end="36050" title="Expansion of the Universe" label="expanding"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36125" end="36144" title="Isotropy#Cosmology" label="isotropy hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q204107" start="36242" end="36256" title="galaxy cluster" label="galaxy cluster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36401" end="36565" title="Hubble&amp;#x27;s law#Measured values of the Hubble constant" label="deviations – which have earlier been described to indicate a &amp;quot;crisis of cosmology&amp;quot; by others – of the normalization parameter A, or the Hubble constant H0"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="36588" end="36600" title="cosmological" label="cosmological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1600376" start="36833" end="36848" title="ULAS J1120+0641" label="ULAS J1120+0641"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36868" end="36939" title="fine-structure constant#Potential time-variation" label="a spatial variation in four measurements of the fine-structure constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="36983" end="36999" title="electromagnetism" label="electromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37159" end="37216" title="Physical constant#Fine-tuned universe" label="theories on the emergence of habitability of the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q29524" start="37276" end="37287" title="natural law" label="natural law"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="37315" end="37324" title="cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q273163" start="37346" end="37355" title="Isotropy" label="isotropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186447" start="37375" end="37401" title="James Webb Space Telescope" label="James Webb Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="37483" end="37491" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q692197" start="37512" end="37539" title="Standard Model of Cosmology" label="Standard Model of Cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q186447" start="37561" end="37587" title="James Webb Space Telescope" label="James Webb Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="37614" end="37623" title="Cosmology" label="Cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q136407" start="37652" end="37678" title="Chronology of the universe" label="Chronology of the universe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37682" end="37728" title="Graphical timeline from Big Bang to Heat Death" label="Graphical timeline from Big Bang to Heat Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363101" start="37731" end="37751" title="List of cosmologists" label="List of cosmologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q899137" start="37754" end="37790" title="Interpretations of quantum mechanics" label="Interpretations of quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637913" start="37793" end="37815" title="Non-standard cosmology" label="Non-standard cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q986141" start="37862" end="37896" title="Timeline of Solar System astronomy" label="Timeline of Solar System astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138416" start="37899" end="37984" title="Timeline of knowledge about galaxies, clusters of galaxies, and large-scale structure" label="Timeline of knowledge about galaxies, clusters of galaxies, and large-scale structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="37987" end="38036" title="Timeline of cosmic microwave background astronomy" label="Timeline of cosmic microwave background astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q65085983" start="38039" end="38076" title="Historical models of the Solar System" label="Historical models of the Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q430297" start="38079" end="38090" title="Fixed stars" label="Fixed stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308653" start="38115" end="38133" title="Buddhist cosmology" label="Buddhist cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11309676" start="38136" end="38150" title="Jain cosmology" label="Jain cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6124060" start="38153" end="38180" title="Jainism and non-creationism" label="Jainism and non-creationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680907" start="38183" end="38198" title="Hindu cosmology" label="Hindu cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q220734" start="38201" end="38215" title="Maya mythology" label="Maya mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136163" start="38232" end="38246" title="Cosmology@Home" label="Cosmology@Home"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58948" wikidata="Q6630849" url="?curid=58948" title="List of notifiable diseases">
<text>The following is a list of notifiable diseases arranged by country.

==Bacteria==
==Virus==
==Other categories==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q314676" start="27" end="45" title="notifiable disease" label="notifiable disease"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58950" wikidata="Q204107" url="?curid=58950" title="Galaxy cluster">
<text>A galaxy cluster, or a cluster of galaxies, is a structure that consists of anywhere from hundreds to thousands of galaxies that are bound together by gravity, with typical masses ranging from 1014 to 1015 solar masses. They are the second-largest known gravitationally bound structures in the universe after some superclusters (of which only one, the Shapley Supercluster, is known to be bound). They were believed to be the largest known structures in the universe until the 1980s, when superclusters were discovered. One of the key features of clusters is the intracluster medium (ICM). The ICM consists of heated gas between the galaxies and has a peak temperature between 2–15 keV that is dependent on the total mass of the cluster. As galaxy clusters form massive amounts of energy are released due to shock waves, heating of gas, and galaxy interactions. Gas collides with existing material generating shock waves that heat it to tens of millions of degrees producing x-ray emissions. Galaxies within the cluster undergo mergers, galaxy interactions, and gas stripping shaping their evolution. Galaxy clusters should not be confused with star clusters, which are clusters of stars &quot;within&quot; the spiral arms of galaxies (open clusters), or orbiting in their halos (globular clusters). Small aggregates of galaxies are referred to as galaxy groups rather than clusters of galaxies. The galaxy groups and clusters together form superclusters.

Notable galaxy clusters in the relatively nearby Universe include the Virgo Cluster, Fornax Cluster, Hercules Cluster, and the Coma Cluster. A very large aggregation of galaxies known as the Great Attractor, dominated by the Norma Cluster, is massive enough to affect the local expansion of the Universe. Notable galaxy clusters in the distant, high-redshift universe include SPT-CL J0546-5345 and SPT-CL J2106-5844, the most massive galaxy clusters found in the early Universe. In the last few decades, they are also found to be relevant sites of particle acceleration, a feature that has been discovered by observing non-thermal diffuse radio emissions, such as radio halos and radio relics. Using the Chandra X-ray Observatory, structures such as cold fronts and shock waves have also been found in many galaxy clusters.

==Basic properties==
Galaxy clusters typically have the following properties:
* They contain 100 to 1,000 galaxies, hot X-ray emitting gas and large amounts of dark matter. Details are described in the &quot;Composition&quot; section.
* The distribution of the three components is approximately the same in the cluster.
* They have total masses of 1014 to 1015 solar masses.
* They typically have a diameter from 1 to 5 Mpc (see 1023 m for distance comparisons).
* The spread of velocities for the individual galaxies is about 800–1000 km/s.

==Composition==
There are three main components of a galaxy cluster. They are tabulated below:
==Classification==
There are many classification systems for galaxy clusters, based on characteristics such as shape symmetry, X-ray luminosity, and dominant galaxy type. The Bautz-Morgan classification sorts clusters into types I, II, and III based on the relative brightness of their galaxies–type I with greatest contrast and type III with the least.

== Galaxy clusters as measuring instruments ==

=== Gravitational redshift ===
Galaxy clusters have been used by Radek Wojtak from the Niels Bohr Institute at the University of Copenhagen to test predictions of general relativity: energy loss from light escaping a gravitational field. Photons emitted from the center of a galaxy cluster should lose more energy than photons coming from the edge of the cluster because gravity is stronger in the center. Light emitted from the center of a cluster has a longer wavelength than light coming from the edge. This effect is known as gravitational redshift. Using the data collected from 8000 galaxy clusters, Wojtak was able to study the properties of gravitational redshift for the distribution of galaxies in clusters. He found that the light from the clusters was redshifted in proportion to the distance from the center of the cluster as predicted by general relativity. The result also strongly supports the Lambda-Cold Dark Matter model of the Universe, according to which most of the cosmos is made up of Dark Matter that does not interact with matter.

=== Gravitational lensing ===
Galaxy clusters are also used for their strong gravitational potential as gravitational lenses to boost the reach of telescopes. The gravitational distortion of space-time occurs near massive galaxy clusters and bends the path of photons to create a cosmic magnifying glass. This can be done with photons of any wavelength from the optical to the X-ray band. The latter is more difficult, because galaxy clusters emit a lot of X-rays. However, X-ray emission may still be detected when combining X-ray data to optical data. One particular case is the use of the Phoenix galaxy cluster to observe a dwarf galaxy in its early high energy stages of star formation.

==Notable galaxy clusters==


==Gallery==

===Images===
===Videos===
==See also==

* Abell catalogue
* Intracluster medium
* List of Abell clusters
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q204107" start="2" end="16" title="Galaxy cluster" label="galaxy cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q204107" start="23" end="42" title="Galaxy cluster" label="cluster of galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="115" end="123" title="galaxy" label="galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="151" end="158" title="gravity" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q180892" start="206" end="216" title="solar mass" label="solar mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547424" start="254" end="275" title="gravitational binding energy" label="gravitationally bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="294" end="302" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27521" start="314" end="326" title="supercluster" label="supercluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513087" start="352" end="372" title="Shapley Supercluster" label="Shapley Supercluster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="426" end="450" title="Observable universe#Large-scale structure" label="largest known structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q27521" start="489" end="501" title="supercluster" label="supercluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540949" start="563" end="582" title="intracluster medium" label="intracluster medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q168845" start="1145" end="1157" title="star cluster" label="star cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q11387" start="1236" end="1249" title="Open cluster" label="open clusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q11276" start="1280" end="1297" title="Globular cluster" label="globular clusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491746" start="1348" end="1360" title="galaxy group" label="galaxy group"/>
<link wikidata="Q14515149" start="1400" end="1426" title="galaxy groups and clusters" label="galaxy groups and clusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q271818" start="1527" end="1540" title="Virgo Cluster" label="Virgo Cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q61226" start="1542" end="1556" title="Fornax Cluster" label="Fornax Cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q777857" start="1558" end="1574" title="Hercules Cluster" label="Hercules Cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q870674" start="1584" end="1596" title="Coma Cluster" label="Coma Cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q656857" start="1648" end="1663" title="Great Attractor" label="Great Attractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068075" start="1682" end="1695" title="Norma Cluster" label="Norma Cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q179916" start="1729" end="1760" title="Hubble&amp;#x27;s law" label="local expansion of the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392674" start="1833" end="1850" title="SPT-CL J0546-5345" label="SPT-CL J0546-5345"/>
<link wikidata="Q10852454" start="1855" end="1872" title="SPT-CL J2106-5844" label="SPT-CL J2106-5844"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281159" start="2121" end="2131" title="radio halo" label="radio halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281194" start="2137" end="2149" title="radio relics" label="radio relics"/>
<link wikidata="Q49002" start="2161" end="2186" title="Chandra X-ray Observatory" label="Chandra X-ray Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499888" start="2223" end="2234" title="shock waves in astrophysics" label="shock waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="2402" end="2407" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q79925" start="2442" end="2453" title="dark matter" label="dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q180892" start="2643" end="2655" title="Solar mass" label="solar masses"/>
<link wikidata="Q12129" start="2702" end="2705" title="Megaparsec" label="Mpc"/>
<link wikidata="Q855630" start="2711" end="2717" title="1 E23 m" label="1023 m"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="3053" end="3063" title="luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873605" start="3095" end="3122" title="Bautz–Morgan classification" label="Bautz-Morgan classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="3486" end="3504" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q656181" start="3853" end="3875" title="gravitational redshift" label="gravitational redshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q692197" start="4233" end="4256" title="Lambda-CDM model" label="Lambda-Cold Dark Matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q79925" start="4332" end="4343" title="Dark matter" label="Dark Matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q185243" start="4485" end="4503" title="gravitational lens" label="gravitational lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q318624" start="5159" end="5174" title="Abell catalogue" label="Abell catalogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540949" start="5177" end="5196" title="Intracluster medium" label="Intracluster medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598222" start="5199" end="5221" title="List of Abell clusters" label="List of Abell clusters"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58952" wikidata="Q7806016" url="?curid=58952" title="Timeline of astronomical maps, catalogs, and surveys">
<text>[[Timeline]] of [[astronomy|astronomical maps]], [[Astronomical catalog|catalogs]] and [[Astronomical survey|surveys]]

* c. 1800 BC — Babylonian star catalog (see Babylonian star catalogues)
* c. 1370 BC; Observations for the Babylonia MUL.APIN (an astro catalog).
* c. 350 BC — Shi Shen&#x27;s star catalog has almost 800 entries
* c. 300 BC — star catalog of Timocharis of Alexandria
* c. 134 BC — Hipparchus makes a detailed star map
* c. 150 — Ptolemy completes his &quot;Almagest&quot;, which contains a catalog of stars, observations of planetary motions, and treatises on geometry and cosmology
* c. 705 — Dunhuang Star Chart, a manuscript star chart from the Mogao Caves at Dunhuang
* c. 750 — The first Zij treatise, &quot;Az-Zij ‛alā Sinī al-‛Arab&quot;, written by Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī and Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī
* c. 777 — Yaʿqūb ibn Ṭāriq&#x27;s &quot;Az-Zij al-Mahlul min as-Sindhind li-Darajat Daraja&quot;
* c. 830 — Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi&#x27;s &quot;Zij al-Sindhind&quot;
* c. 840 — Al-Farghani&#x27;s &quot;Compendium of the Science of the Stars&quot;
* c. 900 — Al-Battani&#x27;s &quot;Az-Zij as-Sabi&quot;
* 964 — Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi (Azophi)&#x27;s star catalog &quot;Book of the Fixed Stars&quot;
* 1031 — Al-Biruni&#x27;s &quot;al-Qanun al-Mas&#x27;udi&quot;, making first use of a planisphere projection, and discussing the use of the astrolabe and the armillary sphere.
* 1088 — The first almanac is the &quot;Almanac of Azarqueil&quot; written by Abū Ishāq Ibrāhīm al-Zarqālī (Azarqueil)
* 1115–1116 — Al-Khazini&#x27;s &quot;Az-Zij as-Sanjarī&quot; (&quot;Sinjaric Tables&quot;)
* c. 1150 — Gerard of Cremona publishes &quot;Tables of Toledo&quot; based on the work of Azarqueil
* 1252–1270 — &quot;Alfonsine tables&quot; recorded by order of Alfonso X
* 1272 — Nasir al-Din al-Tusi&#x27;s &quot;Zij-i Ilkhani&quot; (&quot;Ilkhanic Tables&quot;)
* 1395 — Cheonsang Yeolcha Bunyajido star map created at the order of King Taejo
* c. 1400 — Jamshid al-Kashi&#x27;s &quot;Khaqani Zij&quot;
* 1437 — Publication of Ulugh Beg&#x27;s &quot;Zij-i-Sultani&quot;
* 1551 — Prussian Tables by Erasmus Reinhold
* late 16th century — Tycho Brahe updates Ptolemy&#x27;s &quot;Almagest&quot;
* 1577–1580 — Taqi ad-Din Muhammad ibn Ma&#x27;ruf&#x27;s &quot;Unbored Pearl&quot;
* 1598 — Tycho Brahe publishes his &quot;Thousand Star Catalog&quot;
* 1603 — Johann Bayer&#x27;s &quot;Uranometria&quot;
* 1627 — Johannes Kepler publishes his Rudolphine Tables of 1006 stars from Tycho plus 400 more
* 1678 — Edmond Halley publishes a catalog of 341 southern stars, the first systematic southern sky survey
* 1712 — Isaac Newton and Edmond Halley publish a catalog based on data from a Royal Astronomer who left all his data under seal, the official version would not be released for another decade.
* 1725 — Posthumous publication of John Flamsteed&#x27;s &quot;Historia Coelestis Britannica&quot;
* 1771 — Charles Messier publishes his first list of nebulae
* 1824 — &quot;Urania&#x27;s Mirror&quot; by Sidney Hall
* 1862 — Friedrich Wilhelm Argelander publishes his final edition of the &quot;Bonner Durchmusterung&quot; catalog of stars north of declination -1°.
* 1864 — John Herschel publishes the &quot;General Catalogue&quot; of nebulae and star clusters
* 1887 — Paris conference institutes &quot;Carte du Ciel&quot; project to map entire sky to 14th magnitude photographically
* 1890 — John Dreyer publishes the &quot;New General Catalogue&quot; of nebulae and star clusters
* 1932 — Harlow Shapley and Adelaide Ames publish &quot;A Survey of the External Galaxies Brighter than the Thirteenth Magnitude&quot;, later known as the &quot;Shapley-Ames Catalog&quot;
* 1948 — Antonín Bečvář publishes the &quot;Skalnate Pleso Atlas of the Heavens&quot; (&quot;Atlas Coeli Skalnaté Pleso 1950.0&quot;)
* 1950–1957 — Completion of the Palomar Observatory Sky Survey (POSS) with the Palomar 48-inch Schmidt optical reflecting telescope. Actual date quoted varies upon source.
* 1962 — A.S. Bennett of the Cambridge Radio Astronomy Group publishes the Revised 3C Catalogue of 328 radio sources
* 1965 — Gerry Neugebauer and Robert Leighton begin a 2.2 micrometre sky survey with a 1.6-meter telescope on Mount Wilson
* 1982 — IRAS space observatory completes an all-sky mid-infrared survey
* 1990 — Publication of APM Galaxy Survey of 2+ million galaxies, to study large-scale structure of the cosmos
* 1991 — ROSAT space observatory begins an all-sky X-ray survey
* 1993 — Start of the 20 cm VLA FIRST survey
* 1997 — Two Micron All Sky Survey (2MASS) commences, first version of Hipparcos Catalogue published
* 1998 — Sloan Digital Sky Survey commences
* 2003 — 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey published; 2MASS completes
* 2012 — On March 14, 2012, a new atlas and catalog of the entire infrared sky as imaged by Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer was released.
* 2020 — On July 19, 2020, after a 20-year-long survey, astrophysicists of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey published the largest, most detailed 3D map of the universe so far, fill a gap of 11 billion years in its expansion history, and provide data which supports the theory of a flat geometry of the universe and confirms that different regions seem to be expanding at different speeds.
* 2020 — On October 8, 2020, scientists released the largest and most detailed 3D maps of the Universe, called &quot;PS1-STRM&quot;. The data of the MAST was created using artificial neural networks and combines data from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey and others. Users can query the dataset online or download it in its entirety of ~300GB.
* 2021 — A celestial map is published to the journal &quot;Astronomy &amp; Astrophysics&quot; identifying over 250,000 supermassive black holes, using data from 52 stations across nine different countries in Europe.

== See also ==
* Timeline of knowledge about galaxies, clusters of galaxies, and large-scale structure
* List of asteroid close approaches to Earth
* List of potentially habitable exoplanets
* List of nearby stellar associations and moving groups

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7806016" start="0" end="118" title="Timeline of astronomical maps, catalogs, and surveys" label="[[Timeline]] of [[astronomy|astronomical maps]], [[Astronomical catalog|catalogs]] and [[Astronomical survey|surveys]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="135" end="144" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4450794" start="164" end="190" title="Babylonian star catalogues" label="Babylonian star catalogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q83076" start="237" end="245" title="MUL.APIN" label="MUL.APIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q218900" start="280" end="288" title="Shi Shen" label="Shi Shen"/>
<link wikidata="Q550477" start="362" end="386" title="Timocharis of Alexandria" label="Timocharis of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q159905" start="401" end="411" title="Hipparchus" label="Hipparchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q842617" start="429" end="437" title="star map" label="star map"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="449" end="456" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q155952" start="477" end="485" title="Almagest" label="Almagest"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="580" end="588" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="593" end="602" title="cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315281" start="614" end="633" title="Dunhuang Star Chart" label="Dunhuang Star Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q43286" start="668" end="679" title="Mogao Caves" label="Mogao Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q319114" start="683" end="691" title="Dunhuang" label="Dunhuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658115" start="713" end="716" title="Zij" label="Zij"/>
<link wikidata="Q584679" start="777" end="794" title="Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī" label="Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī"/>
<link wikidata="Q584679" start="799" end="829" title="Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī" label="Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī"/>
<link wikidata="Q527284" start="841" end="857" title="Yaʿqūb ibn Ṭāriq" label="Yaʿqūb ibn Ṭāriq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658115" start="874" end="877" title="Zij" label="Zij"/>
<link wikidata="Q9038" start="939" end="969" title="Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi" label="Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658115" start="983" end="986" title="Zij" label="Zij"/>
<link wikidata="Q336550" start="1016" end="1027" title="Al-Farghani" label="Al-Farghani"/>
<link wikidata="Q11079" start="1097" end="1107" title="Al-Battani" label="Al-Battani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658115" start="1124" end="1127" title="Zij" label="Zij"/>
<link wikidata="Q11075" start="1150" end="1171" title="Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi" label="Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087785" start="1207" end="1230" title="Book of Fixed Stars" label="Book of the Fixed Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q11826" start="1246" end="1255" title="Al-Biruni" label="Al-Biruni"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1269" end="1293" title="al-Qanun al-Mas&amp;#x27;udi" label="al-Qanun al-Mas&amp;#x27;udi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344642" start="1323" end="1334" title="planisphere" label="planisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q164992" start="1377" end="1386" title="astrolabe" label="astrolabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q328720" start="1395" end="1411" title="armillary sphere" label="armillary sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q171341" start="1432" end="1439" title="almanac" label="almanac"/>
<link wikidata="Q11133" start="1491" end="1519" title="Abū Ishāq Ibrāhīm al-Zarqālī" label="Abū Ishāq Ibrāhīm al-Zarqālī"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991836" start="1546" end="1556" title="Al-Khazini" label="Al-Khazini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658115" start="1573" end="1576" title="Zij" label="Zij"/>
<link wikidata="Q367240" start="1636" end="1653" title="Gerard of Cremona" label="Gerard of Cremona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472565" start="1670" end="1686" title="Tables of Toledo" label="Tables of Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11133" start="1714" end="1723" title="Abū Ishāq Ibrāhīm al-Zarqālī" label="Azarqueil"/>
<link wikidata="Q622577" start="1744" end="1760" title="Alfonsine tables" label="Alfonsine tables"/>
<link wikidata="Q47595" start="1788" end="1797" title="Alfonso X" label="Alfonso X"/>
<link wikidata="Q302835" start="1807" end="1827" title="Nasir al-Din al-Tusi" label="Nasir al-Din al-Tusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8071845" start="1841" end="1854" title="Zij-i Ilkhani" label="Zij-i Ilkhani"/>
<link wikidata="Q5091683" start="1900" end="1927" title="Cheonsang Yeolcha Bunyajido" label="Cheonsang Yeolcha Bunyajido"/>
<link wikidata="Q378483" start="1961" end="1971" title="Taejo of Joseon" label="King Taejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q115466" start="1984" end="2000" title="Jamshid al-Kashi" label="Jamshid al-Kashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q486088" start="2056" end="2065" title="Ulugh Beg" label="Ulugh Beg"/>
<link wikidata="Q202813" start="2079" end="2092" title="Zij-i-Sultani" label="Zij-i-Sultani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641182" start="2108" end="2123" title="Prussian Tables" label="Prussian Tables"/>
<link wikidata="Q544169" start="2127" end="2143" title="Erasmus Reinhold" label="Erasmus Reinhold"/>
<link wikidata="Q36620" start="2166" end="2177" title="Tycho Brahe" label="Tycho Brahe"/>
<link wikidata="Q155952" start="2207" end="2215" title="Almagest" label="Almagest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379164" start="2236" end="2272" title="Taqi ad-Din Muhammad ibn Ma&amp;#x27;ruf" label="Taqi ad-Din Muhammad ibn Ma&amp;#x27;ruf"/>
<link wikidata="Q36620" start="2315" end="2326" title="Tycho Brahe" label="Tycho Brahe"/>
<link wikidata="Q78427" start="2384" end="2396" title="Johann Bayer" label="Johann Bayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q609895" start="2410" end="2421" title="Uranometria" label="Uranometria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963" start="2437" end="2452" title="Johannes Kepler" label="Johannes Kepler"/>
<link wikidata="Q611853" start="2467" end="2484" title="Rudolphine Tables" label="Rudolphine Tables"/>
<link wikidata="Q47434" start="2533" end="2546" title="Edmond Halley" label="Edmond Halley"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="2640" end="2652" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q47434" start="2657" end="2670" title="Edmond Halley" label="Edmond Halley"/>
<link wikidata="Q242388" start="2859" end="2873" title="John Flamsteed" label="John Flamsteed"/>
<link wikidata="Q242388" start="2887" end="2916" title="Historia Coelestis Britannica" label="Historia Coelestis Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524" start="2932" end="2947" title="Charles Messier" label="Charles Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q42372" start="2976" end="2982" title="nebula" label="nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q12100938" start="2999" end="3019" title="Urania&amp;#x27;s Mirror" label="Urania&amp;#x27;s Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q7509106" start="3029" end="3040" title="Sidney Hall" label="Sidney Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q58685" start="3050" end="3078" title="Friedrich Wilhelm Argelander" label="Friedrich Wilhelm Argelander"/>
<link wikidata="Q845735" start="3120" end="3141" title="Bonner Durchmusterung" label="Bonner Durchmusterung"/>
<link wikidata="Q76287" start="3174" end="3185" title="declination" label="declination"/>
<link wikidata="Q14278" start="3200" end="3213" title="John Herschel" label="John Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362459" start="3234" end="3251" title="General Catalogue of Nebulae and Clusters" label="General Catalogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045815" start="3330" end="3343" title="Carte du Ciel" label="Carte du Ciel"/>
<link wikidata="Q265015" start="3420" end="3431" title="John Louis Emil Dreyer" label="John Dreyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q14534" start="3452" end="3473" title="New General Catalogue" label="New General Catalogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q281170" start="3518" end="3532" title="Harlow Shapley" label="Harlow Shapley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681665" start="3537" end="3550" title="Adelaide Ames" label="Adelaide Ames"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277103" start="3670" end="3690" title="Shapley-Ames Catalog" label="Shapley-Ames Catalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576640" start="3706" end="3720" title="Antonín Bečvář" label="Antonín Bečvář"/>
<link wikidata="Q633899" start="3741" end="3776" title="Skalnate Pleso Atlas of the Heavens" label="Skalnate Pleso Atlas of the Heavens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425489" start="3863" end="3893" title="National Geographic Society – Palomar Observatory Sky Survey" label="Palomar Observatory Sky Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q891841" start="3926" end="3933" title="Schmidt camera" label="Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q35221" start="3942" end="3962" title="reflecting telescope" label="reflecting telescope"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4012" end="4024" title="A.S. Bennett" label="A.S. Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055012" start="4032" end="4063" title="Cavendish Astrophysics Group" label="Cambridge Radio Astronomy Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q598937" start="4086" end="4088" title="Third Cambridge Catalogue of Radio Sources" label="3C"/>
<link wikidata="Q214345" start="4129" end="4145" title="Gerry Neugebauer" label="Gerry Neugebauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q934337" start="4150" end="4165" title="Robert B. Leighton" label="Robert Leighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q724913" start="4252" end="4256" title="IRAS" label="IRAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q148578" start="4257" end="4274" title="space observatory" label="space observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="4300" end="4308" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q221392" start="4391" end="4426" title="large-scale structure of the cosmos" label="large-scale structure of the cosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q54284" start="4436" end="4441" title="ROSAT" label="ROSAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q148578" start="4442" end="4459" title="space observatory" label="space observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852" start="4478" end="4483" title="X-ray astronomy" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q461382" start="4519" end="4522" title="Very Large Array" label="VLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454942" start="4572" end="4577" title="2MASS" label="2MASS"/>
<link wikidata="Q555846" start="4607" end="4626" title="Hipparcos Catalogue" label="Hipparcos Catalogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q840332" start="4646" end="4670" title="Sloan Digital Sky Survey" label="Sloan Digital Sky Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815842" start="4690" end="4716" title="2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey" label="2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q693552" start="4836" end="4871" title="Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer" label="Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q840332" start="4965" end="4989" title="Sloan Digital Sky Survey" label="Sloan Digital Sky Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="5004" end="5056" title="cosmology" label="largest, most detailed 3D map of the universe so far"/>
<link wikidata="Q136407" start="5092" end="5113" title="Chronology of the universe" label="its expansion history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647152" start="5168" end="5192" title="shape of the universe" label="geometry of the universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129469" start="5240" end="5249" title="expansion of the universe" label="expanding"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5253" end="5269" title="Hubble&amp;#x27;s law#Measured values of the Hubble constant" label="different speeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q631942" start="5353" end="5373" title="cosmography" label="maps of the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q55623118" start="5420" end="5424" title="Mikulski Archive for Space Telescopes" label="MAST"/>
<link wikidata="Q192776" start="5443" end="5468" title="artificial neural network" label="artificial neural network"/>
<link wikidata="Q840332" start="5497" end="5521" title="Sloan Digital Sky Survey" label="Sloan Digital Sky Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138416" start="5845" end="5930" title="Timeline of knowledge about galaxies, clusters of galaxies, and large-scale structure" label="Timeline of knowledge about galaxies, clusters of galaxies, and large-scale structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606299" start="5933" end="5975" title="List of asteroid close approaches to Earth" label="List of asteroid close approaches to Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4436084" start="5978" end="6018" title="List of potentially habitable exoplanets" label="List of potentially habitable exoplanets"/>
<link wikidata="Q88299264" start="6021" end="6074" title="List of nearby stellar associations and moving groups" label="List of nearby stellar associations and moving groups"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58953" wikidata="Q7806210" url="?curid=58953" title="Timeline of telescopes, observatories, and observing technology">
<text>[[Timeline]] of [[telescope]]s, [[observatory|observatories]], and observing [[technology]].
==Before the Common Era (BCE)==

===1900s BCE===
* Taosi Astronomical Observatory, Xiangfen County, Linfen City, Shanxi Province, China

===1500s BCE===
* Shadow clocks invented in ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia

===600s BCE===
* 11th–7th century BCE, Zhou dynasty astronomical observatory (灵台) in Fenghao (today&#x27;s Xi&#x27;an), China

===200s BCE===
* Thirteen Towers solar observatory, Chankillo, Peru
* Antikythera Mechanism, a geared astronomical computer that calculates lunar and solar eclipses, the position of the Sun and the Moon the lunar phase (age of the moon), has several lunisolar calendars, including the Olympic Games calendar. It is at the National Archaeological Museum, Athens, Greece.

===100s BCE===
* 220-206 BCE, Han dynasty astronomical observatory (灵台) in Chang&#x27;an and Luoyang. During East Han dynasty, astronomical observatory (灵台) built in Yanshi, Henan Province, China
* 220-150 BCE, Astrolabe invented by Apollonius of Perga

==Common Era (CE)==

===400s===
* 5th century – Observatory at Ujjain, India

===600s===
* 632–647 – Cheomseongdae observatory is built in the reign of Queen Seondeok at Gyeongju, then the capital of Silla (present day South Korea)
* 618–1279 – Tang dynasty-Song dynasty, observatories built in Chang&#x27;an, Kaifeng, Hangzhou, China

===700s===
* 700–96 – Brass astrolabe constructed by Muhammad al-Fazari based on Hellenistic sources

===800s===
* 9th century – quadrant invented by Muhammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī in 9th century Baghdad and is used for astronomical calculations
* 800–33 – The first modern observatory research institute built in Baghdad, Iraq, by Arabic astronomers during time of Al-Mamun
* 825–35 – Al-Shammisiyyah observatory by Habash al-Hasib al-Marwazi in Baghdad, Iraq

===900s===
* 10th century – Large astrolabe of diameter 1.4 meters constructed by Ibn Yunus
* 994 – First sextant constructed in Ray, Iran, by Abu-Mahmud al-Khujandi. It was a very large mural sextant that achieved a high level of accuracy for astronomical measurements.

===1000s===
* 1000 – Mokattam observatory in Egypt for Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah
* 11th century – Planisphere invented by Biruni
* 11th century – Universal latitude-independent astrolabe invented by Abū Ishāq Ibrāhīm al-Zarqālī (Arzachel)
* 1023 – Hamedan observatory in Persia
* c. 1030 – &quot;Treasury of Optics&quot; by Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen) of Iraq and Egypt
* 1074–92 – Malikshah Observatory at Isfahan used by Omar Khayyám

===1100s===
* 1100–50 – Jabir ibn Aflah develops instruments resembling and perhaps inspiring the torquetum, an observational instrument and mechanical analog computer device
* 1119–25 – Cairo al-Bataihi observatory for Al-Afdal Shahanshah

===1200s===
* 1259 – Maragheh observatory and library of Nasir al-Din al-Tusi built in Persia under Hulagu Khan
* c. 1270 – Terrace for Managing Heaven 26 observatory network of Guo Shoujing under Khubilai Khan
* 1276 – Dengfeng Star Observatory Platform, Gaocheng, Dengfeng City, Henan Province, China

===1300s===
* 1371 – The idea of using hours of equal time length throughout the year in a sundial was the innovation of Ibn al-Shatir

===1400s===
* 1420 – Samarkand observatory of Ulugh Beg
* 1442 – Beijing Ancient Observatory in China
* 1467–71 – Observatory at Nagyvarad Oradea, Kingdom of Hungary for Matthias Corvinus. Tabula Varadensis.
* 1472 – The Nuremberg observatory of Regiomontanus and Bernhard Walther.

===1500s===
* 1560 – Kassel observatory under Landgrave Wilhelm IV of Hesse
* 1575–80 – Constantinople Observatory of Taqi ad-Din under Sultan Murad III
* 1576 – Royal Danish Astronomical Observatory Uraniborg at Hven by Tycho Brahe
* 1577–80 – Taqi al-Din invents a mechanical astronomical clock that measures time in seconds, one of the most important innovations in 16th-century practical astronomy, as previous clocks were not accurate enough to be used for astronomical purposes.
* 1577–80 – Taqi al-Din invents framed sextant
* 1581 – Royal Danish Astronomical Observatory Stjerneborg at Hven by Tycho Brahe

===1600s===
* 1600 – Prague observatory in Benátky nad Jizerou by Tycho Brahe
* 1603 – Johann Bayer&#x27;s &quot;Uranometria&quot; is published
* 1608 – Hans Lippershey tries to patent an optical refracting telescope, the first recorded functional telescope
* 1609 – Galileo Galilei builds his first optical refracting telescope
* 1616 – Niccolò Zucchi experiments with a reflecting telescope
* 1633 – Construction of Leiden University Observatory
* 1641 – William Gascoigne invents telescope cross hairs
* 1641 – Danzig/Gdansk observatory of Jan Hevelius
* 1642 – Copenhagen University Royal observatory
* 1661 – James Gregory proposes an optical reflecting telescope with parabolic mirrors
* 1667 – Paris Observatory
* 1668 – Isaac Newton constructs the first &quot;practical&quot; reflecting telescope, the Newtonian telescope
* 1672 – Laurent Cassegrain designs the Cassegrain telescope
* 1675 – Royal Greenwich Observatory of England
* 1684 – Christiaan Huygens publishes &quot;Astroscopia Compendiaria&quot; in which he described the design of very long aerial telescopes

===1700s===
* 1704 – First observatory at Cambridge University (based at Trinity College)
* 1724 – Indian observatory of Sawai Jai Singh at Delhi
* 1725 – St. Petersburg observatory at Royal Academy
* 1732 – Indian observatories of Sawai Jai Singh at Varanasi, Ujjain, Mathura, Madras
* 1733 – Chester Moore Hall invents the achromatic lens refracting telescope
* 1734 – Indian observatory of Sawai Jai Singh at Jaipur
* 1753 – Real Observatorio de Cádiz (Spain)
* 1753 – Vilnius Observatory at Vilnius University, Lithuania
* 1758 – John Dollond reinvents the achromatic lens
* 1761 – Joseph-Nicolas Delisle 62 observing station network for observing the transit of Venus
* 1769 – Short reflectors used at 63 station network for transit of Venus
* 1774 – Vatican Observatory &quot;(Specola Vaticana)&quot;, originally established as &quot;the Observatory of the Roman College&quot;. 
* 1780 – Florence Specola observatory
* 1789 – William Herschel finishes a 49-inch (1.2 m) optical reflecting telescope, located in Slough, England
* 1798 – Real Observatorio de la Isla de Léon (actualmente Real Instituto y Observatorio de la Armada) (Spain)

===1800s===
*1803 National Astronomical Observatory (Colombia), the first observatory in the Americas
*1836 Swathithirunal opened Trivandrum observatory
*1839 Louis Jacques Mandé Daguerre (inventor of the daguerreotype photographic process) attempts to photograph the moon. Tracking errors in guiding the telescope during the long exposure made the photograph came out as an indistinct fuzzy spot
* 1840 – John William Draper takes make a successful photographic image of the Moon, the first astronomical photograph
* 1845 – Lord Rosse finishes the Birr Castle optical reflecting telescope, located in Parsonstown, Ireland
* 1849 – Santiago observatory set up by USA, later becomes Chilean National Observatory (now part of the University of Chile)
* 1859 – Kirchhoff and Bunsen develop spectroscopy
* 1864 – Herschel&#x27;s so-called GC (General Catalogue) of nebulae and star clusters published
* 1868 – Janssen and Lockyer discover Helium observing spectra of the Sun
* 1871 – German Astronomical Association organized network of 13 (later 16) observatories for stellar proper motion studies
* 1863 – William Allen Miller and Sir William Huggins use the photographic wet collodion plate process to obtain the first ever photographic spectrogram of a star, Sirius and Capella.
* 1872 – Henry Draper photographs a spectrum of Vega that shows absorption lines.
* 1878 – Dreyer published a supplement to the GC of about 1000 new objects, the New General Catalogue
* 1883 – Andrew Ainslie Common uses the photographic dry plate process and a 36-inch (91 cm) reflecting telescope in his backyard to record 60 minute exposures of the Orion nebula that for the first time showed stars too faint to be seen by the human eye.
* 1887 – Paris conference institutes &quot;Carte du Ciel&quot; project to map entire sky to 14th magnitude photographically
* 1888 – First light of 91cm refracting telescope at Lick Observatory, on Mount Hamilton near San Jose, California
* 1889 – Astronomical Society of the Pacific founded
* 1890 – Albert A. Michelson proposes the stellar interferometer
* 1892 – George Ellery Hale finishes a spectroheliograph, which allows the Sun to be photographed in the light of one element only
* 1897 – Alvan Clark finishes the Yerkes optical refracting telescope, located in Williams Bay, Wisconsin

===1900s===
* 1902 – Dominion Observatory, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada established
* 1904 – Observatories of the Carnegie Institution of Washington founded
* 1907 – F.C. Brown and Joel Stebbins develop a selenium cell photometer at the University of Illinois Observatory.

====1910s====
* 1912 – Joel Stebbins and Jakob Kunz begin to use a photometer using a photoelectric cell at the University of Illinois Observatory.
* 1917 – Mount Wilson optical reflecting telescope begins operation, located in Mount Wilson, California
* 1918 – 1.8m Plaskett Telescope begins operation at the Dominion Astrophysical Observatory, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada
* 1919 – International Astronomical Union (IAU) founded

====1930s====

* 1930 – Bernard-Ferdinand Lyot invents the coronagraph
* 1930 – Karl Jansky builds a 30-meter long rotating aerial radio telescope This was the first radio telescope.
* 1933 – Bernard-Ferdinand Lyot invents the Lyot filter
* 1934 – Bernhard Schmidt finishes the first Schmidt optical reflecting telescope
* 1936 – Palomar Schmidt optical reflecting telescope begins operation, located in Palomar, California
* 1937 – Grote Reber builds a radio telescope

====1940s====

* 1941 – Dmitri Dmitrievich Maksutov invents the Maksutov telescope which is adopted by major observatories in the Soviet Union and internationally. It is now also a popular design with amateur astronomers
* 1946 – Martin Ryle and his group perform the first astronomical observations with a radio interferometer
* 1947 – Bernard Lovell and his group complete the Jodrell Bank non-steerable radio telescope
* 1949 – Palomar Schmidt optical reflecting telescope begins operation, located in Palomar, California
* 1949 – Palomar optical reflecting telescope (Hale Telescope) begins regular operation, located in Palomar, California

====1950s====

* 1953 – Luoxue Mountain Cosmic Rays Research Center, Yunnan Province, in China founded
* 1954 – Earth rotation aperture synthesis suggested (see e.g. Christiansen and Warburton (1955))
* 1956 – Dwingeloo Radio Observatory 25 m telescope completed, Dwingeloo, Netherlands
* 1957 – Bernard Lovell and his group complete the Jodrell Bank 250-foot (75 m) steerable radio telescope (the Lovell Telescope)
* 1957 – Peter Scheuer publishes his P(D) method for obtaining source counts of spatially unresolved sources
* 1959 – Radio Observatory of the University of Chile, located at Maipú, Chile founded
* 1959 – The 3C catalogue of radio sources is published (revised in 1962)
* 1959 – The Shane Telescope Opened at Lick Observatory

====1960s====

* 1960 – Owens Valley 27-meter radio telescopes begin operation, located in Big Pine, California
* 1961 – Parkes 64-metre radio telescope begins operation, located near Parkes, Australia
* 1962 – European Southern Observatory (ESO) founded
* 1962 – Kitt Peak solar observatory founded
* 1962 – Green Bank, West Virginia 90m radio telescope
* 1962 – Orbiting Solar Observatory 1 satellite launched
* 1963 – Arecibo 300-meter radio telescope begins operation, located in Arecibo, Puerto Rico
* 1964 – Martin Ryle&#x27;s radio interferometer begins operation, located in Cambridge, England
* 1965 – Owens Valley 40-meter radio telescope begins operation, located in Big Pine, California
* 1967 – First VLBI images, with 183 km baseline
* 1969 – Observations start at Big Bear Solar Observatory, located in Big Bear, California
* 1969 – Las Campanas Observatory

====1970s====

* 1970 – Cerro Tololo optical reflecting telescope begins operation, located in Cerro Tololo, Chile
* 1970 – Kitt Peak National Observatory optical reflecting telescope begins operation, located near Tucson, Arizona
* 1970 – Uhuru x-ray telescope satellite
* 1970 – Antoine Labeyrie performs the first high-resolution optical speckle interferometry observations
* 1970 – Westerbork Synthesis Radio Telescope completed, near Westerbork, Netherlands
* 1972 – 100 m Effelsberg radio telescope inaugurated (Germany)
* 1973 – UK Schmidt Telescope 1.2 metre optical reflecting telescope begins operation, located in Anglo-Australian Observatory near Coonabarabran, Australia
* 1974 – Anglo-Australian Telescope optical reflecting telescope begins operation, located in Anglo-Australian Observatory near Coonabarabran, Australia
* 1975 – Gerald Smith, Frederick Landauer, and James Janesick use a CCD to observe Uranus, the first astronomical CCD observation
* 1975 – Antoine Labeyrie builds the first two-telescope optical interferometer
* 1976 – The 6-m BTA-6 (Bolshoi Teleskop Azimutalnyi or “Large Altazimuth Telescope”) goes into operation on Mt. Pashtukhov in the Russian Caucasus
* 1978 – Multiple Mirror equivalent optical/infrared reflecting telescope begins operation, located in Amado, Arizona
* 1978 – International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) telescope satellite
* 1978 – Einstein High Energy Astronomy Observatory x-ray telescope satellite
* 1979 – UKIRT infrared reflecting telescope begins operation, located at Mauna Kea Observatory, Hawaii
* 1979 – Canada-France-Hawaii optical reflecting telescope begins operation, located at Mauna Kea Observatory, Hawaii
* 1979 – NASA Infrared Telescope Facility infrared reflecting telescope begins operation, located at Mauna Kea, Hawaii

====1980s====

* 1980 – Completion of construction of the VLA, located in Socorro, New Mexico
* 1983 – Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS) telescope
* 1984 – IRAM 30-m telescope at Pico Veleta near Granada, Spain completed
* 1987 – 15-m James Clerk Maxwell Telescope UK submillimetre telescope installed at Mauna Kea Observatory
* 1987 – 5-m Swedish-ESO Submillimetre Telescope (SEST) installed at the ESO La Silla Observatory
* 1988 – Australia Telescope Compact Array aperture synthesis radio telescope begins operation, located near Narrabri, Australia
* 1989 – Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) satellite

====1990s====
* 1990 – Hubble 2.4m space Telescope launched, mirror found to be flawed
* 1991 – Compton Gamma Ray Observatory satellite
* 1993 – Keck 10-meter optical/infrared reflecting telescope begins operation, located at Mauna Kea, Hawaii
* 1993 – Very Long Baseline Array of 10 dishes
* 1995 – Cambridge Optical Aperture Synthesis Telescope (COAST)—the first very high resolution optical astronomical images (from aperture synthesis observations)
* 1995 – Giant Metrewave Radio Telescope of thirty 45 m dishes at Pune
* 1996 – Keck 2 10-meter optical/infrared reflecting telescope begins operation, located at Mauna Kea, Hawaii
* 1997 – The Japanese HALCA satellite begins operations, producing first VLBI observations from space, 25,000 km maximum baseline
* 1998 – First light at VLT1, the 8.2 m ESO telescope

===2000s===

* 2001 – First light at the Keck Interferometer. Single-baseline operations begin in the near-infrared.
* 2001 – First light at VLTI interferometry array. Operations on the interferometer start with single-baseline near-infrared observations with the 103 m baseline.
* 2005 – First imaging with the VLTI using the AMBER optical aperture synthesis instrument and three VLT telescopes.
* 2005 – First light at SALT, the largest optical telescope in the Southern Hemisphere, with a hexagonal primary mirror of 11.1 by 9.8 meters.
* 2007 – First light at Gran Telescopio de Canarias (GTC), in Spain, the largest optical telescope in the world with an effective diameter of 10.4 meters.
* 2021 — James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), was launched 25 December 2021 on an ESA Ariane 5 rocket from Kourou, French Guiana and will succeed the Hubble Space Telescope as NASA&#x27;s flagship mission in astrophysics.
* 2023 — Euclid, was launched on 1 July 2023 on a Falcon 9 Block 5 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, to study dark matter and energy.
* 2023 — XRISM was launched on 6 September 2023 on a H-IIA rocket to study the formation of the universe and the dark matter.

==Under Construction==
* Iranian National Observatory 3.4 m (first light planned in 2020) 
*Extremely Large Telescope (first light planned in 2027)

==Planned==

*Public Telescope (PST), German project of astrofactum. Launch was planned for 2019, but the project&#x27;s website is now defunct and no updates have been provided on the fate of the effort.
* Mid/late-2021 – Science first light of the Vera C. Rubin Observatory is anticipated for 2021 with full science operations to begin a year later.
*Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope, part of NASA&#x27;s Exoplanet Exploration Program. Launch is tentatively scheduled for 2027.

==See also==
* Timeline of telescope technology
* List of largest optical telescopes historically
* Extremely large telescope

==References==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7806210" start="0" end="92" title="Timeline of telescopes, observatories, and observing technology" label="[[Timeline]] of [[telescope]]s, [[observatory|observatories]], and observing [[technology]]."/>
<link wikidata="Q217859" start="144" end="149" title="Taosi" label="Taosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197358" start="176" end="184" title="Xiangfen" label="Xiangfen"/>
<link wikidata="Q73156" start="193" end="199" title="Linfen" label="Linfen"/>
<link wikidata="Q46913" start="206" end="212" title="Shanxi" label="Shanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q80793" start="248" end="260" title="Shadow clock" label="Shadow clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="274" end="287" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="292" end="303" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="344" end="356" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q275515" start="390" end="397" title="Fenghao" label="Fenghao"/>
<link wikidata="Q5826" start="412" end="422" title="Xi&amp;#x27;an" label="Xi&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062357" start="484" end="493" title="Chankillo" label="Chankillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="495" end="499" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="833" end="844" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="871" end="873" title="灵台" label="灵台"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501000" start="878" end="891" title="Chang&amp;#x27;an" label="Chang&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q187136" start="896" end="903" title="Luoyang" label="Luoyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="912" end="928" title="Han dynasty" label="East Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337479" start="969" end="975" title="Yanshi" label="Yanshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q43684" start="977" end="982" title="Henan" label="Henan"/>
<link wikidata="Q164992" start="1014" end="1023" title="Astrolabe" label="Astrolabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q180109" start="1036" end="1055" title="Apollonius of Perga" label="Apollonius of Perga"/>
<link wikidata="Q200119" start="1120" end="1126" title="Ujjain" label="Ujjain"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1128" end="1133" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q562765" start="1158" end="1171" title="Cheomseongdae" label="Cheomseongdae"/>
<link wikidata="Q485131" start="1209" end="1223" title="Queen Seondeok" label="Queen Seondeok"/>
<link wikidata="Q42097" start="1227" end="1235" title="Gyeongju" label="Gyeongju"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456" start="1257" end="1262" title="Silla" label="Silla"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="1276" end="1287" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="1302" end="1314" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="1315" end="1327" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501000" start="1352" end="1365" title="Chang&amp;#x27;an" label="Chang&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q208471" start="1367" end="1374" title="Kaifeng" label="Kaifeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970" start="1376" end="1384" title="Hangzhou" label="Hangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q164992" start="1421" end="1430" title="astrolabe" label="astrolabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q584679" start="1446" end="1464" title="Muhammad al-Fazari" label="Muhammad al-Fazari"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="1474" end="1485" title="Hellenistic civilization" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q841280" start="1522" end="1530" title="Quadrant (instrument)" label="quadrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9038" start="1543" end="1573" title="Muhammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī" label="Muhammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="1589" end="1596" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q62832" start="1667" end="1678" title="observatory" label="observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="1707" end="1714" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="1716" end="1720" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255366" start="1725" end="1743" title="Astronomy in medieval Islam" label="Arabic astronomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q61056" start="1759" end="1767" title="Al-Mamun" label="Al-Mamun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1779" end="1806" title="Astronomy in medieval Islam#Observatories" label="Al-Shammisiyyah observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475262" start="1810" end="1836" title="Habash al-Hasib al-Marwazi" label="Habash al-Hasib al-Marwazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q164992" start="1889" end="1898" title="astrolabe" label="astrolabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q459921" start="1937" end="1946" title="Ibn Yunus" label="Ibn Yunus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776143" start="1961" end="1968" title="Sextant (astronomical)" label="sextant"/>
<link wikidata="Q636188" start="1984" end="1993" title="Ray, Iran" label="Ray, Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q335123" start="1998" end="2020" title="Abu-Mahmud al-Khujandi" label="Abu-Mahmud al-Khujandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q357781" start="2042" end="2047" title="Mural instrument" label="mural"/>
<link wikidata="Q643934" start="2148" end="2156" title="Mokattam" label="Mokattam"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="2172" end="2177" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q342137" start="2182" end="2203" title="Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah" label="Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344642" start="2221" end="2232" title="Planisphere" label="Planisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q164992" start="2300" end="2309" title="astrolabe" label="astrolabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11133" start="2322" end="2350" title="Abū Ishāq Ibrāhīm al-Zarqālī" label="Abū Ishāq Ibrāhīm al-Zarqālī"/>
<link wikidata="Q28587" start="2371" end="2378" title="Hamedan" label="Hamedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="2394" end="2400" title="Iran" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q264562" start="2419" end="2437" title="Book of Optics" label="Treasury of Optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11104" start="2447" end="2461" title="Ibn al-Haytham" label="Ibn al-Haytham"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614652" start="2502" end="2523" title="Malikshah Observatory" label="Malikshah Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q42053" start="2527" end="2534" title="Isfahan" label="Isfahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35900" start="2543" end="2555" title="Omar Khayyám" label="Omar Khayyám"/>
<link wikidata="Q288111" start="2581" end="2596" title="Jabir ibn Aflah" label="Jabir ibn Aflah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372190" start="2655" end="2664" title="torquetum" label="torquetum"/>
<link wikidata="Q63759" start="2709" end="2724" title="analog computer" label="analog computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="2744" end="2749" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q551601" start="2777" end="2796" title="Al-Afdal Shahanshah" label="Al-Afdal Shahanshah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461462" start="2819" end="2839" title="Maragheh observatory" label="Maragheh observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q302835" start="2855" end="2875" title="Nasir al-Din al-Tusi" label="Nasir al-Din al-Tusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q177320" start="2898" end="2909" title="Hulagu Khan" label="Hulagu Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q733082" start="2976" end="2988" title="Guo Shoujing" label="Guo Shoujing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523" start="2995" end="3008" title="Khubilai Khan" label="Khubilai Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q675482" start="3018" end="3052" title="Gaocheng Astronomical Observatory" label="Dengfeng Star Observatory Platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q877609" start="3064" end="3072" title="Dengfeng" label="Dengfeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q43684" start="3079" end="3084" title="Henan" label="Henan"/>
<link wikidata="Q80793" start="3193" end="3200" title="sundial" label="sundial"/>
<link wikidata="Q718169" start="3223" end="3236" title="Ibn al-Shatir" label="Ibn al-Shatir"/>
<link wikidata="Q608580" start="3259" end="3280" title="Ulugh Beg Observatory" label="Samarkand observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q486088" start="3284" end="3293" title="Ulugh Beg" label="Ulugh Beg"/>
<link wikidata="Q439299" start="3303" end="3330" title="Beijing Ancient Observatory" label="Beijing Ancient Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q93358" start="3377" end="3383" title="Oradea" label="Oradea"/>
<link wikidata="Q188634" start="3408" end="3425" title="Matthias Corvinus" label="Matthias Corvinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="3459" end="3468" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q76365" start="3484" end="3497" title="Regiomontanus" label="Regiomontanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q71276" start="3502" end="3518" title="Bernhard Walther" label="Bernhard Walther"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865" start="3542" end="3548" title="Kassel" label="Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q696040" start="3577" end="3596" title="William IV of Hesse" label="Wilhelm IV of Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348357" start="3609" end="3650" title="Constantinople Observatory of Taqi ad-Din" label="Constantinople Observatory of Taqi ad-Din"/>
<link wikidata="Q159934" start="3664" end="3673" title="Murad III" label="Murad III"/>
<link wikidata="Q79220" start="3721" end="3730" title="Uraniborg" label="Uraniborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q509682" start="3734" end="3738" title="Hven" label="Hven"/>
<link wikidata="Q36620" start="3742" end="3753" title="Tycho Brahe" label="Tycho Brahe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275" start="3799" end="3817" title="astronomical clock" label="astronomical clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776143" start="4038" end="4052" title="Sextant (astronomical)" label="framed sextant"/>
<link wikidata="Q142658" start="4100" end="4111" title="Stjerneborg" label="Stjerneborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q509682" start="4115" end="4119" title="Hven" label="Hven"/>
<link wikidata="Q36620" start="4123" end="4134" title="Tycho Brahe" label="Tycho Brahe"/>
<link wikidata="Q818540" start="4179" end="4198" title="Benátky nad Jizerou" label="Benátky nad Jizerou"/>
<link wikidata="Q36620" start="4202" end="4213" title="Tycho Brahe" label="Tycho Brahe"/>
<link wikidata="Q78427" start="4223" end="4235" title="Johann Bayer" label="Johann Bayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q609895" start="4249" end="4260" title="Uranometria" label="Uranometria"/>
<link wikidata="Q76468" start="4289" end="4304" title="Hans Lippershey" label="Hans Lippershey"/>
<link wikidata="Q216778" start="4332" end="4352" title="refracting telescope" label="refracting telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="4384" end="4393" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="4403" end="4418" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo Galilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q983213" start="4474" end="4488" title="Niccolò Zucchi" label="Niccolò Zucchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q35221" start="4508" end="4528" title="reflecting telescope" label="reflecting telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q186244" start="4554" end="4583" title="Leiden Observatory" label="Leiden University Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090266" start="4593" end="4610" title="William Gascoigne (scientist)" label="William Gascoigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q57963" start="4679" end="4691" title="Johannes Hevelius" label="Jan Hevelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140534" start="4701" end="4740" title="Rundetårn" label="Copenhagen University Royal observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q313906" start="4750" end="4763" title="James Gregory (astronomer and mathematician)" label="James Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087850" start="4810" end="4819" title="Parabolic reflector" label="parabolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q461340" start="4837" end="4854" title="Paris Observatory" label="Paris Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="4864" end="4876" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055065" start="4946" end="4965" title="Newtonian telescope" label="Newtonian telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352012" start="4975" end="4993" title="Laurent Cassegrain" label="Laurent Cassegrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q192988" start="5036" end="5063" title="Royal Greenwich Observatory" label="Royal Greenwich Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q39599" start="5084" end="5102" title="Christiaan Huygens" label="Christiaan Huygens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232452" start="5196" end="5212" title="aerial telescope" label="aerial telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="5257" end="5277" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge University"/>
<link wikidata="Q332342" start="5288" end="5303" title="Trinity College, Cambridge" label="Trinity College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392864" start="5336" end="5351" title="Jai Singh II" label="Sawai Jai Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="5355" end="5360" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q79980" start="5466" end="5474" title="Varanasi" label="Varanasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q200119" start="5476" end="5482" title="Ujjain" label="Ujjain"/>
<link wikidata="Q200311" start="5484" end="5491" title="Mathura" label="Mathura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="5493" end="5499" title="Madras" label="Madras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070737" start="5509" end="5527" title="Chester Moore Hall" label="Chester Moore Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q340600" start="5540" end="5555" title="achromatic lens" label="achromatic lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q66485" start="5627" end="5633" title="Jaipur" label="Jaipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4111356" start="5687" end="5706" title="Vilnius Observatory" label="Vilnius Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q658192" start="5710" end="5728" title="Vilnius University" label="Vilnius University"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="5730" end="5739" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q505186" start="5749" end="5761" title="John Dollond" label="John Dollond"/>
<link wikidata="Q431485" start="5801" end="5823" title="Joseph-Nicolas Delisle" label="Joseph-Nicolas Delisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q185203" start="5871" end="5887" title="transit of Venus" label="transit of Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q957681" start="5897" end="5902" title="James Short (mathematician)" label="Short"/>
<link wikidata="Q185203" start="5945" end="5961" title="transit of Venus" label="transit of Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q591923" start="5971" end="6021" title="Vatican Observatory" label="Vatican Observatory &amp;quot;(Specola Vaticana)&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="6109" end="6117" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799158" start="6118" end="6125" title="La Specola" label="Specola"/>
<link wikidata="Q14277" start="6147" end="6163" title="William Herschel" label="William Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q211907" start="6232" end="6238" title="Slough" label="Slough"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6378" end="6422" title="National Astronomical Observatory (Colombia)" label="National Astronomical Observatory (Colombia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="6453" end="6461" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q131405" start="6519" end="6547" title="Louis Jacques Mandé Daguerre" label="Louis Jacques Mandé Daguerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q179744" start="6565" end="6578" title="daguerreotype" label="daguerreotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="6628" end="6632" title="moon" label="moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q472490" start="6766" end="6785" title="John William Draper" label="John William Draper"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="6836" end="6840" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q280855" start="6852" end="6875" title="astrophotography" label="astronomical photograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q310121" start="6885" end="6895" title="William Parsons, 3rd Earl of Rosse" label="Lord Rosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q459970" start="6921" end="6949" title="Leviathan of Parsonstown" label="optical reflecting telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q865849" start="6962" end="6982" title="Birr, County Offaly" label="Parsonstown, Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q232141" start="7088" end="7107" title="University of Chile" label="University of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q60052" start="7118" end="7127" title="Gustav Kirchhoff" label="Kirchhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q71031" start="7132" end="7138" title="Robert Bunsen" label="Bunsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="7147" end="7159" title="spectroscopy" label="spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720156" start="7169" end="7177" title="Alexander Stewart Herschel" label="Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q298581" start="7266" end="7273" title="Pierre Jules César Janssen" label="Janssen"/>
<link wikidata="Q127959" start="7278" end="7285" title="Joseph Norman Lockyer" label="Lockyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="7295" end="7301" title="Helium" label="Helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="7323" end="7330" title="Sun" label="the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q751909" start="7340" end="7371" title="Astronomische Gesellschaft" label="German Astronomical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098099" start="7464" end="7484" title="William Allen Miller" label="William Allen Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q160681" start="7493" end="7508" title="William Huggins" label="William Huggins"/>
<link wikidata="Q904614" start="7530" end="7549" title="Wet plate" label="wet collodion plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q578970" start="7596" end="7607" title="spectrogram" label="spectrogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409" start="7619" end="7625" title="Sirius" label="Sirius"/>
<link wikidata="Q12970" start="7630" end="7637" title="Capella (star)" label="Capella"/>
<link wikidata="Q125515" start="7648" end="7660" title="Henry Draper" label="Henry Draper"/>
<link wikidata="Q76299" start="7675" end="7683" title="optical spectrum" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427" start="7687" end="7691" title="Vega" label="Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q13553575" start="7703" end="7719" title="absorption lines" label="absorption lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q265015" start="7730" end="7736" title="John Louis Emil Dreyer" label="Dreyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q14534" start="7801" end="7822" title="New General Catalogue" label="New General Catalogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q503586" start="7832" end="7853" title="Andrew Ainslie Common" label="Andrew Ainslie Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q172984" start="7876" end="7885" title="dry plate" label="dry plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q13903" start="7990" end="8002" title="Orion nebula" label="Orion nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045815" start="8122" end="8135" title="Carte du Ciel" label="Carte du Ciel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138045" start="8227" end="8252" title="James Lick telescope" label="91cm refracting telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q461613" start="8256" end="8272" title="Lick Observatory" label="Lick Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950508" start="8277" end="8291" title="Mount Hamilton (California)" label="Mount Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="8297" end="8317" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q751779" start="8327" end="8362" title="Astronomical Society of the Pacific" label="Astronomical Society of the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q127234" start="8380" end="8399" title="Albert A. Michelson" label="Albert A. Michelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q850283" start="8421" end="8435" title="interferometer" label="interferometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q312288" start="8445" end="8463" title="George Ellery Hale" label="George Ellery Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930110" start="8475" end="8492" title="spectroheliograph" label="spectroheliograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="8511" end="8514" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q448267" start="8576" end="8587" title="Alvan Clark" label="Alvan Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q14310" start="8601" end="8636" title="Yerkes telescope" label="Yerkes optical refracting telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758449" start="8649" end="8672" title="Williams Bay, Wisconsin" label="Williams Bay, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q266818" start="8695" end="8715" title="Dominion Observatory" label="Dominion Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043963" start="8783" end="8803" title="Carnegie Institution" label="Carnegie Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q739475" start="8850" end="8863" title="Joel Stebbins" label="Joel Stebbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348346" start="8906" end="8940" title="University of Illinois Observatory" label="University of Illinois Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q739475" start="8966" end="8979" title="Joel Stebbins" label="Joel Stebbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348346" start="9055" end="9089" title="University of Illinois Observatory" label="University of Illinois Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q466863" start="9171" end="9195" title="Mount Wilson Observatory" label="Mount Wilson, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238099" start="9253" end="9287" title="Dominion Astrophysical Observatory" label="Dominion Astrophysical Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132" start="9289" end="9297" title="Victoria, British Columbia" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="9299" end="9315" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="9333" end="9365" title="International Astronomical Union" label="International Astronomical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q433773" start="9405" end="9427" title="Bernard-Ferdinand Lyot" label="Bernard-Ferdinand Lyot"/>
<link wikidata="Q835032" start="9440" end="9451" title="coronagraph" label="coronagraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q319212" start="9461" end="9472" title="Karl Jansky" label="Karl Jansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q184356" start="9512" end="9527" title="radio telescope" label="radio telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q433773" start="9573" end="9595" title="Bernard-Ferdinand Lyot" label="Bernard-Ferdinand Lyot"/>
<link wikidata="Q121434" start="9608" end="9619" title="Lyot filter" label="Lyot filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q520703" start="9629" end="9645" title="Bernhard Schmidt" label="Bernhard Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q891841" start="9665" end="9701" title="Schmidt camera" label="Schmidt optical reflecting telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q191684" start="9785" end="9804" title="Mount Palomar observatory" label="Palomar, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q380212" start="9814" end="9825" title="Grote Reber" label="Grote Reber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232475" start="9876" end="9903" title="Dmitri Dmitrievich Maksutov" label="Dmitri Dmitrievich Maksutov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886563" start="9916" end="9934" title="Maksutov telescope" label="Maksutov telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="9982" end="9994" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q560575" start="10053" end="10072" title="Amateur astronomy" label="amateur astronomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q190766" start="10082" end="10093" title="Martin Ryle" label="Martin Ryle"/>
<link wikidata="Q319234" start="10189" end="10203" title="Bernard Lovell" label="Bernard Lovell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569783" start="10231" end="10243" title="Jodrell Bank" label="Jodrell Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428910" start="10283" end="10298" title="Samuel Oschin telescope" label="Palomar Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471197" start="10424" end="10438" title="Hale Telescope" label="Hale Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10522" end="10565" title="Luoxue Mountain Cosmic Rays Research Center" label="Luoxue Mountain Cosmic Rays Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="10567" end="10573" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961815" start="10625" end="10643" title="aperture synthesis" label="aperture synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719207" start="10708" end="10735" title="Dwingeloo Radio Observatory" label="Dwingeloo Radio Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268530" start="10762" end="10771" title="Dwingeloo" label="Dwingeloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="10773" end="10784" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q319234" start="10794" end="10808" title="Bernard Lovell" label="Bernard Lovell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569783" start="10836" end="10848" title="Jodrell Bank" label="Jodrell Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q555130" start="10896" end="10912" title="Lovell Telescope" label="Lovell Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q47195438" start="10923" end="10936" title="Peter Scheuer" label="Peter Scheuer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565143" start="10977" end="10990" title="source counts" label="source counts"/>
<link wikidata="Q232141" start="11057" end="11076" title="University of Chile" label="University of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q16918" start="11089" end="11101" title="Maipú, Chile" label="Maipú, Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q598937" start="11123" end="11125" title="Third Cambridge Catalogue of Radio Sources" label="3C"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006395" start="11197" end="11212" title="C. Donald Shane telescope" label="Shane Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q461613" start="11223" end="11239" title="Lick Observatory" label="Lick Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q174540" start="11265" end="11277" title="Owens Valley Radio Observatory" label="Owens Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532244" start="11332" end="11352" title="Big Pine, California" label="Big Pine, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q148044" start="11362" end="11393" title="Parkes Observatory" label="Parkes 64-metre radio telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q605513" start="11425" end="11431" title="Parkes, New South Wales" label="Parkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q151991" start="11452" end="11481" title="European Southern Observatory" label="European Southern Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q56901" start="11505" end="11532" title="McMath-Pierce Solar Telescope" label="Kitt Peak solar observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012806" start="11550" end="11575" title="Green Bank, West Virginia" label="Green Bank, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q670044" start="11605" end="11631" title="Orbiting Solar Observatory" label="Orbiting Solar Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q44547" start="11662" end="11695" title="Arecibo radio telescope" label="Arecibo 300-meter radio telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q640728" start="11725" end="11745" title="Arecibo, Puerto Rico" label="Arecibo, Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q190766" start="11755" end="11766" title="Martin Ryle" label="Martin Ryle"/>
<link wikidata="Q850283" start="11780" end="11794" title="interferometer" label="interferometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="11824" end="11842" title="Cambridge, England" label="Cambridge, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532244" start="11919" end="11939" title="Big Pine, California" label="Big Pine, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148351" start="11955" end="11959" title="VLBI" label="VLBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004698" start="11980" end="11988" title="Astronomical interferometer" label="baseline"/>
<link wikidata="Q858519" start="12020" end="12046" title="Big Bear Solar Observatory" label="Big Bear Solar Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q14681604" start="12059" end="12079" title="Big Bear Lake" label="Big Bear, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068067" start="12089" end="12113" title="Las Campanas Observatory" label="Las Campanas Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056113" start="12139" end="12180" title="Cerro Tololo telescope" label="Cerro Tololo optical reflecting telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056113" start="12210" end="12222" title="Cerro Tololo" label="Cerro Tololo"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="12224" end="12229" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q592248" start="12239" end="12269" title="Kitt Peak National Observatory" label="Kitt Peak National Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="12330" end="12345" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q580043" start="12355" end="12360" title="Uhuru (satellite)" label="Uhuru"/>
<link wikidata="Q358800" start="12396" end="12412" title="Antoine Émile Henry Labeyrie" label="Antoine Labeyrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504755" start="12456" end="12478" title="Speckle imaging" label="speckle interferometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556501" start="12501" end="12537" title="Westerbork Synthesis Radio Telescope" label="Westerbork Synthesis Radio Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143944" start="12554" end="12564" title="Westerbork (village)" label="Westerbork"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="12566" end="12577" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q705139" start="12593" end="12603" title="Effelsberg" label="Effelsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="12633" end="12640" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547219" start="12651" end="12671" title="UK Schmidt Telescope" label="UK Schmidt Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608932" start="12740" end="12768" title="Anglo-Australian Observatory" label="Anglo-Australian Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000123" start="12774" end="12787" title="Coonabarabran" label="Coonabarabran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632045" start="12808" end="12834" title="Anglo-Australian Telescope" label="Anglo-Australian Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608932" start="12893" end="12921" title="Anglo-Australian Observatory" label="Anglo-Australian Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000123" start="12927" end="12940" title="Coonabarabran" label="Coonabarabran"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="13020" end="13023" title="Charge-coupled device" label="CCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q324" start="13035" end="13041" title="Uranus" label="Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q358800" start="13091" end="13107" title="Antoine Émile Henry Labeyrie" label="Antoine Labeyrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q850283" start="13147" end="13161" title="interferometer" label="interferometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q787671" start="13179" end="13184" title="BTA-6" label="BTA-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q452092" start="13413" end="13427" title="Amado, Arizona" label="Amado, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q51509" start="13437" end="13471" title="International Ultraviolet Explorer" label="International Ultraviolet Explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426842" start="13507" end="13549" title="Einstein Observatory" label="Einstein High Energy Astronomy Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q848021" start="13585" end="13590" title="UKIRT" label="UKIRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q831790" start="13650" end="13671" title="Mauna Kea Observatory" label="Mauna Kea Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031946" start="13689" end="13709" title="Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope" label="Canada-France-Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q831790" start="13768" end="13789" title="Mauna Kea Observatory" label="Mauna Kea Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662664" start="13807" end="13839" title="NASA Infrared Telescope Facility" label="NASA Infrared Telescope Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q461382" start="13976" end="13979" title="Very Large Array" label="VLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q503818" start="13992" end="14011" title="Socorro, New Mexico" label="Socorro, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q724913" start="14021" end="14052" title="Infrared Astronomical Satellite" label="Infrared Astronomical Satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q139994" start="14079" end="14088" title="IRAM 30-m" label="IRAM 30-m"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420262" start="14102" end="14113" title="Veleta (Sierra Nevada)" label="Pico Veleta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8810" start="14119" end="14126" title="Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="14128" end="14133" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q155466" start="14158" end="14187" title="James Clerk Maxwell Telescope" label="James Clerk Maxwell Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q831790" start="14228" end="14249" title="Mauna Kea Observatory" label="Mauna Kea Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q459352" start="14327" end="14347" title="La Silla Observatory" label="La Silla Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q781318" start="14357" end="14390" title="Australia Telescope Compact Array" label="Australia Telescope Compact Array"/>
<link wikidata="Q181766" start="14457" end="14465" title="Narrabri" label="Narrabri"/>
<link wikidata="Q49445" start="14486" end="14512" title="Cosmic Background Explorer" label="Cosmic Background Explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513" start="14554" end="14560" title="Hubble Space Telescope" label="Hubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q41519" start="14627" end="14656" title="Compton Gamma Ray Observatory" label="Compton Gamma Ray Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q210997" start="14676" end="14727" title="Keck telescope" label="Keck 10-meter optical/infrared reflecting telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147559" start="14784" end="14808" title="Very Long Baseline Array" label="Very Long Baseline Array"/>
<link wikidata="Q912398" start="14831" end="14885" title="Cambridge Optical Aperture Synthesis Telescope (COAST)" label="Cambridge Optical Aperture Synthesis Telescope (COAST)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961815" start="14951" end="14969" title="aperture synthesis" label="aperture synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522736" start="14993" end="15024" title="Giant Metrewave Radio Telescope" label="Giant Metrewave Radio Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q210997" start="15064" end="15070" title="Keck 2" label="Keck 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617995" start="15187" end="15192" title="HALCA" label="HALCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148351" start="15238" end="15242" title="VLBI" label="VLBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q265628" start="15319" end="15322" title="Very Large Telescope" label="VLT"/>
<link wikidata="Q151991" start="15335" end="15338" title="European Southern Observatory" label="ESO"/>
<link wikidata="Q210997" start="15391" end="15410" title="Keck Interferometer" label="Keck Interferometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q265628" start="15491" end="15495" title="VLTI" label="VLTI"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004698" start="15620" end="15628" title="Astronomical interferometer" label="baseline"/>
<link wikidata="Q265628" start="15662" end="15666" title="VLTI" label="VLTI"/>
<link wikidata="Q265628" start="15731" end="15734" title="Very Large Telescope" label="VLT"/>
<link wikidata="Q833639" start="15771" end="15775" title="Southern African Large Telescope" label="SALT"/>
<link wikidata="Q59973" start="15914" end="15947" title="Gran Telescopio Canarias" label="Gran Telescopio de Canarias (GTC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q186447" start="16054" end="16087" title="James Webb Space Telescope" label="James Webb Space Telescope (JWST)"/>
<link wikidata="Q578497" start="16274" end="16280" title="Euclid (spacecraft)" label="Euclid"/>
<link wikidata="Q28450215" start="16315" end="16331" title="Falcon 9 Block 5" label="Falcon 9 Block 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q39053896" start="16411" end="16416" title="X-Ray Imaging and Spectroscopy Mission" label="XRISM"/>
<link wikidata="Q60599" start="16455" end="16460" title="H-IIA" label="H-IIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5931793" start="16554" end="16582" title="Iranian National Observatory" label="Iranian National Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q635105" start="16621" end="16646" title="Extremely Large Telescope" label="Extremely Large Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16692" end="16714" title="Public Telescope" label="Public Telescope (PST)"/>
<link wikidata="Q672021" start="16928" end="16953" title="Vera C. Rubin Observatory" label="Vera C. Rubin Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998593" start="17031" end="17064" title="Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope" label="Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420639" start="17086" end="17115" title="Exoplanet Exploration Program" label="Exoplanet Exploration Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806207" start="17175" end="17207" title="Timeline of telescope technology" label="Timeline of telescope technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625020" start="17210" end="17257" title="List of largest optical telescopes historically" label="List of largest optical telescopes historically"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665569" start="17260" end="17285" title="Extremely large telescope" label="Extremely large telescope"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58955" wikidata="Q604626" url="?curid=58955" title="Timeline of artificial satellites and space probes">
<text>This timeline of artificial satellites and space probes includes uncrewed spacecraft including technology demonstrators, observatories, lunar probes, and interplanetary probes. First satellites from each country are included. Not included are most Earth science satellites, commercial satellites or crewed missions.

==Timeline==
=== 1950s ===
===1960s===
===1970s===
===1980s===
===1990s===
===2000s===
===2010s===
===2020s===
==References==
==External links==

*Current and Upcoming Launches
*Missions-NASA
*Unmanned spaceflight discussion forum
*Chronology of Lunar and Planetary Exploration (homepage)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q604626" start="5" end="55" title="Timeline of artificial satellites and space probes" label="timeline of artificial satellites and space probes"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840748" start="248" end="272" title="Timeline of Earth science satellites" label="Earth science satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612102" start="274" end="295" title="List of communications satellite firsts" label="commercial satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129350" start="299" end="314" title="List of human spaceflights" label="crewed missions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58956" wikidata="Q2090337" url="?curid=58956" title="Timeline of biology and organic chemistry">
<text>This timeline of [[biology]] and [[organic chemistry]] captures significant events from before 1600 to the present.
==Before 1600==
* c. 520 BC – Alcmaeon of Croton distinguished veins from arteries and discovered the optic nerve.
* c. 450 BC – Sushruta wrote the &quot;Sushruta Samhita&quot;, redacted versions of which, by the third century AD, describe over 120 surgical instruments and 300 surgical procedures, classify human surgery into eight categories, and introduce cosmetic surgery.
* c. 450 BC – Xenophanes examined fossils and speculated on the evolution of life.
* c. 380 BC – Diocles wrote the oldest known anatomy book and was the first to use the term &quot;anatomy&quot;.
* c. 350 BC – Aristotle attempted a comprehensive classification of animals. His written works include &quot;Historion Animalium&quot;, a general biology of animals, &quot;De Partibus Animalium&quot;, a comparative anatomy and physiology of animals, and &quot;De Generatione Animalium&quot;, on developmental biology.
* c. 300 BC – Theophrastos (or Theophrastus) began the systematic study of botany.
* c. 300 BC – Herophilos dissected the human body.
* c. 50–70 AD – &quot;Historia Naturalis&quot; by Pliny the Elder (Gaius Plinius Secundus) was published in 37 volumes.
* 130–200 – Claudius Galen wrote numerous treatises on human anatomy.
* c. 1010 – Avicenna (Abu Ali al Hussein ibn Abdallah ibn Sina) published &quot;The Canon of Medicine&quot;.
* 1543 – Andreas Vesalius publishes the anatomy treatise &quot;De humani corporis fabrica&quot;.

==1600–1699==
* ?? – Jan Baptist van Helmont performed his famous tree plant experiment in which he shows that the substance of a plant derives from water, a forerunner of the discovery of photosynthesis.
* 1628 – William Harvey published &quot;An Anatomical Exercise on the Motion of the Heart and Blood in Animals&quot;
* 1651 – William Harvey concluded that all animals, including mammals, develop from eggs, and spontaneous generation of any animal from mud or excrement was an impossibility.
* 1665 – Robert Hooke saw cells in cork using a microscope.
* In 1661, 1664 and 1665, the blood cells were discerned by Marcello Malpighi. In 1678, the red blood corpuscles was described by Jan Swammerdam of Amsterdam, a Dutch naturalist and physician. The first complete account of the red cells was made by Anthony van Leeuwenhoek of Delft in the last quarter of the 17th century.
* 1668 – Francesco Redi disproved spontaneous generation by showing that fly maggots only appear on pieces of meat in jars if the jars are open to the air. Jars covered with cheesecloth contained no flies.
* 1672 – Marcello Malpighi published the first description of chick development, including the formation of muscle somites, circulation, and nervous system.
* 1676 – Anton van Leeuwenhoek observed protozoa and calls them &quot;animalcules&quot;.
* 1677 – Anton van Leeuwenhoek observed spermatozoa.
* 1683 – Anton van Leeuwenhoek observed bacteria. Leeuwenhoek&#x27;s discoveries renew the question of spontaneous generation in microorganisms.

==1700–1799==
* 1767 – Kaspar Friedrich Wolff argued that the tissues of a developing chick form from nothing and are not simply elaborations of already-present structures in the egg.
* 1768 – Lazzaro Spallanzani again disproved spontaneous generation by showing that no organisms grow in a rich broth if it is first heated (to kill any organisms) and allowed to cool in a stoppered flask. He also showed that fertilization in mammals requires an egg and semen.
* 1771 – Joseph Priestley demonstrated that plants produce a gas that animals and flames consume. This gas was oxygen.
* 1798 – Thomas Malthus discussed human population growth and food production in &quot;An Essay on the Principle of Population&quot;.

==1800–1899==
* 1801 – Jean-Baptiste Lamarck began the detailed study of invertebrate taxonomy.
* 1802 – The term &quot;biology&quot; in its modern sense was propounded independently by Gottfried Reinhold Treviranus (&quot;Biologie oder Philosophie der lebenden Natur&quot;) and Lamarck (&quot;Hydrogéologie&quot;). The word was coined in 1800 by Karl Friedrich Burdach.
* 1809 – Lamarck proposed a modern theory of evolution based on the inheritance of acquired characteristics.
* 1817 – Pierre-Joseph Pelletier and Joseph Bienaimé Caventou isolated chlorophyll.
* 1820 – Christian Friedrich Nasse formulated Nasse&#x27;s law: hemophilia occurs only in males and is passed on by unaffected females.
* 1824 – J. L. Prevost and J. B. Dumas showed that the sperm in semen were not parasites, as previously thought, but, instead, the agents of fertilization.
* 1826 – Karl von Baer showed that the eggs of mammals are in the ovaries, ending a 200-year search for the mammalian egg.
* 1828 – Friedrich Woehler synthesized urea; first synthesis of an organic compound from inorganic starting materials.
* 1836 – Theodor Schwann discovered pepsin in extracts from the stomach lining; first isolation of an animal enzyme.
* 1837 – Theodor Schwann showed that heating air will prevent it from causing putrefaction.
* 1838 – Matthias Schleiden proposed that all plants are composed of cells.
* 1839 – Theodor Schwann proposed that all animal tissues are composed of cells. Schwann and Schleinden argued that cells are the elementary particles of life.
* 1843 – Martin Barry reported the fusion of a sperm and an egg for rabbits in a 1-page paper in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London.
* 1856 – Louis Pasteur stated that microorganisms produce fermentation.
* 1858 – Charles R. Darwin and Alfred Wallace independently proposed a theory of biological evolution (&quot;descent through modification&quot;) by means of natural selection. Only in later editions of his works did Darwin used the term &quot;evolution.&quot;
* 1858 – Rudolf Virchow proposed that cells can only arise from pre-existing cells; &quot;Omnis cellula e celulla,&quot; all cell from cells. The Cell Theory states that all organisms are composed of cells (Schleiden and Schwann), and cells can only come from other cells (Virchow).
* 1864 – Louis Pasteur disproved the spontaneous generation of cellular life.
* 1865 – Gregor Mendel demonstrated in pea plants that inheritance follows definite rules. The Principle of Segregation states that each organism has two genes per trait, which segregate when the organism makes eggs or sperm. The Principle of Independent Assortment states that each gene in a pair is distributed independently during the formation of eggs or sperm. Mendel&#x27;s trailblazing foundation for the science of genetics went unnoticed, to his lasting disappointment.
* 1865 – Friedrich August Kekulé von Stradonitz realized that benzene is composed of carbon and hydrogen atoms in a hexagonal ring.
* 1869 – Friedrich Miescher discovered nucleic acids in the nuclei of cells.
* 1874 – Jacobus van &#x27;t Hoff and Joseph-Achille Le Bel advanced a three-dimensional stereochemical representation of organic molecules and propose a tetrahedral carbon atom.
* 1876 – Oskar Hertwig and Hermann Fol independently described (in sea urchin eggs) the entry of sperm into the egg and the subsequent fusion of the egg and sperm nuclei to form a single new nucleus.
* 1884 – Emil Fischer began his detailed analysis of the compositions and structures of sugars.
* 1892 – Hans Driesch separated the individual cells of a 2-cell sea urchin embryo and shows that each cell develops into a complete individual, thus disproving the theory of preformation and showing that each cell is &quot;totipotent,&quot; containing all the hereditary information necessary to form an individual.
* 1898 – Martinus Beijerinck used filtering experiments to show that tobacco mosaic disease is caused by something smaller than a bacterium, which he names a virus.

==1900–1949==
* 1900 – Hugo de Vries, Carl Correns and Erich von Tschermak independently rediscovered Mendel&#x27;s paper on heredity.
* 1902 – Walter Sutton and Theodor Boveri, independently proposed that the chromosomes carry the hereditary information.
* 1905 – William Bateson coined the term &quot;genetics&quot; to describe the study of biological inheritance.
* 1906 – Mikhail Tsvet discovered the chromatography technique for organic compound separation.
* 1907 – Ivan Pavlov demonstrated conditioned responses with salivating dogs.
* 1907 – Hermann Emil Fischer artificially synthesized peptide amino acid chains and thereby shows that amino acids in proteins are connected by amino group-acid group bonds.
* 1909 – Wilhelm Johannsen coined the word &quot;gene.&quot;
* 1911 – Thomas Hunt Morgan proposed that genes are arranged in a line on the chromosomes.
* 1922 – Aleksandr Oparin proposed that the Earth&#x27;s early atmosphere contained methane, ammonia, hydrogen, and water vapor, and that these were the raw materials for the origin of life.
* 1926 – James B. Sumner showed that the urease enzyme is a protein.
* 1928 – Otto Diels and Kurt Alder discovered the Diels-Alder cycloaddition reaction for forming ring molecules.
* 1928 – Alexander Fleming discovered the first antibiotic, penicillin
* 1929 – Phoebus Levene discovered the sugar deoxyribose in nucleic acids.
* 1929 – Edward Doisy and Adolf Butenandt independently discovered estrone.
* 1930 – John Howard Northrop showed that the pepsin enzyme is a protein.
* 1931 – Adolf Butenandt discovered androsterone.
* 1932 – Hans Adolf Krebs and Kurt Henseleit discovered the urea cycle.
* 1933 – Tadeus Reichstein artificially synthesized vitamin C; first vitamin synthesis.
* 1935 – Rudolf Schoenheimer used deuterium as a tracer to examine the fat storage system of rats.
* 1935 – Wendell Stanley crystallized the tobacco mosaic virus.
* 1935 – Konrad Lorenz described the imprinting behavior of young birds.
* 1937 – Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin discovered the three-dimensional structure of cholesterol.
* 1937 – Hans Adolf Krebs and William Arthur Johnson discovered the tricarboxylic acid cycle.
* 1937 – In Genetics and the Origin of Species, Theodosius Dobzhansky applies the chromosome theory and population genetics to natural populations in the first mature work of neo-Darwinism, also called the modern synthesis, a term coined by Julian Huxley.
* 1938 – Marjorie Courtenay-Latimer discovered a living coelacanth off the coast of southern Africa.
* 1940 – Donald Griffin and Robert Galambos announced their discovery of echolocation by bats.
* 1942 – Max Delbrück and Salvador Luria demonstrated that bacterial resistance to virus infection is caused by random mutation and not adaptive change.
* 1944 – Oswald Avery shows that DNA carried the hereditary information in pneumococcus bacteria.
* 1944 – Robert Burns Woodward and William von Eggers Doering synthesized quinine.
* 1945 – Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin discovered the three-dimensional structure of penicillin.
* 1948 – Erwin Chargaff showed that in DNA the number of guanine units equals the number of cytosine units and the number of adenine units equals the number of thymine units.

==1950–1989==
* 1951 – The research group of Robert Robinson with John Cornforth (Oxford University) publishes their synthesis of cholesterol, while Robert Woodward (Harvard University) publishes his synthesis of cortisone.
* 1951 – Fred Sanger, Hans Tuppy completed their chromatographic analysis of the insulin amino acid sequence.
* 1952 – American developmental biologists Robert Briggs and Thomas King cloned the first vertebrate by transplanting nuclei from leopard frogs embryos into enucleated eggs. More differentiated cells were the less able they are to direct development in the enucleated egg.
* 1952 – Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase showed that DNA is the genetic material in bacteriophage viruses.
* 1952 – Rosalind Franklin concluded that DNA is a double helix with a diameter of 2 nm and the sugar-phosphate backbones on the outside of the helix, based on x ray diffraction studies. She suspected the two sugar-phosphate backbones have a peculiar relationship to each other.
* 1953 – After examining Franklin&#x27;s unpublished data, James D. Watson and Francis Crick published a double-helix structure for DNA, with one sugar-phosphate backbone running in the opposite direction to the other. They further suggested a mechanism by which the molecule can replicate itself and serve to transmit genetic information. Their paper, combined with the Hershey-Chase experiment and Chargaff&#x27;s data on nucleotides, finally persuaded biologists that DNA is the genetic material, not protein.
* 1953 – Stanley Miller showed that amino acids can be formed when simulated lightning is passed through vessels containing water, methane, ammonia, and hydrogen
* 1954 – Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin discovered the three-dimensional structure of vitamin B12.
* 1955 – Marianne Grunberg-Manago and Severo Ochoa discovered the first nucleic-acid-synthesizing enzyme (polynucleotide phosphorylase), which links nucleotides together into polynucleotides.
* 1955 – Arthur Kornberg discovered DNA polymerase enzymes.
* 1958 – John Gurdon used nuclear transplantation to clone an African Clawed Frog; first cloning of a vertebrate using a nucleus from a fully differentiated adult cell.
* 1958 – Matthew Stanley Meselson and Franklin W. Stahl proved that DNA replication is semiconservative in the Meselson-Stahl experiment
* 1959 – Max Perutz comes up with a model for the structure of oxygenated hemoglobin.
* 1959 – Severo Ochoa and Arthur Kornberg received the Nobel Prize for their work.
* 1960 – John Kendrew described the structure of myoglobin, the oxygen-carrying protein in muscle.
* 1960 – Four separate researchers (S. Weiss, J. Hurwitz, Audrey Stevens Niyogi and J. Bonner) discovered bacterial RNA polymerase, which polymerizes nucleotides under the direction of DNA.
* 1960 – Robert Woodward synthesized chlorophyll.
* 1961 – J. Heinrich Matthaei cracked the first codon of the genetic code (the codon for the amino acid phenylalanine) using Grunberg-Manago&#x27;s 1955 enzyme system for making polynucleotides.
* 1961 – Joan Oró found that concentrated solutions of ammonium cyanide in water can produce the nucleotide adenine, a discovery that opened the way for theories on the origin of life.
* 1962 – Max Perutz and John Kendrew shared the Nobel prize for their work on the structure of hemoglobin and myoglobin.
* 1966 – Genetic code fully cracked through trial-and-error experimental work.
* 1966 – Kimishige Ishizaka discovered a new type of immunoglobulin, IgE, that develops allergy and explains the mechanisms of allergy at molecular and cellular levels.
* 1966 – Lynn Margulis proposed the endosymbiotic theory, that the eukaryotic cell is a symbiotic union of primitive prokaryotic cells. Richard Dawkins called the theory &quot;one of the great achievements of twentieth-century evolutionary biology.&quot;
* 1968 – Fred Sanger used radioactive phosphorus as a tracer to chromatographically decipher a 120 base long RNA sequence.
* 1969 – Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin deciphered the three-dimensional structure of insulin.
* 1970 – Hamilton Smith and Daniel Nathans discovered DNA restriction enzymes.
* 1970 – Howard Temin and David Baltimore independently discovered reverse transcriptase enzymes.
* 1972 – Albert Eschenmoser and Robert Woodward synthesized vitamin B12.
* 1972 – Stephen Jay Gould and Niles Eldredge proposed an idea they call &quot;punctuated equilibrium&quot;, which states that the fossil record is an accurate depiction of the pace of evolution, with long periods of &quot;stasis&quot; (little change) punctuated by brief periods of rapid change and species formation (within a lineage).
* 1972 – Seymour Jonathan Singer and Garth L. Nicholson developed the fluid mosaic model, which deals with the make-up of the membrane of all cells.
* 1974 – Manfred Eigen and Manfred Sumper showed that mixtures of nucleotide monomers and RNA replicase will give rise to RNA molecules which replicate, mutate, and evolve.
* 1974 – Leslie Orgel showed that RNA can replicate without RNA-replicase and that zinc aids this replication.
* 1977 – John Corliss and ten coauthors discovered chemosynthetically based animal communities located around submarine hydrothermal vents on the Galapagos Rift.
* 1977 – Walter Gilbert and Allan Maxam present a rapid DNA sequencing technique which uses cloning, base destroying chemicals, and gel electrophoresis.
* 1977 – Carl Woese and George E. Fox discover archaebacteria, a third domain of life distinct from prokaryotes and eukaryotes, by analyzing 16S ribosomal RNA.
* 1977 – Frederick Sanger and Alan Coulson presented a rapid gene sequencing technique which uses dideoxynucleotides and gel electrophoresis.
* 1978 – Frederick Sanger presented the 5,386 base sequence for the virus PhiX174; first sequencing of an entire genome.
* 1981 - The first extant species of remipedes, a new class of crustaceans, is described.
* 1982 – Stanley B. Prusiner proposed the existence of infectious proteins, or prions. His idea is widely derided in the scientific community, but he wins a Nobel Prize in 1997.
* 1983 – Kary Mullis invented &quot;PCR&quot; ( polymerase chain reaction), an automated method for rapidly copying sequences of DNA.
* 1984 – Alec Jeffreys devised a genetic fingerprinting method.
* 1985 – Harry Kroto, J.R. Heath, S.C. O&#x27;Brien, R.F. Curl, and Richard Smalley discovered the unusual stability of the buckminsterfullerene molecule and deduce its structure.
* 1986 – Alexander Klibanov demonstrated that enzymes can function in non-aqueous environments.
* 1986 – Rita Levi-Montalcini and Stanley Cohen received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for their discovery of Nerve growth factor (NGF).

==1990–present==
* 1990 – French Anderson et al. performed the first approved gene therapy on a human patient
* 1990 – Napoli, Lemieux and Jorgensen discovered RNA interference (1990) during experiments aimed at the color of petunias.
* 1990 – Wolfgang Krätschmer, Lowell Lamb, Konstantinos Fostiropoulos, and Donald Huffman discovered that Buckminsterfullerene can be separated from soot because it is soluble in benzene.
* 1995 – Publication of the first complete genome of a free-living organism.
* 1995 - Symbion pandora, the first known species from the phylum Cycliophora is described by Reinhardt Kristensen and Peter Funch.
* 1996 – Dolly the sheep was first clone of an adult mammal.
* 1998 – Mello and Fire publish their work on RNAi in c.elegans, for which they shared the 2006 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.
* 1999 – Researchers at the Institute for Human Gene Therapy at the University of Pennsylvania accidentally kill Jesse Gelsinger during a clinical trial of a gene therapy technique, leading the FDA to halt further gene therapy trials at the institute.
* 2000 - Reinhardt Kristensen and Peter Funch describe Limnognathia maerski, the first known species from the phylum Micrognathozoa.
* 2001 - First insects from the suborder Mantophasmatodea are discovered.
* 2001 – Publication of the first drafts of the complete human genome (see Craig Venter).
* 2002 – First virus produced &#x27;from scratch&#x27;, an artificial polio virus that paralyzes and kills mice.
* 2007 – Commercialization of Illumina Next generation Sequencing tools. This has become the most popular high-throughput sequencing system.
* 2012 – Use of CRISPR-Cas9 as a DNA-editing biotechnology tool.

==See also==
* Timeline of medicine and medical technology
* History of biology
* History of chemistry
* Timeline of zoology
* Timeline of paleontology
* International Institute for Species Exploration

== Footnotes ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2090337" start="5" end="54" title="Timeline of biology and organic chemistry" label="timeline of [[biology]] and [[organic chemistry]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q188332" start="146" end="164" title="Alcmaeon of Croton" label="Alcmaeon of Croton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9609" start="179" end="183" title="vein" label="vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q9655" start="190" end="198" title="artery" label="arteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q186029" start="218" end="229" title="optic nerve" label="optic nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q383027" start="245" end="253" title="Sushruta" label="Sushruta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995239" start="270" end="286" title="Sushruta Samhita" label="Sushruta Samhita"/>
<link wikidata="Q131671" start="507" end="517" title="Xenophanes" label="Xenophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="527" end="533" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="557" end="566" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226889" start="590" end="597" title="Diocles of Carystus" label="Diocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="703" end="712" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582682" start="739" end="753" title="Categorization" label="classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="904" end="911" title="anatomy" label="anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="916" end="926" title="physiology" label="physiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q160362" start="1021" end="1051" title="Theophrastus" label="Theophrastos (or Theophrastus)"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="1082" end="1088" title="botany" label="botany"/>
<link wikidata="Q312500" start="1104" end="1114" title="Herophilos" label="Herophilos"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="1191" end="1206" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="1282" end="1287" title="Galen" label="Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011" start="1343" end="1351" title="Avicenna" label="Avicenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q466060" start="1411" end="1432" title="The Canon of Medicine" label="The Canon of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q170267" start="1449" end="1465" title="Andreas Vesalius" label="Andreas Vesalius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233009" start="1503" end="1529" title="De humani corporis fabrica" label="De humani corporis fabrica"/>
<link wikidata="Q294169" start="1559" end="1582" title="Jan Baptist van Helmont" label="Jan Baptist van Helmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q93128" start="1752" end="1766" title="William Harvey" label="William Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q46830" start="2044" end="2056" title="Robert Hooke" label="Robert Hooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q49444" start="2070" end="2074" title="cork (material)" label="cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q311187" start="2427" end="2441" title="Francesco Redi" label="Francesco Redi"/>
<link wikidata="Q232583" start="2633" end="2650" title="Marcello Malpighi" label="Marcello Malpighi"/>
<link wikidata="Q43522" start="2790" end="2811" title="Anton van Leeuwenhoek" label="Anton van Leeuwenhoek"/>
<link wikidata="Q101274" start="2821" end="2829" title="protozoa" label="protozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q737248" start="2851" end="2862" title="animalcules" label="animalcules"/>
<link wikidata="Q74560" start="2910" end="2921" title="spermatozoa" label="spermatozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q62837" start="3092" end="3114" title="Kaspar Friedrich Wolff" label="Kaspar Friedrich Wolff"/>
<link wikidata="Q213351" start="3262" end="3281" title="Lazzaro Spallanzani" label="Lazzaro Spallanzani"/>
<link wikidata="Q159636" start="3540" end="3556" title="Joseph Priestley" label="Joseph Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="3642" end="3648" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13526" start="3659" end="3673" title="Thomas Malthus" label="Thomas Malthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q82122" start="3808" end="3829" title="Jean-Baptiste Lamarck" label="Jean-Baptiste Lamarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="3858" end="3870" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="3871" end="3879" title="Taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="4191" end="4210" title="theory of evolution" label="theory of evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q715164" start="4274" end="4297" title="Pierre-Joseph Pelletier" label="Pierre-Joseph Pelletier"/>
<link wikidata="Q901897" start="4302" end="4326" title="Joseph Bienaimé Caventou" label="Joseph Bienaimé Caventou"/>
<link wikidata="Q43177" start="4336" end="4347" title="chlorophyll" label="chlorophyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q97088" start="4358" end="4383" title="Christian Friedrich Nasse" label="Christian Friedrich Nasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q134003" start="4413" end="4423" title="hemophilia" label="hemophilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q57190" start="4650" end="4663" title="Karl von Baer" label="Karl von Baer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147" start="4680" end="4683" title="Egg (biology)" label="egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="4688" end="4694" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q58575" start="4773" end="4790" title="Friedrich Woehler" label="Friedrich Woehler"/>
<link wikidata="Q48318" start="4803" end="4807" title="urea" label="urea"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="4831" end="4847" title="organic compound" label="organic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q76745" start="4892" end="4907" title="Theodor Schwann" label="Theodor Schwann"/>
<link wikidata="Q190265" start="4919" end="4925" title="pepsin" label="pepsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029907" start="4947" end="4954" title="stomach" label="stomach"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="4992" end="4998" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q76747" start="5101" end="5119" title="Matthias Schleiden" label="Matthias Schleiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q76745" start="5177" end="5192" title="Theodor Schwann" label="Theodor Schwann"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774947" start="5337" end="5349" title="Martin Barry" label="Martin Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q529" start="5497" end="5510" title="Louis Pasteur" label="Louis Pasteur"/>
<link wikidata="Q41760" start="5546" end="5558" title="fermentation (biochemistry)" label="fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="5569" end="5586" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles R. Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q160627" start="5591" end="5605" title="Alfred Russel Wallace" label="Alfred Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="5717" end="5734" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q76432" start="5829" end="5843" title="Rudolf Virchow" label="Rudolf Virchow"/>
<link wikidata="Q177935" start="5966" end="5977" title="Cell Theory" label="Cell Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q529" start="6112" end="6125" title="Louis Pasteur" label="Louis Pasteur"/>
<link wikidata="Q37970" start="6190" end="6203" title="Gregor Mendel" label="Gregor Mendel"/>
<link wikidata="Q185055" start="6256" end="6270" title="Mendelian Inheritance" label="definite rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q76784" start="6669" end="6707" title="Friedrich August Kekulé von Stradonitz" label="Friedrich August Kekulé von Stradonitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270" start="6722" end="6729" title="benzene" label="benzene"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="6745" end="6751" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="6756" end="6764" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q116072" start="6801" end="6819" title="Friedrich Miescher" label="Friedrich Miescher"/>
<link wikidata="Q123619" start="6831" end="6843" title="nucleic acid" label="nucleic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q40260" start="6852" end="6858" title="cell nucleus" label="nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q102822" start="6878" end="6902" title="Jacobus van &amp;#x27;t Hoff" label="Jacobus van &amp;#x27;t Hoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q519172" start="6907" end="6928" title="Joseph-Achille Le Bel" label="Joseph-Achille Le Bel"/>
<link wikidata="Q68753" start="7057" end="7070" title="Oskar Hertwig" label="Oskar Hertwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q115929" start="7075" end="7086" title="Hermann Fol" label="Hermann Fol"/>
<link wikidata="Q83483" start="7115" end="7125" title="sea urchin" label="sea urchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q70554" start="7257" end="7269" title="Hermann Emil Fischer" label="Emil Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41476" start="7353" end="7365" title="Hans Driesch" label="Hans Driesch"/>
<link wikidata="Q25539274" start="7670" end="7689" title="Martinus Beijerinck" label="Martinus Beijerinck"/>
<link wikidata="Q332874" start="7730" end="7752" title="tobacco mosaic disease" label="tobacco mosaic disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="7819" end="7824" title="virus (biology)" label="virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q160192" start="7850" end="7863" title="Hugo de Vries" label="Hugo de Vries"/>
<link wikidata="Q62096" start="7865" end="7877" title="Carl Correns" label="Carl Correns"/>
<link wikidata="Q93385" start="7882" end="7901" title="Erich von Tschermak" label="Erich von Tschermak"/>
<link wikidata="Q964571" start="7971" end="7984" title="Walter Sutton" label="Walter Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q62092" start="7989" end="8003" title="Theodor Boveri" label="Theodor Boveri"/>
<link wikidata="Q297302" start="8092" end="8107" title="William Bateson" label="William Bateson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="8130" end="8138" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q241118" start="8203" end="8216" title="Mikhail Tsvet" label="Mikhail Tsvet"/>
<link wikidata="Q170050" start="8232" end="8246" title="chromatography" label="chromatography"/>
<link wikidata="Q42985" start="8299" end="8310" title="Ivan Pavlov" label="Ivan Pavlov"/>
<link wikidata="Q70554" start="8377" end="8397" title="Hermann Emil Fischer" label="Hermann Emil Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q172847" start="8423" end="8430" title="peptide" label="peptide"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="8431" end="8441" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="8487" end="8494" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q347272" start="8552" end="8569" title="Wilhelm Johannsen" label="Wilhelm Johannsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q177681" start="8613" end="8631" title="Thomas Hunt Morgan" label="Thomas Hunt Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="8682" end="8692" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q44483" start="8704" end="8720" title="Aleksandr Oparin" label="Aleksandr Oparin"/>
<link wikidata="Q231218" start="8870" end="8884" title="origin of life" label="origin of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q106756" start="8895" end="8910" title="James B. Sumner" label="James B. Sumner"/>
<link wikidata="Q22327086" start="8927" end="8933" title="urease" label="urease"/>
<link wikidata="Q76616" start="8964" end="8974" title="Otto Diels" label="Otto Diels"/>
<link wikidata="Q76595" start="8979" end="8989" title="Kurt Alder" label="Kurt Alder"/>
<link wikidata="Q375669" start="9005" end="9039" title="Diels-Alder cycloaddition reaction" label="Diels-Alder cycloaddition reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q37064" start="9077" end="9094" title="Alexander Fleming" label="Alexander Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q12190" start="9128" end="9138" title="penicillin" label="penicillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q902182" start="9148" end="9162" title="Phoebus Levene" label="Phoebus Levene"/>
<link wikidata="Q192454" start="9184" end="9195" title="deoxyribose" label="deoxyribose"/>
<link wikidata="Q230612" start="9223" end="9235" title="Edward Doisy" label="Edward Doisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327" start="9240" end="9255" title="Adolf Butenandt" label="Adolf Butenandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q414986" start="9281" end="9288" title="estrone" label="estrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q106399" start="9299" end="9319" title="John Howard Northrop" label="John Howard Northrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q190265" start="9336" end="9342" title="pepsin" label="pepsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327" start="9373" end="9388" title="Adolf Butenandt" label="Adolf Butenandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q422469" start="9400" end="9412" title="androsterone" label="androsterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q57191" start="9423" end="9439" title="Hans Adolf Krebs" label="Hans Adolf Krebs"/>
<link wikidata="Q595994" start="9474" end="9484" title="urea cycle" label="urea cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q115490" start="9495" end="9512" title="Tadeus Reichstein" label="Tadeus Reichstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q199678" start="9538" end="9547" title="vitamin C" label="vitamin C"/>
<link wikidata="Q34956" start="9555" end="9562" title="vitamin" label="vitamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q74901" start="9583" end="9602" title="Rudolf Schoenheimer" label="Rudolf Schoenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q102296" start="9608" end="9617" title="deuterium" label="deuterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q26018" start="9667" end="9670" title="rat" label="rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q105937" start="9682" end="9697" title="Wendell Stanley" label="Wendell Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="9698" end="9705" title="crystal" label="crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q332874" start="9715" end="9735" title="tobacco mosaic virus" label="tobacco mosaic virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q78496" start="9746" end="9759" title="Konrad Lorenz" label="Konrad Lorenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q624349" start="9774" end="9784" title="imprinting (psychology)" label="imprinting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487" start="9819" end="9843" title="Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin" label="Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43656" start="9890" end="9901" title="cholesterol" label="cholesterol"/>
<link wikidata="Q57191" start="9912" end="9928" title="Hans Adolf Krebs" label="Hans Adolf Krebs"/>
<link wikidata="Q133895" start="9971" end="9995" title="Citric acid cycle" label="tricarboxylic acid cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q246731" start="10045" end="10066" title="Theodosius Dobzhansky" label="Theodosius Dobzhansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096404" start="10172" end="10185" title="neo-Darwinism" label="neo-Darwinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q337897" start="10203" end="10219" title="Modern synthesis (20th century)" label="modern synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q243419" start="10238" end="10251" title="Julian Huxley" label="Julian Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q371568" start="10262" end="10288" title="Marjorie Courtenay-Latimer" label="Marjorie Courtenay-Latimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q59166" start="10309" end="10319" title="coelacanth" label="coelacanth"/>
<link wikidata="Q327908" start="10363" end="10377" title="Donald Griffin" label="Donald Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344649" start="10382" end="10397" title="Robert Galambos" label="Robert Galambos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6921783" start="10427" end="10439" title="Animal echolocation" label="echolocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28425" start="10443" end="10446" title="bat" label="bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q76807" start="10458" end="10470" title="Max Delbrück" label="Max Delbrück"/>
<link wikidata="Q205667" start="10475" end="10489" title="Salvador Luria" label="Salvador Luria"/>
<link wikidata="Q315129" start="10611" end="10623" title="Oswald Avery" label="Oswald Avery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="10635" end="10638" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q221179" start="10677" end="10689" title="pneumococci" label="pneumococcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q232316" start="10709" end="10730" title="Robert Burns Woodward" label="Robert Burns Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q908247" start="10735" end="10761" title="William von Eggers Doering" label="William von Eggers Doering"/>
<link wikidata="Q189522" start="10774" end="10781" title="quinine" label="quinine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487" start="10792" end="10816" title="Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin" label="Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12190" start="10863" end="10873" title="penicillin" label="penicillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q455944" start="10884" end="10898" title="Erwin Chargaff" label="Erwin Chargaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q169313" start="10932" end="10939" title="guanine" label="guanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q178425" start="10967" end="10975" title="cytosine" label="cytosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15277" start="11000" end="11007" title="adenine" label="adenine"/>
<link wikidata="Q171973" start="11035" end="11042" title="thymine" label="thymine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49351" start="11096" end="11111" title="Robert Robinson (organic chemist)" label="Robert Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q135154" start="11117" end="11131" title="John Cornforth" label="John Cornforth"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="11133" end="11150" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q43656" start="11181" end="11192" title="cholesterol" label="cholesterol"/>
<link wikidata="Q232316" start="11200" end="11215" title="Robert Burns Woodward" label="Robert Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="11217" end="11235" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q423185" start="11264" end="11273" title="cortisone" label="cortisone"/>
<link wikidata="Q151564" start="11284" end="11295" title="Fred Sanger" label="Fred Sanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q94483" start="11297" end="11307" title="Hans Tuppy" label="Hans Tuppy"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="11356" end="11363" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q271703" start="11667" end="11681" title="Alfred Hershey" label="Alfred Hershey"/>
<link wikidata="Q257008" start="11686" end="11698" title="Martha Chase" label="Martha Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q165028" start="11742" end="11755" title="bacteriophage" label="bacteriophage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7474" start="11774" end="11791" title="Rosalind Franklin" label="Rosalind Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="11807" end="11810" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q83333" start="12103" end="12118" title="James D. Watson" label="James D. Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q123280" start="12123" end="12136" title="Francis Crick" label="Francis Crick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="12176" end="12179" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q271703" start="12415" end="12422" title="Alfred Hershey" label="Hershey"/>
<link wikidata="Q257008" start="12423" end="12428" title="Martha Chase" label="Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q455944" start="12444" end="12452" title="Chargaff" label="Chargaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q130347" start="12566" end="12580" title="Stanley Miller" label="Stanley Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q33741" start="12634" end="12643" title="lightning" label="lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="12688" end="12695" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="12697" end="12704" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="12710" end="12718" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487" start="12728" end="12752" title="Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin" label="Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q187706" start="12799" end="12810" title="vitamin B12" label="vitamin B12"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291309" start="12821" end="12845" title="Marianne Grunberg-Manago" label="Marianne Grunberg-Manago"/>
<link wikidata="Q233957" start="12850" end="12862" title="Severo Ochoa" label="Severo Ochoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q295678" start="13013" end="13028" title="Arthur Kornberg" label="Arthur Kornberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q206286" start="13040" end="13054" title="DNA polymerase" label="DNA polymerase"/>
<link wikidata="Q81218" start="13073" end="13084" title="John Gurdon" label="John Gurdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q120877" start="13117" end="13122" title="cloning" label="clone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342298" start="13134" end="13145" title="Clawed Frog" label="Clawed Frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="13166" end="13176" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q261276" start="13242" end="13266" title="Matthew Stanley Meselson" label="Matthew Stanley Meselson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445286" start="13271" end="13288" title="Franklin W. Stahl" label="Franklin W. Stahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208348" start="13320" end="13336" title="semiconservative" label="semiconservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q917550" start="13344" end="13369" title="Meselson-Stahl experiment" label="Meselson-Stahl experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q78480" start="13379" end="13389" title="Max Perutz" label="Max Perutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q43041" start="13444" end="13454" title="hemoglobin" label="hemoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q233957" start="13465" end="13477" title="Severo Ochoa" label="Severo Ochoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q295678" start="13482" end="13497" title="Arthur Kornberg" label="Arthur Kornberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q232295" start="13548" end="13560" title="John Kendrew" label="John Kendrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q192642" start="13588" end="13597" title="myoglobin" label="myoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20248467" start="13696" end="13717" title="Audrey Stevens Niyogi" label="Audrey Stevens Niyogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q232316" start="13837" end="13852" title="Robert Burns Woodward" label="Robert Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q87750" start="13887" end="13907" title="J. Heinrich Matthaei" label="J. Heinrich Matthaei"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291309" start="14003" end="14018" title="Marianne Grunberg-Manago" label="Grunberg-Manago"/>
<link wikidata="Q783922" start="14082" end="14090" title="Joan Oró" label="Joan Oró"/>
<link wikidata="Q231218" start="14242" end="14256" title="origin of life" label="origin of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q78480" start="14267" end="14277" title="Max Perutz" label="Max Perutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q232295" start="14282" end="14294" title="John Kendrew" label="John Kendrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q43041" start="14353" end="14363" title="hemoglobin" label="hemoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192642" start="14368" end="14377" title="myoglobin" label="myoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q544711" start="14467" end="14485" title="Kimishige Ishizaka" label="Kimishige Ishizaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q234583" start="14636" end="14649" title="Lynn Margulis" label="Lynn Margulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030494" start="14663" end="14683" title="endosymbiotic theory" label="endosymbiotic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="14694" end="14709" title="eukaryotic cell" label="eukaryotic cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q121610" start="14715" end="14724" title="symbiosis" label="symbiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q151564" start="14891" end="14902" title="Fred Sanger" label="Fred Sanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="14920" end="14930" title="phosphorus" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345443" start="14966" end="14974" title="decipher" label="decipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487" start="15014" end="15038" title="Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin" label="Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="15085" end="15092" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q108896" start="15103" end="15117" title="Hamilton O. Smith" label="Hamilton Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q295706" start="15122" end="15136" title="Daniel Nathans" label="Daniel Nathans"/>
<link wikidata="Q219715" start="15152" end="15170" title="restriction enzyme" label="restriction enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q243536" start="15182" end="15194" title="Howard Temin" label="Howard Temin"/>
<link wikidata="Q234949" start="15199" end="15214" title="David Baltimore" label="David Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q28774" start="15240" end="15261" title="reverse transcriptase" label="reverse transcriptase"/>
<link wikidata="Q116960" start="15280" end="15298" title="Albert Eschenmoser" label="Albert Eschenmoser"/>
<link wikidata="Q232316" start="15303" end="15318" title="Robert Burns Woodward" label="Robert Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q187706" start="15331" end="15342" title="Vitamin B12" label="vitamin B12"/>
<link wikidata="Q180619" start="15353" end="15370" title="Stephen Jay Gould" label="Stephen Jay Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q451437" start="15375" end="15389" title="Niles Eldredge" label="Niles Eldredge"/>
<link wikidata="Q582558" start="15423" end="15445" title="punctuated equilibrium" label="punctuated equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995468" start="15691" end="15714" title="Seymour Jonathan Singer" label="Seymour Jonathan Singer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15719" end="15737" title="Garth L. Nicholson" label="Garth L. Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q76600" start="15840" end="15853" title="Manfred Eigen" label="Manfred Eigen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15858" end="15872" title="Manfred Sumper" label="Manfred Sumper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919111" start="15921" end="15934" title="RNA replicase" label="RNA replicase"/>
<link wikidata="Q280966" start="16013" end="16025" title="Leslie Orgel" label="Leslie Orgel"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="16087" end="16091" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q6111822" start="16124" end="16136" title="Jack Corliss" label="John Corliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q867648" start="16235" end="16252" title="hydrothermal vent" label="hydrothermal vent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124559" start="16261" end="16275" title="Galapagos Rift" label="Galapagos Rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q217486" start="16286" end="16300" title="Walter Gilbert" label="Walter Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730830" start="16305" end="16316" title="Allan Maxam" label="Allan Maxam"/>
<link wikidata="Q380546" start="16333" end="16347" title="DNA sequencing" label="DNA sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q48255" start="16409" end="16428" title="gel electrophoresis" label="gel electrophoresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q310067" start="16439" end="16449" title="Carl Woese" label="Carl Woese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101545" start="16454" end="16467" title="George E. Fox" label="George E. Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872" start="16477" end="16491" title="archaebacteria" label="archaebacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q19081" start="16530" end="16541" title="prokaryotes" label="prokaryotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="16546" end="16556" title="eukaryotes" label="eukaryotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209205" start="16571" end="16588" title="16S ribosomal RNA" label="16S ribosomal RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q25513789" start="16620" end="16632" title="Alan Coulson" label="Alan Coulson"/>
<link wikidata="Q421201" start="16688" end="16705" title="dideoxynucleotide" label="dideoxynucleotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="16845" end="16851" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q490800" start="16890" end="16899" title="Remipedia" label="remipedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q37517" start="16907" end="16912" title="class (biology)" label="class"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="16916" end="16926" title="crustacean" label="crustacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q155380" start="16952" end="16971" title="Stanley B. Prusiner" label="Stanley B. Prusiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q47051" start="17022" end="17027" title="prion" label="prion"/>
<link wikidata="Q157224" start="17130" end="17141" title="Kary Mullis" label="Kary Mullis"/>
<link wikidata="Q176996" start="17169" end="17194" title="polymerase chain reaction" label="polymerase chain reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q511916" start="17264" end="17277" title="Alec Jeffreys" label="Alec Jeffreys"/>
<link wikidata="Q476697" start="17288" end="17310" title="genetic fingerprinting" label="genetic fingerprinting"/>
<link wikidata="Q157250" start="17328" end="17339" title="Harry Kroto" label="Harry Kroto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17341" end="17351" title="J.R. Heath" label="J.R. Heath"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17353" end="17370" title="S.C. O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="S.C. O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q110930" start="17372" end="17381" title="R.F. Curl" label="R.F. Curl"/>
<link wikidata="Q106746" start="17387" end="17402" title="Richard Smalley" label="Richard Smalley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075376" start="17443" end="17463" title="buckminsterfullerene" label="buckminsterfullerene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719327" start="17508" end="17526" title="Alexander Klibanov (chemist)" label="Alexander Klibanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q185007" start="17604" end="17624" title="Rita Levi-Montalcini" label="Rita Levi-Montalcini"/>
<link wikidata="Q232299" start="17629" end="17642" title="Stanley Cohen (biochemist)" label="Stanley Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="17656" end="17693" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q417782" start="17717" end="17742" title="Nerve growth factor" label="Nerve growth factor (NGF)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300359" start="17771" end="17786" title="French Anderson" label="French Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q213901" start="17823" end="17835" title="gene therapy" label="gene therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q201993" start="17905" end="17921" title="RNA interference" label="RNA interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q161103" start="17970" end="17977" title="petunia" label="petunia"/>
<link wikidata="Q90757" start="17989" end="18008" title="Wolfgang Krätschmer" label="Wolfgang Krätschmer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18010" end="18021" title="Lowell Lamb" label="Lowell Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q23304607" start="18023" end="18049" title="Konstantinos Fostiropoulos" label="Konstantinos Fostiropoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q17279357" start="18055" end="18069" title="Donald Huffman" label="Donald Huffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q13174856" start="18129" end="18133" title="soot" label="soot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270" start="18159" end="18166" title="benzene" label="benzene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714238" start="18254" end="18269" title="Symbion pandora" label="Symbion pandora"/>
<link wikidata="Q502012" start="18311" end="18322" title="Cycliophora" label="Cycliophora"/>
<link wikidata="Q63514" start="18339" end="18359" title="Reinhardt Kristensen" label="Reinhardt Kristensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q21338248" start="18364" end="18375" title="Peter Funch" label="Peter Funch"/>
<link wikidata="Q171433" start="18386" end="18401" title="Dolly the sheep" label="Dolly the sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q201993" start="18484" end="18488" title="RNA interference" label="RNAi"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="18641" end="18667" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825818" start="18686" end="18701" title="Jesse Gelsinger" label="Jesse Gelsinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q213901" start="18731" end="18743" title="gene therapy" label="gene therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q63514" start="18834" end="18854" title="Reinhardt Kristensen" label="Reinhardt Kristensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q21338248" start="18859" end="18870" title="Peter Funch" label="Peter Funch"/>
<link wikidata="Q18636218" start="18880" end="18900" title="Limnognathia maerski" label="Limnognathia maerski"/>
<link wikidata="Q38348" start="18935" end="18941" title="phylum" label="phylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18636218" start="18942" end="18956" title="Micrognathozoa" label="Micrognathozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="18973" end="18979" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="18990" end="18998" title="order (biology)" label="suborder"/>
<link wikidata="Q13560459" start="18999" end="19015" title="Mantophasmatodea" label="Mantophasmatodea"/>
<link wikidata="Q311003" start="19107" end="19119" title="Craig Venter" label="Craig Venter"/>
<link wikidata="Q380546" start="19265" end="19300" title="DNA sequencing" label="Illumina Next generation Sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q412563" start="19392" end="19403" title="CRISPR" label="CRISPR-Cas9"/>
<link wikidata="Q284464" start="19457" end="19500" title="Timeline of medicine and medical technology" label="Timeline of medicine and medical technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q746656" start="19503" end="19521" title="History of biology" label="History of biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q501353" start="19524" end="19544" title="History of chemistry" label="History of chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q116699395" start="19547" end="19566" title="Timeline of zoology" label="Timeline of zoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806139" start="19569" end="19593" title="Timeline of paleontology" label="Timeline of paleontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6051133" start="19596" end="19643" title="International Institute for Species Exploration" label="International Institute for Species Exploration"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58959" wikidata="Q666494" url="?curid=58959" title="Evening Standard">
<text>The London Standard, formerly the Evening Standard (1904–2024) and originally The Standard (1827–1904), is a long-established regional newspaper published weekly and distributed free of charge in London, England. It is printed in tabloid format, and also has an online edition.

In October 2009, after being purchased by Russian businessman Alexander Lebedev, the paper ended a 180-year history of paid circulation and multiple editions every day, and became a free newspaper publishing a single print edition every weekday, doubling its circulation as part of a change in its business plan.

On 29 May 2024, the newspaper announced that it would reduce print publication to once weekly, after nearly 200 years of daily publication, as it had become unprofitable. Daily publication ended on 19 September 2024. The first weekly edition was published on 26 September 2024 under the new name of &quot;The London Standard&quot;.

==History==

===From 1827 to 2009===

The newspaper was founded by barrister Stanley Lees Giffard on 21 May 1827 as &quot;The Standard&quot;. The early owner of the paper was Charles Baldwin. Under the ownership of James Johnstone, &quot;The Standard&quot; became a morning paper from 29 June 1857. &quot;The Evening Standard&quot; was published from 11 June 1859. &quot;The Standard&quot; gained eminence for its detailed foreign news, notably its reporting of events of the American Civil War (1861–1865), the Austro-Prussian War of 1866, and the Franco-Prussian War of 1870, all contributing to a rise in circulation. By the end of the 19th century, the evening edition eclipsed its morning counterpart.

Both &quot;The Standard&quot; and the &quot;Evening Standard&quot; were acquired by C. Arthur Pearson in 1904. In May 1915, Edward Hulton purchased the &quot;Evening Standard&quot; from Davison Dalziel. Dalziel had purchased both papers in 1910, and closed &quot;The Standard&quot;, the morning paper, in 1916. Hulton introduced the gossip column &quot;Londoner&#x27;s Diary&quot;, originally billed as &quot;a column written by gentlemen for gentlemen&quot;.

In 1923, Lord Beaverbrook, owner of the &quot;Daily Express&quot;, bought Hulton&#x27;s newspapers, although he sold them shortly thereafter to the &quot;Daily Mail&quot;″s owner Lord Rothermere, with the exception of the &quot;Standard&quot;. It became a staunchly Conservative paper, harshly attacking Labour in 1945 in a high-profile campaign that backfired. In the 1960s, the paper was upstaged by &quot;The Evening News&quot;, which sold more than 1 million copies nightly. During the decade, the paper also began to publish the comic strip &quot;Modesty Blaise&quot;, which bolstered its sales throughout the 1970s. &quot;The Evening Standard&quot; ceased publishing on Saturdays on 30 November 1974, when it still produced six editions daily. In the 1960s, the paper&#x27;s political editor Robert Carvel was granted a morning briefing by prime minister Harold Wilson and it had its own correspondents in Paris and Washington.

In 1980, Express Newspapers merged the &quot;Standard&quot; with Associated Newspapers&#x27; &quot;Evening News&quot; in a Joint Operating Agreement. The new paper was known as the &quot;New Standard&quot; until 1985, when Associated Newspapers bought out the remaining stake, turning it into &quot;The Standard&quot;. In 1987 the &quot;Evening News&quot; was briefly revived to compete with Robert Maxwell&#x27;s &quot;London Daily News&quot;, but was reabsorbed into &quot;The Standard&quot; later that year, after the collapse of Maxwell&#x27;s paper. In 1988 the &quot;Evening Standard&quot; included the by-line &quot;Incorporating the &#x27;Evening News, which remained until the paper&#x27;s sale in 2009.

===Lebedev takeover===
On 21 January 2009, the Russian businessman and former KGB agent Alexander Lebedev and his son Evgeny Lebedev, who in 2010 went on to own &quot;The Independent&quot;, agreed to acquire control of the &quot;Evening Standard&quot; for £1 for 64 per cent ownership. A few years earlier, 12 per cent of the paper had been sold to Justin Shaw and Geordie Greig. Associated Newspapers retained the remaining 24 per cent.

In November 2009, it was announced that the &quot;London Evening Standard&quot; would drop its morning &quot;News Extra&quot; edition from 4 January 2010. From then on, the first edition was the &quot;West End Final&quot;, available from 2 pm. One edition of 600,000 copies would be printed starting at 12:30 pm, ending 5.30 am starts for journalists and the previous deadline of 7 am for the first edition. Twenty people were expected to lose their jobs as a result.

There were often considerable changes between editions in the front-page lead and the following news pages, including the Londoner&#x27;s Diary, though features and reviews stayed the same. In January 2010, circulation was increased to 900,000.

===May 2009 relaunch===
In May 2009, the newspaper launched a series of poster ads, each of which prominently featured the word &quot;Sorry&quot; in the paper&#x27;s then-masthead font. These ads offered various apologies for past editorial approaches, such as &quot;Sorry for losing touch&quot;. None of the posters mentioned the &quot;Evening Standard&quot; by name, although they featured the paper&#x27;s Eros logo. Ex-editor Veronica Wadley criticised the &quot;&quot;Pravda&quot;-style&quot; campaign saying it humiliated the paper&#x27;s staff and insulted its readers. 

The campaign was designed by McCann Erickson. Also in May 2009, the paper relaunched as the &quot;London Evening Standard&quot; with a new layout and masthead, marking the occasion by giving away 650,000 free copies on the day, and refreshed its sports coverage.

===October 2009: freesheet===
After a long history of paid circulation, on 12 October 2009, the &quot;Standard&quot; became a free newspaper, with free circulation of 700,000, limited to central London. In February 2010, a paid-for circulation version became available in suburban areas of London for 20p (although many places sell it for 50p). The newspaper won the &quot;Media Brand of the Year&quot; and the &quot;Grand Prix Gold&quot; awards at the Media Week awards in October 2010. The judges said: &quot;[&quot;The Standard&quot; has] quite simply ... stunned the market. Not just for the act of going free, but because editorial quality has been maintained, circulation has almost trebled and advertisers have responded favourably. Here is a media brand restored to health.&quot; The &quot;Standard&quot; also won the daily newspaper of the year award at the London Press Club Awards in May 2011.

===May 2010: mobile application===
&quot;The Evening Standard&quot; launched a mobile app with US app developer Handmark in May 2010. The range of apps was updated in 2015.

===March 2018: redesign===
In March 2018, editor George Osborne initiated a redesign of the paper, which included dropping the &quot;London&quot; from its title in a signal of the paper&#x27;s ambition to have greater national and international influence. The paper also introduced more colourful &quot;signposting&quot; for different sections such as news, comment, and business, as it was noted by Osborne that it had not been &quot;easy&quot; to find them inside the paper previously. The masthead was also redesigned with a new font, and emojis were added to the paper&#x27;s five-day weather forecast.

===May 2018: financial sponsorship===
In May 2018, James Cusick of &quot;openDemocracy&quot; alleged the newspaper had been providing favourable news coverage to companies, including Uber and Google, in exchange for financial sponsorship.

===June 2019: Job cuts===
In June 2019, the &quot;Evening Standard&quot; announced job cuts. By the end of 2019, the company reported a pre-tax loss of £13.6 million. In August 2020, the paper announced a further 115 job cuts in order to save the company.

===2024: from daily to weekly, with redundancies===
Before the COVID-19 pandemic that started in 2020, the &quot;Evening Standard&quot;&#x27;s daily circulation was about 800,000. By mid-2024, it had dropped below 300,000.

On 29 May 2024, the newspaper announced that it would go from a daily to weekly print publication as it was unprofitable. The newspaper had dropped from about 70 to 30 pages in the preceding decade. The change was made by Lebedev under pressure by Sultan Muhammad Abuljadayel, who has owned a 30% stake in the &quot;Evening Standard&quot;″s parent company since 2018.

On 14 June 2024, the newspaper announced it would eliminate 150 jobs. The redundancies included 70 editorial workers (out of 120), 40 office workers and 45 workers from the paper&#x27;s printing and distribution operations at Broxbourne. Lebedev proposed to make statutory minimum payments plus £1,000, capped at £21,000, to those made redundant.

On 29 July 2024, the last Friday and Monday editions had been printed, and on Thursday 19 September 2024 the last daily format edition was printed. The weekly edition was published on Thursdays from 26 September 2024 under the new name of &quot;The London Standard&quot;.

==Editorial style==
From July 2020 to October 2021, the newspaper&#x27;s editor was Emily Sheffield, sister of Samantha Cameron, who took over from the former Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne, who became editor-in-chief. As editor he had replaced Sarah Sands who, in turn, had replaced Geordie Greig following his departure to &quot;The Mail on Sunday&quot; in March 2012. Veronica Wadley was the newspaper&#x27;s editor between 2002 and 2009. Max Hastings was editor from 1996 until he retired in 2002.

The &quot;Evening Standard&quot;, a regional newspaper, emphasises London-centred news (especially in its features pages), covering building developments, property prices, traffic schemes, politics, the congestion charge and, in the &quot;Londoner&#x27;s Diary&quot; page, gossip on the social scene, and also covers significant national and international news. It also occasionally runs campaigns on London issues that national newspapers do not cover in detail.

It has a tradition of providing arts coverage. Its best known former art critic, Brian Sewell, was known for his acerbic view of conceptual art, Britart and the Turner Prize and his views attracted controversy and criticism in the art world. He has been described as &quot;Britain&#x27;s most famous and controversial art critic&quot;.

===Political stance===
During the 2008 London mayoral election, the newspaper – and particularly the correspondent Andrew Gilligan – published articles in support of the Conservative candidate, Boris Johnson, including frequent front-page headlines condemning Labour opponent Ken Livingstone. This included the headline &quot;Suicide bomb backer runs Ken&#x27;s campaign&quot;.

On 5 May 2010, the newspaper stated in an editorial that, having supported Labour under Tony Blair, the newspaper would be supporting David Cameron and the Conservatives in the general election, saying that &quot;the Conservatives are ready for power: they look like a government in waiting&quot;. On 5 May 2015, an editorial stated that the newspaper would again be supporting David Cameron and the Conservatives in the 2015 General Election, saying that the Conservatives have &quot;shown themselves to be good for London&quot;. The newspaper also said &quot;there may be good tactical reasons to vote Liberal Democrat&quot;.

The Media Reform Coalition (MRC) and Goldsmiths, University of London considered that in the 2016 elections, the &quot;Evening Standard&quot; favoured the Conservative Party, according to MRC chair Justin Schlosberg. There were almost twice as many positive headlines about the Conservative candidate, Zac Goldsmith, as for his Labour rival, Sadiq Khan, with stories exhibiting the strongest bias against Khan also being the most prominent.

In the 2017 and 2019 United Kingdom general elections, the &quot;Evening Standard&quot; endorsed the Conservative Party.

During the 2019 Conservative leadership election, the &quot;Evening Standard&quot; endorsed Boris Johnson. During the 2020 Labour leadership election, the &quot;Evening Standard&quot; endorsed Keir Starmer to become Labour leader and consequently Leader of the Opposition.

The &quot;Evening Standard&quot; endorsed Liz Truss in the July–September 2022 Conservative Party leadership election.

For the 2024 London mayoral election, the &quot;Evening Standard&quot; endorsed Labour candidate Sadiq Khan for Mayor of London. The &quot;Evening Standard&quot; later endorsed the Labour Party in the 2024 United Kingdom general election.

==Freesheet and supplements==
On 14 December 2004, Associated Newspapers launched a Monday–Friday freesheet edition of the &quot;Evening Standard&quot; called &quot;Standard Lite&quot; to help boost circulation. This edition had 48 pages, compared with about 80 in the main paper, which also had a supplement on most days.

In August 2006, the freesheet was relaunched as &quot;London Lite&quot;. It was designed to be especially attractive to younger female readers and featured a wide range of lifestyle articles, but less news and business news than the main paper. It was initially available only between 11:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. at &quot;Evening Standard&quot; vendors and in the central area, but later became available in the evening from its street distributors. With the sale of the &quot;Evening Standard&quot;, but not the &quot;London Lite&quot;, to Alexander Lebedev on 21 January 2009, the ownership links between the &quot;Standard&quot; and the &quot;Lite&quot; were broken.

On Fridays, the newspaper includes a free glossy lifestyle magazine, &quot;ES&quot; (launched as the &quot;Evening Standard Magazine&quot; in 2009,) and the circulation was increased to 350,000 in September 2014. This has moved from more general articles to concentrate on glamour, with features on the rich, powerful and famous. On Wednesdays, some areas offer a free copy of the &quot;Homes &amp; Property&quot; supplement, edited by Janice Morley, which includes London property listings and articles from lifestyle journalists including Barbara Chandler, Katie Law, and Alison Cork.

A free entertainment guide supplement &quot;Metro Life&quot;, previously called &quot;Hot Tickets&quot;, was published on Thursdays from September 2002 to September 2005. This was a &quot;what&#x27;s-on&quot; guide with listings of cinemas and theatres in and around London.
==Editors==
Editors, with their year of appointment, have been:

*1827: Stanley Lees Giffard
*1846: Robert Knox
*1857: Thomas Hamber (&quot;The Standard&quot;)
*1860: Charles Williams 
*1863: Thomas Hamber
*1870: James Johnstone Jr. and John Gorst
*1876: W. H. Mudford
*1899: Byron Curtis
*1906: William Woodward
*1912: James A. Kilpatrick
*1914: D. M. Sutherland
*1916: Arthur Mann
*1920: D. Phillips
*1923: E. Raymond Thompson
*1928: George Gilliat
*1933: Percy Cudlipp
*1937: Reginald John Tanner Thompson
*1938: Frank Owen
*1942: Michael Foot
*1943: Sydney Elliott
*1945: Bert Gunn
*1952: Percy Elland
*1959: Charles Wintour
*1976: Simon Jenkins
*1978: Charles Wintour
*1980: Louis Kirby
*1986: John Leese
*1991: Paul Dacre
*1992: Stewart Steven
*1996: Max Hastings
*2002: Veronica Wadley
*2009: Geordie Greig
*2012: Sarah Sands
*2017: George Osborne
*2020: Emily Sheffield
*2021: Charlotte Ross 
*2022: Jack Lefley 
*2023: Dylan Jones
*2024: Anna van Praagh 
==Journalists==

*George Orwell, author of Nineteen Eighty-Four and Animal Farm
*John Lahr, biographer and theatre critic
*John Preston, former arts editor
*Julie Burchill, author
*Jack Massarik, jazz critic

==References==
==External links==

* &quot;Evening Standard&quot; Official Web Site
* &quot;London Evening Standard&quot; E-edition 
* London &quot;Evening Standard&quot; | Media at &quot;The Guardian&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q142043" start="178" end="192" title="free newspaper" label="free of charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="196" end="202" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449648" start="230" end="244" title="Tabloid (newspaper format)" label="tabloid format"/>
<link wikidata="Q370787" start="341" end="358" title="Alexander Lebedev" label="Alexander Lebedev"/>
<link wikidata="Q759811" start="398" end="414" title="print circulation" label="paid circulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599748" start="1003" end="1023" title="Stanley Lees Giffard" label="Stanley Lees Giffard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16063617" start="1141" end="1156" title="James Johnstone (publisher)" label="James Johnstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1402" end="1420" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q153650" start="1438" end="1457" title="Austro-Prussian War" label="Austro-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="1475" end="1494" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6038822" start="1718" end="1735" title="Sir Arthur Pearson, 1st Baronet" label="C. Arthur Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526572" start="1758" end="1771" title="Edward Hulton" label="Edward Hulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q334201" start="1820" end="1835" title="Davison Dalziel, 1st Baron Dalziel of Wooler" label="Davison Dalziel"/>
<link wikidata="Q332454" start="2104" end="2120" title="Max Aitken, 1st Baron Beaverbrook" label="Lord Beaverbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q610190" start="2141" end="2154" title="Daily Express" label="Daily Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q210534" start="2249" end="2259" title="Daily Mail" label="Daily Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q336483" start="2274" end="2289" title="Harold Harmsworth, 1st Viscount Rothermere" label="Lord Rothermere"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732654" start="2503" end="2519" title="The Evening News (London newspaper)" label="The Evening News"/>
<link wikidata="Q957752" start="2647" end="2661" title="Modesty Blaise" label="Modesty Blaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="2956" end="2969" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="3007" end="3012" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="3017" end="3027" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q321273" start="3039" end="3057" title="Northern &amp;amp; Shell" label="Express Newspapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809216" start="3095" end="3116" title="DMG Media" label="Associated Newspapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732654" start="3129" end="3141" title="The Evening News (London newspaper)" label="Evening News"/>
<link wikidata="Q7019734" start="3153" end="3178" title="Newspaper Preservation Act of 1970" label="Joint Operating Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q333468" start="3422" end="3436" title="Robert Maxwell" label="Robert Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670311" start="3450" end="3467" title="London Daily News" label="London Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="3822" end="3825" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q370787" start="3832" end="3849" title="Alexander Lebedev" label="Alexander Lebedev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889271" start="3862" end="3876" title="Evgeny Lebedev" label="Evgeny Lebedev"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="3911" end="3926" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535605" start="4109" end="4122" title="Geordie Greig" label="Geordie Greig"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160753" start="4774" end="4795" title="Londoner&amp;#x27;s Diary" label="Londoner&amp;#x27;s Diary"/>
<link wikidata="Q121973" start="5307" end="5311" title="Eros" label="Eros"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922462" start="5328" end="5343" title="Veronica Wadley, Baroness Fleet" label="Veronica Wadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q183644" start="5371" end="5377" title="Pravda" label="Pravda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779040" start="5506" end="5521" title="McCann (company)" label="McCann Erickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670668" start="6608" end="6625" title="London Press Club" label="London Press Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647536" start="6759" end="6767" title="Handmark" label="Handmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q332493" start="6870" end="6884" title="George Osborne" label="George Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051984" start="7502" end="7515" title="openDemocracy" label="openDemocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q780442" start="7612" end="7616" title="Uber" label="Uber"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="7621" end="7627" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q84167106" start="7989" end="8006" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19791" start="8745" end="8755" title="Broxbourne" label="Broxbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306395" start="8850" end="8864" title="Redundancy in United Kingdom law" label="made redundant"/>
<link wikidata="Q75343344" start="9224" end="9239" title="Emily Sheffield" label="Emily Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636948" start="9251" end="9267" title="Samantha Cameron" label="Samantha Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="9299" end="9326" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q332493" start="9327" end="9341" title="George Osborne" label="George Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422754" start="9397" end="9408" title="Sarah Sands" label="Sarah Sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535605" start="9436" end="9449" title="Geordie Greig" label="Geordie Greig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463285" start="9483" end="9501" title="The Mail on Sunday" label="The Mail on Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922462" start="9523" end="9538" title="Veronica Wadley, Baroness Fleet" label="Veronica Wadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q726622" start="9594" end="9606" title="Max Hastings" label="Max Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160753" start="9894" end="9915" title="Londoner&amp;#x27;s Diary" label="Londoner&amp;#x27;s Diary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965255" start="10201" end="10213" title="Brian Sewell" label="Brian Sewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q203209" start="10249" end="10263" title="conceptual art" label="conceptual art"/>
<link wikidata="Q516316" start="10265" end="10272" title="Young British Artists" label="Britart"/>
<link wikidata="Q284500" start="10281" end="10293" title="Turner Prize" label="Turner Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011607" start="10491" end="10519" title="2008 London mayoral election" label="2008 London mayoral election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757096" start="10572" end="10587" title="Andrew Gilligan" label="Andrew Gilligan"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="10651" end="10664" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q220723" start="10733" end="10748" title="Ken Livingstone" label="Ken Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="10911" end="10917" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="10924" end="10934" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q192" start="10970" end="10983" title="David Cameron" label="David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="10992" end="11005" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="11013" end="11029" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q192" start="11214" end="11227" title="David Cameron" label="David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586935" start="11257" end="11278" title="2015 United Kingdom general election" label="2015 General Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141155" start="11415" end="11431" title="strategic voting" label="tactical reasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q528231" start="11502" end="11534" title="Goldsmiths, University of London" label="Goldsmiths, University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671130" start="11554" end="11572" title="2016 London mayoral election" label="the 2016 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q391562" start="11767" end="11780" title="Zac Goldsmith" label="Zac Goldsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q334155" start="11807" end="11817" title="Sadiq Khan" label="Sadiq Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052149" start="11910" end="11918" title="2017 United Kingdom general election" label="the 2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q30173038" start="11923" end="11959" title="2019 United Kingdom general election" label="2019 United Kingdom general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325756" start="12040" end="12077" title="2019 Conservative Party leadership election" label="2019 Conservative leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="12121" end="12134" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q78326482" start="12147" end="12178" title="2020 Labour Party leadership election (UK)" label="2020 Labour leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383803" start="12222" end="12234" title="Keir Starmer" label="Keir Starmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3615378" start="12245" end="12258" title="Leader of the Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741536" start="12276" end="12300" title="Leader of the Opposition (United Kingdom)" label="Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q272201" start="12345" end="12354" title="Liz Truss" label="Liz Truss"/>
<link wikidata="Q110664430" start="12362" end="12420" title="July–September 2022 Conservative Party leadership election" label="July–September 2022 Conservative Party leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q110613074" start="12431" end="12459" title="2024 London mayoral election" label="2024 London mayoral election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="12503" end="12509" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q334155" start="12520" end="12530" title="Sadiq Khan" label="Sadiq Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="12604" end="12616" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q78851988" start="12624" end="12660" title="2024 United Kingdom general election" label="2024 United Kingdom general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809216" start="12714" end="12735" title="DMG Media" label="Associated Newspapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q142043" start="12761" end="12770" title="free newspaper" label="freesheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868983" start="12828" end="12841" title="Standard Lite" label="Standard Lite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868983" start="13041" end="13052" title="London Lite" label="London Lite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727050" start="14229" end="14240" title="Alison Cork" label="Alison Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599748" start="14590" end="14610" title="Stanley Lees Giffard" label="Stanley Lees Giffard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16031094" start="14685" end="14701" title="Charles Frederick Williams" label="Charles Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q16063617" start="14731" end="14750" title="James Johnstone (publisher)" label="James Johnstone Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5765264" start="14755" end="14765" title="John Eldon Gorst" label="John Gorst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945653" start="14773" end="14786" title="W. H. Mudford" label="W. H. Mudford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203728" start="14865" end="14881" title="D. M. Sutherland" label="D. M. Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q52048906" start="14927" end="14946" title="Edward Roffe Thompson" label="E. Raymond Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167294" start="14976" end="14989" title="Percy Cudlipp" label="Percy Cudlipp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488833" start="15034" end="15044" title="Frank Owen (politician)" label="Frank Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q332419" start="15052" end="15064" title="Michael Foot" label="Michael Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659911" start="15072" end="15086" title="Sydney Elliott" label="Sydney Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895093" start="15094" end="15103" title="Bert Gunn" label="Bert Gunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167327" start="15111" end="15123" title="Percy Elland" label="Percy Elland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083664" start="15131" end="15146" title="Charles Wintour" label="Charles Wintour"/>
<link wikidata="Q587339" start="15154" end="15167" title="Simon Jenkins" label="Simon Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083664" start="15175" end="15190" title="Charles Wintour" label="Charles Wintour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6687552" start="15198" end="15209" title="Louis Kirby" label="Louis Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6244429" start="15217" end="15227" title="John Leese" label="John Leese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150105" start="15235" end="15245" title="Paul Dacre" label="Paul Dacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615949" start="15253" end="15267" title="Stewart Steven" label="Stewart Steven"/>
<link wikidata="Q726622" start="15275" end="15287" title="Max Hastings" label="Max Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922462" start="15295" end="15310" title="Veronica Wadley" label="Veronica Wadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535605" start="15318" end="15331" title="Geordie Greig" label="Geordie Greig"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422754" start="15339" end="15350" title="Sarah Sands" label="Sarah Sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q332493" start="15358" end="15372" title="George Osborne" label="George Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q75343344" start="15380" end="15395" title="Emily Sheffield" label="Emily Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q109282740" start="15403" end="15417" title="Charlotte Ross (journalist)" label="Charlotte Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318731" start="15446" end="15457" title="Dylan Jones" label="Dylan Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335" start="15500" end="15513" title="George Orwell" label="George Orwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q208460" start="15525" end="15545" title="Nineteen Eighty-Four" label="Nineteen Eighty-Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396889" start="15550" end="15561" title="Animal Farm" label="Animal Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243813" start="15563" end="15572" title="John Lahr" label="John Lahr"/>
<link wikidata="Q47117005" start="15605" end="15617" title="John Preston (English author)" label="John Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404917" start="15639" end="15653" title="Julie Burchill" label="Julie Burchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q129217851" start="15663" end="15676" title="Jack Massarik" label="Jack Massarik"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="15879" end="15891" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
</links>
</doc>
