<doc id="60520" wikidata="Q150229" url="?curid=60520" title="Boxer Rebellion">
<text>The Boxer Rebellion, also known as the Boxer Uprising, was an anti-foreign, anti-imperialist, and anti-Christian uprising in North China between 1899 and 1901, towards the end of the Qing dynasty, by the Society of Righteous and Harmonious Fists, known as the &quot;Boxers&quot; in English due to many of its members having practised Chinese martial arts, which at the time were referred to as &quot;Chinese boxing&quot;. It was defeated by the Eight-Nation Alliance of foreign powers.

Following the First Sino-Japanese War, villagers in North China feared the expansion of foreign spheres of influence and resented the extension of privileges to Christian missionaries, who used them to shield their followers. In 1898, North China experienced several natural disasters, including the Yellow River flooding and droughts, which Boxers blamed on foreign and Christian influence. Beginning in 1899, the movement spread across Shandong and the North China Plain, destroying foreign property such as railroads, and attacking or murdering Christian missionaries and Chinese Christians. The events came to a head in June 1900, when Boxer fighters, convinced they were invulnerable to foreign weapons, converged on Beijing with the slogan &quot;Support the Qing government and exterminate the foreigners&quot;.

Diplomats, missionaries, soldiers, and some Chinese Christians took refuge in the Legation Quarter, which the Boxers besieged. The Eight-Nation Alliance—comprising American, Austro-Hungarian, British, French, German, Italian, Japanese, and Russian troops—moved into China to lift the siege and on 17 June stormed the Dagu Fort at Tianjin. Empress Dowager Cixi, who had initially been hesitant, supported the Boxers and on 21 June issued an imperial decree that was a de facto declaration of war on the invading powers. Chinese officialdom was split between those supporting the Boxers and those favouring conciliation, led by Prince Qing. The supreme commander of the Chinese forces, the Manchu general Ronglu, later claimed he acted to protect the foreigners. Officials in the southern provinces ignored the imperial order to fight against foreigners.

The Eight-Nation Alliance, after initially being turned back by the Imperial Chinese military and Boxer militia, brought 20,000 armed troops to China. They defeated the Imperial Army in Tianjin and arrived in Beijing on 14 August, relieving the 55-day Siege of the International Legations. Plunder and looting of the capital and the surrounding countryside ensued, along with summary execution of those suspected of being Boxers in retribution. The Boxer Protocol of 7 September 1901 provided for the execution of government officials who had supported the Boxers, for foreign troops to be stationed in Beijing, and for 450 million taels of silver—more than the government&#x27;s annual tax revenue—to be paid as indemnity over the course of the next 39 years to the eight invading nations. The Qing dynasty&#x27;s handling of the Boxer Rebellion further weakened their control over China, and led to the Late Qing reforms.

== Background ==
=== Christian missionary activity ===
According to John King Fairbank:
The opening of the country in the 1860s facilitated the great effort to Christianize China. Building on old [French] foundations, the Roman Catholic establishment totaled by 1894 some 750 European missionaries, 400 native priests, and over half a million communicants. By 1894 the newer Protestant mission effort supported over 1300 missionaries, mainly British and American, and maintained some 500 stations-each with a church, residences, street chapels, and usually a small school and possibly a hospital or dispensary-in about 350 different cities and towns. Yet they had made fewer than 60,000 Chinese Christian converts.

There was limited success in terms of converts and establishing schools in a nation of about 400 million people. The missions faced escalating anger directed at the threat of cultural imperialism. The main result was the Boxer Rebellion, in which missions were attacked and thousands of Chinese Christians were massacred to destroy Western influences.

=== Origins of the Boxers ===

The Righteous and Harmonious Fists arose in the inland sections of the northern coastal province of Shandong, a region which had long been plagued by social unrest, religious sects, and martial societies. American Christian missionaries were probably the first people who referred to the well-trained, athletic young men as the &quot;Boxers&quot;, because of the martial arts which they practised and the weapons training which they underwent. Their primary practice was a type of spiritual possession which involved the whirling of swords, violent prostrations, and incantations to deities.

The opportunities to fight against Western encroachment were especially attractive to unemployed village men, many of whom were teenagers. The tradition of possession and invulnerability went back several hundred years but took on special meaning against the powerful new weapons of the West. The Boxers, armed with rifles and swords, claimed supernatural invulnerability against cannons, rifle shots, and knife attacks. The Boxer groups popularly claimed that millions of soldiers would descend out of heaven to assist them in purifying China of foreign oppression.

In 1895, despite ambivalence toward their heterodox practices, Yuxian, a Manchu who was the then prefect of Cao Prefecture and would later become provincial governor, cooperated with the Big Swords Society, whose original purpose was to fight bandits. The German Catholic missionaries of the Society of the Divine Word had built up their presence in the area, partially by taking in a significant portion of converts who were &quot;in need of protection from the law&quot;. On one occasion in 1895, a large bandit gang defeated by the Big Swords Society claimed to be Catholics to avoid prosecution. &quot;The line between Christians and bandits became increasingly indistinct&quot;, remarks historian Paul Cohen.

Some missionaries such as Georg Maria Stenz also used their privileges to intervene in lawsuits. The Big Swords responded by attacking Catholic properties and burning them. As a result of diplomatic pressure in the capital, Yuxian executed several Big Sword leaders but did not punish anyone else. More martial secret societies started emerging after this.

The early years saw a variety of village activities, not a broad movement with a united purpose. Martial folk-religious societies such as the Baguadao (&#x27;Eight Trigrams&#x27;) prepared the way for the Boxers. Like the Red Boxing school or the Plum Flower tradition, the Boxers of Shandong were more concerned with traditional social and moral values, such as filial piety, than with foreign influences. One leader, Zhu Hongdeng (Red Lantern Zhu), started as a wandering healer, specialising in skin ulcers, and gained wide respect by refusing payment for his treatments. Zhu claimed descent from Ming dynasty emperors, since his surname was the surname of the Ming imperial family. He announced that his goal was to &quot;Revive the Qing and destroy the foreigners&quot; ( ).

The enemy was seen as foreign influence. They decided the &quot;primary devils&quot; were the Christian missionaries while the &quot;secondary devils&quot; were the Chinese converts to Christianity, which both had either to repent, be driven out or killed.

=== Causes ===
The Boxer Rebellion was an anti-imperialist movement which sought to expel foreigners from China and end the system of foreign concessions and treaty ports. The rebellion had multiple causes. Escalating tensions caused Chinese to turn against &quot;foreign devils&quot; who engaged in the Scramble for China in the late 19th century. The Western success at controlling China, growing anti-imperialist sentiment, and extreme weather conditions sparked the movement. A drought followed by floods in Shandong province in 1897–98 forced farmers to flee to cities and seek food.

A major source of discontent in northern China was missionary activity. The Boxers opposed German missionaries in Shandong and in the German concession in Qingdao. The Treaty of Tientsin and the Convention of Peking, signed in 1860 after the Second Opium War, had granted foreign missionaries the freedom to preach anywhere in China and to buy land on which to build churches. There was strong public indignation over the dispossession of Chinese temples that were replaced by Catholic churches which were viewed as deliberately anti-feng shui. A further cause of discontent among Chinese people were the destruction of Chinese burial sites to make way for German railroads and telegraph lines. In response to Chinese protests against German railroads, Germans shot the protestors.

Economic conditions in Shandong also contributed to rebellion. Northern Shandong&#x27;s economy focused significantly on cotton production and was hampered by the importation of foreign cotton. Traffic along the Grand Canal was also decreasing, further eroding the economy. The area had also experienced periods of drought and flood.

A major precipitating incident was anger at the German Catholic Priest Georg Stenz, who had allegedly serially raped Chinese women in Juye County, Shandong. In an attack known as the Juye Incident, Chinese rebels attempted to kill Stenz in his missionary quarters, but failed to find him and killed two other missionaries. The German Navy&#x27;s East Asia Squadron dispatched to occupy Jiaozhou Bay on the southern coast of the Shandong peninsula.

In December 1897, Wilhelm declared his intent to seize territory in China, which triggered a &quot;scramble for concessions&quot; by which Britain, France, Russia and Japan also secured their own sphere of influence in China. Germany gained exclusive control of developmental loans, mining, and railway ownership in Shandong province. Russia gained influence of all territory north of the Great Wall, plus the previous tax exemption for trade in Mongolia and Xinjiang, economic powers similar to Germany&#x27;s over Fengtian, Jilin and Heilongjiang. France gained influence of Yunnan, most of Guangxi and Guangdong, Japan over Fujian. Britain gained influence of the whole Yangtze valley (defined as all provinces adjoining the Yangtze, as well as Henan and Zhejiang), parts of Guangdong and Guangxi provinces and part of Tibet. Only Italy&#x27;s request for Zhejiang was declined by the Chinese government. These do not include the lease and concession territories where the foreign powers had full authority. The Russian government militarily occupied their zone, imposed their law and schools, seized mining and logging privileges, settled their citizens, and even established their municipal administration on several cities.

In October 1898, a group of Boxers attacked the Christian community of Liyuantun village where a temple to the Jade Emperor had been converted into a Catholic church. Disputes had surrounded the church since 1869, when the temple had been granted to the Christian residents of the village. This incident marked the first time the Boxers used the slogan &quot;Support the Qing, destroy the foreigners&quot; () that later characterised them.

The Boxers called themselves the &quot;Militia United in Righteousness&quot; for the first time in October 1899, at the Battle of Senluo Temple, a clash between Boxers and Qing government troops. By using the word &quot;Militia&quot; rather than &quot;Boxers&quot;, they distanced themselves from forbidden martial arts sects and tried to give their movement the legitimacy of a group that defended orthodoxy.

Violence toward missionaries and Christians drew sharp responses from diplomats protecting their nationals, including Western seizure of harbors and forts and the moving in of troops in preparation for all-out war, as well as taking control of more land by force or by coerced long-term leases from the Qing. In 1899, the French minister in Beijing helped the missionaries to obtain an edict granting official status to every order in the Roman Catholic hierarchy, enabling local priests to support their people in legal or family disputes and bypass the local officials. After the German government took over Shandong, many Chinese feared that the foreign missionaries and possibly all Christian activities were imperialist attempts at &quot;carving the melon&quot;, i.e., to colonise China piece by piece. A Chinese official expressed the animosity towards foreigners succinctly, &quot;Take away your missionaries and your opium and you will be welcome.&quot;

In 1899, the Boxer Rebellion developed into a mass movement. The previous year, the Hundred Days&#x27; Reform, in which progressive Chinese reformers persuaded the Guangxu Emperor to engage in modernizing efforts, was suppressed by Empress Dowager Cixi and Yuan Shikai. The Qing political elite struggled with the question of how to retain its power. The Qing government came to view the Boxers as a means to help oppose foreign powers. The national crisis was widely perceived as caused by &quot;foreign aggression&quot; inside, even though afterwards a majority of Chinese were grateful for the actions of the alliance. The Qing government was corrupt, common people often faced extortions from government officials and the government offered no protection from the violent actions of the Boxers.

== Qing forces ==
The military of the Qing dynasty had been dealt a severe blow by the First Sino-Japanese War and this had prompted military reform that was still in its early stages when the Boxer rebellion occurred and they were expected to fight. The bulk of the fighting was conducted by the forces already around Zhili with troops from other provinces only arriving after the main fighting had ended.

The failure of the Qing forces to withstand the Allied forces was not surprising given the limited time for reform and the fact that the best troops of China were not committed to the fight, remaining instead in Huguang and Shandong. The officer corps was particularly deficient; many lacked basic knowledge of strategy and tactics, and even those with training had not actively commanded troops in the field. In addition, the regular soldiers were noted for their poor marksmanship and inaccuracy, while cavalry was ill-organised and was not used to its full extent. Tactically, the Chinese still retained their belief in the superiority of defence, often withdrawing as soon as they were flanked, a tendency attributable to their lack of combat experience and training as well as a lack of initiative from commanders who would rather retreat than counterattack. However, accusations of cowardice were minimal; this was a marked improvement from the Sino-Japanese War of 1894–1895, as Chinese troops did not flee en masse as before. If led by courageous officers, the troops would often fight to the death as occurred under Nie Shicheng and Ma Yukun.

On the other hand, Chinese artillery was well-regarded, and caused far more casualties than the infantry at Tientsin, and proving themselves superior to Allied artillery in counter-battery fire. The infantry, for their part, were commended for their good usage of cover and concealment in addition to their tenacity in resistance.

The Boxers also targeted Jewish groups in the region destroying their reputation and leading to Britain temporarily vacating their civilian workers from the front lines.

== Boxer War ==
=== Intensifying crisis ===

In January 1900, with a majority of conservatives in the imperial court, Cixi changed her position on the Boxers and issued edicts in their defence, causing protests from foreign powers. Cixi urged provincial authorities to support the Boxers, although few did so. In the spring of 1900, the Boxer movement spread rapidly north from Shandong into the countryside near Beijing. Boxers burned Christian churches, killed Chinese Christians and intimidated Chinese officials who stood in their way. American Minister Edwin H. Conger cabled Washington, &quot;the whole country is swarming with hungry, discontented, hopeless idlers&quot;.

On 30 May the diplomats, led by British Minister Claude Maxwell MacDonald, requested that foreign soldiers come to Beijing to defend the legations. The Chinese government reluctantly acquiesced, and the next day a multinational force of 435 navy troops from eight countries debarked from warships and travelled by train from the Taku Forts to Beijing. They set up defensive perimeters around their respective missions.

On 5 June 1900, the railway line to Tianjin was cut by Boxers in the countryside, and Beijing was isolated. On 11 June, at Yongdingmen, the secretary of the Japanese legation, Sugiyama Akira, was attacked and killed by the forces of General Dong Fuxiang, who were guarding the southern part of the Beijing walled city. Armed with Mauser rifles but wearing traditional uniforms, Dong&#x27;s troops had threatened the foreign legations in the fall of 1898 soon after arriving in Beijing, so much that United States Marines had been called to Beijing to guard the legations.

Wilhelm was so alarmed by the Chinese Muslim troops that he requested Ottoman caliph Abdul Hamid II to find a way to stop the Muslim troops from fighting. Abdul Hamid agreed to the Kaiser&#x27;s request and sent Enver Pasha (not to be confused with the later Young Turk leader) to China in 1901, but the rebellion was over by that time.

On 11 June, the first Boxer was seen in the Peking Legation Quarter. The German Minister Clemens von Ketteler and German soldiers captured a Boxer boy and inexplicably executed him. In response, thousands of Boxers burst into the walled city of Beijing that afternoon and burned many of the Christian churches and cathedrals in the city, burning some victims alive. American and British missionaries took refuge in the Methodist Mission, and an attack there was repulsed by US Marines. The soldiers at the British Embassy and German legations shot and killed several Boxers. The Kansu Braves and Boxers, along with other Chinese, then attacked and killed Chinese Christians around the legations in revenge for foreign attacks on Chinese.

=== Seymour Expedition ===

As the situation grew more violent, the Eight Powers authorities at Dagu dispatched a second multinational force to Beijing on 10 June 1900. This force of 2,000 sailors and marines was under the command of Vice Admiral Edward Hobart Seymour, the largest contingent being British. The force moved by train from Dagu to Tianjin with the agreement of the Chinese government, but the railway had been severed between Tianjin and Beijing. Seymour resolved to continue forward by rail to the break and repair the railway, or progress on foot from there, if necessary, as it was only 120 km from Tianjin to Beijing. The court then replaced Prince Qing at the Zongli Yamen with Manchu Prince Duan, a member of the imperial Aisin Gioro clan (foreigners called him a &quot;Blood Royal&quot;), who was anti-foreigner and pro-Boxer. He soon ordered the Imperial army to attack the foreign forces. Confused by conflicting orders from Beijing, General Nie Shicheng let Seymour&#x27;s army pass by in their trains.

After leaving Tianjin, the force quickly reached Langfang, but the railway was destroyed there. Seymour&#x27;s engineers tried to repair the line, but the force found itself surrounded, as the railway in both behind directions was destroyed. They were attacked from all sides by Chinese irregulars and imperial troops. Five thousand of Dong Fuxiang&#x27;s Gansu Braves and an unknown number of Boxers won a costly but major victory over Seymour&#x27;s troops at the Battle of Langfang on 18 June. The Seymour force could not locate the Chinese artillery, which was raining shells upon their positions. Chinese troops employed mining, engineering, flooding, and simultaneous attacks. The Chinese also employed pincer movements, ambushes, and sniping with some success.

On 18 June, Seymour learned of attacks on the Legation Quarter in Beijing, and decided to continue advancing, this time along the Beihe River, toward Tongzhou, from Beijing. By 19 June, the force was halted by progressively stiffening resistance and started to retreat southward along the river with over 200 wounded. The force was now very low on food, ammunition, and medical supplies. They happened upon The Great Hsi-Ku Arsenal, a hidden Qing munitions cache of which the Eight Powers had had no knowledge until then.

There they dug in and awaited rescue. A Chinese servant slipped through the Boxer and Imperial lines, reached Tianjin, and informed the Eight Powers of Seymour&#x27;s predicament. His force was surrounded by Imperial troops and Boxers, attacked nearly around the clock, and at the point of being overrun. The Eight Powers sent a relief column from Tianjin of 1,800 men (900 Russian troops from Port Arthur, 500 British seamen, and other assorted troops). On 25 June the relief column reached Seymour. The Seymour force destroyed the Arsenal: they spiked the captured field guns and set fire to any munitions that they could not take (an estimated £3 million worth). The Seymour force and the relief column marched back to Tientsin, unopposed, on 26 June. Seymour&#x27;s casualties during the expedition were 62 killed and 228 wounded.

=== Conflict within the Qing imperial court ===
Meanwhile, in Beijing, on 16 June, Empress Dowager Cixi summoned the imperial court for a mass audience and addressed the choice between using the Boxers to evict the foreigners from the city, and seeking a diplomatic solution. In response to a high official who doubted the efficacy of the Boxers, Cixi replied that both sides of the debate at the imperial court realised that popular support for the Boxers in the countryside was almost universal and that suppression would be both difficult and unpopular, especially when foreign troops were on the march.

=== Siege of the Beijing legations ===
On 15 June, Qing imperial forces deployed electric naval mines in the Beihe River to prevent the Eight-Nation Alliance from sending ships to attack. With a difficult military situation in Tianjin and a total breakdown of communications between Tianjin and Beijing, the allied nations took steps to reinforce their military presence significantly. On 17 June, Allied forces under Russian Admiral Yevgeni Alekseyev took the Dagu Forts commanding the approaches to Tianjin, and from there brought increasing numbers of troops on shore. When Cixi received an ultimatum that same day demanding that China surrender total control over all its military and financial affairs to foreigners, she defiantly stated before the entire Grand Council, &quot;Now they [the Powers] have started the aggression, and the extinction of our nation is imminent. If we just fold our arms and yield to them, I would have no face to see our ancestors after death. If we must perish, why don&#x27;t we fight to the death?&quot; It was at this point that Cixi began to blockade the legations with the armies of the Peking Field Force, which began the siege. Cixi stated that &quot;I have always been of the opinion, that the allied armies had been permitted to escape too easily in 1860. Only a united effort was then necessary to have given China the victory. Today, at last, the opportunity for revenge has come&quot;, and said that millions of Chinese would join the cause of fighting the foreigners since the Manchus had provided &quot;great benefits&quot; on China. On receipt of the news of the attack on the Dagu Forts on 19 June, Empress Dowager Cixi immediately sent an order to the legations that the diplomats and other foreigners depart Beijing under escort of the Chinese army within 24 hours.

The next morning, diplomats from the besieged legations met to discuss the Empress&#x27;s offer. The majority quickly agreed that they could not trust the Chinese army. Fearing that they would be killed, they agreed to refuse the Empress&#x27;s demand. The German Imperial Envoy, Baron Clemens von Ketteler, was infuriated with the actions of the Chinese army troops and determined to take his complaints to the royal court. Against the advice of the fellow foreigners, the baron left the legations with a single aide and a team of porters to carry his sedan chair. On his way to the palace, von Ketteler was killed on the streets of Beijing by a Manchu captain. His aide managed to escape the attack and carried word of the baron&#x27;s death back to the diplomatic compound. At this news, the other diplomats feared they also would be murdered if they left the legation quarter and they chose to continue to defy the Chinese order to depart Beijing. The legations were hurriedly fortified. Most of the foreign civilians, which included a large number of missionaries and businessmen, took refuge in the British legation, the largest of the diplomatic compounds. Chinese Christians were primarily housed in the adjacent palace (Fu) of Prince Su, who was forced to abandon his property by the foreign soldiers.
On 21 June, Cixi issued an imperial decree stating that hostilities had begun and ordering the regular Chinese army to join the Boxers in their attacks on the invading troops. This was a declaration of war, but the Allies also made no formal declaration of war. Regional governors in the south, who commanded substantial modernised armies, such as Li Hongzhang at Guangzhou, Yuan Shikai in Shandong, Zhang Zhidong at Wuhan, and Liu Kunyi at Nanjing, formed the Mutual Defense Pact of the Southeastern Provinces. They refused to recognise the imperial court&#x27;s declaration of war, which they declared a (illegitimate order) and withheld knowledge of it from the public in the south. Yuan Shikai used his own forces to suppress Boxers in Shandong, and Zhang entered into negotiations with the foreigners in Shanghai to keep his army out of the conflict. The neutrality of these provincial and regional governors left the majority of Chinese military forces out of the conflict. The republican revolutionary Sun Yat-sen even took the opportunity to submit a proposal to Li Hongzhang to declare an independent democratic republic, although nothing came of the suggestion.

The legations of the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Italy, Austria-Hungary, Spain, Belgium, the Netherlands, the United States, Russia and Japan were located in the Beijing Legation Quarter south of the Forbidden City. The Chinese army and Boxer irregulars besieged the Legation Quarter from 20 June to 14 August 1900. A total of 473 foreign civilians, 409 soldiers, marines and sailors from eight countries, and about 3,000 Chinese Christians took refuge there. Under the command of the British minister to China, Claude Maxwell MacDonald, the legation staff and military guards defended the compound with small arms, three machine guns, and one old muzzle-loaded cannon, which was nicknamed the &quot;International Gun&quot; because the barrel was British, the carriage Italian, the shells Russian and the crew American. Chinese Christians in the legations led the foreigners to the cannon and it proved important in the defence. Also under siege in Beijing was the Northern Cathedral (&quot;Beitang&quot;) of the Catholic Church. The cathedral was defended by 43 French and Italian soldiers, 33 Catholic foreign priests and nuns, and about 3,200 Chinese Catholics. The defenders suffered heavy casualties from lack of food and from mines which the Chinese exploded in tunnels dug beneath the compound. The number of Chinese soldiers and Boxers besieging the Legation Quarter and the Beitang is unknown. Zaiyi&#x27;s bannermen in the Tiger and Divine Corps led attacks against the Catholic cathedral church.

On 22 and 23 June, Chinese soldiers and Boxers set fire to areas north and west of the British Legation, using it as a &quot;frightening tactic&quot; to attack the defenders. The nearby Hanlin Academy, a complex of courtyards and buildings that housed &quot;the quintessence of Chinese scholarship ... the oldest and richest library in the world&quot;, caught fire. Each side blamed the other for the destruction of the invaluable books it contained.
After the failure to burn out the foreigners, the Chinese army adopted an anaconda-like strategy. The Chinese built barricades surrounding the Legation Quarter and advanced, brick by brick, on the foreign lines, forcing the foreign legation guards to retreat a few feet at a time. This tactic was especially used in the Fu, defended by Japanese and Italian sailors and soldiers, and inhabited by most of the Chinese Christians. Fusillades of bullets, artillery and firecrackers were directed against the Legations almost every night—but did little damage. Sniper fire took its toll among the foreign defenders. Despite their numerical advantage, the Chinese did not attempt a direct assault on the Legation Quarter although in the words of one of the besieged, &quot;it would have been easy by a strong, swift movement on the part of the numerous Chinese troops to have annihilated the whole body of foreigners ... in an hour&quot;. American missionary Francis Dunlap Gamewell and his crew of &quot;fighting parsons&quot; fortified the Legation Quarter, but impressed Chinese Christians to do most of the physical labour of building defences.

The Germans and the Americans occupied perhaps the most crucial of all defensive positions: the Tartar Wall. Holding the top of the tall and wide wall was vital. The German barricades faced east on top of the wall and west were the west-facing American positions. The Chinese advanced toward both positions by building barricades even closer. &quot;The men all feel they are in a trap&quot;, said the US commander Capt. John Twiggs Myers, &quot;and simply await the hour of execution&quot;. On 30 June, the Chinese forced the Germans off the Wall, leaving the American Marines alone in its defence. In June 1900, one American described the scene of 20,000 Boxers storming the walls:

At the same time, a Chinese barricade was advanced to within a few feet of the American positions, and it became clear that the Americans had to abandon the wall or force the Chinese to retreat. At 2 am on 3 July 56 British, Russian and American marines and sailors, under the command of Myers, launched an assault against the Chinese barricade on the wall. The attack caught the Chinese sleeping, killed about 20 of them, and expelled the rest of them from the barricades. The Chinese did not attempt to advance their positions on the Tartar Wall for the remainder of the siege.

Sir Claude MacDonald said 13 July was the &quot;most harassing day&quot; of the siege. The Japanese and Italians in the Fu were driven back to their last defence line. The Chinese detonated a mine beneath the French Legation pushing the French and Austrians out of most of the French Legation. On 16 July, the most capable British officer was killed and the journalist George Ernest Morrison was wounded. American Minister Edwin H. Conger established contact with the Chinese government and on 17 July, and an armistice was declared by the Chinese.

=== Infighting among officials and commanders ===

General Ronglu concluded that it was futile to fight all of the powers simultaneously and declined to press home the siege. Zaiyi wanted artillery for Dong&#x27;s troops to destroy the legations. Ronglu blocked the transfer of artillery to Zaiyi and Dong, preventing them from attacking. Ronglu forced Dong Fuxiang and his troops to pull back from completing the siege and destroying the legations, thereby saving the foreigners and making diplomatic concessions. Ronglu and Prince Qing sent food to the legations and used their bannermen to attack the Gansu Braves of Dong Fuxiang and the Boxers who were besieging the foreigners. They issued edicts ordering the foreigners to be protected, but the Gansu warriors ignored it, and fought against bannermen who tried to force them away from the legations. The Boxers also took commands from Dong Fuxiang. Ronglu also deliberately hid an Imperial Decree from Nie Shicheng. The Decree ordered him to stop fighting the Boxers because of the foreign invasion, and also because the population was suffering. Due to Ronglu&#x27;s actions, Nie continued to fight the Boxers and killed many of them even as the foreign troops were making their way into China. Ronglu also ordered Nie to protect foreigners and save the railway from the Boxers. Because parts of the railway were saved under Ronglu&#x27;s orders, the foreign invasion army was able to transport itself into China quickly. Nie committed thousands of troops against the Boxers instead of against the foreigners, but was already outnumbered by the Allies by 4,000 men. He was blamed for attacking the Boxers, and decided to sacrifice his life at Tietsin by walking into the range of Allied guns.

Xu Jingcheng, who had served as the envoy to many of the same states under siege in the Legation Quarter, argued that &quot;the evasion of extraterritorial rights and the killing of foreign diplomats are unprecedented in China and abroad&quot;. Xu and five other officials urged Empress Dowager Cixi to order the repression of Boxers, the execution of their leaders, and a diplomatic settlement with foreign armies. The Empress Dowager was outraged, and sentenced Xu and the five others to death for &quot;willfully and absurdly petitioning the imperial court&quot; and &quot;building subversive thought&quot;. They were executed on 28 July 1900 and their severed heads placed on display at Caishikou Execution Grounds in Beijing.

Reflecting this vacillation, some Chinese soldiers were quite liberally firing at foreigners under siege from its very onset. Cixi did not personally order imperial troops to conduct a siege, and on the contrary had ordered them to protect the foreigners in the legations. Prince Duan led the Boxers to loot his enemies within the imperial court and the foreigners, although imperial authorities expelled Boxers after they were let into the city and went on a looting rampage against both the foreign and the Qing imperial forces. Older Boxers were sent outside Beijing to halt the approaching foreign armies, while younger men were absorbed into the Muslim Gansu army.

With conflicting allegiances and priorities motivating the various forces inside Beijing, the situation in the city became increasingly confused. The foreign legations continued to be surrounded by both Qing imperial and Gansu forces. While Dong&#x27;s Gansu army, now swollen by the addition of the Boxers, wished to press the siege, Ronglu&#x27;s imperial forces seem to have largely attempted to follow Cixi&#x27;s decree and protect the legations. However, to satisfy the conservatives in the imperial court, Ronglu&#x27;s men also fired on the legations and let off firecrackers to give the impression that they, too, were attacking the foreigners. Inside the legations and out of communication with the outside world, the foreigners simply fired on any targets that presented themselves, including messengers from the imperial court, civilians and besiegers of all persuasions. Dong Fuxiang was denied artillery held by Ronglu which stopped him from levelling the legations, and when he complained to Empress Dowager Cixi on 23 June, she dismissively said that &quot;Your tail is becoming too heavy to wag.&quot; The Alliance discovered large amounts of unused Chinese Krupp guns and shells after the siege was lifted.

=== Gaselee Expedition ===

Foreign navies started building up their presence along the northern China coast from the end of April 1900. Several international forces were sent to the capital, with varying success, and the Chinese forces were ultimately defeated by the Alliance. Independently, the Netherlands dispatched three cruisers in July to protect its citizens in Shanghai.

British Lieutenant-General Alfred Gaselee acted as the commanding officer of the Eight-Nation Alliance, which eventually numbered 55,000. Japanese forces, led by Fukushima Yasumasa and Yamaguchi Motomi and numbering over 20,840 men, made up the majority of the expeditionary force. French forces in the campaign, led by general Henri-Nicolas Frey, consisted mostly of inexperienced Vietnamese and Cambodian conscripts from French Indochina. The &quot;First Chinese Regiment&quot; (Weihaiwei Regiment) which was praised for its performance, consisted of Chinese collaborators serving in the British military. Notable events included the seizure of the Dagu Forts commanding the approaches to Tianjin and the boarding and capture of four Chinese destroyers by British Commander Roger Keyes. Among the foreigners besieged in Tianjin was a young American mining engineer named Herbert Hoover, who would go on to become the 31st President of the United States.

The international force captured Tianjin on 14 July. The international force suffered its heaviest casualties of the Boxer Rebellion in the Battle of Tientsin. With Tianjin as a base, the international force marched from Tianjin to Beijing (about ), with 20,000 allied troops. On 4 August, there were approximately 70,000 Qing imperial troops and anywhere from 50,000 to 100,000 Boxers along the way. The allies only encountered minor resistance, fighting battles at Beicang and Yangcun. At Yangcun, Russian general Nikolai Linevich led the 14th Infantry Regiment of the US and British troops in the assault. The weather was a major obstacle. Conditions were extremely humid with temperatures sometimes reaching . These high temperatures and insects plagued the Allies. Soldiers became dehydrated and horses died. Chinese villagers killed Allied troops who searched for wells.

The heat killed Allied soldiers, who foamed at the mouth. The tactics along the way were gruesome on either side. Allied soldiers beheaded already dead Chinese corpses, bayoneted or beheaded live Chinese civilians, and raped Chinese girls and women. Cossacks were reported to have killed Chinese civilians almost automatically and Japanese kicked a Chinese soldier to death. The Chinese responded to the Alliance&#x27;s atrocities with similar acts of violence and cruelty, especially towards captured Russians. Lieutenant Smedley Butler saw the remains of two Japanese soldiers nailed to a wall, who had their tongues cut off and their eyes gouged. Lieutenant Butler was wounded during the expedition in the leg and chest, later receiving the Brevet Medal in recognition for his actions.

The international force reached Beijing on 14 August. Following Beiyang army&#x27;s defeat in the First Sino-Japanese War, the Chinese government had invested heavily in modernising the imperial army, which was equipped with modern Mauser repeater rifles and Krupp artillery. Three modernised divisions consisting of Manchu bannermen protected the Beijing Metropolitan region. Two of them were under the command of the anti-Boxer Prince Qing and Ronglu, while the anti-foreign Prince Duan commanded the ten-thousand-strong Hushenying, or &quot;Tiger Spirit Division&quot;, which had joined the Gansu Braves and Boxers in attacking the foreigners. It was a Hushenying captain who had assassinated the German diplomat, Ketteler. The Tenacious Army under Nie Shicheng received Western style training under German and Russian officers in addition to their modernised weapons and uniforms. They effectively resisted the Alliance at the Battle of Tientsin before retreating and astounded the Alliance forces with the accuracy of their artillery during the siege of the Tianjin concessions (the artillery shells failed to explode upon impact due to corrupt manufacturing). The Gansu Braves under Dong Fuxiang, which some sources described as &quot;ill disciplined&quot;, were armed with modern weapons but were not trained according to Western drill and wore traditional Chinese uniforms. They led the defeat of the Alliance at Langfang in the Seymour Expedition and were the most ferocious in besieging the Legations in Beijing. The British won the race among the international forces to be the first to reach the besieged Legation Quarter. The US was able to play a role due to the presence of UD ships and troops stationed in Manila since the US conquest of the Philippines during the Spanish–American War and the subsequent Philippine–American War. The US military refers to this as the China Relief Expedition. United States Marines scaling the walls of Beijing is an iconic image of the Boxer Rebellion.

The British Army reached the legation quarter on the afternoon of 14 August and relieved the Legation Quarter. The Beitang was relieved on 16 August, first by Japanese soldiers and then, officially, by the French.

=== Qing court flight to Xi&#x27;an ===
As the foreign armies reached Beijing, the Qing court fled to Xi&#x27;an, with Cixi disguised as a Buddhist nun. The journey was made all the more arduous by the lack of preparation, but the Empress Dowager insisted this was not a retreat, rather a &quot;tour of inspection&quot;. After weeks of travel, the party arrived in Xi&#x27;an, beyond protective mountain passes where the foreigners could not reach, deep in Chinese Muslim territory and protected by the Gansu Braves. The foreigners had no orders to pursue Cixi, so they decided to stay put.

== Russian invasion of Manchuria ==
The Russian Empire and the Qing dynasty had maintained a long peace, starting with the Treaty of Nerchinsk in 1689, but Russian forces took advantage of Chinese defeats to impose the Aigun Treaty of 1858 and the Treaty of Peking of 1860 which ceded formerly Chinese territory in Manchuria to Russia, much of which is held by Russia to the present day (Primorye). The Russians aimed for control over the Amur River for navigation, and the all-weather ports of Dairen and Port Arthur in the Liaodong peninsula. The rise of Japan as an Asian power provoked Russia&#x27;s anxiety, especially in light of expanding Japanese influence in Korea. Following Japan&#x27;s victory in the First Sino-Japanese War of 1895, the Triple Intervention of Russia, Germany and France forced Japan to return the territory won in Liaodong, leading to a de facto Sino-Russian alliance.

Local Chinese in Manchuria were incensed at these Russian advances and began to harass Russians and Russian institutions, such as the Chinese Eastern Railway, which was guarded by Russian troops under Pavel Mishchenko. In June 1900, the Chinese bombarded the town of Blagoveshchensk on the Russian side of the Amur. The Russian government, at the insistence of war minister Aleksey Kuropatkin, used the pretext of Boxer activity to move some 200,000 troops led by Paul von Rennenkampf into the area to crush the Boxers. The Chinese used arson to destroy a bridge carrying a railway and a barracks on 27 July. The Boxer attacks on Chinese Eastern Railway and burned the Yantai mines.

== Massacre of missionaries and Chinese Christians ==

A total of 136 Protestant missionaries, 53 children, 47 Catholic priests and nuns, 30,000 Chinese Catholics, 2,000 Chinese Protestants, and 200–400 of the 700 Russian Orthodox Christians in Beijing are estimated to have been killed during the uprising. The Protestant dead were collectively termed the China Martyrs of 1900.

Orthodox, Protestant, and Catholic missionaries and their Chinese parishioners were massacred throughout northern China, some by Boxers and others by government troops and authorities. After the declaration of war on Western powers in June 1900, Yuxian, who had been named governor of Shanxi in March of that year, implemented a brutal anti-foreign and anti-Christian policy. On 9 July, reports circulated that he had executed forty-four foreigners (including women and children) from missionary families whom he had invited to the provincial capital Taiyuan under the promise to protect them. Although the purported eyewitness accounts have recently been questioned as improbable, this event became a notorious symbol of Chinese anger, known as the Taiyuan massacre.

The England-based Baptist Missionary Society opened its mission in Shanxi in 1877. In 1900, all its missionaries there were killed, along with all 120 converts. By the summer&#x27;s end, more foreigners and as many as 2,000 Chinese Christians had been put to death in the province. Journalist and historical writer Nat Brandt has called the massacre of Christians in Shanxi &quot;the greatest single tragedy in the history of Christian evangelicalism&quot;.

Some 222 Russian–Chinese martyrs, including Chi Sung as St. Metrophanes, were locally canonised as New Martyrs on 22 April 1902, after Archimandrite Innocent (Fugurovsky), head of the Russian Orthodox Mission in China, solicited the Most Holy Synod to perpetuate their memory. This was the first local canonisation for more than two centuries.

== Aftermath ==
=== Allied occupation and atrocities ===

The Eight Nation Alliance occupied Zhili province while Russia occupied Manchuria, but the rest of China was not occupied due to the actions of several Han governors who formed the Mutual Protection of Southeast China that refused to obey the declaration of war and kept their armies and provinces out of the war. Zhang Zhidong told Everard Fraser, the Hankou-based British consul general, that he despised Manchus so that the Eight Nation Alliance would not occupy provinces under the Mutual Defense Pact.

Beijing, Tianjin and Zhili province were occupied for more than one year by the international expeditionary force under the command of German Field Marshal Alfred von Waldersee, who had initially been appointed commander of the Eight-Nation Alliance during the rebellion but did not arrive in China until after most of the fighting had ended. The Americans and British paid General Yuan Shikai and his army (the Right Division) to help the Eight Nation Alliance suppress the Boxers. Yuan Shikai&#x27;s forces killed tens of thousands of people in their anti-Boxer campaign in Zhili province and Shandong after the Alliance captured Beijing. The majority of the hundreds of thousands of people living in inner Beijing during the Qing were Manchus and Mongol bannermen from the Eight Banners after they were moved there in 1644, when Han Chinese were expelled. Sawara Tokusuke, a Japanese journalist, wrote in &quot;Miscellaneous Notes about the Boxers&quot; about the rapes of Manchu and Mongol banner girls. He alleged that soldiers of the Eight-Nation Alliance raped a large number of women in Peking, including all seven daughters of Viceroy Yulu of the Hitara clan. Likewise, a daughter and a wife of Mongol banner noble Chongqi of the Alute clan were allegedly gang-raped by soldiers of the Eight-Nation Alliance. Chongqi killed himself on 26 August 1900, and some other relatives, including his son, Baochu, did likewise shortly afterward.

During attacks on suspected Boxer areas from September 1900 to March 1901, European and American forces engaged in tactics which included public decapitations of Chinese with suspected Boxer sympathies, systematic looting, routine shooting of farm animals and crop destruction, destruction of religion buildings and public buildings, burning of religious texts, and widespread rape of Chinese women and girls.

Contemporary British and American observers levelled their greatest criticism at German, Russian, and Japanese troops for their ruthlessness and willingness to execute Chinese of all ages and backgrounds, sometimes burning villages and killing their entire populations. The German force arrived too late to take part in the fighting but undertook punitive expeditions to villages in the countryside. According to missionary Arthur Henderson Smith, in addition to burning and looting, Germans &quot;cut off the heads of many Chinese within their jurisdiction, many of them for absolutely trivial offenses&quot;. US Army Lieutenant C. D. Rhodes reported that German and French soldiers set fire to buildings where innocent peasants were sheltering and would shoot and bayonet peasants who fled the burning buildings. According to Australian soldiers, Germans extorted ransom payments from villages in exchange for not torching their homes and crops. British journalist George Lynch wrote that German and Italian soldiers engaged in a practice of raping Chinese women and girls before burning their villages. According to Lynch, German soldiers would attempt to cover up these atrocities by throwing rape victims into wells as staged suicides. Lynch said, &quot;There are things that I must not write, and that may not be printed in England, which would seem to show that this Western civilisation of ours is merely a veneer over savagery&quot;.

On 27 July, during departure ceremonies for the German relief force, Kaiser Wilhelm II included an impromptu but intemperate reference to the Hun invaders of continental Europe:

One newspaper called the aftermath of the siege a &quot;carnival of ancient loot&quot;, and others called it &quot;an orgy of looting&quot; by soldiers, civilians and missionaries. These characterisations called to mind the sacking of the Summer Palace in 1860. Each nationality accused the others of being the worst looters. An American diplomat, Herbert G. Squiers, filled several railway carriages with loot and artefacts. The British Legation held loot auctions every afternoon and proclaimed, &quot;Looting on the part of British troops was carried out in the most orderly manner.&quot; However, one British officer noted, &quot;It is one of the unwritten laws of war that a city which does not surrender at the last and is taken by storm is looted.&quot; For the rest of 1900 and 1901, the British held loot auctions every day except Sunday in front of the main-gate to the British Legation. Many foreigners, including Claude Maxwell MacDonald and Lady Ethel MacDonald and George Ernest Morrison of &quot;The Times&quot;, were active bidders among the crowd. Many of these looted items ended up in Europe. The Catholic Beitang or North Cathedral was a &quot;salesroom for stolen property&quot;. The American general Adna Chaffee banned looting by American soldiers, but the ban was ineffectual. According to Chaffee, &quot;it is safe to say that where one real Boxer has been killed, fifty harmless coolies or laborers, including not a few women and children, have been slain&quot;.

A few Western missionaries took an active part in calling for retribution. To provide restitution to missionaries and Chinese Christian families whose property had been destroyed, William Scott Ament, a missionary of American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions, guided American troops through villages to punish those he suspected of being Boxers and confiscate their property. When Mark Twain read of this expedition, he wrote a scathing essay, &quot;To the Person Sitting in Darkness&quot;, that attacked the &quot;Reverend bandits of the American Board&quot;, especially targeting Ament, one of the most respected missionaries in China. The controversy was front-page news during much of 1901. Ament&#x27;s counterpart on the distaff side was British missionary Georgina Smith, who presided over a neighbourhood in Beijing as judge and jury.

While one historical account reported that Japanese troops were astonished by other Alliance troops raping civilians, others noted that Japanese troops were &quot;looting and burning without mercy&quot;, and that Chinese &quot;women and girls by hundreds have committed suicide to escape a worse fate at the hands of Russian and Japanese brutes&quot;. Roger Keyes, who commanded the British destroyer &quot;Fame&quot; and accompanied the Gaselee Expedition, noted that the Japanese had brought their own &quot;regimental wives&quot; (prostitutes) to the front to keep their soldiers from raping Chinese civilians.
&quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; journalist E. J. Dillon stated that he witnessed the mutilated corpses of Chinese women who were raped and killed by the Alliance troops. The French commander dismissed the rapes, attributing them to &quot;gallantry of the French soldier&quot;. According to U.S. Captain Grote Hutcheson, French forces burned each village they encountered during a 99-mile march and planted the French flag in the ruins.

Many bannermen supported the Boxers, and shared their anti-foreign sentiment. Bannermen had been devastated in the First Sino-Japanese War in 1895 and Banner armies were destroyed while resisting the invasion. In the words of historian Pamela Crossley, their living conditions went &quot;from desperate poverty to true misery&quot;. When thousands of Manchus fled south from Aigun during the fighting in 1900, their cattle and horses were stolen by Russian Cossacks who then burned their villages and homes to ashes. Manchu Banner armies were destroyed while resisting the invasion, many annihilated by Russians. Manchu Shoufu killed himself during the battle of Peking and the Manchu Lao She&#x27;s father was killed by Western soldiers in the battle as the Manchu banner armies of the Center Division of the Guards Army, Tiger Spirit Division and Peking Field Force in the Metropolitan banners were slaughtered by the western soldiers. The Inner-city Legation Quarters and Catholic cathedral (Church of the Saviour, Beijing) were both attacked by Manchu bannermen. Manchu bannermen were slaughtered by the Eight Nation Alliance all over Manchuria and Beijing because most of the Manchu bannermen supported the Boxers.The clan system of the Manchus in Aigun was obliterated by the despoliation of the area at the hands of the Russian invaders. There were 1,266 households including 900 Daurs and 4,500 Manchus in Sixty-Four Villages East of the River and Blagoveshchensk until the Blagoveshchensk massacre and Sixty-Four Villages East of the River massacre committed by Russian Cossack soldiers. Many Manchu villages were burned by Cossacks in the massacre according to Victor Zatsepine.

Manchu royals, officials and officers like Yuxian, Qixiu, Zaixun, Prince Zhuang and Captain Enhai were executed or forced to commit suicide by the Eight Nation Alliance. Manchu official Gangyi&#x27;s execution was demanded, but he had already died. Japanese soldiers arrested Qixiu before he was executed. Zaixun, Prince Zhuang was forced to commit suicide on 21 February 1901. They executed Yuxian on 22 February 1901. On 31 December 1900 German soldiers beheaded the Manchu captain Enhai for killing Clemens von Ketteler.

=== Indemnity ===
After the capture of Peking by the foreign armies, some of Cixi&#x27;s advisers advocated that the war be carried on, arguing that China could have defeated the foreigners as it was disloyal and traitorous people within China who allowed Beijing and Tianjin to be captured by the Allies, and that the interior of China was impenetrable. They also recommended that Dong Fuxiang continue fighting. The Empress Dowager Cixi was practical however, and decided that the terms were generous enough for her to acquiesce when she was assured of her continued reign after the war and that China would not be forced to cede any territory.

On 7 September 1901, the Qing imperial court agreed to sign the Boxer Protocol, also known as Peace Agreement between the Eight-Nation Alliance and China. The protocol ordered the execution of 10 high-ranking officials linked to the outbreak and other officials who were found guilty for the slaughter of foreigners in China. Alfons Mumm, Ernest Satow, and Komura Jutaro signed on behalf of Germany, Britain, and Japan, respectively.

China was fined war reparations of 450,000,000 taels of fine silver () for the loss that it caused. The reparation was to be paid by 1940, within 39 years, and would be 982,238,150 taels with interest (4 per cent per year) included. The existing tariff increased from 3.18 to 5 per cent, and formerly duty-free merchandise was newly taxed, to help meet these indemnity demands. The sum of reparations was estimated by the Chinese population size (roughly 450 million in 1900) at one tael per person. Chinese customs income and salt taxes guaranteed the reparation. China paid 668,661,220 taels of silver from 1901 to 1939 – equivalent in 2010 to US$61 billion on a purchasing-power-parity basis.

A large portion of the reparations paid to the United States was diverted to pay for the education of Chinese students in US universities under the Boxer Indemnity Scholarship Program. To prepare the students chosen for this program, an institute was established to teach the English language and to serve as a preparatory school. When the first of these students returned to China, they undertook the teaching of subsequent students; from this institute was born Tsinghua University.
The US China Inland Mission lost more members than any other missionary agency: 58 adults and 21 children were killed. However, in 1901, when the allied nations were demanding compensation from the Chinese government, Hudson Taylor refused to accept payment for loss of property or life, to demonstrate the meekness and gentleness of Christ to the Chinese.

The Belgian Catholic vicar apostolic of Ordos wanted foreign troops garrisoned in Inner Mongolia, but the Governor refused. Bermyn petitioned the Manchu Enming to send troops to Hetao where Prince Duan&#x27;s Mongol troops and General Dong Fuxiang&#x27;s Muslim troops allegedly threatened Catholics. It turned out that Bermyn had created the incident as a hoax. Western Catholic missionaries forced Mongols to give up their land to Han Chinese Catholics as part of the Boxer indemnities according to Mongol historian Shirnut Sodbilig. Mongols had participated in attacks against Catholic missions in the Boxer rebellion.

The Qing government did not capitulate to all the foreign demands. The Manchu governor Yuxian was executed, but the imperial court refused to execute the Han Chinese General Dong Fuxiang, although he had also encouraged the killing of foreigners during the rebellion. Empress Dowager Cixi intervened when the Alliance demanded him executed and Dong was only cashiered and sent back home. Instead, Dong lived a life of luxury and power in &quot;exile&quot; in his home province of Gansu. Upon Dong&#x27;s death in 1908, all honours which had been stripped from him were restored and he was given a full military burial. The indemnity was never fully paid and was lifted during World War II.

== Long-term consequences ==

The occupation of Beijing by foreign powers and the failure of the rebellion further eroded support for the Qing state. Support for reforms decreased, while support for revolution increased. In the ten years after the Boxer Rebellion, uprisings in China increased, particularly in the south. Support grew for the &quot;Tongmenghui&quot;, an alliance of anti-Qing groups which later became the Kuomintang.

Cixi was returned to Beijing, the foreign powers believing that maintaining the Qing government was the best way to control China. The Qing state made further efforts to reform. It abolished the imperial examinations in 1905 and sought to gradually introduce consultative assemblies. Along with the formation of new military and police organisations, the reforms also simplified central bureaucracy and made a start at revamping taxation policies. These efforts failed to maintain the Qing dynasty, which was overthrown in the 1911 Xinhai Revolution.

In October 1900, Russia occupied the provinces of Manchuria, a move that threatened Anglo-American hopes of maintaining the country&#x27;s openness to commerce under the Open Door Policy.
The historian Walter LaFeber has argued that President William McKinley&#x27;s decision to send 5,000 American troops to quell the rebellion marks &quot;the origins of modern presidential war powers&quot;:

Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., concurred and wrote:

== Analysis of the Boxers ==

From the beginning, views differed as to whether the Boxers were better seen as anti-imperialist, patriotic and proto-nationalist, or as backward, irrational, and futile opponents of what was inevitable change. The historian Joseph W. Esherick comments that &quot;confusion about the Boxer Uprising is not simply a matter of popular misconceptions&quot; since &quot;there is no major incident in China&#x27;s modern history on which the range of professional interpretation is as great&quot;.

The Boxers drew condemnation from those who wanted to modernise China according to a Western model of civilisation. Sun Yat-sen, considered the founding father of modern China, at the time worked to overthrow the Qing but believed that government spread rumours that &quot;caused confusion among the populace&quot; and stirred up the Boxer Movement. He delivered &quot;scathing criticism&quot; of the Boxers&#x27; &quot;anti-foreignism and obscurantism&quot;. Sun praised the Boxers for their &quot;spirit of resistance&quot; but called them &quot;bandits&quot;. Students studying in Japan were ambivalent. Some stated that while the uprising originated from the ignorant and stubborn people, their beliefs were brave and righteous and could be transformed into a force for independence. After the fall of the Qing dynasty in 1911, nationalistic Chinese became more sympathetic to the Boxers. In 1918, Sun praised their fighting spirit and said that the Boxers were courageous and fearless in fighting to the death against the Alliance armies, specifically the Battle of Yangcun. Chinese liberals such as Hu Shih, who called on China to modernise, still condemned the Boxers for their irrationality and barbarity. The leader of the New Culture Movement, Chen Duxiu, forgave the &quot;barbarism of the Boxer ... given the crime foreigners committed in China&quot;, and contended that it was those &quot;subservient to the foreigners&quot; that truly &quot;deserved our resentment&quot;.

In other countries, views of the Boxers were complex and contentious. Mark Twain said that &quot;the Boxer is a patriot. He loves his country better than he does the countries of other people. I wish him success.&quot; The Russian writer Leo Tolstoy also praised the Boxers and accused Nicholas II of Russia and Wilhelm II of Germany of being chiefly responsible for the lootings, rapes, murders, and &quot;Christian brutality&quot; of the Russian and Western troops. The Russian revolutionary Vladimir Lenin mocked the Russian government&#x27;s claim that it was protecting Christian civilisation: &quot;Poor Imperial Government! So Christianly unselfish, and yet so unjustly maligned! Several years ago it unselfishly seized Port Arthur, and now it is unselfishly seizing Manchuria; it has unselfishly flooded the frontier provinces of China with hordes of contractors, engineers, and officers, who, by their conduct, have roused to indignation even the Chinese, known for their docility.&quot; The Russian newspaper &quot;Amurskii Krai&quot; criticised the killing of innocent civilians and charged that restraint would have been more becoming of a &quot;civilized Christian nation&quot;, asking: &quot;What shall we tell civilized people? We shall have to say to them: &#x27;Do not consider us as brothers anymore. We are mean and terrible people; we have killed those who hid at our place, who sought our protection. Lenin saw the Boxers as an avant-garde Proletarian force fighting against imperialism.
Some American churchmen spoke out in support of the Boxers. In 1912, the evangelist George F. Pentecost said that the Boxer uprising was a:

The Indian Bengali Rabindranath Tagore attacked the European colonialists. A number of Indian soldiers in the British Indian Army sympathised with the cause of the Boxers, and in 1994 the Indian military returned a bell looted by British soldiers in the Temple of Heaven to China.

The events also left a longer impact. Historian Robert Bickers noted that the Boxer Rebellion served as an equivalent to the Indian Rebellion of 1857 for the British government, and agitated the Yellow Peril among the British public. He adds that later events like the Northern Expedition during the 1920s, and even the activities of the Red Guards during the 1960s, were perceived as standing in the shadow of the Boxers.

History textbooks in Taiwan and Hong Kong often present the Boxer as irrational, but the central government textbooks in mainland China have described the Boxer movement as an anti-imperialist, patriotic peasant movement that failed by the lack of leadership from the modern working class—and the international army as an invading force. In recent decades, however, large-scale projects of village interviews and explorations of archival sources have led historians in China to take a more nuanced view. Some non-Chinese scholars, such as Joseph Esherick, have seen the movement as anti-imperialist, but others hold that the concept &quot;nationalistic&quot; is anachronistic because the Chinese nation had not been formed, and the Boxers were more concerned with regional issues. Paul Cohen&#x27;s recent study includes a survey of &quot;the Boxers as myth&quot;, which shows how their memory was used in changing ways in 20th-century China from the New Culture Movement to the Cultural Revolution.

In recent years, the Boxer question has been debated in the People&#x27;s Republic of China. In 1998, the critical scholar Wang Yi argued that the Boxers had features in common with the extremism of the Cultural Revolution. Both events had the external goal of &quot;liquidating all harmful pests&quot; and the domestic goal of &quot;eliminating bad elements of all descriptions&quot; and that the relation was rooted in &quot;cultural obscurantism&quot;. Wang explained to his readers the changes in attitudes towards the Boxers from the condemnation of the May Fourth Movement to the approval expressed by Mao Zedong during the Cultural Revolution. In 2006, Yuan Weishi, a professor of philosophy at Zhongshan University in Guangzhou, wrote that the Boxers by their &quot;criminal actions brought unspeakable suffering to the nation and its people! These are all facts that everybody knows, and it is a national shame that the Chinese people cannot forget.&quot; Yuan charged that history textbooks had been lacking in neutrality by presenting the Boxer Uprising as a &quot;magnificent feat of patriotism&quot; and not the view that most Boxer rebels were violent. In response, some labelled Yuan Weishi a &quot;traitor&quot; (Hanjian).

== Terminology ==
The name &quot;Boxer Rebellion&quot;, concludes Joseph W. Esherick, a contemporary historian, is truly a &quot;misnomer&quot;, for the Boxers &quot;never rebelled against the Manchu rulers of China and their Qing dynasty&quot; and the &quot;most common Boxer slogan, throughout the history of the movement, was &#x27;support the Qing, destroy the Foreign,&#x27; where &#x27;foreign&#x27; clearly meant the foreign religion, Christianity, and its Chinese converts as much as the foreigners themselves&quot;. He adds that only after the movement was suppressed by the Allied Intervention did the foreign powers and influential Chinese officials both realise that the Qing would have to remain as the government of China to maintain order and collect taxes to pay the indemnity. Therefore, to save face for the Empress Dowager and the members of the imperial court, all argued that the Boxers were rebels and that the only support which the Boxers received from the imperial court came from a few Manchu princes. Esherick concludes that the origin of the term &quot;rebellion&quot; was &quot;purely political and opportunistic&quot;, but it has had a remarkable staying power, particularly in popular accounts.

On 6 June 1900, &quot;The Times&quot; of London used the term &quot;rebellion&quot; in quotation marks, presumably to indicate its view that the rising was actually instigated by Empress Dowager Cixi. The historian Lanxin Xiang refers to the uprising as the &quot;so called &#x27;Boxer Rebellion, and he also states that &quot;while peasant rebellion was nothing new in Chinese history, a war against the world&#x27;s most powerful states was.&quot; Other recent Western works refer to the uprising as the &quot;Boxer Movement&quot;, the &quot;Boxer War&quot; or the Yihetuan Movement, while Chinese studies refer to it as the &quot;Yihetuan Movement&quot; (). In his discussion of the general and legal implications of the terminology involved, the German scholar Thoralf Klein notes that all of the terms, including the Chinese terms, are &quot;posthumous interpretations of the conflict&quot;. He argues that each term, whether it be &quot;uprising&quot;, &quot;rebellion&quot; or &quot;movement&quot; implies a different definition of the conflict. Even the term &quot;Boxer War&quot;, which has frequently been used by scholars in the West, raises questions. Neither side made a formal declaration of war. The imperial edicts on June 21 said that hostilities had begun and directed the regular Chinese army to join the Boxers against the Allied armies. This was a de facto declaration of war. The Allied troops behaved like soldiers who were mounting a punitive expedition in colonial style, rather than soldiers who were waging a declared war with legal constraints. The Allies took advantage of the fact that China had not signed &quot;The Laws and Customs of War on Land&quot;, a key document signed at the 1899 Hague Peace Conference. They argued that China had violated provisions that they themselves ignored.

There is also a difference in terms referring to the combatants. The first reports which came from China in 1898 referred to the village activists as the &quot;Yihequan&quot;, (Wade–Giles: I Ho Ch&#x27;uan). The earliest use of the term &quot;Boxer&quot; is contained in a letter which was written in Shandong in September 1899 by missionary Grace Newton. The context of the letter makes it clear that when it was written, &quot;Boxer&quot; was already a well-known term, probably coined by Arthur Henderson Smith or Henry Porter, two missionaries who were also residing in Shandong. Smith wrote in his 1902 book that the name:

== Media portrayal ==

By 1900, many new forms of media had matured, including illustrated newspapers and magazines, postcards, broadsides, and advertisements, all of which presented images of the Boxers and the invading armies. The rebellion was covered in the foreign illustrated press by artists and photographers. Paintings and prints were also published including Japanese woodblocks. In the following decades, the Boxers were a constant subject of comment. A sampling includes:
* Liu E, &quot;The Travels of Lao Can&quot; sympathetically shows an honest official trying to carry out reforms and depicts the Boxers as sectarian rebels.
* Wu Jianren, &quot;Sea of Regret&quot; deals with the disintegration of the relationship of a young couple with the Boxer Rebellion in its background.
* Lin Yutang, &quot;Moment in Peking&quot; covers events in China from 1900 to 1938, including the Boxer Rebellion.
* The 1963 film &quot;55 Days at Peking&quot; directed by Nicholas Ray and starring Charlton Heston, Ava Gardner, and David Niven.
* In 1975, Hong Kong&#x27;s Shaw Brothers studio produced the film &quot;Boxer Rebellion&quot; () under director Chang Cheh.
* &quot;The Last Empress&quot; (Boston, 2007), by Anchee Min, describes the long reign of the Empress Dowager Cixi in which the siege of the legations is one of the climactic events in the novel.
* Mo Yan&#x27;s &quot;Sandalwood Death&quot;, a novel told from the viewpoint of villagers during the Boxer Uprising.
* Gene Luen Yang&#x27;s &quot;Boxers&quot;, a piece of historical fiction written around the event in the form of a graphic novel.

== See also ==
* Gengzi Guobian Tanci
* Imperial Decree on events leading to the signing of Boxer Protocol
* List of 1900–1930 publications on the Boxer Rebellion
* Xishiku Cathedral

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* Excerpt
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Volume I; volume II. An account of the Boxers and the siege by a missionary who had lived in a North China village.
* 


== Further reading ==
=== General accounts and analysis ===
* 
* Introduction to a special issue of the journal devoted to translations of recent research on the Boxers in the People&#x27;s Republic.
* 
* 

=== Missionary experience and personal accounts ===
* The story of the Xinzhou martyrs, Shanxi Province.
* 
* 
* 
* 

=== Allied intervention, the Boxer War, and the aftermath ===
* 
* 
* 

=== Contemporary accounts and sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* Includes interviews and selections from newspaper and magazine first person accounts.
* An account by the Italian Minister in Peking.

== External links ==

* Lost in the Gobi Desert: Hart retraces great-grandfather&#x27;s footsteps, William &amp; Mary News Story, 3 January 2005.
* 200 Photographs in Library of Congress online Collection
* University of Washington Library&#x27;s Digital Collections – Robert Henry Chandless Photographs
* Proceedings of the Tenth Universal Peace Congress, 1901
* Pictures from the Siege of Peking, from the Caldwell Kvaran archives
* Eyewitness account: When the Allies Entered Peking, 1900 , an excerpt of Pierre Loti&#x27;s &quot;Les Derniers Jours de Pékin&quot; (1902).
* Documents of the Boxer Rebellion (China Relief Expedition), 1900–1901 National Museum of the U.S. Navy (Selected Naval Documents).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q150229" start="4" end="19" title="Boxer Rebellion" label="Boxer Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q150229" start="39" end="53" title="Boxer Rebellion" label="Boxer Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144178" start="76" end="92" title="anti-imperialist" label="anti-imperialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q564862" start="98" end="112" title="anti-Christian" label="anti-Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="183" end="195" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335146" start="204" end="245" title="Society of Righteous and Harmonious Fists" label="Society of Righteous and Harmonious Fists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705105" start="334" end="354" title="Chinese martial arts" label="Chinese martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q320404" start="445" end="466" title="Eight-Nation Alliance" label="Eight-Nation Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q178687" start="501" end="524" title="First Sino-Japanese War" label="First Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="583" end="603" title="Spheres of influence#China" label="spheres of influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q51647" start="648" end="670" title="Christian missionaries" label="Christian missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355" start="787" end="799" title="Yellow River" label="Yellow River"/>
<link wikidata="Q43407" start="925" end="933" title="Shandong" label="Shandong"/>
<link wikidata="Q147304" start="942" end="959" title="North China Plain" label="North China Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q908467" start="1062" end="1080" title="Chinese Christians" label="Chinese Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663651" start="1388" end="1404" title="Legation Quarter" label="Legation Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q548289" start="1623" end="1632" title="Dagu Fort" label="Dagu Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q11736" start="1636" end="1643" title="Tianjin" label="Tianjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47842" start="1645" end="1665" title="Empress Dowager Cixi" label="Empress Dowager Cixi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006544" start="1743" end="1761" title="Imperial decree of declaration of war against foreign powers" label="an imperial decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204208" start="1932" end="1943" title="Yikuang" label="Prince Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q705554" start="2009" end="2015" title="Ronglu" label="Ronglu"/>
<link wikidata="Q838098" start="2084" end="2102" title="Mutual Defence Pact of the Southeastern Provinces" label="southern provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4337436" start="2412" end="2448" title="Siege of the International Legations" label="Siege of the International Legations"/>
<link wikidata="Q672556" start="2609" end="2623" title="Boxer Protocol" label="Boxer Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q876244" start="2792" end="2796" title="tael" label="tael"/>
<link wikidata="Q708399" start="2873" end="2882" title="indemnity" label="indemnity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497146" start="3065" end="3082" title="Late Qing reforms" label="Late Qing reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394780" start="3153" end="3171" title="John King Fairbank" label="John King Fairbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335146" start="4189" end="4219" title="Righteous and Harmonious Fists" label="Righteous and Harmonious Fists"/>
<link wikidata="Q43407" start="4285" end="4293" title="Shandong" label="Shandong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100937" start="4666" end="4686" title="Chinese spirit possession" label="spiritual possession"/>
<link wikidata="Q842272" start="5409" end="5415" title="Yuxian (Qing dynasty)" label="Yuxian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10323398" start="5454" end="5468" title="Cao Prefecture" label="Cao Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906503" start="5533" end="5551" title="Big Swords Society" label="Big Swords Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q696656" start="5638" end="5664" title="Society of the Divine Word" label="Society of the Divine Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428546" start="6048" end="6058" title="Paul Cohen (historian)" label="Paul Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16030446" start="6087" end="6104" title="Georg Maria Stenz" label="Georg Maria Stenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q10892022" start="6561" end="6569" title="Baguadao" label="Baguadao"/>
<link wikidata="Q10892022" start="6666" end="6687" title="Plum Flower tradition" label="Plum Flower tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="7019" end="7031" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376651" start="7592" end="7611" title="Foreign concessions in China" label="foreign concessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q282843" start="7616" end="7628" title="treaty ports" label="treaty ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q11498834" start="7762" end="7780" title="Scramble for China" label="Scramble for China"/>
<link wikidata="Q170322" start="8203" end="8210" title="Qingdao" label="Qingdao"/>
<link wikidata="Q612577" start="8216" end="8234" title="Treaty of Tientsin" label="Treaty of Tientsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q604938" start="8243" end="8263" title="Convention of Peking" label="Convention of Peking"/>
<link wikidata="Q418151" start="8290" end="8306" title="Second Opium War" label="Second Opium War"/>
<link wikidata="Q170537" start="8582" end="8591" title="feng shui" label="feng shui"/>
<link wikidata="Q31347" start="9043" end="9054" title="Grand Canal (China)" label="Grand Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921362" start="9349" end="9362" title="Juye Incident" label="Juye Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q702819" start="9512" end="9530" title="East Asia Squadron" label="East Asia Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q489170" start="9552" end="9564" title="Jiaozhou Bay" label="Jiaozhou Bay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9641" end="9688" title="German colonial empire#The empire under Kaiser Wilhelm (1890–1914)" label="declared his intent to seize territory in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152565" start="9727" end="9738" title="concession (territory)" label="concessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q593682" start="9811" end="9830" title="sphere of influence" label="sphere of influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="10004" end="10014" title="Great Wall" label="Great Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="10061" end="10069" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="10074" end="10082" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q43934" start="10131" end="10139" title="Fengtian Province" label="Fengtian"/>
<link wikidata="Q19206" start="10151" end="10163" title="Heilongjiang" label="Heilongjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="10192" end="10198" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15176" start="10208" end="10215" title="Guangxi" label="Guangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="10220" end="10229" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="10242" end="10248" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="10288" end="10295" title="Yangtze" label="Yangtze"/>
<link wikidata="Q860434" start="10957" end="10969" title="Jade Emperor" label="Jade Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872353" start="11407" end="11430" title="Battle of Senluo Temple" label="Battle of Senluo Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q917709" start="12745" end="12770" title="Hundred Days&amp;#x27; Reform" label="Hundred Days&amp;#x27; Reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q299710" start="12825" end="12840" title="Guangxu Emperor" label="Guangxu Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q47842" start="12893" end="12913" title="Empress Dowager Cixi" label="Empress Dowager Cixi"/>
<link wikidata="Q210329" start="12918" end="12929" title="Yuan Shikai" label="Yuan Shikai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4505775" start="13483" end="13511" title="military of the Qing dynasty" label="military of the Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q178687" start="13548" end="13571" title="First Sino-Japanese War" label="First Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604022" start="13780" end="13785" title="Zhili" label="Zhili"/>
<link wikidata="Q462309" start="16083" end="16098" title="Edwin H. Conger" label="Edwin H. Conger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096957" start="16254" end="16278" title="Claude Maxwell MacDonald" label="Claude Maxwell MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q548289" start="16534" end="16544" title="Taku Forts" label="Taku Forts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808040" start="16748" end="16759" title="Yongdingmen" label="Yongdingmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295726" start="16866" end="16878" title="Dong Fuxiang" label="Dong Fuxiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q166203" start="16955" end="16961" title="Mauser" label="Mauser"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="17124" end="17145" title="United States Marines" label="United States Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q134817" start="17283" end="17297" title="Abdul Hamid II" label="Abdul Hamid II"/>
<link wikidata="Q153899" start="17451" end="17474" title="Enver Pasha" label="later Young Turk leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663651" start="17580" end="17603" title="Peking Legation Quarter" label="Peking Legation Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q215788" start="17625" end="17645" title="Clemens von Ketteler" label="Clemens von Ketteler"/>
<link wikidata="Q694458" start="18522" end="18543" title="Edward Hobart Seymour" label="Edward Hobart Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q934262" start="19018" end="19029" title="Aisin Gioro" label="Aisin Gioro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578502" start="19241" end="19253" title="Nie Shicheng" label="Nie Shicheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q58710" start="19353" end="19361" title="Langfang" label="Langfang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6365268" start="19660" end="19672" title="Gansu Braves" label="Gansu Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356964" start="19770" end="19788" title="Battle of Langfang" label="Battle of Langfang"/>
<link wikidata="Q146889" start="20013" end="20028" title="pincer movement" label="pincer movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q501253" start="20203" end="20214" title="Beihe River" label="Beihe River"/>
<link wikidata="Q393836" start="20223" end="20231" title="Tongzhou, Hebei" label="Tongzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599344" start="20480" end="20504" title="The Great Hsi-Ku Arsenal" label="The Great Hsi-Ku Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q189929" start="22130" end="22140" title="naval mine" label="naval mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q501253" start="22149" end="22160" title="Beihe River" label="Beihe River"/>
<link wikidata="Q701150" start="22474" end="22491" title="Yevgeni Ivanovich Alekseyev" label="Yevgeni Alekseyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347854" start="22801" end="22814" title="Grand Council (Qing dynasty)" label="Grand Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242077" start="23167" end="23185" title="Peking Field Force" label="Peking Field Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q548289" start="23667" end="23676" title="Dagu Fort" label="Dagu Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q215788" start="24146" end="24166" title="Clemens von Ketteler" label="Clemens von Ketteler"/>
<link wikidata="Q11604543" start="25096" end="25105" title="Prince Su" label="Prince Su"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006544" start="25195" end="25213" title="Imperial decree of declaration of war against foreign powers" label="an imperial decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q378517" start="25519" end="25531" title="Li Hongzhang" label="Li Hongzhang"/>
<link wikidata="Q210329" start="25546" end="25557" title="Yuan Shikai" label="Yuan Shikai"/>
<link wikidata="Q197344" start="25571" end="25584" title="Zhang Zhidong" label="Zhang Zhidong"/>
<link wikidata="Q338088" start="25599" end="25608" title="Liu Kunyi" label="Liu Kunyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q838098" start="25632" end="25681" title="Mutual Defense Pact of the Southeastern Provinces" label="Mutual Defense Pact of the Southeastern Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663651" start="26511" end="26535" title="Beijing Legation Quarter" label="Beijing Legation Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q80290" start="26549" end="26563" title="Forbidden City" label="Forbidden City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096957" start="26861" end="26885" title="Claude Maxwell MacDonald" label="Claude Maxwell MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032749" start="27314" end="27332" title="Church of the Saviour, Beijing" label="Northern Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5949288" start="27782" end="27804" title="Tiger and Divine Corps" label="Tiger and Divine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q546633" start="28043" end="28057" title="Hanlin Academy" label="Hanlin Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15434697" start="29261" end="29284" title="Francis Dunlap Gamewell" label="Francis Dunlap Gamewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812732" start="29548" end="29559" title="Tartar Wall" label="Tartar Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261477" start="29872" end="29889" title="John Twiggs Myers" label="John Twiggs Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q842116" start="31086" end="31108" title="George Ernest Morrison" label="George Ernest Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q462309" start="31140" end="31155" title="Edwin H. Conger" label="Edwin H. Conger"/>
<link wikidata="Q705554" start="31326" end="31332" title="Ronglu" label="Ronglu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578502" start="32225" end="32237" title="Nie Shicheng" label="Nie Shicheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284372" start="33018" end="33030" title="Xu Jingcheng" label="Xu Jingcheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q10508956" start="33709" end="33736" title="Caishikou Execution Grounds" label="Caishikou Execution Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6439386" start="35596" end="35605" title="Krupp gun" label="Krupp gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722709" start="36056" end="36070" title="Alfred Gaselee" label="Alfred Gaselee"/>
<link wikidata="Q481405" start="36191" end="36209" title="Fukushima Yasumasa" label="Fukushima Yasumasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467415" start="36214" end="36230" title="Yamaguchi Motomi" label="Yamaguchi Motomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18114987" start="36357" end="36375" title="Henri-Nicolas Frey" label="Henri-Nicolas Frey"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="36452" end="36468" title="French Indochina" label="French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147514" start="36510" end="36528" title="Weihaiwei Regiment" label="Weihaiwei Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890708" start="36680" end="36690" title="Battle of Dagu Forts (1900)" label="Dagu Forts"/>
<link wikidata="Q333787" start="36805" end="36816" title="Roger Keyes" label="Roger Keyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="36902" end="36916" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q11736" start="37019" end="37026" title="Tianjin" label="Tianjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087324" start="37126" end="37144" title="Battle of Tientsin" label="Battle of Tientsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087414" start="37453" end="37460" title="Battle of Beicang" label="Beicang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087483" start="37465" end="37472" title="Battle of Yangcun" label="Yangcun"/>
<link wikidata="Q888207" start="37502" end="37518" title="Nikolai Linevich" label="Nikolai Linevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q4550032" start="37527" end="37549" title="14th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="14th Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q47805" start="38114" end="38121" title="Cossack" label="Cossack"/>
<link wikidata="Q556880" start="38387" end="38401" title="Smedley Butler" label="Smedley Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q911283" start="38608" end="38620" title="Brevet (military)" label="Brevet Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204208" start="39084" end="39095" title="Yikuang" label="Prince Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5949288" start="39177" end="39187" title="Hushenying" label="Hushenying"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087324" start="39585" end="39603" title="Battle of Tientsin" label="Battle of Tientsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="40376" end="40382" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="40435" end="40455" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q214456" start="40475" end="40498" title="Philippine–American War" label="Philippine–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099879" start="40538" end="40561" title="China Relief Expedition" label="China Relief Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="40563" end="40584" title="United States Marines" label="United States Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q696094" start="41588" end="41607" title="Treaty of Nerchinsk" label="Treaty of Nerchinsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q618292" start="41684" end="41696" title="Aigun Treaty" label="Aigun Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q604938" start="41713" end="41729" title="Treaty of Peking" label="Treaty of Peking"/>
<link wikidata="Q4341" start="41853" end="41861" title="Primorye" label="Primorye"/>
<link wikidata="Q6862" start="41904" end="41914" title="Amur River" label="Amur River"/>
<link wikidata="Q74881" start="41960" end="41966" title="Dairen" label="Dairen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085373" start="41971" end="41982" title="Port Arthur naval base" label="Port Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q326917" start="41990" end="41998" title="Liaodong" label="Liaodong"/>
<link wikidata="Q178687" start="42178" end="42201" title="First Sino-Japanese War" label="First Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q696874" start="42215" end="42234" title="Triple Intervention" label="Triple Intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q39158" start="42499" end="42522" title="Chinese Eastern Railway" label="Chinese Eastern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443464" start="42566" end="42582" title="Pavel Mishchenko" label="Pavel Mishchenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934" start="42632" end="42647" title="Blagoveshchensk" label="Blagoveshchensk"/>
<link wikidata="Q527156" start="42739" end="42757" title="Aleksey Kuropatkin" label="Aleksey Kuropatkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4012" start="42829" end="42849" title="Paul von Rennenkampf" label="Paul von Rennenkampf"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42978" end="43018" title="Boxer attacks on Chinese Eastern Railway" label="Boxer attacks on Chinese Eastern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197792" start="43406" end="43427" title="China Martyrs of 1900" label="China Martyrs of 1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q72778" start="43981" end="43988" title="Taiyuan" label="Taiyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676655" start="44180" end="44196" title="Taiyuan massacre" label="Taiyuan massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4208381" start="44217" end="44243" title="Baptist Missionary Society" label="Baptist Missionary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4505420" start="44702" end="44729" title="Metrophanes, Chi Sung" label="Chi Sung as St. Metrophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389950" start="44757" end="44768" title="New Martyrs" label="New Martyrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q213159" start="44793" end="44806" title="Archimandrite" label="Archimandrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492984" start="44891" end="44906" title="Most Holy Synod" label="Most Holy Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q838098" start="45242" end="45278" title="Mutual Protection of Southeast China" label="Mutual Protection of Southeast China"/>
<link wikidata="Q60680" start="45725" end="45745" title="Alfred von Waldersee" label="Alfred von Waldersee"/>
<link wikidata="Q210329" start="45951" end="45962" title="Yuan Shikai" label="Yuan Shikai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186887" start="45981" end="45995" title="New Army" label="Right Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q11626801" start="46705" end="46717" title="Yulu (viceroy)" label="Viceroy Yulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q48936818" start="46725" end="46731" title="Hitara" label="Hitara"/>
<link wikidata="Q8249039" start="46793" end="46800" title="Chongqi (official)" label="Chongqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q104857261" start="46808" end="46818" title="Arute Hala" label="Alute clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799020" start="47850" end="47872" title="Arthur Henderson Smith" label="Arthur Henderson Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="49012" end="49015" title="Hun" label="Hun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5734156" start="49397" end="49415" title="Herbert G. Squiers" label="Herbert G. Squiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833880" start="49710" end="49721" title="laws of war" label="laws of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096957" start="49974" end="49998" title="Claude Maxwell MacDonald" label="Claude Maxwell MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q842116" start="50028" end="50050" title="George Ernest Morrison" label="George Ernest Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="50060" end="50069" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032749" start="50174" end="50181" title="Xishiku Cathedral" label="Beitang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2541061" start="50271" end="50283" title="Adna Chaffee" label="Adna Chaffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018218" start="50719" end="50738" title="William Scott Ament" label="William Scott Ament"/>
<link wikidata="Q463587" start="50756" end="50808" title="American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions" label="American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="50931" end="50941" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q16222947" start="51801" end="51805" title="HMS Fame (1896)" label="Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="52014" end="52033" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321940" start="52051" end="52063" title="E. J. Dillon" label="E. J. Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q50376803" start="52311" end="52326" title="Grote Hutcheson" label="Grote Hutcheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q178687" start="52560" end="52583" title="First Sino-Japanese War" label="First Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11522" start="52681" end="52696" title="Pamela Crossley" label="Pamela Crossley"/>
<link wikidata="Q404795" start="52820" end="52825" title="Aigun" label="Aigun"/>
<link wikidata="Q315167" start="53130" end="53137" title="Lao She" label="Lao She"/>
<link wikidata="Q5949288" start="53268" end="53289" title="Tiger Spirit Division" label="Tiger Spirit Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242077" start="53294" end="53312" title="Peking Field Force" label="Peking Field Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032749" start="53440" end="53470" title="Church of the Saviour, Beijing" label="Church of the Saviour, Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q217464" start="53832" end="53837" title="Daurs" label="Daurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q618995" start="53859" end="53896" title="Sixty-Four Villages East of the River" label="Sixty-Four Villages East of the River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934" start="53901" end="53916" title="Blagoveshchensk" label="Blagoveshchensk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4222418" start="53927" end="54002" title="Blagoveshchensk massacre and Sixty-Four Villages East of the River massacre" label="Blagoveshchensk massacre and Sixty-Four Villages East of the River massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q842272" start="54178" end="54184" title="Yuxian (Qing dynasty)" label="Yuxian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10923281" start="54186" end="54191" title="Qixiu" label="Qixiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8064895" start="54193" end="54214" title="Zaixun, Prince Zhuang" label="Zaixun, Prince Zhuang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54227" end="54232" title="Clemens von Ketteler#Boxer rebellion and death" label="Enhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q10898134" start="54321" end="54327" title="Gangyi" label="Gangyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q215788" start="54637" end="54657" title="Clemens von Ketteler" label="Clemens von Ketteler"/>
<link wikidata="Q672556" start="55372" end="55386" title="Boxer Protocol" label="Boxer Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q214971" start="55634" end="55645" title="Alfons Mumm von Schwarzenstein" label="Alfons Mumm"/>
<link wikidata="Q166598" start="55647" end="55659" title="Ernest Satow" label="Ernest Satow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140896" start="55665" end="55678" title="Komura Jutaro" label="Komura Jutaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q194181" start="55759" end="55774" title="war reparations" label="war reparations"/>
<link wikidata="Q876244" start="55790" end="55794" title="tael" label="tael"/>
<link wikidata="Q3770536" start="56588" end="56623" title="Boxer Indemnity Scholarship Program" label="Boxer Indemnity Scholarship Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955" start="56904" end="56923" title="Tsinghua University" label="Tsinghua University"/>
<link wikidata="Q470718" start="57143" end="57156" title="Hudson Taylor" label="Hudson Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57436" end="57442" title="Enming" label="Enming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071754" start="57461" end="57466" title="Hetao" label="Hetao"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295726" start="57518" end="57530" title="Dong Fuxiang" label="Dong Fuxiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q950326" start="58946" end="58957" title="Tongmenghui" label="Tongmenghui"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="59020" end="59030" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497146" start="59192" end="59209" title="Late Qing reforms" label="efforts to reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408" start="59228" end="59248" title="imperial examination" label="imperial examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q190517" start="59565" end="59582" title="Xinhai Revolution" label="Xinhai Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051734" start="59755" end="59771" title="Open Door Policy" label="Open Door Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4255281" start="59787" end="59801" title="Walter LaFeber" label="Walter LaFeber"/>
<link wikidata="Q35041" start="59828" end="59844" title="William McKinley" label="William McKinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q435195" start="59980" end="60005" title="Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr." label="Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="60171" end="60188" title="proto-nationalist" label="proto-nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241610" start="60284" end="60302" title="Joseph W. Esherick" label="Joseph W. Esherick"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="60669" end="60680" title="Sun Yat-sen" label="Sun Yat-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087483" start="61614" end="61631" title="Battle of Yangcun" label="Battle of Yangcun"/>
<link wikidata="Q47667" start="61658" end="61665" title="Hu Shih" label="Hu Shih"/>
<link wikidata="Q852377" start="61785" end="61805" title="New Culture Movement" label="New Culture Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q369681" start="61807" end="61817" title="Chen Duxiu" label="Chen Duxiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="62278" end="62289" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Leo Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="62534" end="62548" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539476" start="63633" end="63652" title="George F. Pentecost" label="George F. Pentecost"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241" start="63709" end="63728" title="Rabindranath Tagore" label="Rabindranath Tagore"/>
<link wikidata="Q642932" start="63800" end="63819" title="British Indian Army" label="British Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q81418324" start="64020" end="64034" title="Robert Bickers" label="Robert Bickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q129864" start="64097" end="64121" title="Indian Rebellion of 1857" label="Indian Rebellion of 1857"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499276" start="64167" end="64179" title="Yellow Peril" label="Yellow Peril"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073476" start="64241" end="64260" title="Northern Expedition" label="Northern Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q821788" start="64310" end="64320" title="Red Guards" label="Red Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="64517" end="64531" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="65375" end="65394" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q701801" start="65520" end="65527" title="Wang Yi (politician)" label="Wang Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="65600" end="65619" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q279790" start="65956" end="65975" title="May Fourth Movement" label="May Fourth Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="66005" end="66015" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060042" start="66057" end="66068" title="Yuan Weishi" label="Yuan Weishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q178972" start="66099" end="66119" title="Zhongshan University" label="Zhongshan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154793" start="66626" end="66633" title="Hanjian" label="Hanjian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241610" start="66703" end="66721" title="Joseph W. Esherick" label="Joseph W. Esherick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566316" start="69584" end="69606" title="Hague Peace Conference" label="Hague Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799020" start="70177" end="70199" title="Arthur Henderson Smith" label="Arthur Henderson Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q702301" start="70801" end="70806" title="Liu E (writer)" label="Liu E"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424209" start="70814" end="70836" title="The Travels of Lao Can" label="The Travels of Lao Can"/>
<link wikidata="Q796190" start="70958" end="70968" title="Wu Jianren" label="Wu Jianren"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004433" start="70976" end="70989" title="Sea of Regret" label="Sea of Regret"/>
<link wikidata="Q334086" start="71110" end="71120" title="Lin Yutang" label="Lin Yutang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069350" start="71128" end="71144" title="Moment in Peking" label="Moment in Peking"/>
<link wikidata="Q244115" start="71246" end="71263" title="55 Days at Peking" label="55 Days at Peking"/>
<link wikidata="Q240677" start="71282" end="71294" title="Nicholas Ray" label="Nicholas Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q80739" start="71308" end="71323" title="Charlton Heston" label="Charlton Heston"/>
<link wikidata="Q164487" start="71325" end="71336" title="Ava Gardner" label="Ava Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q181917" start="71342" end="71353" title="David Niven" label="David Niven"/>
<link wikidata="Q947354" start="71383" end="71396" title="Shaw Brothers" label="Shaw Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q709580" start="71468" end="71478" title="Chang Cheh" label="Chang Cheh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745743" start="71488" end="71504" title="The Last Empress (novel)" label="The Last Empress"/>
<link wikidata="Q259096" start="71530" end="71540" title="Anchee Min" label="Anchee Min"/>
<link wikidata="Q47842" start="71574" end="71594" title="Empress Dowager Cixi" label="Empress Dowager Cixi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8998" start="71678" end="71684" title="Mo Yan" label="Mo Yan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531537" start="71796" end="71810" title="Gene Luen Yang" label="Gene Luen Yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q16207913" start="71824" end="71830" title="Boxers and Saints" label="Boxers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196408" start="71849" end="71867" title="historical fiction" label="historical fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q725377" start="71910" end="71923" title="graphic novel" label="graphic novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838626" start="71943" end="71963" title="Gengzi Guobian Tanci" label="Gengzi Guobian Tanci"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241817" start="71966" end="72032" title="Imperial Decree on events leading to the signing of Boxer Protocol" label="Imperial Decree on events leading to the signing of Boxer Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6559404" start="72035" end="72088" title="List of 1900–1930 publications on the Boxer Rebellion" label="List of 1900–1930 publications on the Boxer Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032749" start="72091" end="72108" title="Xishiku Cathedral" label="Xishiku Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q311854" start="73414" end="73425" title="Pierre Loti" label="Pierre Loti"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="60521" wikidata="Q5634246" url="?curid=60521" title="HMS Scorpion (1863)">
<text>HMS &quot;Scorpion&quot; was an ironclad turret ship built by John Laird Sons &amp; Company, at Birkenhead, England. She was one of two sister ships secretly ordered from the Laird shipyard in 1862 by the Confederate States of America.

Her true ownership was concealed by the fiction that she was being built as the Egyptian warship &quot;El Tousson&quot;. She was to have been named CSS &quot;North Carolina&quot; upon delivery to the Confederacy. Her sister was built under the false name &quot;El Monassir&quot; and was to have been renamed CSS &quot;Mississippi&quot;. In October 1863, a few months after their launch and before they could be completed, the UK Government seized the two ironclads.

In 1864 the Admiralty bought them and commissioned them into the Royal Navy: &quot;El Tousson&quot; as HMS &quot;Scorpion&quot; and &quot;El Monassir&quot; as . &quot;Scorpion&quot; had a long Royal Navy career, until she was lost in the North Atlantic in 1903.

==Design and description==
&quot;North Carolina&quot; and her sister were intended, together with other warships, to break the Federal blockade of Confederate coastal cities and to hold some Northern cities for ransom. The ships had a length between perpendiculars of , a beam of , and a draught of at deep load. They displaced . The hull was divided by 12 watertight bulkheads and the ships had a double bottom beneath the engine and boiler rooms. Their crew consisted of 152 officers and ratings.

The &quot;Scorpion&quot;-class ships had two horizontal direct-acting steam engines, built by Lairds, each driving a single propeller shaft, using steam provided by four tubular boilers. The engines produced a total of which gave the ships a maximum speed of . The ships carried of coal, enough to steam at . They were barque-rigged with three masts. The funnel was made semi-retractable to reduce wind resistance while under sail.

No ordnance had been ordered by the Confederates before the ships were seized in 1863, but in British service they mounted a pair of 9-inch rifled muzzle-loading guns in each turret. The guns could fire both solid shot and explosive shells. According to Parkes, going from full depression to full elevation supposedly took one hour in smooth water and with an even keel!

The &quot;Scorpion&quot;-class ships had a complete waterline belt of wrought iron that was thick amidships and thinned to at the bow and at the stern. It completely covered the hull from the upper deck to below the waterline. The armour protection of the turrets was quite elaborate. The inside of the turret was lined with of iron boiler plate to which T-shaped beams were bolted. The space between the beams was filled with of teak. This was covered by an iron lattice thick that was covered in turn by of teak. The iron plates were bolted to the outside using bolts that ran through to the interior iron &quot;skin&quot;. The area around the gun ports was reinforced by 4.5-inch plates to give a total thickness of 10 inches. The turret roof consisted of T-shaped beams covered by iron plates.

==Construction and career==

In early 1864, the Admiralty purchased both for the Royal Navy and named them &quot;Scorpion&quot; and . Commissioned in July 1865, &quot;Scorpion&quot; was assigned to the Channel Fleet until 1869, with time out for a refit that reduced her sailing rig from a bark to a schooner. In late 1869, she moved to Bermuda for coast and harbour defence service. &quot;Scorpion&quot; remained there for over three decades before being removed from the effective list. &quot;Scorpion&quot; was sunk as a target in 1901 but raised the next year and sold in February 1903. She was lost at sea while under tow to the U.S., where she was to be scrapped.

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5634246" start="0" end="18" title="HMS Scorpion (1863)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Scorpion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410980" start="32" end="40" title="Ironclad warship" label="ironclad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461104" start="41" end="52" title="turret ship" label="turret ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029631" start="62" end="91" title="John Laird Sons &amp;amp; Company" label="John Laird Sons &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q746718" start="96" end="106" title="Birkenhead" label="Birkenhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q923085" start="136" end="147" title="sister ship" label="sister ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="205" end="234" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="769" end="779" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q273976" start="1102" end="1110" title="blockade" label="blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716072" start="1202" end="1231" title="length between perpendiculars" label="length between perpendiculars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376482" start="1239" end="1243" title="beam (nautical)" label="beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q244777" start="1255" end="1262" title="draft (ship)" label="draught"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636358" start="1269" end="1278" title="deep load" label="deep load"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053830" start="1335" end="1343" title="bulkhead (partition)" label="bulkhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878246" start="1365" end="1378" title="double bottom" label="double bottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415781" start="1391" end="1397" title="engine room" label="engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451648" start="1402" end="1414" title="Boiler room (ship)" label="boiler rooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q337902" start="1457" end="1464" title="naval rating" label="ratings"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1523" end="1550" title="Marine steam engine#Direct acting" label="direct-acting steam engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304756" start="1591" end="1606" title="propeller shaft" label="propeller shaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195517" start="1645" end="1651" title="boiler (steam generator)" label="boiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q216057" start="1786" end="1792" title="barque" label="barque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609216" start="1822" end="1828" title="funnel (ship)" label="funnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277054" start="2033" end="2039" title="RML 9 inch 12 ton gun" label="9-inch"/>
<link wikidata="Q25098557" start="2040" end="2066" title="rifled muzzle loader" label="rifled muzzle-loading guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723884" start="2108" end="2118" title="Round shot" label="solid shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q318028" start="2123" end="2139" title="Shell (projectile)" label="explosive shells"/>
<link wikidata="Q422887" start="2334" end="2338" title="Belt armor" label="belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q492878" start="2488" end="2497" title="waterline" label="waterline"/>
<link wikidata="Q156938" start="2702" end="2706" title="teak" label="teak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368562" start="2736" end="2743" title="latticework" label="lattice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2918" end="2927" title="Glossary of nautical terms (A-L)#gunport" label="gun ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="3119" end="3128" title="British Admiralty" label="Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="3152" end="3162" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q216057" start="3361" end="3365" title="Barque" label="bark"/>
<link wikidata="Q204577" start="3371" end="3379" title="schooner" label="schooner"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="3408" end="3415" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="60523" wikidata="Q131075" url="?curid=60523" title="1954 FIFA World Cup">
<text>The 1954 FIFA World Cup was the 5th edition of the FIFA World Cup, the quadrennial international football tournament for senior men&#x27;s national teams of the nations affiliated to FIFA. It was held in Switzerland from 16 June to 4 July. Switzerland was selected as the host country in July 1946. At the tournament, several all-time records for goalscoring were set, including the highest average number of goals scored per game. The tournament was won by West Germany, who defeated tournament favourites Hungary 3–2 in the final for their first World Cup title. Uruguay, the defending champions, were eliminated by Hungary and would lose to Austria in the third-place match.

The highest scoring match of a World Cup happened in the quarter-finals of this tournament, when Austria defeated hosts Switzerland 7-5. The 12 goals of that match have never been surpassed in a World Cup since.

==Host selection==
Switzerland was awarded the tournament unopposed at a meeting in Luxembourg City on 22 July 1946, the same day Brazil was selected to host the 1950 World Cup.

==Qualification==

The hosts (Switzerland) and the defending champions (Uruguay) qualified automatically. Of the remaining 14 places, 11 were allocated to Europe (including Egypt, Turkey, and Israel), two to the Americas, and one to Asia.

Scotland, Turkey, and South Korea made their World Cup debuts at this tournament (Turkey and Scotland had qualified for the 1950 competition but both withdrew). South Korea became the first independent Asian country to participate in a World Cup tournament. Austria appeared following a hiatus from 1934. South Korea did not appear at a World Cup finals again until 1986, while Turkey&#x27;s next appearance was not until 2002. Several teams, such as Hungary and Czechoslovakia (the pre-war World Cups&#x27; runners-up) were back into the tournament after missing out the 1950 World Cup.

The teams that finished third and fourth in 1950, Sweden and Spain, both failed to qualify. Spain was eliminated by Turkey; the two countries finished level on points in their qualifying group, and then drew their neutral play-off, which led to the drawing of lots by a blindfolded Italian boy, who picked Turkey to progress.

German teams as well as Japan were allowed to qualify again, after having been banned from the 1950 FIFA World Cup. West Germany qualified against fellow Germans from the Saarland (which then was a French protectorate), while East Germany did not enter, having cancelled international football matches after the East German uprising of 1953. Japan failed to qualify, having finished below South Korea in their qualifying group. Argentina declined to participate for the third successive World Cup.

===List of qualified teams===
The following 16 teams qualified for the final tournament.

Asia (1)
* (debut)

North, Central America and Caribbean (1)
South America (2)
* (title holders)

Europe (12)
* 
* 
* 
* (debut)
* (hosts)
* (debut)
* 

==Summary==

===Format===

====Group stage====
The 1954 tournament used a unique format. The sixteen qualifying teams were divided into four groups of four teams each. Each group contained two seeded teams and two unseeded teams. Only four matches were scheduled for each group, each pitting a seeded team against an unseeded team. This contrasts with the usual round-robin in which every team plays every other team: six matches in each group. Another oddity was that extra time, which in most tournaments is not employed at the group stage, was played in the group games if the score was level after 90 minutes, with the result being a draw if the scores were still level after 120 minutes.

Two points were awarded for a win and one for a draw. The two teams with the most points from each group progressed to the knockout stage. In the case of a tie between two teams for second place, the two tied teams competed in a play-off to decide which team would progress to the next stage, with extra time and drawing of lots if necessary. Had all four teams in a group been tied on points, there would have been two further play-offs – one play-off between the two seeded teams, and the other between the two unseeded teams, again with extra time and drawing of lots if necessary – with the winner of each play-off progressing to the quarter-finals.
Two of the four groups ended up requiring play-offs – one between Switzerland and Italy, and the other between Turkey and West Germany. In each match, the unseeded team (Switzerland and West Germany) repeated an earlier victory against the seeded team (Italy and Turkey) to progress. The fact that two group matches were played twice, while other group opponents never faced each other at all, attracted criticism; newly elected FIFA President Seeldrayers declared that this group format would be abandoned in future world cups.

====Quarter-finals====
For each of the first two quarter-finals, one team progressing from group 1 was drawn against one team progressing from group 2. For the remaining two quarter-finals, this procedure was repeated for groups 3 and 4. Before the tournament, it was stated that in the event of a quarter-final being tied after 90 minutes, 30 minutes of extra time would be played, followed by drawing of lots if necessary. Later, it was stated that a quarter-final could be replayed in this situation. The draw was scheduled to be held on Sunday 20 June, though in fact it was delayed into the early morning of Monday 21 June.

====Semi-finals====

For the semi-finals, a further draw was held, with each semi-final featuring one team from groups 1–2 against one team from groups 3–4. In the event of a semi-final being tied after extra time, it would be replayed once, followed by drawing of lots if necessary.

The draw for the semi-finals, held on Sunday 27 June, was delayed by a complaint from the Hungarian team concerning the manner in which their quarter-final against Brazil had been played.

====Final====

The final would be replayed if scores were level after extra-time. If the replay was also tied, the winner would be decided by the tournament organising committee, or by drawing of lots.

===Seeding===
Before qualification was complete, the eight seeded teams were determined by FIFA. They were Austria, Brazil, England, France, Hungary, Italy, Spain, and Uruguay.

These seedings were thrown into disarray when, in an unexpected result, Turkey eliminated Spain in qualification. FIFA resolved this situation by giving Turkey the seeding that had previously been allocated to Spain.

===Notable results===
The Germany national football team, then limited to the area of West Germany only, had been reinstated as full FIFA members only in late 1950, had played only 18 games since, and were unseeded. When meeting the seeded Turkish side at Wankdorf stadium in Berne, the Turks scored early, but the Germans convincingly won the encounter, which would turn out as the first of two within six days.

The South Koreans, the other unseeded team, lost 7–0 and 9–0 against the seeded sides of Hungary and Turkey. West Germany, being denied the chance to play such an easy opponent, had to face the seeded team of Hungary, a favourite to win the World Cup. Sepp Herberger, the West German coach, did not want his A-squad to suffer a possible defeat against a strong opponent while trying to qualify for a rather meaningless first place, and gambled by going the easier route into the play-offs and sending in a reserve side which lost 8–3 in Basel. A benefit was that the Hungarians did not get to know the best German players in case both teams would meet again - which they did, in the Final, along with referee William Ling. Now two teams were tied for second place on 2 points, and with no tie breaking procedures in effect, even though West Germany had beaten Turkey head-to-head, they had to play-off against each other, a match-up that West Germany easily won for the second time within six days, this time in Zürich. 

Hungary&#x27;s team captain Ferenc Puskás, considered by many as the best player in the world in that time, was injured by West German defender Werner Liebrich, and had to miss Hungary&#x27;s next two matches. Puskás played for Hungary in the final, despite still being in a questionable condition.

In the quarter-finals, the favourites Hungary beat Brazil 4–2 in one of the most violent matches in football history, which became infamous as the Battle of Berne. Meanwhile, the World Cup holders Uruguay sent England out of the tournament, also by 4–2. West Germany dispatched Yugoslavia 2–0, and Austria beat the host nation Switzerland in the game that saw the most goals in any World Cup match, 7–5.

In the first semi-final, West Germany beat Austria 6–1.

The other semi-final, one of the most exciting games of the tournament, saw Hungary go into the second half leading Uruguay 1–0, only for the game to be taken to extra time with a score after 90 minutes of 2–2. The deadlock was broken by Sándor Kocsis with two late goals to take Hungary through to the final, with Uruguay finally losing their unbeaten record in World Cup Final matches. Uruguay then went on to be beaten for a second time as Austria secured third place.

===Final: &quot;The Miracle of Bern&quot;===
The Wankdorf Stadion in Berne saw 60,000 people cram inside to watch the final between West Germany and Hungary, a rematch of a first-round game, which Hungary had won 8–3 against the reserves of the German team. The Golden Team of the Hungarians were favourites, as they were unbeaten for a record of 32 consecutive matches, but they had had two tough knockout matches. It started raining on match day–in Germany this was dubbed &quot;Fritz-Walter-Wetter&quot; (&quot;Fritz Walter&#x27;s weather&quot;) because the West German team captain Fritz Walter was said to play his best in the rain, a result of having contracted malaria during the war. Adi Dassler of &quot;Adidas&quot; provided the West German team with a new kind of shoes, with exchangeable studs that were replaced during halftime. 
Hungary&#x27;s Ferenc Puskás played again in the final, even though he was not fully fit. Despite this he put his team ahead after only six minutes and with Zoltán Czibor adding another two minutes later it seemed that the pre-tournament favourites would take the title. However, with a quick goal from Max Morlock in the 10th minute and an equaliser by Helmut Rahn in the 19th, the tide began to turn.

The second half saw telling misses by the Hungarian team. Barely six minutes before the end of the match, the popular German radio reporter Herbert Zimmermann delivered the most famous line in the German commentary, recommending that &quot;Rahn should shoot from deep&quot;, which he did. The second goal from Rahn gave West Germany a 3–2 lead while the Hungarian reporter György Szepesi burst into tears. Later, Zimmermann called Puskás offside before he kicked the ball into Toni Turek&#x27;s net with 2 minutes left. While referee William Ling pointed to the centre spot, linesman Griffiths signalled offside. After a one-minute consultation, Ling disallowed the claimed equaliser.

The West Germans were handed the Jules Rimet Trophy as World Cup winners, while the crowd sang along to the tune of the national anthem of Germany–there was disquiet in the stadium as the Germans fans decided to sing the (too) well known anthem&#x27;s first stanza &quot;Deutschland über alles&quot;, instead of the uncontroversial third &quot;Unity and Justice and Freedom&quot; which was supposed to be sung at official events according to a 1952 decree. In Germany the success is known as the &quot;Miracle of Bern&quot; (&quot;Das Wunder Von Bern&quot;), and was memorialised in a 2003 film of the same name. For the Hungarians, the defeat was a disaster, and remains controversial due to apparent refereeing errors and claims of doping.

One controversy concerns the 2–2 equaliser. Hungarian goalie Gyula Grosics jumped to catch Fritz Walter&#x27;s corner shot, but Hans Schäfer obstructed him (in plain sight of TV cameras), allowing the ball to reach Rahn, who then scored. Another controversy concerns allegations of doping. Though teammates steadfastly denied this rumour, German historian Guido Knopp claimed in a 2004 documentary for German public channel ZDF that the players were injected with shots of vitamin C at half-time, using a needle earlier taken from a Soviet sports doctor. This would explain both the better condition of the West German team in the second half and the wave of jaundice among their players following the tournament. A Leipzig University study in 2010 posited that the West German players had been injected with the banned substance methamphetamine.

Most controversial was the offside ruling for Puskás&#x27;s intended 87th-minute equaliser. The camera filming the official footage was in a bad position to judge the situation, but eyewitnesses claimed that the referee was wrong, including West German substitute player Alfred Pfaff. In 2004, North German regional public channel NDR aired unofficial footage appearing to show that Puskás was onside.

===Records===
The following all-time records were set or equalled at this tournament, and have not been surpassed:

All matches in one tournament
* highest average goals per game (5.38)

Team records for one tournament
* most goals scored (Hungary, 27)
* highest average goals scored per game (Hungary, 5.4)
* highest aggregate goal difference (Hungary, +17)
* highest average goal difference per game (Hungary, +3.4)
* most goals scored, champions (West Germany, 25)
* most average goals scored per game, champions (West Germany, 4.17)
* most goals conceded, champions (West Germany, 14)
* most average goals conceded per game, champions (West Germany, 2.33)
* most goals conceded (South Korea, 16)
* lowest aggregate goal difference (South Korea, −16)
* most average goals conceded per game (South Korea, 8, tied with Bolivia 1950)
* lowest average goal difference per game (South Korea, −8.0, tied with Bolivia 1950).

Records for a single game
* most goals in a single game (both teams) (Austria 7 Switzerland 5)
* greatest margin of victory in a single game (Hungary 9 South Korea 0) (equalled by Yugoslavia winning 9–0 against Zaire in 1974 and again Hungary winning 10–1 against El Salvador in 1982).

====Other landmarks====
For the first time there was television coverage, and special coins were issued to mark the event.

The 11 goals scored by Kocsis of Hungary not only led the World Cup but bettered the previous record (set by Brazilian Ademir in the previous tournament) by three goals. Kocsis&#x27; mark was broken by Just Fontaine&#x27;s 13 goals in 1958. Despite not winning the 1954 tournament, their fourth-place finish and their two previous World Cup titles made Uruguay the most successful World Cup nation for eight years, until Brazil won their second title in 1962. Hungary&#x27;s 9–0 win against Korea during the group stages remains the biggest margin of victory in FIFA World Cup history, later equalled by Yugoslavia over Zaire (9–0) in 1974 and Hungary over El Salvador (10–1) in 1982.

West Germany also became the first team to win the World Cup after having lost a match at the finals, losing 8–3 after pitting the backups against Hungary in the group stage with the intention of getting an additional play-off game. This feat was repeated by West Germany in 1974 (beaten 1–0 by East Germans), Argentina in 1978 and Spain in 2010, who all lost group matches 1–0 (coincidentally, all three teams won against the Netherlands in the final), as well as by Argentina in 2022, who lost their first group match 2–1 against Saudi Arabia but would also defeat the Netherlands (although this time, it was in the quarter-finals).

West Germany&#x27;s 1954 victory remains the only time that a team has won the World Cup without playing any team from outside its own continent; South Korea was in the same group, but with both team unseeded, they were not matched against each other. Instead, West Germany had to play Turkey twice, which is geographically more in Asia than in Europe, but qualified from Europe&#x27;s qualification zone and has always been affiliated with UEFA. Turkey had also been one of the few non-German speaking countries that had played West Germany after being reinstated as FIFA member in late 1950; and like most, did it twice, Switzerland even four times. Thus, West Germany&#x27;s coach and players had limited international experience in 1954, and no intercontinental game before the 1958 FIFA World Cup.

West Germany&#x27;s victory in the final is considered one of the greatest upsets of all time and one of the finest achievements in German sporting history. The West German team was made up of amateur &quot;contract&quot; players from several regional leagues, as German sports did not have a nationwide league nor professional play before 1963, while the Hungarians were &quot;de jure&quot; amateurs, like in all the communist countries at that time, but playing football as professionals, mainly for Budapesti Honvéd FC and later for major clubs like Real Madrid and Barcelona in Spain, and were ranked best in the world. This is the only time a team has won the World Cup with amateur footballers.

==Venues==
Six venues in six cities (1 venue in each city) hosted the tournament&#x27;s 26 matches. The most used stadium was the St. Jakob Stadium in Basel, which hosted 6 matches. The venues in Bern, Zurich and Lausanne each hosted 5 matches, the venue in Geneva hosted 4 matches, and the venue in Lugano only hosted 1 match.

==Squads==

The 16 finalists named squads of 22 for the finals, though South Korea only named 20 players in their squad. Unlike recent tournaments, there were no requirements for teams to name three goalkeepers; most teams did, but 6 did not. Some teams also chose to leave some of their named squad at home, only bringing them to Switzerland if necessary.

== Match officials ==

* Raymon Wyssling
* Benjamin Griffiths
* Charlie Faultless
* Manuel Asensi
* José Vieira da Costa
* Raymond Vincenti
* William Ling
* Esteban Marino
* Arthur Edward Ellis
* Laurent Franken
* Vincenzo Orlandini
* Vasa Stefanović
* Mário Vianna
* Emil Schmetzer
* Carl Erich Steiner
* István Zsolt
==Group stage==
All times listed are local time (CET, UTC+1).

===Group 1===





===Group 2===





====Play-off====
===Group 3===





===Group 4===





====Play-off====
==Knockout stage==
===Bracket===
&lt;section begin=Bracket /&gt;&lt;section end=Bracket /&gt;

===Quarter-finals===
----


===Semi-finals===


===Third place play-off===
===Final===


==Goalscorers==

With 11 goals, Sándor Kocsis was the top scorer in the tournament. In total, 140 goals were scored by 63 players, with four of them credited as own goals.

;11 goals

* Sándor Kocsis
;6 goals

* Erich Probst
* Josef Hügi
* Max Morlock
;4 goals

* Nándor Hidegkuti
* Ferenc Puskás
* Robert Ballaman
* Carlos Borges
* Helmut Rahn
* Hans Schäfer
* Ottmar Walter
;3 goals

* Ernst Stojaspal
* Theodor Wagner
* Léopold Anoul
* Nat Lofthouse
* Zoltán Czibor
* Burhan Sargun
* Suat Mamat
* Juan Hohberg
* Óscar Míguez
* Fritz Walter
;2 goals

* Alfred Körner
* Ernst Ocwirk
* Didi
* Julinho
* Pinga
* Ivor Broadis
* Mihály Lantos
* Péter Palotás
* Lefter Küçükandonyadis
* Julio Abbadie
* Juan Alberto Schiaffino
;1 goal

* Henri Coppens
* Baltazar
* Djalma Santos
* Tom Finney
* Jimmy Mullen
* Dennis Wilshaw
* Raymond Kopa
* Jean Vincent
* József Tóth
* Giampiero Boniperti
* Amleto Frignani
* Carlo Galli
* Benito Lorenzi
* Fulvio Nesti
* Egisto Pandolfini
* Tomás Balcázar
* José Luis Lamadrid
* Jacques Fatton
* Mustafa Ertan
* Erol Keskin
* Javier Ambrois
* Obdulio Varela
* Richard Herrmann
* Bernhard Klodt
* Alfred Pfaff
* Miloš Milutinović
* Branko Zebec
;1 own goal

* Jimmy Dickinson (playing against Belgium)
* Raúl Cárdenas (playing against France)
* Luis Cruz (playing against Austria)
* Ivica Horvat (playing against West Germany)
==FIFA retrospective ranking==
In 1986, FIFA published a report that ranked all teams in each World Cup up to and including 1986, based on progress in the competition, overall results and quality of the opposition. The rankings for the 1954 tournament were as follows:

== In film ==
The final scene of Rainer Werner Fassbinder&#x27;s film &quot;The Marriage of Maria Braun&quot; takes place during the finals of the 1954 World Cup; in the scene&#x27;s background, the sports announcer is celebrating West Germany&#x27;s victory and shouting &quot;Deutschland ist wieder was!&quot; (Germany is something again); the film uses this as the symbol of Germany&#x27;s recovery from the ravages of the Second World War.

Sönke Wortmann&#x27;s 2003 German box-office hit &quot;The Miracle of Bern&quot; (in German: &quot;Das Wunder von Bern&quot;) re-tells the story of the German team&#x27;s route to victory through the eyes of a young boy who admires the key player of the final, Helmut Rahn.

==References==
==External links==

*1954 FIFA World Cup Switzerland , FIFA.com
*Details at RSSSF</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131075" start="4" end="23" title="1954 FIFA World Cup" label="1954 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="51" end="65" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="97" end="105" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="183" end="187" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="272" end="284" title="FIFA World Cup hosts#1950 and 1954 FIFA World Cups" label="host country"/>
<link wikidata="Q43310" start="458" end="470" title="Germany national football team" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q170561" start="507" end="514" title="Hungary national football team" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q665946" start="526" end="531" title="1954 FIFA World Cup Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q134916" start="565" end="572" title="Uruguay national football team" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q163534" start="644" end="651" title="Austria national football team" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q525354" start="683" end="719" title="Austria v Switzerland (1954 FIFA World Cup)" label="highest scoring match of a World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q163534" start="776" end="783" title="Austria national football team" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q165141" start="799" end="810" title="Switzerland national football team" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842" start="976" end="991" title="Luxembourg City" label="Luxembourg City"/>
<link wikidata="Q132515" start="1054" end="1068" title="1950 FIFA World Cup" label="1950 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q132515" start="1435" end="1451" title="1950 FIFA World Cup" label="1950 competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477177" start="1610" end="1614" title="1934 FIFA World Cup" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q46938" start="1677" end="1681" title="1986 FIFA World Cup" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q47735" start="1733" end="1737" title="2002 FIFA World Cup" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q132515" start="1883" end="1897" title="1950 FIFA World Cup" label="1950 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q170566" start="2251" end="2256" title="Japan national football team" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q132515" start="2322" end="2341" title="1950 FIFA World Cup" label="1950 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q156975" start="2398" end="2406" title="Saarland national football team" label="Saarland"/>
<link wikidata="Q157682" start="2539" end="2567" title="Uprising of 1953 in East Germany" label="East German uprising of 1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q543842" start="2616" end="2627" title="South Korea national football team" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q79800" start="2655" end="2664" title="Argentina national football team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4568056" start="2816" end="2820" title="1954 FIFA World Cup qualification (AFC – Group 13)" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2836" end="2872" title="1954_FIFA_World_Cup_qualification#Group_12" label="North, Central America and Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2877" end="2890" title="1954_FIFA_World_Cup_qualification#Group_11" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q259983" start="2914" end="2920" title="1954 FIFA World Cup qualification" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q841144" start="3331" end="3342" title="round-robin tournament" label="round-robin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3438" end="3448" title="Overtime (sports)#Association football" label="extra time"/>
<link wikidata="Q312662" start="4761" end="4772" title="Rodolphe Seeldrayers" label="Seeldrayers"/>
<link wikidata="Q163534" start="6261" end="6268" title="Austria national football team" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q83459" start="6270" end="6276" title="Brazil national football team" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="6278" end="6285" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="6287" end="6293" title="France national football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q170561" start="6295" end="6302" title="Hungary national football team" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q676899" start="6304" end="6309" title="Italy national football team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42267" start="6311" end="6316" title="Spain men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q134916" start="6322" end="6329" title="Uruguay national football team" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q483856" start="6404" end="6410" title="Turkey national football team" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q43310" start="6576" end="6606" title="Germany national football team" label="Germany national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="6636" end="6648" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q85815017" start="6719" end="6745" title="West Germany national football team results" label="played only 18 games since"/>
<link wikidata="Q157820" start="7216" end="7230" title="Sepp Herberger" label="Sepp Herberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q654847" start="7673" end="7685" title="William Ling (referee)" label="William Ling"/>
<link wikidata="Q482931" start="8014" end="8027" title="Ferenc Puskás" label="Ferenc Puskás"/>
<link wikidata="Q551474" start="8130" end="8145" title="Werner Liebrich" label="Werner Liebrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q690331" start="8433" end="8448" title="Battle of Berne (1954 FIFA World Cup)" label="Battle of Berne"/>
<link wikidata="Q188363" start="8564" end="8574" title="Yugoslavia national football team" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q525354" start="8628" end="8636" title="Austria v Switzerland (1954)" label="the game"/>
<link wikidata="Q295265" start="8986" end="8999" title="Sándor Kocsis" label="Sándor Kocsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q676004" start="9270" end="9286" title="Wankdorf Stadion" label="Wankdorf Stadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q775352" start="9483" end="9494" title="Golden Team" label="Golden Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q22717" start="9807" end="9819" title="Fritz Walter" label="Fritz Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="9889" end="9896" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q76751" start="9913" end="9924" title="Adi Dassler" label="Adi Dassler"/>
<link wikidata="Q218915" start="10221" end="10234" title="Zoltán Czibor" label="Zoltán Czibor"/>
<link wikidata="Q366361" start="10367" end="10378" title="Max Morlock" label="Max Morlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q60691" start="10418" end="10429" title="Helmut Rahn" label="Helmut Rahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q96673" start="10608" end="10626" title="Herbert Zimmermann (football commentator)" label="Herbert Zimmermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297296" start="10841" end="10855" title="György Szepesi" label="György Szepesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q376015" start="10945" end="10955" title="Toni Turek" label="Toni Turek"/>
<link wikidata="Q654847" start="11002" end="11014" title="William Ling (referee)" label="William Ling"/>
<link wikidata="Q465029" start="11052" end="11061" title="Benjamin Mervyn Griffiths" label="Griffiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q517621" start="11187" end="11205" title="Jules Rimet Trophy" label="Jules Rimet Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44042" start="11274" end="11300" title="national anthem of Germany" label="national anthem of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q670309" start="11739" end="11765" title="The Miracle of Bern" label="2003 film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q166376" start="11888" end="11894" title="doping in sport" label="doping"/>
<link wikidata="Q371557" start="11958" end="11971" title="Gyula Grosics" label="Gyula Grosics"/>
<link wikidata="Q22717" start="11988" end="12000" title="Fritz Walter" label="Fritz Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q455823" start="12025" end="12037" title="Hans Schäfer" label="Hans Schäfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q63211" start="12253" end="12264" title="Guido Knopp" label="Guido Knopp"/>
<link wikidata="Q48989" start="12321" end="12324" title="ZDF" label="ZDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q199678" start="12370" end="12379" title="vitamin C" label="vitamin C"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="12430" end="12436" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q133244" start="12556" end="12564" title="jaundice" label="jaundice"/>
<link wikidata="Q154804" start="12613" end="12631" title="Leipzig University" label="Leipzig University"/>
<link wikidata="Q191924" start="12727" end="12742" title="methamphetamine" label="methamphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q438501" start="13016" end="13028" title="Alfred Pfaff" label="Alfred Pfaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q201275" start="13076" end="13079" title="Norddeutscher Rundfunk" label="NDR"/>
<link wikidata="Q166121" start="14290" end="14294" title="1974 FIFA World Cup" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q46934" start="14349" end="14353" title="1982 FIFA World Cup" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q332012" start="14600" end="14606" title="Ademir Marques de Menezes" label="Ademir"/>
<link wikidata="Q192749" start="14683" end="14696" title="Just Fontaine" label="Just Fontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q132533" start="14716" end="14720" title="1958 FIFA World Cup" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q160813" start="14935" end="14939" title="1962 FIFA World Cup" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q132533" start="16585" end="16604" title="1958 FIFA World Cup" label="1958 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q275612" start="17109" end="17128" title="Budapesti Honvéd FC" label="Budapesti Honvéd FC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18021" end="18036" title="Raymon Wyssling" label="Raymon Wyssling"/>
<link wikidata="Q465029" start="18039" end="18057" title="Sandy Griffiths" label="Benjamin Griffiths"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18060" end="18077" title="Charlie Faultless" label="Charlie Faultless"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18080" end="18093" title="Manuel Asensi" label="Manuel Asensi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18096" end="18116" title="José Vieira da Costa" label="José Vieira da Costa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18119" end="18135" title="Raymond Vincenti" label="Raymond Vincenti"/>
<link wikidata="Q654847" start="18138" end="18150" title="William Ling (referee)" label="William Ling"/>
<link wikidata="Q957614" start="18153" end="18167" title="Esteban Marino" label="Esteban Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q570759" start="18170" end="18189" title="Arthur Edward Ellis" label="Arthur Edward Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18192" end="18207" title="Laurent Franken" label="Laurent Franken"/>
<link wikidata="Q841616" start="18210" end="18228" title="Vincenzo Orlandini" label="Vincenzo Orlandini"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18231" end="18246" title="Vasa Stefanović" label="Vasa Stefanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q581597" start="18249" end="18261" title="Mário Vianna" label="Mário Vianna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18264" end="18278" title="Emil Schmetzer" label="Emil Schmetzer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18281" end="18299" title="Carl Erich Steiner" label="Carl Erich Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q323859" start="18302" end="18314" title="István Zsolt" label="István Zsolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q25989" start="18364" end="18367" title="Central European Time" label="CET"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18369" end="18374" title="UTC+01:00" label="UTC+1"/>
<link wikidata="Q295265" start="18858" end="18871" title="Sándor Kocsis" label="Sándor Kocsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q224612" start="18884" end="18896" title="Erich Probst" label="Erich Probst"/>
<link wikidata="Q665684" start="18899" end="18909" title="Josef Hügi" label="Josef Hügi"/>
<link wikidata="Q366361" start="18912" end="18923" title="Max Morlock" label="Max Morlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q166035" start="18936" end="18952" title="Nándor Hidegkuti" label="Nándor Hidegkuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q482931" start="18955" end="18968" title="Ferenc Puskás" label="Ferenc Puskás"/>
<link wikidata="Q543314" start="18971" end="18986" title="Robert Ballaman" label="Robert Ballaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q166999" start="18989" end="19002" title="Carlos Borges" label="Carlos Borges"/>
<link wikidata="Q60691" start="19005" end="19016" title="Helmut Rahn" label="Helmut Rahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q455823" start="19019" end="19031" title="Hans Schäfer" label="Hans Schäfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q315704" start="19034" end="19047" title="Ottmar Walter" label="Ottmar Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q697239" start="19060" end="19075" title="Ernst Stojaspal" label="Ernst Stojaspal"/>
<link wikidata="Q700338" start="19078" end="19092" title="Theodor Wagner" label="Theodor Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371144" start="19095" end="19108" title="Léopold Anoul" label="Léopold Anoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q351978" start="19111" end="19124" title="Nat Lofthouse" label="Nat Lofthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q218915" start="19127" end="19140" title="Zoltán Czibor" label="Zoltán Czibor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016283" start="19143" end="19156" title="Burhan Sargun" label="Burhan Sargun"/>
<link wikidata="Q953983" start="19159" end="19169" title="Suat Mamat" label="Suat Mamat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361736" start="19172" end="19184" title="Juan Hohberg" label="Juan Hohberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q24347" start="19187" end="19199" title="Óscar Míguez" label="Óscar Míguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q22717" start="19202" end="19214" title="Fritz Walter" label="Fritz Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q695094" start="19227" end="19240" title="Alfred Körner" label="Alfred Körner"/>
<link wikidata="Q697373" start="19243" end="19255" title="Ernst Ocwirk" label="Ernst Ocwirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q312486" start="19258" end="19262" title="Didi (footballer, born 1928)" label="Didi"/>
<link wikidata="Q523520" start="19265" end="19272" title="Julinho (footballer, born 1929)" label="Julinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q254747" start="19275" end="19280" title="Pinga (footballer, born 1924)" label="Pinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775704" start="19283" end="19295" title="Ivor Broadis" label="Ivor Broadis"/>
<link wikidata="Q643287" start="19298" end="19311" title="Mihály Lantos" label="Mihály Lantos"/>
<link wikidata="Q921043" start="19314" end="19327" title="Péter Palotás" label="Péter Palotás"/>
<link wikidata="Q919302" start="19330" end="19352" title="Lefter Küçükandonyadis" label="Lefter Küçükandonyadis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340304" start="19355" end="19368" title="Julio Abbadie" label="Julio Abbadie"/>
<link wikidata="Q332064" start="19371" end="19394" title="Juan Alberto Schiaffino" label="Juan Alberto Schiaffino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605788" start="19406" end="19419" title="Henri Coppens" label="Henri Coppens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378184" start="19422" end="19430" title="Baltazar (footballer, born 1926)" label="Baltazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q299693" start="19433" end="19446" title="Djalma Santos" label="Djalma Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q352338" start="19449" end="19459" title="Tom Finney" label="Tom Finney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179384" start="19462" end="19474" title="Jimmy Mullen (footballer, born 1923)" label="Jimmy Mullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189604" start="19477" end="19491" title="Dennis Wilshaw" label="Dennis Wilshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q123118" start="19494" end="19506" title="Raymond Kopa" label="Raymond Kopa"/>
<link wikidata="Q708893" start="19509" end="19521" title="Jean Vincent" label="Jean Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q944590" start="19524" end="19535" title="József Tóth (footballer, born 1929)" label="József Tóth"/>
<link wikidata="Q68050" start="19538" end="19557" title="Giampiero Boniperti" label="Giampiero Boniperti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546696" start="19560" end="19575" title="Amleto Frignani" label="Amleto Frignani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721098" start="19578" end="19589" title="Carlo Galli (footballer)" label="Carlo Galli"/>
<link wikidata="Q705162" start="19592" end="19606" title="Benito Lorenzi" label="Benito Lorenzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292663" start="19609" end="19621" title="Fulvio Nesti" label="Fulvio Nesti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298064" start="19624" end="19641" title="Egisto Pandolfini" label="Egisto Pandolfini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375634" start="19644" end="19658" title="Tomás Balcázar" label="Tomás Balcázar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709339" start="19661" end="19679" title="José Luis Lamadrid" label="José Luis Lamadrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q673067" start="19682" end="19696" title="Jacques Fatton" label="Jacques Fatton"/>
<link wikidata="Q608027" start="19699" end="19712" title="Mustafa Ertan" label="Mustafa Ertan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479782" start="19715" end="19726" title="Erol Keskin" label="Erol Keskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643936" start="19729" end="19743" title="Javier Ambrois" label="Javier Ambrois"/>
<link wikidata="Q471743" start="19746" end="19760" title="Obdulio Varela" label="Obdulio Varela"/>
<link wikidata="Q708145" start="19763" end="19779" title="Richard Herrmann" label="Richard Herrmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q601212" start="19782" end="19796" title="Bernhard Klodt" label="Bernhard Klodt"/>
<link wikidata="Q438501" start="19799" end="19811" title="Alfred Pfaff" label="Alfred Pfaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q957107" start="19814" end="19831" title="Miloš Milutinović" label="Miloš Milutinović"/>
<link wikidata="Q531378" start="19834" end="19846" title="Branko Zebec" label="Branko Zebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352718" start="19862" end="19877" title="Jimmy Dickinson" label="Jimmy Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q166776" start="19895" end="19902" title="Belgium national football team" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q125262" start="19906" end="19919" title="Raúl Cárdenas" label="Raúl Cárdenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="19937" end="19943" title="France national football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q9024881" start="19947" end="19956" title="Luis Cruz (Uruguayan footballer)" label="Luis Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q163534" start="19974" end="19981" title="Austria national football team" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q688186" start="19985" end="19997" title="Ivica Horvat" label="Ivica Horvat"/>
<link wikidata="Q43310" start="20015" end="20027" title="West Germany national football team" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q44426" start="20332" end="20356" title="Rainer Werner Fassbinder" label="Rainer Werner Fassbinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q699490" start="20375" end="20402" title="The Marriage of Maria Braun" label="The Marriage of Maria Braun"/>
<link wikidata="Q66041" start="20744" end="20758" title="Sönke Wortmann" label="Sönke Wortmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q670309" start="20799" end="20818" title="The Miracle of Bern" label="The Miracle of Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q60691" start="21005" end="21016" title="Helmut Rahn" label="Helmut Rahn"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="60524" wikidata="Q2621039" url="?curid=60524" title="General semantics">
<text>General semantics is a school of thought that incorporates philosophic and scientific aspects. Although it does not stand on its own as a separate school of philosophy, a separate science, or an academic discipline, it describes itself as a scientifically empirical approach to cognition and problem solving. It has been described by nonproponents as a self-help system, and it has been criticized as having pseudoscientific aspects, but it has also been favorably viewed by various scientists as a useful set of analytical tools albeit not its own science.

General semantics is concerned with how phenomena (observable events) translate to perceptions, how they are further modified by the names and labels we apply to them, and how we might gain a measure of control over our own cognitive, emotional, and behavioral responses. Proponents characterize general semantics as an antidote to certain kinds of delusional thought patterns in which incomplete and possibly warped mental constructs are projected onto the world and treated as reality itself. Accurate map–territory relations are a central theme.

After partial launches under the names &quot;human engineering&quot; and &quot;humanology&quot;, Polish-American originator Alfred Korzybski (1879–1950) fully launched the program as &quot;general semantics&quot; in 1933 with the publication of &quot;Science and Sanity: An Introduction to Non-Aristotelian Systems and General Semantics&quot;.

In &quot;Science and Sanity&quot;, general semantics is presented as both a theoretical and a practical system whose adoption can reliably alter human behavior in the direction of greater sanity. In the 1947 preface to the third edition of &quot;Science and Sanity&quot;, Korzybski wrote: &quot;We &quot;need not&quot; blind ourselves with the old dogma that &#x27;human nature cannot be changed&#x27;, for we find that it &quot;can be changed&quot;.&quot; While Korzybski considered his program to be empirically based and to strictly follow the scientific method, general semantics has been described as veering into the domain of pseudoscience.

Starting around 1940, university English professor S. I. Hayakawa (1906–1992), speech professor Wendell Johnson, speech professor Irving J. Lee, and others assembled elements of general semantics into a package suitable for incorporation into mainstream communications curricula. The Institute of General Semantics, which Korzybski and co-workers founded in 1938, continues today. General semantics as a movement has waned considerably since the 1950s, although many of its ideas live on in other movements, such as media literacy, neuro-linguistic programming and rational emotive behavior therapy.

== Overview ==

=== &quot;Identification&quot; and &quot;the silent level&quot; ===
In the 1946 &quot;Silent and Verbal Levels&quot; diagram, the arrows and boxes denote ordered stages in human neuro-evaluative processing that happens in an instant. Although newer knowledge in biology has more sharply defined what the text in these 1946 boxes labels &quot;electro-colloidal&quot;, the diagram remains, as Korzybski wrote in his last published paper in 1950, &quot;satisfactory for our purpose of explaining briefly the most general and important points&quot;. General semantics postulates that most people &quot;identify,&quot; or fail to differentiate the serial stages or &quot;levels&quot; within their own neuro-evaluative processing. &quot;Most people,&quot; Korzybski wrote, &quot;&quot;identify in value&quot; levels I, II, III, and IV and react &quot;as if&quot; our verbalizations about the first three levels were &#x27;it.&#x27; Whatever we may say something &#x27;is&#x27; obviously &quot;is not&quot; the &#x27;something&#x27; on the silent levels.&quot; 
By making it a &#x27;mental&#x27; habit to find and keep one&#x27;s bearings among the ordered stages, general semantics training seeks to sharpen internal orientation much as a GPS device may sharpen external orientation. Once trained, general semanticists affirm, a person will act, respond, and make decisions more appropriate to any given set of happenings. Although producing saliva constitutes an appropriate response when lemon juice drips onto the tongue, a person has inappropriately identified when an imagined lemon or the word &quot;l–e–m–o–n&quot; triggers a salivation response.

&quot;Once we differentiate, differentiation becomes the denial of identity,&quot; Korzybski wrote in &quot;Science and Sanity&quot;. &quot;Once we discriminate among the objective and verbal levels, we learn &#x27;silence&#x27; on the unspeakable objective levels, and so introduce a most beneficial neurological &#x27;delay&#x27;—engage the cortex to perform its natural function.&quot; British-American philosopher Max Black, an influential critic of general semantics, called this neurological delay the &quot;central aim&quot; of general semantics training, &quot;so that in responding to verbal or nonverbal stimuli, we are aware of what it is that we are doing&quot;.

=== Abstracting and consciousness of abstracting ===
Identification prevents what general semantics seeks to promote: the additional cortical processing experienced as a delay. Korzybski called his remedy for identification &quot;consciousness of abstracting.&quot; The term &quot;abstracting&quot; occurs ubiquitously in &quot;Science and Sanity.&quot; Korzybski&#x27;s use of the term is somewhat unusual and requires study to understand his meaning. He discussed the problem of identification in terms of &quot;confusions of orders of abstractions&quot; and &quot;lack of consciousness of abstracting&quot;. To be conscious of abstracting is to differentiate among the &quot;levels&quot; described above; levels II–IV being abstractions of level I (whatever level I &quot;is&quot;—all we really get are abstractions). The techniques Korzybski prescribed to help a person develop consciousness of abstracting he called &quot;extensional devices&quot;.

=== Extensional devices ===
Satisfactory accounts of general semantics extensional devices can be found easily. This article seeks to explain briefly only the &quot;indexing&quot; devices. Suppose you teach in a school or university. Students enter your classroom on the first day of a new term, and, if you identify these new students to a memory association retrieved by your brain, you under-engage your powers of observation and your cortex. Indexing makes explicit a differentiating of studentsthis term from studentsprior terms. You survey the new students, and indexing explicitly differentiates student1 from student2 from student3, etc. Suppose you recognize one student—call her Anna—from a prior course in which Anna either excelled or did poorly. Again, you escape identification by your indexed awareness that Annathis term, this course is different from Annathat term, that course. Not identifying, you both expand and sharpen your apprehension of &quot;students&quot; with an awareness rooted in fresh silent-level observations.

=== Language as a core concern ===
Autoassociative memory in the memory-prediction model describes neural operations in mammalian brains generally. A special circumstance for humans arises with the introduction of language components, both as fresh stimuli and as stored representations. Language considerations figure prominently in general semantics, and three language and communications specialists who embraced general semantics, university professors and authors Hayakawa, Wendell Johnson and Neil Postman, played major roles in framing general semantics, especially for non-readers of &quot;Science and Sanity&quot;.

=== Criticism ===
Korzybski wrote in the preface to the third edition of &quot;Science and Sanity&quot; (1947) that general semantics &quot;turned out to be an empirical natural science&quot;. But the type of existence, if any, of universals and abstract objects is an issue of serious debate within metaphysical philosophy. So Black summed up general semantics as &quot;some hypothetical neurology fortified with dogmatic metaphysics&quot;. And in 1952, two years after Korzybski died, American skeptic Martin Gardner wrote, &quot;[Korzybski&#x27;s] work moves into the realm of cultism and pseudo-science.&quot;
Former Institute of General Semantics executive director Steve Stockdale has compared GS to yoga. &quot;First, I&#x27;d say that there is little if any benefit to be gained by just &quot;knowing&quot; something about general semantics. The benefits come from maintaining an awareness of the principles and attitudes that are derived from GS and applying them as they are needed. You can sort of compare general semantics to yoga in that respect... knowing about yoga is okay, but to benefit from yoga you have to &quot;do&quot; yoga.&quot; Similarly, Kenneth Burke explains Korzybski&#x27;s kind of semantics contrasting it, in &quot;A Grammar of Motives&quot;, with a kind of Burkean poetry by saying &quot;&quot;Semantics&quot; is essentially scientist, an approach to language in terms of knowledge, whereas poetic forms are kinds of action&quot;.

== History ==

=== Early attempts at validation ===
The First American Congress for General Semantics convened in March 1935 at the Central Washington College of Education in Ellensburg, Washington. In introductory remarks to the participants, Korzybski said: General semantics formulates a new experimental branch of natural science, underlying an empirical theory of human evaluations and orientations and involving a definite neurological mechanism, present in all humans. It discovers direct neurological methods for the stimulation of the activities of the human cerebral cortex and the direct introduction of beneficial neurological &#x27;inhibition&#x27;... He added that general semantics &quot;will be judged by experimentation&quot;. One paper presented at the congress reported dramatic score improvements for college sophomores on standardized intelligence tests after six weeks of training by methods prescribed in Chapter 29 of &quot;Science and Sanity.&quot;

=== Interpretation as semantics ===
General semantics accumulated only a few early experimental validations. In 1938, economist and writer Stuart Chase praised and popularized Korzybski in &quot;The Tyranny of Words&quot;. Chase called Korzybski &quot;a pioneer&quot; and described &quot;Science and Sanity&quot; as &quot;formulating a genuine science of communication. The term which is coming into use to cover such studies is &#x27;semantics,&#x27; matters having to do with signification or meaning.&quot; Because Korzybski, in &quot;Science and Sanity&quot;, had articulated his program using &quot;semantic&quot; as a standalone qualifier on hundreds of pages in constructions like &quot;semantic factors,&quot; &quot;semantic disturbances,&quot; and especially &quot;semantic reactions,&quot; to label the general semantics program &quot;semantics&quot; amounted to only a convenient shorthand.

Hayakawa read &quot;The Tyranny of Words,&quot; then &quot;Science and Sanity&quot;, and in 1939 he attended a Korzybski-led workshop conducted at the newly organized Institute of General Semantics in Chicago. In the introduction to his own &quot;Language in Action&quot;, a 1941 Book of the Month Club selection, Hayakawa wrote, &quot;[Korzybski&#x27;s] principles have in one way or another influenced almost every page of this book...&quot; But, Hayakawa followed Chase&#x27;s lead in interpreting general semantics as making communication its defining concern. When Hayakawa co-founded the Society for General Semantics and its publication &quot;ETC: A Review of General Semantics&quot; in 1943—he would continue to edit &quot;ETC.&quot; until 1970—Korzybski and his followers at the Institute of General Semantics began to complain that Hayakawa had wrongly coopted general semantics. In 1985, Hayakawa gave this defense to an interviewer: &quot;I wanted to treat general semantics as a subject, in the same sense that there&#x27;s a scientific concept known as gravitation, which is independent of Isaac Newton. So after a while, you don&#x27;t talk about Newton anymore; you talk about gravitation. You talk about semantics and not Korzybskian semantics.&quot;

=== Lowered sights ===
The regimen in the Institute&#x27;s seminars, greatly expanded as team-taught seminar-workshops starting in 1944, continued to develop following the prescriptions laid down in Chapter XXIX of &quot;Science and Sanity.&quot; The structural differential, patented by Korzybski in the 1920s, remained among the chief training aids to help students reach &quot;the silent level,&quot; a prerequisite for achieving &quot;neurological delay&quot;. Innovations in the seminar-workshops included a new &quot;neuro-relaxation&quot; component, led by dancer and Institute editorial secretary Charlotte Schuchardt (1909–2002).

But although many people were introduced to general semantics—perhaps the majority through Hayakawa&#x27;s more limited &#x27;semantics&#x27;—superficial lip service seemed more common than the deep internalization that Korzybski and his co-workers at the Institute aimed for. Marjorie Kendig (1892–1981), probably Korzybski&#x27;s closest co-worker, director of the Institute after his death, and editor of his posthumously published &quot;Collected Writings: 1920–1950&quot;, wrote in 1968:I would guess that I have known about 30 individuals who have in some degree adequately, by my standards, mastered this highly general, very simple, very difficult system of orientation and method of evaluating—reversing as it must all our cultural conditioning, neurological canalization, etc...

To me the &quot;great error&quot; Korzybski made—and I carried on, financial necessity—and for which we pay the price today in many criticisms, consisted in not restricting ourselves to training very thoroughly &quot;a very few people&quot; who would be competent to utilize the discipline in various fields and to train others. We should have done this before encouraging anyone to popularize or spread the word (horrid phrase) in societies for general semantics, by talking &quot;about&quot; general semantics instead of learning, using, etc. the methodology to &quot;change&quot; our essential epistemological assumptions, premises, etc. (unconscious or conscious), i.e. the &quot;un&quot;-learning basic to learning to learn.

Yes, large numbers of people do enjoy making a philosophy of general semantics. This saves them the pain of rigorous training so simple and general and limited that it seems obvious when &quot;said&quot;, yet so difficult.

Successors at the Institute of General Semantics continued for many years along the founders&#x27; path. Stuart Mayper (1916–1997), who studied under Karl Popper, introduced Popper&#x27;s principle of falsifiability into the seminar-workshops he led at the Institute starting in 1977. More modest pronouncements gradually replaced Korzybski&#x27;s claims that general semantics can change human nature and introduce an era of universal human agreement. In 2000, Robert Pula (1928–2004), whose roles at the Institute over three decades included Institute director, editor-in-chief of the Institute&#x27;s &quot;General Semantics Bulletin&quot;, and leader of the seminar-workshops, characterized Korzybski&#x27;s legacy as a &quot;contribution toward the improvement of human evaluating, to the amelioration of human woe...&quot;

Hayakawa died in 1992. The Society for General Semantics merged into the Institute of General Semantics in 2003. In 2007, Martin Levinson, president of the Institute&#x27;s Board of Trustees, teamed with Paul D. Johnston, executive director of the Society at the date of the merger, to teach general semantics with a light-hearted &quot;Practical Fairy Tales for Everyday Living&quot;.

Other institutions supporting or promoting general semantics in the 21st century include the New York Society for General Semantics, the European Society for General Semantics, the Australian General Semantics Society, and the Balvant Parekh Centre for General Semantics and Other Human Sciences (Baroda, India).

==The major premises==
* &quot;Non-Aristotelianism&quot;: While Aristotle wrote that a true definition gives the essence of the thing (defined in Greek &quot;to ti ên einai&quot;, literally &quot;the what it was to be&quot;), general semantics denies the existence of such an &#x27;essence&#x27;. In this, general semantics purports to represent an evolution in human evaluative orientation. In general semantics, it is always possible to give a &quot;description&quot; of empirical facts, but such descriptions remain just that—&quot;descriptions&quot;—which necessarily leave out many aspects of the objective, microscopic, and submicroscopic events they describe. According to general semantics, language, natural or otherwise (including the language called &#x27;mathematics&#x27;) can be used to &quot;describe&quot; the taste of an orange, but one cannot &quot;give&quot; the taste of the orange using language alone. According to general semantics, the &quot;content of all knowledge is structure&quot;, so that language (in general) and science and mathematics (in particular) can provide people with a structural &#x27;map&#x27; of empirical facts, but there can be no &#x27;identity&#x27;, only structural similarity, between the language (map) and the empirical facts as lived through and observed by people as humans-in-environments (including doctrinal and linguistic environments).
* &quot;Time binding&quot;: The human ability to pass information and knowledge from one generation to the next. Korzybski claimed this to be a unique capacity, separating people from animals. This &quot;distinctly human&quot; ability for one generation to start where a previous generation left off, is a consequence of the uniquely human ability to move to higher and higher levels of abstraction &quot;without limit&quot;. Animals may have multiple levels of abstraction, but &quot;their abstractions must stop at some finite upper limit&quot;; this is not so for humans: humans can have &#x27;knowledge about knowledge&#x27;, &#x27;knowledge about knowledge about knowledge&#x27;, etc., without any upper limit. Animals possess knowledge, but each generation of animals does things pretty much in the same way as the previous generation, limited by their neurology and genetic makeup. By contrast, at one time most human societies were hunter-gatherers, but now more advanced means of food production (growing, raising, or buying) predominate. Except for some insects (for example, ants), all animals are still hunter-gatherer species, even though many have existed longer than the human species. For this reason, animals are regarded in general semantics as &quot;space-binders&quot; (doing space-binding), and plants, which are usually stationary, as &quot;energy-binders&quot; (doing energy-binding).
* &quot;Non-elementalism and non-additivity&quot;: The refusal to separate verbally what cannot be separated empirically, and the refusal to regard such verbal splits as evidence that the &#x27;things&#x27; that are verbally split bear an additive relation to one another. For example, space-time cannot empirically be split into &#x27;space&#x27; + &#x27;time&#x27;, a conscious organism (including humans) cannot be split into &#x27;body&#x27; + &#x27;mind&#x27;, etc., therefore, people should never speak of &#x27;space&#x27; and &#x27;time&#x27; or &#x27;mind&#x27; and &#x27;body&#x27; in isolation, but always use the terms space-time or mind-body (or other organism-as-a-whole terms).
* &quot;Infinite-valued determinism&quot;: General semantics regards the problem of &#x27;indeterminism vs. determinism&#x27; as the failure of pre-modern epistemologies to formulate the issue properly, as the failure to consider or include all factors relevant to a particular prediction, and failure to adjust our languages and linguistic structures to empirical facts. General semantics resolves the issue in favor of determinism of a special kind called &#x27;infinite-valued&#x27; determinism which always allows for the possibility that relevant &#x27;causal&#x27; factors may be &#x27;left out&#x27; at any given date, resulting in, if the issue is not understood at that date, &#x27;indeterminism&#x27;, which simply indicates that our ability to predict events has broken down, not that the world is &#x27;indeterministic&#x27;. General semantics considers all human behavior (including all human decisions) as, in principle, fully determined once all relevant doctrinal and linguistic factors are included in the analysis, regarding theories of &#x27;free will&#x27; as failing to include the doctrinal and linguistic environments &quot;as environments&quot; in the analysis of human behavior.

==Connections to other disciplines==
The influence of Ludwig Wittgenstein and the Vienna Circle, and of early operationalists and pragmatists such as Charles Sanders Peirce, is particularly clear in the foundational ideas of general semantics. Korzybski himself acknowledged many of these influences.

The concept of &quot;silence on the objective level&quot;—attributed to Korzybski and his insistence on consciousness of abstracting—are parallel to some of the central ideas in Zen Buddhism. Although Korzybski never acknowledged any influence from this quarter, he formulated general semantics during the same years that the first popularizations of Zen were becoming part of the intellectual currency of educated speakers of English. On the other hand, later Zen-popularizer Alan Watts was influenced by ideas from general semantics.

General semantics has survived most profoundly in the cognitive therapies that emerged in the 1950s and 1960s. Albert Ellis (1913–2007), who developed rational emotive behavior therapy, acknowledged influence from general semantics and delivered the Alfred Korzybski Memorial Lecture in 1991. The Bruges (Belgium) center for solution-focused brief therapy operates under the name Korzybski Institute Training and Research Center. George Kelly, creator of personal construct psychology, was influenced by general semantics. Fritz Perls and Paul Goodman, founders of Gestalt therapy are said to have been influenced by Korzybski Wendell Johnson wrote &quot;People in Quandaries: The Semantics of Personal Adjustment&quot; in 1946, which stands as the first attempt to form a therapy from general semantics.

Ray Solomonoff (1926–2009) was influenced by Korzybski. Solomonoff was the inventor of algorithmic probability, and founder of algorithmic information theory ( Kolmogorov complexity).

Another scientist influenced by Korzybski (verbal testimony) is Paul Vitanyi (born 1944), a scientist in the theory of computation.

During the 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s, general semantics entered the idiom of science fiction. Notable examples include the works of A. E. van Vogt, &quot;The World of Null-A&quot; and its sequels. General semantics appear also in Robert A. Heinlein&#x27;s work, especially &quot;Gulf&quot;. Bernard Wolfe drew on general semantics in his 1952 science fiction novel &quot;Limbo&quot;. Frank Herbert&#x27;s novels &quot;Dune&quot; and &quot;Whipping Star&quot; are also indebted to general semantics. The ideas of general semantics became a sufficiently important part of the shared intellectual toolkit of genre science fiction to merit parody by Damon Knight and others; they have since shown a tendency to reappear in the work of more recent writers such as Samuel R. Delany, Suzette Haden Elgin and Robert Anton Wilson. In 2008, John Wright extended van Vogt&#x27;s Null-A series with &quot;Null-A Continuum&quot;. William Burroughs references Korzybski&#x27;s time binding principle in his essay The Electronic Revolution, and elsewhere. Henry Beam Piper explicitly mentioned general semantics in &quot;Murder in the Gunroom&quot;, and its principles, such as awareness of the limitations of knowledge, are apparent in his later work. A fictional rendition of the &quot;Institute of General Semantics&quot; appears in the 1965 French science fiction film, Alphaville, directed by Jean-Luc Godard.

Neil Postman, founder of New York University&#x27;s media ecology program in 1971, edited &quot;ETC: A Review of General Semantics&quot; from 1976 to 1986. Postman&#x27;s student Lance Strate, a co-founder of the Media Ecology Association, served as executive director of the Institute of General Semantics from 2007 to 2010.

With Charles Weingartner, Neil Postman included General Semantics within the introductory background analysis in &quot;Teaching as a Subversive Activity&quot; (Delacorte, 1969). In particular, they argued that General Semantics fitted with what Postman and Weingartner referred to as the &quot;Whorf-Sapir hypothesis&quot;, the claim that the particular language used to describe experience shapes how we perceive and understand that experience; that is, language shapes the way people think. (The &quot;Whorf-Sapir hypothesis&quot; is also known as Linguistic relativity.)

==See also==
Related fields
* Cognitive science
* Cognitive therapy
* E-Prime
* Gestalt therapy
* Language and thought
* Linguistic relativity
* Perceptual control theory
* Rational emotive behavior therapy

Related subjects
* &quot;Cratylus&quot; (dialogue)
* Harold Innis&#x27;s communications theories
* Institute of General Semantics
* Ladder of inference
* Map–territory relation
* Neuro-linguistic programming
* Propaganda

Related persons
* Aristotle
* Gregory Bateson
* Sanford I. Berman
* Albert Ellis
* Elwood Murray
* Allen Walker Read
* Wilhelm Reich
* Ida Rolf
* William Vogt
* Robert Anton Wilson

Related books
* &quot;Levels of Knowing and Existence: Studies in General Semantics&quot;, by Harry L. Weinberg
* &quot;Language in Thought and Action&quot;, by Professor S.I. Hayakawa (later a U.S. Senator), popularizing the tenets of General Semantics
* &quot;The World of Null-A&quot;, a science fiction novel by A. E. van Vogt, which envisions a world run by General Semanticists
* &quot;Gulf&quot;, a science fiction novella by Robert A. Heinlein (published in Assignment in Eternity), in which a secret society trained in General Semantics and the techniques of Samuel Renshaw act to protect humanity

==Notes==
==Further reading==

* &quot;Dare to Inquire: Sanity and Survival for the 21st Century and Beyond.&quot; by , (2003). Robert Anton Wilson wrote: &quot;This seems to me a revolutionary book on how to transcend prejudices, evade the currently fashionable lunacies, open yourself to new perceptions, new empathy and even new ideas, free your living total brain from the limits of your dogmatic verbal &#x27;mind&#x27;, and generally wake up and smell the bodies of dead children and other innocents piling up everywhere. In a time of rising rage and terror, we need this as badly as a city with plague needs vaccines and antibiotics. If I had the money I&#x27;d send a copy to every delegate at the UN.&quot;
*&quot;Trance-Formations: Neuro-Linguistic Programming and the Structure of Hypnosis&quot; by Richard Bandler and John Grinder, (1981). One of the important principles—also widely used in political propaganda—discussed in this book is that trance induction uses a language of pure process and lets the listener fill in all the &quot;specific content&quot; from their own personal experience. E.g. the hypnotist might say &quot;imagine you are sitting in a very comfortable chair in a room painted your favorite color&quot; but not &quot;imagine you are sitting in a very comfortable chair in a room painted red, your favorite color&quot; because then the listener might think &quot;wait a second, red is not my favorite color&quot;.
*The work of the scholar of political communication Murray Edelman (1919–2001), starting with his seminal book &quot;The Symbolic Uses of Politics&quot; (1964), continuing with &quot;Politics as symbolic action: mass arousal and quiescience&quot; (1971), &quot;Political Language: Words that succeed and policies that fail&quot; (1977), &quot;Constructing the Political Spectacle&quot; (1988) and ending with his last book &quot;The Politics of Misinformation&quot; (2001) can be viewed as an exploration of the deliberate manipulation and obfuscation of the map-territory distinction for political purposes.
*&quot;Logic and contemporary rhetoric: the use of reason in everyday life&quot; by Howard Kahane (d. 2001). (Wadsworth: First edition 1971, sixth edition 1992, tenth edition 2005 with Nancy Cavender.) Highly readable guide to the rhetoric of clear thinking, frequently updated with examples of the opposite drawn from contemporary U.S. media sources.
*&quot;Doing Physics : how physicists take hold of the world&quot; by Martin H. Krieger, Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1992. A &quot;cultural phenomenology of doing physics&quot;. The General Semantics connection is the relation to Korzybski&#x27;s original motivation of trying to identify key features of the successes of mathematics and the physical sciences that could be extended into everyday thinking and social organization.
*&quot;Metaphors We Live By&quot; by George Lakoff and Mark Johnson, (1980).
*&quot;Philosophy in the flesh: the embodied mind and its challenge to Western thought&quot; by George Lakoff and Mark Johnson, (1997).
*&quot;The Art of Asking Questions&quot; by Stanley L. Payne, (1951) This book is a short handbook-style discussion of how the honest pollster should ask questions to find out what people actually think without leading them, but the same information could be used to slant a poll to get a predetermined answer. Payne notes that the effect of asking a question in different ways or in different contexts can be much larger than the effect of sampling bias, which is the error estimate usually given for a poll. E.g. (from the book) if you ask people &quot;should government go into debt?&quot; the majority will answer &quot;No&quot;, but if you ask &quot;Corporations have the right to issue bonds. Should governments also have the right to issue bonds?&quot; the majority will answer &quot;Yes&quot;.
===Related books===

*&quot;The art of awareness; a textbook on general semantics&quot; by , Dubuque, Iowa: W.C. Brown Co., 1966, 1973, 1978; , 1996.
*&quot;Crazy talk, stupid talk: how we defeat ourselves by the way we talk and what to do about it&quot; by Neil Postman, Delacorte Press, 1976. All of Postman&#x27;s books are informed by his study of General Semantics (Postman was editor of &quot;ETC.&quot; from 1976 to 1986) but this book is his most explicit and detailed commentary on the use and misuse of language as a tool for thought.
* &quot;Developing sanity in human affairs&quot; edited by Susan Presby Kodish and Robert P. Holston, Greenwood Press, Westport Connecticut, copyright 1998, Hofstra University. A collection of papers on the subject of general semantics.
* &quot;Drive Yourself Sane: Using the Uncommon Sense of General Semantics, Third Edition&quot;. by Bruce I. Kodish and Susan Presby Kodish. Pasadena, CA: Extensional Publishing, 2011.
*&quot;General Semantics in Psychotherapy: Selected Writings on Methods Aiding Therapy&quot;, edited by Isabel Caro and Charlotte Schuchardt Read, Institute of General Semantics, 2002.
*&quot;Language habits in human affairs; an introduction to General Semantics&quot; by Irving J. Lee, Harper and Brothers, 1941. Still in print from the Institute of General Semantics. On a similar level to Hayakawa.
*&quot;The language of wisdom and folly; background readings in semantics&quot; edited by Irving J. Lee, Harper and Row, 1949. Was in print (ca. 2000) from the International Society of General Semantics—now merged with the Institute of General Semantics. A selection of essays and short excerpts from different authors on linguistic themes emphasized by General Semantics—without reference to Korzybski, except for an essay by him.
*&quot;Language Revision by Deletion of Absolutisms,&quot; by Allen Walker Read. Paper presented at the ninth annual meeting of the Semiotic Society of America, Bloomington, IN, 13 October 1984. Published in ETC: A Review of General Semantics. V42n1, Spring 1985, pp. 7–12.
*Living With Change, Wendell Johnson, Harper Collins, 1972.
*&quot;Mathsemantics: making numbers talk sense&quot; by Edward MacNeal, HarperCollins, 1994. Penguin paperback 1995. Explicit General Semantics combined with numeracy education (along the lines of John Allen Paulos&#x27;s books) and simple statistical and mathematical modelling, influenced by MacNeal&#x27;s work as an airline transportation consultant. Discusses the fallacy of Single Instance thinking in statistical situations.
*&quot;Operational philosophy: integrating knowledge and action&quot; by Anatol Rapoport, New York: Wiley (1953, 1965).
*&quot;People in Quandaries: the semantics of personal adjustment&quot; by Wendell Johnson, 1946—still in print from the Institute of General Semantics. Insightful book about the application of General Semantics to psychotherapy; was an acknowledged influence on Richard Bandler and John Grinder in their formulation of Neuro-Linguistic Programming.
*&quot;Semantics&quot; by Anatol Rapoport, Crowell, 1975. Includes both general semantics along the lines of Hayakawa, Lee, and Postman and more technical (mathematical and philosophical) material. A valuable survey. Rapoport&#x27;s autobiography &quot;Certainties and Doubts : A Philosophy of Life&quot; (Black Rose Books, 2000) gives some of the history of the General Semantics movement as he saw it.
*&quot;Your Most Enchanted Listener&quot; by Wendell Johnson, Harper, 1956. Your most enchanted listener is yourself, of course. Similar material as in &quot;People in Quandaries&quot; but considerably briefer.
===Related academic articles===

* Bramwell, R. D. (1981). The semantics of multiculturalism: a new element in curriculum. &quot;Canadian Journal of Education&quot;, Vol. 6, No. 2 (1981), pp. 92–101.
* Clarke, R. A. (1948). General semantics in art education. &quot;The School Review&quot;, Vol. 56, No. 10 (Dec., 1948), pp. 600–605.
* Chisholm, F. P. (1943). Some misconceptions about general semantics. &quot;College English&quot;, Vol. 4, No. 7 (Apr., 1943), p. 412–416.
* Glicksberg, C. I. (1946) General semantics and the science of man. &quot;Scientific Monthly&quot;, Vol. 62, No. 5 (May, 1946), pp. 440–446.
* Hallie, P. P. (1952). A criticism of general semantics. &quot;College English&quot;, Vol. 14, No. 1 (Oct., 1952), pp. 17–23.
* Hasselris, P. (1991). From Pearl Harbor to Watergate to Kuwait: &quot;Language in Thought and Action&quot;. &quot;The English Journal&quot;, Vol. 80, No. 2 (Feb., 1991), pp. 28–35.
* Hayakawa, S. I. (1939). General semantics and propaganda. &quot;Public Opinion Quarterly&quot;, Vol. 3 No. 2 (Apr., 1939), pp. 197–208.
* Kenyon, R. E. (1988). The Impossibility of Non-identity Languages. &quot;General Semantics Bulletin&quot;, No. 55, (1990), pp. 43–52.
* Kenyon, R. E. (1993). E-prime: The Spirit and the Letter. &quot;ETC: A Review of General Semantics&quot;. Vol. 49 No. 2, (Summer 1992). pp. 185–188
* Krohn, F. B. (1985). A general semantics approach to teaching business ethics. &quot;Journal of Business Communication&quot;, Vol. 22, Issue 3 (Summer, 1985), pp 59–66.
* Maymi, P. (1956). General concepts or laws in translation. &quot;The Modern Language Journal&quot;, Vol. 40, No. 1 (Jan., 1956), pp. 13–21.
* O&#x27;Brien, P. M. (1972). The sesame land of general semantics. &quot;The English Journal&quot;, Vol. 61, No. 2 (Feb., 1972), pp. 281–301.
* Rapaport, W. J. (1995). Understanding understanding: syntactic semantics and computational cognition. &quot;Philosophical Perspectives&quot;, Vol. 9, AI, Connectionism and Philosophical Psychology (1995), pp. 49–88.
* Thorndike, E. L. (1946). The psychology of semantics. &quot;American Journal of Psychology&quot;, Vol. 59, No. 4 (Oct., 1946), pp. 613–632.
* Whitworth, R. (1991). A book for all occasions: activities for teaching general semantics. &quot;The English Journal&quot;, Vol. 80, No. 2 (Feb., 1991), pp. 50–54.
* Youngren, W. H. (1968). General semantics and the science of meaning. &quot;College English&quot;, Vol. 29, No. 4 (Jan., 1968), pp. 253–285.
==External links==
*Institute of General Semantics
*Institute of General Semantics in Europe
*New York Society for General Semantics
*European Society For General Semantics
*Australian General Semantics Society
*ETC A Review of General Semantics Index</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2621039" start="0" end="17" title="General semantics" label="General semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387659" start="23" end="40" title="school of thought" label="school of thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="59" end="70" title="philosophy" label="philosophic"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="75" end="85" title="science" label="scientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743282" start="147" end="167" title="list of schools of philosophy" label="school of philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="180" end="187" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11862829" start="195" end="214" title="academic discipline" label="academic discipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="256" end="265" title="empiricism" label="empirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="278" end="287" title="cognition" label="cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q730920" start="292" end="307" title="problem solving" label="problem solving"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498453" start="353" end="362" title="self-help" label="self-help"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="408" end="424" title="pseudoscience" label="pseudoscientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q217602" start="513" end="523" title="analysis" label="analytical"/>
<link wikidata="Q483247" start="599" end="608" title="phenomenon" label="phenomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="642" end="652" title="perception" label="perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q82799" start="692" end="696" title="name" label="name"/>
<link wikidata="Q380709" start="702" end="708" title="labelling" label="labels"/>
<link wikidata="Q189643" start="908" end="926" title="Delusion" label="delusional thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963130" start="1063" end="1085" title="map–territory relation" label="map–territory relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q333402" start="1233" end="1249" title="Alfred Korzybski" label="Alfred Korzybski"/>
<link wikidata="Q25916981" start="1360" end="1378" title="Science and Sanity" label="Science and Sanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="2087" end="2100" title="pseudoscience" label="pseudoscience"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2154" end="2168" title="S. I. Hayakawa" label="S. I. Hayakawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982440" start="2199" end="2214" title="Wendell Johnson" label="Wendell Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040335" start="2387" end="2417" title="Institute of General Semantics" label="Institute of General Semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507246" start="2619" end="2633" title="media literacy" label="media literacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202745" start="2635" end="2663" title="neuro-linguistic programming" label="neuro-linguistic programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133018" start="2668" end="2701" title="rational emotive behavior therapy" label="rational emotive behavior therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="3953" end="3956" title="GPS" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q687424" start="4787" end="4796" title="Max Black" label="Max Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q673661" start="5292" end="5303" title="abstraction" label="abstracting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826150" start="7080" end="7102" title="Autoassociative memory" label="Autoassociative memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157100" start="7110" end="7133" title="memory-prediction framework" label="memory-prediction model"/>
<link wikidata="Q942027" start="7514" end="7522" title="S.I. Hayakawa" label="Hayakawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982440" start="7524" end="7539" title="Wendell Johnson" label="Wendell Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q436131" start="7544" end="7556" title="Neil Postman" label="Neil Postman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551307" start="7901" end="7911" title="universals" label="universals"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205125" start="7916" end="7932" title="abstract objects" label="abstract objects"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7970" end="7993" title="Philosophy#Metaphysics" label="metaphysical philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q687424" start="7998" end="8003" title="Max Black" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q677706" start="8174" end="8188" title="Martin Gardner" label="Martin Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040335" start="8291" end="8321" title="Institute of General Semantics" label="Institute of General Semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9350" start="8376" end="8380" title="yoga" label="yoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q868684" start="9311" end="9333" title="Ellensburg, Washington" label="Ellensburg, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q590563" start="10250" end="10262" title="Stuart Chase" label="Stuart Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q942027" start="11014" end="11022" title="S. I. Hayakawa" label="Hayakawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040335" start="11181" end="11211" title="Institute of General Semantics" label="Institute of General Semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486744" start="11261" end="11279" title="Language in Action" label="Language in Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943125" start="11294" end="11316" title="Book of the Month Club" label="Book of the Month Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147930" start="12534" end="12557" title="structural differential" label="structural differential"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766294" start="13200" end="13215" title="Marjorie Kendig" label="Marjorie Kendig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040335" start="14686" end="14716" title="Institute of General Semantics" label="Institute of General Semantics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14773" end="14786" title="Stuart Mayper" label="Stuart Mayper"/>
<link wikidata="Q81244" start="14818" end="14829" title="Karl Popper" label="Karl Popper"/>
<link wikidata="Q220888" start="14869" end="14883" title="falsifiability" label="falsifiability"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040335" start="15130" end="15141" title="Robert P. Pula" label="Robert Pula"/>
<link wikidata="Q19594723" start="16112" end="16126" title="Balvant Parekh" label="Balvant Parekh"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="16263" end="16272" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16357" end="16371" title="Quiddity#Etymology" label="to ti ên einai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386" start="18681" end="18684" title="ant" label="ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9391" start="20955" end="20974" title="Ludwig Wittgenstein" label="Ludwig Wittgenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q208238" start="20983" end="20996" title="Vienna Circle" label="Vienna Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q286017" start="21011" end="21026" title="Operationalism" label="operationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q187520" start="21051" end="21073" title="Charles Sanders Peirce" label="Charles Sanders Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953" start="21381" end="21393" title="Zen Buddhism" label="Zen Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q354867" start="21680" end="21690" title="Alan Watts" label="Alan Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q313931" start="21851" end="21863" title="Albert Ellis (psychologist)" label="Albert Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133018" start="21891" end="21924" title="rational emotive behavior therapy" label="rational emotive behavior therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040335" start="21990" end="22023" title="Alfred Korzybski Memorial Lecture" label="Alfred Korzybski Memorial Lecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="22037" end="22043" title="Bruges" label="Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598049" start="22065" end="22095" title="solution-focused brief therapy" label="solution-focused brief therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972973" start="22195" end="22224" title="personal construct psychology" label="personal construct psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q60750" start="22263" end="22274" title="Fritz Perls" label="Fritz Perls"/>
<link wikidata="Q943567" start="22279" end="22291" title="Paul Goodman" label="Paul Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q828879" start="22305" end="22320" title="Gestalt therapy" label="Gestalt therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982440" start="22367" end="22382" title="Wendell Johnson" label="Wendell Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123640" start="22546" end="22560" title="Ray Solomonoff" label="Ray Solomonoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724365" start="22633" end="22656" title="algorithmic probability" label="algorithmic probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757543" start="22673" end="22703" title="algorithmic information theory" label="algorithmic information theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456811" start="22706" end="22727" title="Kolmogorov complexity" label="Kolmogorov complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154167" start="22795" end="22807" title="Paul Vitanyi" label="Paul Vitanyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="22939" end="22954" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q315059" start="22994" end="23008" title="A. E. van Vogt" label="A. E. van Vogt"/>
<link wikidata="Q957076" start="23016" end="23035" title="The World of Null-A" label="The World of Null-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q123078" start="23092" end="23117" title="Robert A. Heinlein" label="Robert A. Heinlein&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5617374" start="23141" end="23145" title="Gulf (Heinlein)" label="Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q822793" start="23153" end="23166" title="Bernard Wolfe" label="Bernard Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934" start="23246" end="23266" title="Frank Herbert" label="Frank Herbert&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q190192" start="23280" end="23284" title="Dune (novel)" label="Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975729" start="23301" end="23314" title="Whipping Star" label="Whipping Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q534599" start="23508" end="23520" title="Damon Knight" label="Damon Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q438164" start="23621" end="23637" title="Samuel R. Delany" label="Samuel R. Delany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741191" start="23639" end="23658" title="Suzette Haden Elgin" label="Suzette Haden Elgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q314215" start="23663" end="23682" title="Robert Anton Wilson" label="Robert Anton Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q202122" start="23693" end="23704" title="John C. Wright (author)" label="John Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q188176" start="23779" end="23796" title="William Burroughs" label="William Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731737" start="23861" end="23886" title="The Electronic Revolution" label="The Electronic Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364100" start="23903" end="23919" title="Henry Beam Piper" label="Henry Beam Piper"/>
<link wikidata="Q542688" start="24221" end="24231" title="Alphaville (film)" label="Alphaville"/>
<link wikidata="Q53001" start="24245" end="24260" title="Jean-Luc Godard" label="Jean-Luc Godard"/>
<link wikidata="Q436131" start="24263" end="24275" title="Neil Postman" label="Neil Postman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583195" start="24315" end="24328" title="media ecology" label="media ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483553" start="24442" end="24454" title="Lance Strate" label="Lance Strate"/>
<link wikidata="Q436131" start="24616" end="24628" title="Neil Postman" label="Neil Postman"/>
<link wikidata="Q179677" start="25140" end="25161" title="Linguistic relativity" label="Linguistic relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q147638" start="25195" end="25212" title="Cognitive science" label="Cognitive science"/>
<link wikidata="Q13693745" start="25215" end="25232" title="Cognitive therapy" label="Cognitive therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382728" start="25235" end="25242" title="E-Prime" label="E-Prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q828879" start="25245" end="25260" title="Gestalt therapy" label="Gestalt therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486702" start="25263" end="25283" title="Language and thought" label="Language and thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q179677" start="25286" end="25307" title="Linguistic relativity" label="Linguistic relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167033" start="25310" end="25335" title="Perceptual control theory" label="Perceptual control theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133018" start="25338" end="25371" title="Rational emotive behavior therapy" label="Rational emotive behavior therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347394" start="25392" end="25423" title="Cratylus (dialogue)" label="&amp;quot;Cratylus&amp;quot; (dialogue)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986312" start="25426" end="25469" title="Harold Innis&amp;#x27;s communications theories" label="Harold Innis&amp;#x27;s communications theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040335" start="25472" end="25502" title="Institute of General Semantics" label="Institute of General Semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076951" start="25505" end="25524" title="Ladder of inference" label="Ladder of inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963130" start="25527" end="25549" title="Map–territory relation" label="Map–territory relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q202745" start="25552" end="25580" title="Neuro-linguistic programming" label="Neuro-linguistic programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="25583" end="25593" title="Propaganda" label="Propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="25613" end="25622" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q314252" start="25625" end="25640" title="Gregory Bateson" label="Gregory Bateson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417630" start="25643" end="25660" title="Sanford I. Berman" label="Sanford I. Berman"/>
<link wikidata="Q313931" start="25663" end="25675" title="Albert Ellis" label="Albert Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368345" start="25678" end="25691" title="Elwood Murray" label="Elwood Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q384865" start="25694" end="25711" title="Allen Walker Read" label="Allen Walker Read"/>
<link wikidata="Q84412" start="25714" end="25727" title="Wilhelm Reich" label="Wilhelm Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q56185" start="25730" end="25738" title="Ida Rolf" label="Ida Rolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569014" start="25741" end="25753" title="William Vogt" label="William Vogt"/>
<link wikidata="Q314215" start="25756" end="25775" title="Robert Anton Wilson" label="Robert Anton Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535128" start="25799" end="25830" title="Levels of Knowing and Existence" label="Levels of Knowing and Existence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486744" start="25897" end="25927" title="Language in Thought and Action" label="Language in Thought and Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q942027" start="25948" end="25961" title="S.I. Hayakawa" label="S.I. Hayakawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q957076" start="26039" end="26058" title="The World of Null-A" label="The World of Null-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q315059" start="26093" end="26107" title="A. E. van Vogt" label="A. E. van Vogt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5617374" start="26169" end="26173" title="Gulf (novella)" label="Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q123078" start="26210" end="26228" title="Robert A. Heinlein" label="Robert A. Heinlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808865" start="26243" end="26265" title="Assignment in Eternity" label="Assignment in Eternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q276548" start="26279" end="26293" title="secret society" label="secret society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3946639" start="26345" end="26359" title="Samuel Renshaw" label="Samuel Renshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q314215" start="26513" end="26532" title="Robert Anton Wilson" label="Robert Anton Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q452751" start="27195" end="27210" title="Richard Bandler" label="Richard Bandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q201446" start="27215" end="27227" title="John Grinder" label="John Grinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3867444" start="27886" end="27900" title="Murray Edelman" label="Murray Edelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q313772" start="29274" end="29287" title="George Lakoff" label="George Lakoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6768264" start="29292" end="29304" title="Mark Johnson (professor)" label="Mark Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q313772" start="29410" end="29423" title="George Lakoff" label="George Lakoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6768264" start="29428" end="29440" title="Mark Johnson (professor)" label="Mark Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q436131" start="30510" end="30522" title="Neil Postman" label="Neil Postman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623314" start="30954" end="30972" title="Hofstra University" label="Hofstra University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256698" start="32585" end="32602" title="John Allen Paulos" label="John Allen Paulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q487453" start="32893" end="32908" title="Anatol Rapoport" label="Anatol Rapoport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982440" start="33015" end="33030" title="Wendell Johnson" label="Wendell Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q202745" start="33260" end="33288" title="Neuro-Linguistic Programming" label="Neuro-Linguistic Programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744240" start="34171" end="34188" title="The School Review" label="The School Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146365" start="34316" end="34331" title="College English" label="College English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762584" start="34454" end="34472" title="Scientific Monthly" label="Scientific Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378299" start="34764" end="34783" title="The English Journal" label="The English Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257479" start="34897" end="34921" title="Public Opinion Quarterly" label="Public Opinion Quarterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744269" start="35991" end="36021" title="American Journal of Psychology" label="American Journal of Psychology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="60525" wikidata="Q921015" url="?curid=60525" title="List of Intel processors">
<text>This generational list of Intel processors attempts to present all of Intel&#x27;s processors from the 4-bit 4004 (1971) to the present high-end offerings. Concise technical data is given for each product.

== Latest ==
=== 13th and 14th generation Core ===

==== Desktop - Raptor Lake-S Refresh (codenamed &quot;Raptor Lake&quot;) (14th Gen) ====
An iterative refresh of Raptor Lake-S desktop processors, called the 14th generation of Intel Core, was launched on October 17, 2023.

CPUs in bold below feature ECC memory support when paired with a motherboard based on the W680 chipset according to each respective Intel Ark product page.
==== Mobile - Raptor Lake-HX Refresh (codenamed &quot;Raptor Lake&quot;) (14th Gen) ====
An iterative refresh of Raptor Lake-HX mobile processors, called the 14th generation of Intel Core, was launched on Jan 9, 2024 


==== Desktop (codenamed &quot;Raptor Lake&quot;) (13th Gen) ====
==== Mobile (codenamed &quot;Raptor Lake&quot;) (13th Gen) ====
=== 12th generation Core ===
==== Desktop (codenamed &quot;Alder Lake&quot;) ====
==== Mobile (codenamed &quot;Alder Lake&quot;) ====

=== 11th generation Core ===

==== Desktop (codenamed &quot;Rocket Lake&quot;) ====
==== Mobile (codenamed &quot;Tiger Lake&quot;) ====
=== 10th generation Core ===

==== Desktop (codenamed &quot;Comet Lake&quot;) ====
==== Mobile (codenamed &quot;Comet Lake&quot;, &quot;Ice Lake&quot;, and &quot;Amber Lake&quot;) ====
=== 9th generation Core ===

==== Desktop (codenamed &quot;Coffee Lake Refresh&quot;) ====
=== 8th generation Core ===

==== Desktop (codenamed &quot;Coffee Lake&quot;) ====

==== Mobile (codenamed &quot;Coffee Lake&quot;, &quot;Amber Lake&quot; and &quot;Whiskey Lake&quot;) ====
=== 7th generation Core ===

==== Desktop (codenamed &quot;Kaby Lake&quot; and &quot;Skylake-X&quot;) ====

==== Mobile (codenamed &quot;Kaby Lake&quot; and &quot;Apollo Lake&quot;) ====

==All processors==
All processors are listed in chronological order.

===The 4-bit processors===

==== Intel 4004 ====
First commercially available microprocessor (single-chip IC processor)

* Introduced November 15, 1971
* Clock rate 740 kHz

* 0.07 MIPS
* Bus width: 4 bits (multiplexed address/data due to limited pins)
* PMOS
* 2,300 transistors at 10 μm
* Addressable memory 640 bytes
* Program memory 4 KB (4096 B)
* Originally designed to be used in Busicom calculator
MCS-4 family:
* 4004 – CPU
* 4001 – ROM &amp; 4-bit Port
* 4002 – RAM &amp; 4-bit Port
* 4003 – 10-bit Shift Register
* 4008 – Memory+I/O Interface
* 4009 – Memory+I/O Interface
* 4211 – General Purpose Byte I/O Port
* 4265 – Programmable General Purpose I/O Device
* 4269 – Programmable Keyboard Display Device
* 4289 – Standard Memory Interface for MCS-4/40
* 4308 – 8192-bit (1024 × 8) ROM w/ 4-bit I/O Ports
* 4316 – 16384-bit (2048 × 8) Static ROM
* 4702 – 2048-bit (256 × 8) EPROM
* 4801 – 5.185 MHz Clock Generator Crystal for 4004/4201A or 4040/4201A

==== Intel 4040 ====
* Introduced in 1974 by Intel
* Clock speed was 740 kHz (same as the 4004 microprocessor)
* 3,000 transistors
* Interrupt features were available
* Programmable memory size: 8 KB (8192 B)
* 640 bytes of data memory
* 24-pin DIP

===The 8-bit processors===
====8008====
* Introduced April 1, 1972
* Clock rate 500 kHz (8008-1: 800 kHz)
* 0.05 MIPS
* Bus width: 8 bits (multiplexed address/data due to limited pins)
* Enhancement load PMOS logic
* 3,500 transistors at 10 μm
* Addressable memory 16 KB
* Typical in early 8-bit microcomputers, dumb terminals, general calculators, bottling machines
* Developed in tandem with 4004
* Originally intended for use in the Datapoint 2200 microcomputer
* Key volume deployment in Texas Instruments 742 microcomputer in &gt;3,000 Ford dealerships

====8080====
* Introduced April 1, 1974
* Clock rate 2 MHz (very rare 8080B: 3 MHz)
* 0.29 MIPS
* Data bus width: 8 bits, address bus: 16 bits
* Enhancement load NMOS logic
* 4,500 transistors at 6 μm
* Assembly language downward compatible with 8008
* Addressable memory 64 KB (64 × 1024 B)
* Up to 10× the performance of the 8008
* Used in e.g. the Altair 8800, traffic light controller, cruise missile
* Required six support chips versus 20 for the 8008


====8085====
* Introduced March 1976
* Clock rate 3 MHz
* 0.37 MIPS
* Data bus width: 8 bits, address bus: 16 bits
* Depletion load NMOS logic
* 6,500 transistors at 3 μm
* Binary compatible downward with the 8080
* Used in Toledo scales. Also used as a computer peripheral controller – modems, hard disks, printers, etc.
* CMOS 80C85 in Mars Sojourner, Radio Shack Model 100 portable

===Microcontrollers===
They are ICs with CPU, RAM, ROM (or PROM or EPROM), I/O Ports, Timers &amp; Interrupts
====Intel 8048====
* Single accumulator Harvard architecture

MCS-48 family:
* Intel 8020 – Single-Component 8-bit Microcontroller, 1 KB ROM, 64 Byte RAM, 13 I/O ports
* Intel 8021 – Single-Component 8-bit Microcontroller, 1 KB ROM, 64 Byte RAM, 21 I/O ports
* Intel 8022 – Single-Component 8-bit Microcontroller, With On-Chip A/D Converter
* Intel 8035 – Single-Component 8-bit Microcontroller, 64 Byte RAM
* Intel 8039 – Single-Component 8-bit Microcontroller, 128 Byte RAM
* Intel 8040 – Single-Component 8-bit Microcontroller, 256 Byte RAM
* Intel 8048 – Single-Component 8-bit Microcontroller, 1 KB ROM, 64 byte RAM, 27 I/O ports, 0.73 MIPS @ 11 MHz 
* Intel 8049 – Single-Component 8-bit Microcontroller, 2 KB ROM, 128 byte RAM, 27 I/O ports, 
* Intel 8050 – Single-Component 8-bit Microcontroller, 4 KB ROM, 256 byte RAM, 27 I/O ports, 
* Intel 8748 – Single-Component 8-bit Microcontroller, 1 KB EPROM, 64 byte RAM, 27 I/O ports, 
* Intel 8749 – Single-Component 8-bit Microcontroller, 2 KB EPROM, 128 byte RAM, 27 I/O ports, 
* Intel 87P50 – Single-Component 8-bit Microcontroller, ext. ROM socket (2758/2716/2732), 256 byte RAM, 27 I/O ports
* Intel 8648 – Single-Component 8-bit Microcontroller, 1 KB OTP EPROM, 64 byte RAM, 27 I/O ports
* Intel 8041 – Universal Peripheral Interface 8-bit Slave Microcontroller, 1 KB ROM, 64 byte RAM
* Intel 8041AH – Universal Peripheral Interface 8-bit Slave Microcontroller, 1 KB ROM, 128 byte RAM
* Intel 8641 – Universal Peripheral Interface 8-bit Slave Microcontroller ?
* Intel 8741 – Universal Peripheral Interface 8-bit Slave Microcontroller, 1 KB EPROM, 64 byte RAM
* Intel 8741AH – Universal Peripheral Interface 8-bit Slave Microcontroller, 1 KB EPROM, 128 byte RAM
* Intel 8042 – Universal Peripheral Interface 8-bit Slave Microcontroller, 2 KB ROM, 256 byte RAM
* Intel 8742 – Universal Peripheral Interface 8-bit Slave Microcontroller, 2 KB EPROM, 128 byte RAM
* Intel 8742AH – Universal Peripheral Interface 8-bit Slave Microcontroller, 2 KB OTP EPROM, 256 byte RAM
* Intel 8243 – Input/Output Expander. The available 28-pin PLCC version in sampling for first quarter of 1986.
* Intel 8244 – General Purpose Graphics Display Device (ASIC NTSC/SECAM)
* Intel 8245 – General Purpose Graphics Display Device (ASIC PAL)

====Intel 8051====
* Single accumulator Harvard architecture

MCS-51 family:
* 8031 – 8-bit Control-Oriented Microcontroller
* 8032 – 8-bit Control-Oriented Microcontroller
* 8044 – High Performance 8-bit Microcontroller
* 8344 – High Performance 8-bit Microcontroller
* 8744 – High Performance 8-bit Microcontroller
* 8051 – 8-bit Control-Oriented Microcontroller
* 8052 – 8-bit Control-Oriented Microcontroller
* 8054 – 8-bit Control-Oriented Microcontroller
* 8058 – 8-bit Control-Oriented Microcontroller
* 8351 – 8-bit Control-Oriented Microcontroller
* 8352 – 8-bit Control-Oriented Microcontroller
* 8354 – 8-bit Control-Oriented Microcontroller
* 8358 – 8-bit Control-Oriented Microcontroller
* 8751 – 8-bit Control-Oriented Microcontroller
* 8752 – 8-bit Control-Oriented Microcontroller
* 8754 – 8-bit Control-Oriented Microcontroller
* 8758 – 8-bit Control-Oriented Microcontroller

====Intel 80151====
* Single accumulator Harvard architecture

MCS-151 family:
* 80151 – High Performance 8-bit Control-Oriented Microcontroller
* 83151 – High Performance 8-bit Control-Oriented Microcontroller
* 87151 – High Performance 8-bit Control-Oriented Microcontroller
* 80152 – High Performance 8-bit Control-Oriented Microcontroller
* 83152 – High Performance 8-bit Control-Oriented Microcontroller

====Intel 80251====
* Single accumulator Harvard architecture

MCS-251 family:
* 80251 – 8/16/32-bit Microcontroller
* 80252 – 8/16/32-bit Microcontroller
* 80452 – 8/16/32-bit Microcontroller
* 83251 – 8/16/32-bit Microcontroller
* 87251 – 8/16/32-bit Microcontroller
* 87253 – 8/16/32-bit Microcontroller

====MCS-96 family====
* 8061 – 16-bit Microcontroller (parent of MCS-96 family ROMless With A/D, most sold to Ford) 
* 8094 – 16-bit Microcontroller (48-Pin ROMLess Without A/D)
* 8095 – 16-bit Microcontroller (48-Pin ROMLess With A/D)
* 8096 – 16-bit Microcontroller (68-Pin ROMLess Without A/D)
* 8097 – 16-bit Microcontroller (68-Pin ROMLess With A/D)
* 8394 – 16-bit Microcontroller (48-Pin With ROM Without A/D)
* 8395 – 16-bit Microcontroller (48-Pin With ROM With A/D)
* 8396 – 16-bit Microcontroller (68-Pin With ROM Without A/D)
* 8397 – 16-bit Microcontroller (68-Pin With ROM With A/D)
* 8794 – 16-bit Microcontroller (48-Pin With EROM Without A/D)
* 8795 – 16-bit Microcontroller (48-Pin With EROM With A/D)
* 8796 – 16-bit Microcontroller (68-Pin With EROM Without A/D)
* 8797 – 16-bit Microcontroller (68-Pin With EROM With A/D)
* 8098 – 16-bit Microcontroller
* 8398 – 16-bit Microcontroller
* 8798 – 16-bit Microcontroller
* 80196 – 16-bit Microcontroller
* 83196 – 16-bit Microcontroller
* 87196 – 16-bit Microcontroller
* 80296 – 16-bit Microcontroller

===The bit-slice processor===

====3000 family====

Introduced in the third quarter of 1974, these bit-slicing components used bipolar Schottky transistors. Each component implemented two bits of a processor function; packages could be interconnected to build a processor with any desired word length.

Members of the 3000 family:

* 3001 – Microcontrol Unit
* 3002 – 2-bit Arithmetic Logic Unit slice
* 3003 – Look-ahead Carry Generator
* 3205 – High-performance 1 of 8 Binary Decoder
* 3207 – Quad Bipolar-to-MOS Level Shifter and Driver
* 3208 – Hex Sense Amp and Latch for MOS Memories
* 3210 – TTL-to-MOS Level Shifter and High Voltage Clock Driver
* 3211 – ECL-to-MOS Level Shifter and High Voltage Clock Driver
* 3212 – Multimode Latch Buffer
* 3214 – Interrupt Control Unit
* 3216 – Parallel, Inverting Bi-Directional Bus Driver
* 3222 – Refresh Controller for 4K (4096 B) NMOS DRAMs
* 3226 – Parallel, Inverting Bi-Directional Bus Driver
* 3232 – Address Multiplexer and Refresh Counter for 4K DRAMs
* 3242 – Address Multiplexer and Refresh Counter for 16K (16 × 1024 B) DRAMs
* 3245 – Quad Bipolar TTL-to-MOS Level Shifter and Driver for 4K
* 3246 – Quad Bipolar ECL-to-MOS Level Shifter and Driver for 4K
* 3404 – High-performance 6-bit Latch
* 3408 – Hex Sense Amp and Latch for MOS Memories
* 3505 – Next generation processor

Bus width 2&quot;n&quot; bits data/address (depending on number &quot;n&quot; of slices used)

===The 16-bit processors: MCS-86 family===
====8086====
* Introduced June 8, 1978
* Clock rates:
** 5 MHz, 0.33 MIPS
** 8 MHz, 0.66 MIPS
** 10 MHz, 0.75 MIPS
* The memory is divided into odd and even banks. It accesses both banks concurrently to read 16 bits of data in one clock cycle
* Data bus width: 16 bits, address bus: 20 bits
* 29,000 transistors at 3 μm
* Addressable memory 1 megabyte (1024B)
* Up to 10× the performance of 8080
* First used in the Compaq Deskpro IBM PC-compatible computers. Later used in portable computing, and in the IBM PS/2 Model 25 and Model 30. Also used in the AT&amp;T PC6300 / Olivetti M24, a popular IBM PC-compatible (predating the IBM PS/2 line)
* Used segment registers to access more than 64 KB of data at once, which many programmers complained made their work excessively difficult.
* The first x86 CPU
* Later renamed the iAPX 86
====8088====
* Introduced June 1, 1979
* Clock rates:
** 4.77 MHz, 0.33 MIPS
** 8 MHz, 0.66 MIPS
* 16-bit internal architecture
* External data bus width: 8 bits, address bus: 20 bits
* 29,000 transistors at 3 μm
* Addressable memory 1 megabyte
* Identical to 8086 except for its 8-bit external bus (hence an &quot;8&quot; instead of a &quot;6&quot; at the end); identical Execution Unit (EU), different Bus Interface Unit (BIU)
* Used in IBM PC and PC-XT and compatibles
* Later renamed the iAPX 88
====80186====
* Introduced 1982
* Clock rates
** 6 MHz, &gt; 1 MIPS
* 55,000 transistors
* Included two timers, a DMA controller, and an interrupt controller on the chip in addition to the processor (these were at fixed addresses which differed from the IBM PC, although it was used by several PC compatible vendors such as Australian company Cleveland)
* Added a few opcodes and exceptions to the 8086 design, otherwise identical instruction set to 8086 and 8088
** BOUND, ENTER, LEAVE
** INS, OUTS
** IMUL imm, PUSH imm, PUSHA, POPA
** RCL/RCR/ROL/ROR/SHL/SHR/SAL/SAR reg, imm
* Address calculation and shift operations are faster than 8086
* Used mostly in embedded applications – controllers, point-of-sale systems, terminals, and the like
* Used in several non-PC compatible DOS computers including RM Nimbus, Tandy 2000, and CP/M 86 Televideo PM16 server
* Later renamed to iAPX 186

====80188====
* A version of the 80186 with an 8-bit external data bus
* Later renamed the iAPX 188
====80286====
* Introduced February 1, 1982
* Clock rates:
** 6 MHz, 0.9 MIPS
** 8 MHz, 10 MHz, 1.5 MIPS
** 12.5 MHz, 2.66 MIPS
** 16 MHz, 20 MHz and 25 MHz available.
* Data bus width: 16 bits, address bus: 24 bits
* Included memory protection hardware to support multitasking operating systems with per-process address space.
* 134,000 transistors at 1.5 μm
* Addressable memory 16 MB
* Added protected-mode features to 8086 with essentially the same instruction set
* 3–6× the performance of the 8086
* Widely used in IBM PC AT and AT clones contemporary to it

===32-bit processors: the non-x86 microprocessors===

====iAPX 432====
* Introduced January 1, 1981 as Intel&#x27;s first 32-bit microprocessor
* Multi-chip CPU
* Object/capability architecture
* Microcoded operating system primitives
* One terabyte virtual address space
* Hardware support for fault tolerance
* Two-chip General Data Processor (GDP), consists of 43201 and 43202
* 43203 Interface Processor (IP) interfaces to I/O subsystem
* 43204 Bus Interface Unit (BIU) simplifies building multiprocessor systems
* 43205 Memory Control Unit (MCU)
* Architecture and execution unit internal data base paths: 32 bits
* Clock rates:
** 5 MHz
** 7 MHz
** 8 MHz

====i960 a.k.a. 80960====
* Introduced April 5, 1988
* RISC-like 32-bit architecture
* Predominantly used in embedded systems
* Evolved from the capability processor developed for the BiiN joint venture with Siemens
* Many variants identified by two-letter suffixes

====i860 a.k.a. 80860====
* Initial version 80860XR Introduced February 26, 1989
* RISC 32/64-bit architecture, with floating point pipeline characteristics very visible to programmer
* Used in the Intel iPSC/860 Hypercube parallel supercomputer
* Mid-life kicker in the 80860XP processor (primarily a speed bump, some refinement/extension of instruction set)
* Used in the Intel Delta massively parallel supercomputer prototype, emplaced at California Institute of Technology
* Used in the Intel Paragon massively parallel supercomputer, emplaced at Sandia National Laboratory

====XScale====
* Introduced August 23, 2000
* 32-bit RISC microprocessor based on the ARM architecture
* Many variants, such as the PXA2xx applications processors, IOP3xx I/O processors and IXP2xxx and IXP4xx network processors

===32-bit processors: the 80386 range===
==== 80386DX ====
* Introduced October 17, 1985
* Clock rates:
** 16 MHz, 5 MIPS
** 20 MHz, 6 to 7 MIPS, introduced February 16, 1987
** 25 MHz, 7.5 MIPS, introduced April 4, 1988
** 33 MHz, 9.9 MIPS (9.4 SPECint92 on Compaq/i 16 KB L2), introduced April 10, 1989
* Data bus width: 32 bits, address bus: 32 bits
* 275,000 transistors at 1 μm
* Addressable memory 4 GB (4 × 1024 B)
* Virtual memory 64 TB (64 × 1024 B)
* First x86 chip to handle 32-bit data sets
* Reworked and expanded memory protection support including paged virtual memory and virtual-86 mode, features required at the time by Xenix and Unix. This memory capability spurred the development and availability of OS/2 and is a fundamental requirement for modern operating systems like Linux, Windows, and macOS
* First used by Compaq in the Deskpro 386. Used in desktop computing
* Unlike the DX naming convention of the 486 chips, it had no math co-processor
* Later renamed Intel386 DX

====80386SX====
* Introduced June 16, 1988
* Clock rates:
** 16 MHz, 2.5 MIPS
** 20 MHz, 3.1 MIPS, introduced January 25, 1989
** 25 MHz, 3.9 MIPS, introduced January 25, 1989
** 33 MHz, 5.1 MIPS, introduced October 26, 1992
* 32-bit internal architecture
* External data bus width: 16 bits
* External address bus width: 24 bits
* 275,000 transistors at 1 μm
* Addressable memory 16 MB
* Virtual memory 64 TB
* Narrower buses enable low-cost 32-bit processing
* Used in entry-level desktop and portable computing
* No math co-processor
* No commercial software used protected mode or virtual storage for many years
* Later renamed Intel386 SX

====80376====

* Introduced January 16, 1989; discontinued June 15, 2001
* Variant of 386SX intended for embedded systems
* No &quot;real mode&quot;, starts up directly in &quot;protected mode&quot;
* Replaced by much more successful 80386EX from 1994

====80386SL====
* Introduced October 15, 1990
* Clock rates:
** 20 MHz, 4.21 MIPS
** 25 MHz, 5.3 MIPS, introduced September 30, 1991
* 32-bit internal architecture
* External bus width: 16 bits
* 855,000 transistors at 1 μm
* Addressable memory 4 GB
* Virtual memory 64 TB
* First chip specifically made for portable computers because of low power consumption of chip
* Highly integrated, includes cache, bus, and memory controllers

====80386EX====
* Introduced August 1994
* Variant of 80386SX intended for embedded systems
* Static core (i.e. may run as slowly (and thus, power efficiently) as desired) down to full halt
* On-chip peripherals:
** Clock and power management
** Timers/counters
** Watchdog timer
** Serial I/O units (sync and async) and parallel I/O
** DMA
** RAM refresh
** JTAG test logic
* Significantly more successful than the 80376
* Used aboard several orbiting satellites and microsatellites
* Used in NASA&#x27;s FlightLinux project

===32-bit processors: the 80486 range===
====80486DX====
* Introduced April 10, 1989
* Clock rates:
** 25 MHz, 20 MIPS (16.8 SPECint92, 7.40 SPECfp92)
** 33 MHz, 27 MIPS (22.4 SPECint92 on Micronics M4P 128 KB L2), introduced May 7, 1990
** 50 MHz, 41 MIPS (33.4 SPECint92, 14.5 SPECfp92 on Compaq/50L 256 KB L2), introduced June 24, 1991
* Bus width: 32 bits
* 1.2 million transistors at 1 μm; the 50 MHz was at 0.8 μm
* Addressable memory 4 GB
* Virtual memory 64 TB
* Level 1 cache of 8 KB on chip
* Math coprocessor on chip
* 50× performance of the 8088
* Officially named Intel486 DX
* Used in desktop computing and servers
* Family 4 model 1

====80486SX====
* Introduced April 22, 1991
* Clock rates:
** 16 MHz, 13 MIPS
** 20 MHz, 16.5 MIPS, introduced September 16, 1991
** 25 MHz, 20 MIPS (12 SPECint92), introduced September 16, 1991
** 33 MHz, 27 MIPS (15.86 SPECint92), introduced September 21, 1992
* Bus width: 32 bits
* 1.185 million transistors at 1 μm and 900,000 at 0.8 μm
* Addressable memory 4 GB
* Virtual memory 64 TB
* Identical in design to 486DX but without a math coprocessor. The first version was an 80486DX with disabled math coprocessor in the chip and different pin configuration. If the user needed math coprocessor capabilities, they must add 487SX which was actually a 486DX with different pin configuration to prevent the user from installing a 486DX instead of 487SX, so with this configuration 486SX+487SX you had 2 identical CPU&#x27;s with only 1 effectively turned on
* Officially named Intel486 SX
* Used in low-cost entry to 486 CPU desktop computing, as well as extensively in low cost mobile computing
* Upgradable with the Intel OverDrive processor
* Family 4 model 2

====80486DX2====
* Introduced March 3, 1992
* Runs at twice the speed of the external bus (FSB)
* Socket 3
* Clock rates:
** 40 MHz
** 50 MHz, 41 MIPS
** 66 MHz, 54 MIPS
* Officially named Intel486 DX2
* Family 4 model 3

====80486SL====
* Introduced November 9, 1992
* Clock rates:
** 20 MHz, 15.4 MIPS
** 25 MHz, 19 MIPS
** 33 MHz, 25 MIPS
* Bus width: 32 bits
* 1.4 million transistors at 0.8 μm
* Addressable memory 4 GB
* Virtual memory 64 TB
* Officially named Intel486 SL
* Used in notebook computers
* Family 4 model 4
====80486DX4====
* Introduced March 7, 1994
* Clock rates:
** 75 MHz, 53 MIPS (41.3 SPECint92, 20.1 SPECfp92 on Micronics M4P 256 KB L2)
** 100 MHz, 70.7 MIPS (54.59 SPECint92, 26.91 SPECfp92 on Micronics M4P 256 KB L2)
* 1.6 million transistors at 0.6 μm
* Bus width: 32 bits
* Addressable memory 4 GB
* Virtual memory 64 TB
* Socket 3 168-pin PGA Package, or 208 sq. ftP package
* Officially named Intel486 DX4
* Used in high performance entry-level desktops and value notebooks
* Family 4 model 8

===32-bit processors: P5 microarchitecture===

====Original Pentium====
* Introduced March 22, 1993
* Bus width: 64 bits
* System bus clock rate 60 or 66 MHz
* Address bus: 32 bits
* Addressable memory 4 GB
* Virtual memory 64 TB
* Superscalar architecture
* Runs on 3.3 volts (except the very first generation &quot;P5&quot;)
* Used in desktops
* 8 KB of instruction cache
* 8 KB of data cache
* P5 – 0.8 μm process technology
** Introduced March 22, 1993
** 3.1 million transistors
** The only Pentium to run on 5 Volts
** Socket 4 273 pin PGA Package
** Package dimensions 2.16 in × 2.16 in
** Family 5 model 1
** Variants
*** 60 MHz, 100 MIPS (70.4 SPECint92, 55.1 SPECfp92 on Xpress 256 KB L2)
*** 66 MHz, 112 MIPS (77.9 SPECint92, 63.6 SPECfp92 on Xpress 256 KB L2)
* P54 – 0.6 μm process technology
** Socket 5 296/320-pin PGA package
** 3.2 million transistors
** Variants
*** 75 MHz, 126.5 MIPS (2.31 SPECint95, 2.02 SPECfp95 on Gateway P5 256K L2)
**** Introduced October 10, 1994
*** 90, 100 MHz, 149.8 and 166.3 MIPS respectively (2.74 SPECint95, 2.39 SPECfp95 on Gateway P5 256K L2 and 3.30 SPECint95, 2.59 SPECfp95 on Xpress 1ML2 respectively)
**** Introduced March 7, 1994
* P54CQS – 0.35 μm process technology
** Socket 5 296/320 pin PGA package
** 3.2 million transistors
** Variants
*** 120 MHz, 203 MIPS (3.72 SPECint95, 2.81 SPECfp95 on Xpress 1 MB L2)
**** Introduced March 27, 1995
*P54CS – 0.35 μm process technology
** 3.3 million transistors
** 90 mm2 die size
** Family 5 model 2
** Variants
** Socket 5 296/320-pin PGA package
*** 133 MHz, 218.9 MIPS (4.14 SPECint95, 3.12 SPECfp95 on Xpress 1 MB L2)
**** Introduced June 12, 1995
*** 150, 166 MHz, 230 and 247 MIPS respectively
**** Introduced January 4, 1996
** Socket 7 296/321-pin PGA package
*** 200 MHz, 270 MIPS (5.47 SPECint95, 3.68 SPECfp95)
**** Introduced June 10, 1996

====Pentium with MMX Technology====
* P55C – 0.35 μm process technology
** Introduced January 8, 1997
** Intel MMX (instruction set) support
** Socket 7 296/321 pin PGA (pin grid array) package
** 16 KB L1 instruction cache
** 16 KB data cache
** 4.5 million transistors
** System bus clock rate 66 MHz
** Basic P55C is family 5 model 4, mobile are family 5 model 7 and 8
** Variants
*** 166, 200 MHz introduced January 8, 1997
*** 233 MHz introduced June 2, 1997
*** 133 MHz (Mobile)
*** 166, 266 MHz (Mobile) introduced January 12, 1998
*** 200, 233 MHz (Mobile) introduced September 8, 1997
*** 300 MHz (Mobile) introduced January 7, 1999

===32-bit processors: P6/Pentium M microarchitecture===
====Pentium Pro====
* Introduced November 1, 1995
* Multichip Module (2 die)
* Precursor to Pentium II and III
* Primarily used in server systems
* Socket 8 processor package (387 pins; Dual SPGA)
* 5.5 million transistors
* Family 6 model 1
* 0.6 μm process technology
** 16 KB L1 cache
** 256 KB integrated L2 cache
** 60 MHz system bus clock rate
** Variants
*** 150 MHz
* 0.35 μm process technology, (two die, a 0.35 μm CPU with 0.6 μm L2 cache)
** 5.5 million transistors
** 512 KB or 256 KB integrated L2 cache
** 60 or 66 MHz system bus clock rate
** Variants
*** 150 MHz (60 MHz bus clock rate, 256 KB 0.6 μm cache) introduced November 1, 1995
*** 166 MHz (66 MHz bus clock rate, 512 KB 0.35 μm cache) introduced November 1, 1995
*** 180 MHz (60 MHz bus clock rate, 256 KB 0.6 μm cache) introduced November 1, 1995
*** 200 MHz (66 MHz bus clock rate, 256 KB 0.6 μm cache) introduced November 1, 1995
*** 200 MHz (66 MHz bus clock rate, 512 KB 0.35 μm cache) introduced November 1, 1995
*** 200 MHz (66 MHz bus clock rate, 1 MB 0.35 μm cache) introduced August 18, 1997

====Pentium II====
* Introduced May 7, 1997
* Pentium Pro with MMX and improved 16-bit performance
* 242-pin Slot 1 (SEC) processor package
* Voltage identification pins
* 7.5 million transistors
* 32 KB L1 cache
* 512 KB frequency external L2 cache
* The &quot;Performance Enhanced&quot; mobile Pentium II (codenamed Dixon) had a full-speed 256 KB L2 cache
* Klamath – 0.35 μm process technology (233, 266, 300 MHz)
** 66 MHz system bus clock rate
** Family 6 model 3
** Variants
*** 233, 266, 300 MHz introduced May 7, 1997
* Deschutes – 0.25 μm process technology (333, 350, 400, 450 MHz)
** Introduced January 26, 1998
** 66 MHz system bus clock rate (&quot;333 MHz variant&quot;), 100 MHz system bus clock rate for all subsequent models
** Family 6 model 5
** Variants
*** 333 MHz introduced January 26, 1998
*** 350, 400 MHz introduced April 15, 1998
*** 450 MHz introduced August 24, 1998
*** 233, 266 MHz (Mobile) introduced April 2, 1998
*** 333 MHz Pentium II Overdrive processor for Socket 8 Introduced August 10, 1998
*** 300 MHz (Mobile) introduced September 9, 1998
*** 333 MHz (Mobile) introduced January 25, 1999

====Celeron (Pentium II-based)====
* Covington – 0.25 μm process technology
** Introduced April 15, 1998
** 242-pin Slot 1 SEPP (Single Edge Processor Package)
** 7.5 million transistors
** 66 MHz system bus clock rate
** Slot 1
** 32 KB L1 cache
** No L2 cache
** Variants
*** 266 MHz introduced April 15, 1998
*** 300 MHz introduced June 9, 1998
* Mendocino – 0.25 μm process technology
** Introduced August 24, 1998
** 242-pin Slot 1 SEPP (Single Edge Processor Package), Socket 370 PPGA package
** 19 million transistors
** 66 MHz system bus clock rate
** Slot 1, Socket 370
** 32 KB L1 cache
** 128 KB integrated cache
** Family 6 model 6
** Variants
*** 300, 333 MHz introduced August 24, 1998
*** 366, 400 MHz introduced January 4, 1999
*** 433 MHz introduced March 22, 1999
*** 466 MHz
*** 500 MHz introduced August 2, 1999
*** 533 MHz introduced January 4, 2000
*** 266 MHz (Mobile)
*** 300 MHz (Mobile)
*** 333 MHz (Mobile) introduced April 5, 1999
*** 366 MHz (Mobile)
*** 400 MHz (Mobile)
*** 433 MHz (Mobile)
*** 450 MHz (Mobile) introduced February 14, 2000
*** 466 MHz (Mobile)
*** 500 MHz (Mobile) introduced February 14, 2000

Pentium II Xeon &quot;(chronological entry)&quot;

* Introduced June 29, 1998

====Pentium III====
* Katmai – 0.25 μm process technology
** Introduced February 26, 1999
** Improved PII (i.e. P6-based core) now including Streaming SIMD Extensions (SSE)
** 9.5 million transistors
** 512 KB (512 × 1024 B) bandwidth L2 External cache
** 242-pin Slot 1 SECC2 (Single Edge Contact cartridge 2) processor package
** System bus clock rate 100 MHz, 133 MHz (B-models)
** Slot 1
** Family 6 model 7
** Variants
*** 450, 500 MHz introduced February 26, 1999
*** 550 MHz introduced May 17, 1999
*** 600 MHz introduced August 2, 1999
*** 533, 600 MHz introduced (133 MHz bus clock rate) September 27, 1999
* Coppermine – 0.18 μm process technology
** Introduced October 25, 1999
** 28.1 million transistors
** 256 KB (512 × 1024 B) Advanced Transfer L2 cache (integrated)
** 242-pin Slot-1 SECC2 (Single Edge Contact cartridge 2) processor package, 370-pin FC-PGA (flip-chip pin grid array) package
** System Bus clock rate 100 MHz (E-models), 133 MHz (EB models)
** Slot 1, Socket 370
** Family 6 model 8
** Variants
*** 500 MHz (100 MHz bus clock rate)
*** 533 MHz
*** 550 MHz (100 MHz bus clock rate)
*** 600 MHz
*** 600 MHz (100 MHz bus clock rate)
*** 650 MHz (100 MHz bus clock rate) introduced October 25, 1999
*** 667 MHz introduced October 25, 1999
*** 700 MHz (100 MHz bus clock rate) introduced October 25, 1999
*** 733 MHz introduced October 25, 1999
*** 750, 800 MHz (100 MHz bus clock rate) introduced December 20, 1999
*** 850 MHz (100 MHz bus clock rate) introduced March 20, 2000
*** 866 MHz introduced March 20, 2000
*** 933 MHz introduced May 24, 2000
*** 1000 MHz introduced March 8, 2000 (not widely available at time of release)
*** 1100 MHz
*** 1133 MHz (first version recalled, later re-released)
*** 400, 450, 500 MHz (Mobile) introduced October 25, 1999
*** 600, 650 MHz (Mobile) introduced January 18, 2000
*** 700 MHz (Mobile) introduced April 24, 2000
*** 750 MHz (Mobile) introduced June 19, 2000
*** 800, 850 MHz (Mobile) introduced September 25, 2000
*** 900, 1000 MHz (Mobile) introduced March 19, 2001
* Tualatin – 0.13 μm process technology
** Introduced July 2001
** 28.1 million transistors
** 32 KB (32 × 1024 B) L1 cache
** 256 KB or 512 KB Advanced Transfer L2 cache (integrated)
** 370-pin FC-PGA2 (flip-chip pin grid array) package
** 133 MHz system bus clock rate
** Socket 370
** Family 6 model 11
** Variants
*** 1133 MHz (256 KB L2)
*** 1133 MHz (512 KB L2)
*** 1200 MHz
*** 1266 MHz (512 KB L2)
*** 1333 MHz
*** 1400 MHz (512 KB L2)

====Pentium II Xeon and Pentium III Xeon====
* PII Xeon
** Variants
*** 400 MHz introduced June 29, 1998
*** 450 MHz (512 KB L2 cache) introduced October 6, 1998
*** 450 MHz (1 MB and 2 MB L2 cache) introduced January 5, 1999
* PIII Xeon
** Introduced October 25, 1999
** 9.5 million transistors at 0.25 μm or 28 million at 0.18 μm
** L2 cache is 256 KB, 1 MB, or 2 MB Advanced Transfer Cache (Integrated)
** Processor Package Style is Single Edge Contact Cartridge (S.E.C.C.2) or SC330
** System Bus clock rate 133 MHz (256 KB L2 cache) or 100 MHz (1–2 MB L2 cache)
** System Bus width: 64 bits
** Addressable memory: 64 GB
** Used in two-way servers and workstations (256 KB L2) or 4- and 8-way servers (1–2 MB L2)
** Family 6 model 10
** Variants
*** 500 MHz (0.25 μm process) introduced March 17, 1999
*** 550 MHz (0.25 μm process) introduced August 23, 1999
*** 600 MHz (0.18 μm process, 256 KB L2 cache) introduced October 25, 1999
*** 667 MHz (0.18 μm process, 256 KB L2 cache) introduced October 25, 1999
*** 733 MHz (0.18 μm process, 256 KB L2 cache) introduced October 25, 1999
*** 800 MHz (0.18 μm process, 256 KB L2 cache) introduced January 12, 2000
*** 866 MHz (0.18 μm process, 256 KB L2 cache) introduced April 10, 2000
*** 933 MHz (0.18 μm process, 256 KB L2 cache)
*** 1000 MHz (0.18 μm process, 256 KB L2 cache) introduced August 22, 2000
*** 700 MHz (0.18 μm process, 1–2 MB L2 cache) introduced May 22, 2000

====Celeron (Pentium III Coppermine-based)====
* Coppermine-128, 0.18 μm process technology
** Introduced March, 2000
** Streaming SIMD Extensions (SSE)
** Socket 370, FC-PGA processor package
** 28.1 million transistors
** 66 MHz system bus clock rate, 100 MHz system bus clock rate from January 3, 2001
** 32 KB L1 cache
** 128 KB Advanced Transfer L2 cache
** Family 6 model 8
** Variants
*** 533 MHz
*** 566 MHz
*** 600 MHz
*** 633, 667, 700 MHz introduced June 26, 2000
*** 733, 766 MHz introduced November 13, 2000
*** 800 MHz introduced January 3, 2001
*** 850 MHz introduced April 9, 2001
*** 900 MHz introduced July 2, 2001
*** 950, 1000, 1100 MHz introduced August 31, 2001
*** 550 MHz (Mobile)
*** 600, 650 MHz (Mobile) introduced June 19, 2000
*** 700 MHz (Mobile) introduced September 25, 2000
*** 750 MHz (Mobile) introduced March 19, 2001
*** 800 MHz (Mobile)
*** 850 MHz (Mobile) introduced July 2, 2001
*** 600 MHz (LV Mobile)
*** 500 MHz (ULV Mobile) introduced January 30, 2001
*** 600 MHz (ULV Mobile)

XScale &quot;(chronological entry – non-x86 architecture)&quot;

* Introduced August 23, 2000

Pentium 4 (not 4EE, 4E, 4F), Itanium, P4-based Xeon, Itanium 2 &quot;(chronological entries)&quot;

* Introduced April 2000 – July 2002

====Pentium III Tualatin-based====
* Tualatin – 0.13 μm process technology
** 32 KB L1 cache
** 512 KB Advanced Transfer L2 cache
** 133 MHz system bus clock rate
** Socket 370
** Variants
*** 1.0 GHz
*** 1.13 GHz
*** 1.26 GHz
*** 1.4 GHz

====Celeron (Pentium III Tualatin-based)====
* Tualatin Celeron – 0.13 μm process technology
** 32 KB L1 cache
** 256 KB Advanced Transfer L2 cache
** 100 MHz system bus clock rate
** Socket 370
** Family 6 model 11
** Variants
*** 1.0 GHz
*** 1.1 GHz
*** 1.2 GHz
*** 1.3 GHz
*** 1.4 GHz

====Pentium M====
* Banias 0.13 μm process technology
** Introduced March 2003
** 64 KB L1 cache
** 1 MB L2 cache (integrated)
** Based on Pentium III core, with SSE2 SIMD instructions and deeper pipeline
** 77 million transistors
** Micro-FCPGA, Micro-FCBGA processor package
** Heart of the Intel mobile &quot;Centrino&quot; system
** 400 MHz NetBurst-style system bus
** Family 6 model 9
** Variants
*** 900 MHz (ultra-low voltage)
*** 1.0 GHz (ultra-low voltage)
*** 1.1 GHz (low voltage)
*** 1.2 GHz (low voltage)
*** 1.3 GHz
*** 1.4 GHz
*** 1.5 GHz
*** 1.6 GHz
*** 1.7 GHz
* Dothan 0.09 μm (90 nm) process technology
** Introduced May 2004
** 2 MB L2 cache
** 140 million transistors
** Revised data prefetch unit
** 400 MHz NetBurst-style system bus
** 21 W TDP
** Family 6 model 13
** Variants
*** 1.00 GHz (Pentium M 723) (ultra-low voltage, 5 W TDP)
*** 1.10 GHz (Pentium M 733) (ultra-low voltage, 5 W TDP)
*** 1.20 GHz (Pentium M 753) (ultra-low voltage, 5 W TDP)
*** 1.30 GHz (Pentium M 718) (low voltage, 10 W TDP)
*** 1.40 GHz (Pentium M 738) (low voltage, 10 W TDP)
*** 1.50 GHz (Pentium M 758) (low voltage, 10 W TDP)
*** 1.60 GHz (Pentium M 778) (low voltage, 10 W TDP)
*** 1.40 GHz (Pentium M 710)
*** 1.50 GHz (Pentium M 715)
*** 1.60 GHz (Pentium M 725)
*** 1.70 GHz (Pentium M 735)
*** 1.80 GHz (Pentium M 745)
*** 2.00 GHz (Pentium M 755)
*** 2.10 GHz (Pentium M 765)
* Dothan 533 0.09 μm (90 nm) process technology
** Introduced Q1 2005
** Same as Dothan except with a 533 MHz NetBurst-style system bus and 27 W TDP
** Variants
*** 1.60 GHz (Pentium M 730)
*** 1.73 GHz (Pentium M 740)
*** 1.86 GHz (Pentium M 750)
*** 2.00 GHz (Pentium M 760)
*** 2.13 GHz (Pentium M 770)
*** 2.26 GHz (Pentium M 780)
* Stealey 0.09 μm (90 nm) process technology
** Introduced Q2 2007
** 512 KB L2, 3 W TDP
** Variants
*** 600 MHz (A100)
*** 800 MHz (A110)

====Celeron M====
* Banias-512 0.13 μm process technology
** Introduced March 2003
** 64 KB L1 cache
** 512 KB L2 cache (integrated)
** SSE2 SIMD instructions
** No SpeedStep technology, is not part of the &#x27;Centrino&#x27; package
** Family 6 model 9
** Variants
*** 310, 1.20 GHz
*** 320, 1.30 GHz
*** 330, 1.40 GHz
*** 340, 1.50 GHz
* Dothan-1024 90 nm process technology
** 64 KB L1 cache
** 1 MB L2 cache (integrated)
** SSE2 SIMD instructions
** No SpeedStep technology, is not part of the &#x27;Centrino&#x27; package
** Variants
*** 350, 1.30 GHz
*** 350J, 1.30 GHz, with Execute Disable bit
*** 360, 1.40 GHz
*** 360J, 1.40 GHz, with Execute Disable bit
*** 370, 1.50 GHz, with Execute Disable bit
**** Family 6, Model 13, Stepping 8
*** 380, 1.60 GHz, with Execute Disable bit
*** 390, 1.70 GHz, with Execute Disable bit
* Yonah-1024 65 nm process technology
** 64 KB L1 cache
** 1 MB L2 cache (integrated)
** SSE3 SIMD instructions, 533 MHz front-side bus, execute-disable bit
** No SpeedStep technology, is not part of the &#x27;Centrino&#x27; package
** Variants
*** 410, 1.46 GHz
*** 420, 1.60 GHz,
*** 423, 1.06 GHz (ultra-low voltage)
*** 430, 1.73 GHz
*** 440, 1.86 GHz
*** 443, 1.20 GHz (ultra-low voltage)
*** 450, 2.00 GHz

====Intel Core====
* Yonah 0.065 μm (65 nm) process technology
** Introduced January 2006
** 533/667 MHz front-side bus
** 2 MB (Shared on Duo) L2 cache
** SSE3 SIMD instructions
** 31W TDP (T versions)
** Family 6, Model 14
** Variants:
*** Intel Core Duo T2700 2.33 GHz
*** Intel Core Duo T2600 2.16 GHz
*** Intel Core Duo T2500 2 GHz
*** Intel Core Duo T2450 2 GHz
*** Intel Core Duo T2400 1.83 GHz
*** Intel Core Duo T2300 1.66 GHz
*** Intel Core Duo T2050 1.6 GHz
*** Intel Core Duo T2300e 1.66 GHz
*** Intel Core Duo T2080 1.73 GHz
*** Intel Core Duo L2500 1.83 GHz (low voltage, 15 W TDP)
*** Intel Core Duo L2400 1.66 GHz (low voltage, 15 W TDP)
*** Intel Core Duo L2300 1.5 GHz (low voltage, 15 W TDP)
*** Intel Core Duo U2500 1.2 GHz (ultra-low voltage, 9 W TDP)
*** Intel Core Solo T1350 1.86 GHz (533 FSB)
*** Intel Core Solo T1300 1.66 GHz
*** Intel Core Solo T1200 1.5 GHz

====Dual-Core Xeon LV====
* Sossaman 0.065 μm (65 nm) process technology
** Introduced March 2006
** Based on Yonah core, with SSE3 SIMD instructions
** 667 MHz frontside bus
** 2 MB shared L2 cache
** Variants
*** 2.0 GHz

===32-bit processors: NetBurst microarchitecture===

====Pentium 4====
* 0.18 μm process technology (1.40 and 1.50 GHz)
** Introduced November 20, 2000
** L2 cache was 256 KB Advanced Transfer cache (integrated)
** Processor package Style was PGA423, PGA478
** System bus clock rate 400 MHz
** SSE2 SIMD Extensions
** 42 million transistors
** Used in desktops and entry-level workstations
* 0.18 μm process technology (1.7 GHz)
** Introduced April 23, 2001
** See the 1.4 and 1.5 chips for details
* 0.18 μm process technology (1.6 and 1.8 GHz)
** Introduced July 2, 2001
** See 1.4 and 1.5 chips for details
** Core voltage is 1.15 volts in Maximum Performance Mode; 1.05 volts in battery optimized mode
** Power &lt;1 watt in battery optimized mode
** Used in full-size and then light mobile PCs
* 0.18 μm process technology Willamette (1.9 and 2.0 GHz)
** Introduced August 27, 2001
** See 1.4 and 1.5 chips for details
* Family 15 model 1
* Pentium 4 (2 GHz, 2.20 GHz)
** Introduced January 7, 2002
* Pentium 4 (2.4 GHz)
** Introduced April 2, 2002
* 0.13 μm process technology Northwood A (1.7, 1.8, 1.9, 2, 2.2, 2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 2.8 (OEM), 3.0 (OEM) GHz)
** Improved branch prediction and other microcodes tweaks
** 512 KB integrated L2 cache
** 55 million transistors
** 400 MHz system bus
* Family 15 model 2
* 0.13 μm process technology Northwood B (2.26, 2.4, 2.53, 2.66, 2.8, 3.06 GHz)
** 533 MHz system bus. (3.06 includes Intel&#x27;s Hyper-Threading technology)
* 0.13 μm process technology Northwood C (2.4, 2.6, 2.8, 3.0, 3.2, 3.4 GHz)
** 800 MHz system bus (all versions include Hyper-Threading)
** 6500 to 10,000 MIPS

Itanium &quot;(chronological entry – new non-x86 architecture)&quot;

* Introduced 2001

====Xeon (32-bit NetBurst)====
* Official designation now Xeon; i.e. not &quot;Pentium 4 Xeon&quot;
* Xeon 1.4, 1.5, 1.7 GHz
** Introduced May 21, 2001
** L2 cache was 256 KB Advanced Transfer cache (integrated)
** Processor package Organic Land Grid Array 603 (OLGA 603)
** System bus clock rate 400 MHz
** SSE2 SIMD Extensions
** Used in high-performance and mid-range dual processor enabled workstations
* Xeon 2.0 GHz and up to 3.6 GHz
** Introduced September 25, 2001

Itanium 2 &quot;(chronological entry – new non-x86 architecture)&quot;
* Introduced July 2002
* &quot;See main entry&quot;

====Mobile Pentium 4-M====
* 0.13 μm process technology
* 55 million transistors
* 512 KB L2 cache
* BUS a 400 MHz
* Supports up to 1 GB of DDR 266 MHz memory
* Supports ACPI 2.0 and APM 1.2 System Power Management
* 1.3–1.2 V (SpeedStep)
* Power: 1.2 GHz 20.8 W, 1.6 GHz 30 W, 2.6 GHz 35 W
* Sleep power 5 W (1.2 V)
* Deeper sleep power 2.9 W (1.0 V)
** 1.40 GHz – 23 April 2002
** 1.50 GHz – 23 April 2002
** 1.60 GHz – 4 March 2002
** 1.70 GHz – 4 March 2002
** 1.80 GHz – 23 April 2002
** 1.90 GHz – 24 June 2002
** 2.00 GHz – 24 June 2002
** 2.20 GHz – 16 September 2002
** 2.40 GHz – 14 January 2003
** 2.50 GHz – 16 April 2003
** 2.60 GHz – 11 June 2003

====Pentium 4 EE====
* Introduced September 2003
* &quot;Extreme Edition&quot;
* Built from the Xeon&#x27;s &quot;Gallatin&quot; core, but with 2 MB cache

====Pentium 4E====
* Introduced February 2004
* Built on 0.09 μm (90 nm) process technology Prescott (2.4 A, 2.8, 2.8 A, 3.0, 3.2, 3.4, 3.6, 3.8 ) 1 MB L2 cache
* 533 MHz system bus (2.4A and 2.8A only)
* 800 MHz system bus (all other models)
* 125 million transistors in 1 MB models
* 169 million transistors in 2 MB models
* Hyper-Threading support is only available on CPUs using the 800 MHz system bus.
* The processor&#x27;s integer instruction pipeline has been increased from 20 stages to 31 stages, which theoretically allows for even greater bandwidth
* 7500 to 11,000 MIPS
* LGA 775 versions are in the 5xx series (32-bit) and 5&quot;x&quot;1 series (with Intel 64)
* The 6xx series has 2 MB L2 cache and Intel 64

===64-bit processors: IA-64===
* New instruction set, not at all related to x86
* Before the feature was eliminated (Montecito, July 2006) IA-64 processors supported 32-bit x86 in hardware, but slowly (see its 2001 market reception and 2006 architectural changes)

====Itanium====
* Code name Merced
* Family 7
* Released May 29, 2001
* 733 MHz and 800 MHz
* 2 MB cache
* All recalled and replaced by Itanium 2

====Itanium 2====
* Family 0x1F
* Released July 2002
* 900 MHz – 1.6 GHz
* McKinley 900 MHz 1.5 MB cache, Model 0x0
* McKinley 1 GHz, 3 MB cache, Model 0x0
* Deerfield 1 GHz, 1.5 MB cache, Model 0x1
* Madison 1.3 GHz, 3 MB cache, Model 0x1
* Madison 1.4 GHz, 4 MB cache, Model 0x1
* Madison 1.5 GHz, 6 MB cache, Model 0x1
* Madison 1.67 GHz, 9 MB cache, Model 0x1
* Hondo 1.4 GHz, 4 MB cache, dual-core MCM, Model 0x1

===64-bit processors: Intel 64 – NetBurst microarchitecture===
* Intel Extended Memory 64 Technology
* Mostly compatible with AMD&#x27;s AMD64 architecture
* Introduced Spring 2004, with the Pentium 4F (D0 and later P4 steppings)

====Pentium 4F====
* Prescott-2M built on 0.09 μm (90 nm) process technology
* 2.8–3.8 GHz (model numbers 6&quot;x&quot;0)
* Introduced February 20, 2005
* Same features as Prescott with the addition of:
** 2 MB cache
** Intel 64-bit
** Enhanced Intel SpeedStep Technology (EIST)
* Cedar Mill built on 0.065 μm (65 nm) process technology
* 3.0–3.6 GHz (model numbers 6&quot;x&quot;1)
* Introduced January 16, 2006
* Die shrink of Prescott-2M
* Same features as Prescott-2M
* Family 15 Model 4

====Pentium D====

* Dual-core microprocessor
* No Hyper-Threading
* 800 (4×200) MHz front-side bus
* LGA 775 (Socket T)
* Smithfield (Pentium D) – 90 nm process technology (2.66–3.2 GHz)
** Introduced May 26, 2005
** 2.66–3.2 GHz (model numbers 805–840)
** 230 million transistors
** 1 MB × 2 (non-shared, 2 MB total) L2 cache
** Cache coherency between cores requires communication over the FSB
** Performance increase of 60% over similarly clocked Prescott
** 2.66 GHz (533 MHz FSB) Pentium D 805 introduced December 2005
** Contains 2× Prescott dies in one package
** Family 15 Model 4
* Presler (Pentium D) – 65 nm process technology (2.8–3.6 GHz)
** Introduced January 16, 2006
** 2.8–3.6 GHz (model numbers 915–960)
** 376 million transistors
** 2× 2 MB (non-shared, 4 MB total) L2 cache
** Contains 2× Cedar Mill dies in one package
** Variants
*** Pentium D 945

====Pentium Extreme Edition====
* Dual-core microprocessor
* Enabled Hyper-Threading
* 800 (4×200) MHz front-side bus
* Smithfield (Pentium Extreme Edition) – 90 nm process technology (3.2 GHz)
** Variants
*** Pentium 840 EE – 3.20 GHz (2 × 1 MB L2)
* Presler (Pentium Extreme Edition) – 65 nm process technology (3.46, 3.73)
** 2 MB × 2 (non-shared, 4 MB total) L2 cache
** Variants
*** Pentium 955 EE – 3.46 GHz, 1066 MHz front-side bus
*** Pentium 965 EE – 3.73 GHz, 1066 MHz front-side bus

====Xeon (64-bit NetBurst)====
* Nocona
** Introduced 2004
* Irwindale
** Introduced 2004
* Cranford
** Introduced April 2005
** MP version of Nocona
* Potomac
** Introduced April 2005
** Cranford with 8 MB of L3 cache
* Paxville DP (2.8 GHz)
** Introduced October 10, 2005
** Dual-core version of Irwindale, with 4 MB of L2 cache (2 MB per core)
** 2.8 GHz
** 800 MT/s front-side bus
* Paxville MP – 90 nm process (2.67 – 3.0 GHz)
** Introduced November 1, 2005
** Dual-core Xeon 7000 series
** MP-capable version of Paxville DP
** 2 MB of L2 cache (1 MB per core) or 4 MB of L2 (2 MB per core)
** 667 MT/s FSB or 800 MT/s FSB
* Dempsey – 65 nm process (2.67–3.73 GHz)
** Introduced May 23, 2006
** Dual-core Xeon 5000 series
** MP version of Presler
** 667 MT/s or 1066 MT/s FSB
** 4 MB of L2 cache (2 MB per core)
** LGA 771 (Socket J).
* Tulsa – 65 nm process (2.5–3.4 GHz)
** Introduced August 29, 2006
** Dual-core Xeon 7100-series
** Improved version of Paxville MP
** 667 MT/s or 800 MT/s FSB

===64-bit processors: Intel 64 – Core microarchitecture===
====Xeon (64-bit Core microarchitecture)====
* Woodcrest – 65 nm process technology
** Server and Workstation CPU (SMP support for dual CPU system)
** Introduced June 26, 2006
** Intel VT-x, multiple OS support
** EIST (Enhanced Intel SpeedStep Technology) in 5140, 5148LV, 5150, 5160
** Execute Disable Bit
** TXT, enhanced security hardware extensions
** SSSE3 SIMD instructions
** iAMT2 (Intel Active Management Technology), remotely manage computers
** Variants
*** Xeon 5160, 3.00 GHz (4 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB, 80 W)
*** Xeon 5150, 2.66 GHz (4 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB, 65 W)
*** Xeon 5140, 2.33 GHz (4 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB, 65 W)
*** Xeon 5130, 2.00 GHz (4 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB, 65 W)
*** Xeon 5120, 1.86 GHz (4 MB L2, 1066 MHz FSB, 65 W)
*** Xeon 5110, 1.60 GHz (4 MB L2, 1066 MHz FSB, 65 W)
*** Xeon 5148LV, 2.33 GHz (4 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB, 40 W) (low voltage edition)
* Clovertown – 65 nm process technology
** Server and Workstation CPU (SMP support for dual CPU system)
** Introduced December 13, 2006
** Quad-core
** Intel VT-x, multiple OS support
** EIST (Enhanced Intel SpeedStep Technology) in E5365, L5335
** Execute Disable Bit
** TXT, enhanced security hardware extensions
** SSSE3 SIMD instructions
** iAMT2 (Intel Active Management Technology), remotely manage computers
** Variants
*** Xeon X5355, 2.66 GHz (2×4 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB, 105 W)
*** Xeon E5345, 2.33 GHz (2×4 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB, 80 W)
*** Xeon E5335, 2.00 GHz (2×4 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB, 80 W)
*** Xeon E5320, 1.86 GHz (2×4 MB L2, 1066 MHz FSB, 65 W)
*** Xeon E5310, 1.60 GHz (2×4 MB L2, 1066 MHz FSB, 65 W)
*** Xeon L5320, 1.86 GHz (2×4 MB L2, 1066 MHz FSB, 50 W) (low voltage edition)

====Intel Core 2====
* Conroe – 65 nm process technology
** Desktop CPU (SMP support restricted to 2 CPUs)
** Two cores on one die
** Introduced July 27, 2006
** SSSE3 SIMD instructions
** 291 million transistors
** 64 KB of L1 cache per core (32+32 KB 8-way)
** Intel VT-x, multiple OS support
** TXT, enhanced security hardware extensions
** Execute Disable Bit
** EIST (Enhanced Intel SpeedStep Technology)
** iAMT2 (Intel Active Management Technology), remotely manage computers
** Intel Management Engine introduced
** LGA 775
** Variants
*** Core 2 Duo E6850, 3.00 GHz (4 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo E6800, 2.93 GHz (4 MB L2, 1066 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo E6750, 2.67 GHz (4 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB, 65 W)
*** Core 2 Duo E6700, 2.67 GHz (4 MB L2, 1066 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo E6600, 2.40 GHz (4 MB L2, 1066 MHz FSB, 65 W)
*** Core 2 Duo E6550, 2.33 GHz (4 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo E6420, 2.13 GHz (4 MB L2, 1066 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo E6400, 2.13 GHz (2 MB L2, 1066 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo E6320, 1.86 GHz (4 MB L2, 1066 MHz FSB) Family 6, Model 15, Stepping 6
*** Core 2 Duo E6300, 1.86 GHz (2 MB L2, 1066 MHz FSB)
* Conroe XE – 65 nm process technology
** Desktop Extreme Edition CPU (SMP support restricted to 2 CPUs)
** Introduced July 27, 2006
** Same features as Conroe
** LGA 775
** Variants
*** Core 2 Extreme X6800 – 2.93 GHz (4 MB L2, 1066 MHz FSB)
* Allendale (Intel Core 2) – 65 nm process technology
** Desktop CPU (SMP support restricted to 2 CPUs)
** Two CPUs on one die
** Introduced January 21, 2007
** SSSE3 SIMD instructions
** 167 million transistors
** TXT, enhanced security hardware extensions
** Execute Disable Bit
** EIST (Enhanced Intel SpeedStep Technology)
** iAMT2 (Intel Active Management Technology), remotely manage computers
** LGA 775
** Variants
*** Core 2 Duo E4700, 2.60 GHz (2 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo E4600, 2.40 GHz (2 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo E4500, 2.20 GHz (2 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo E4400, 2.00 GHz (2 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo E4300, 1.80 GHz (2 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB) Family 6, Model 15, Stepping 2
* Merom – 65 nm process technology
** Mobile CPU (SMP support restricted to 2 CPUs)
** Introduced July 27, 2006
** Family 6, Model 15
** Same features as Conroe
** Socket M / Socket P / 479-ball Micro-FCBGA
** Variants
*** Core 2 Extreme X7900 2.80 GHz (4 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Extreme X7800 2.60 GHz (4 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo T7800, 2.60 GHz (4 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB) (Santa Rosa platform)
*** Core 2 Duo T7700, 2.40 GHz (4 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo T7600, 2.33 GHz (4 MB L2, 667 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo T7500, 2.20 GHz (4 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo T7400, 2.16 GHz (4 MB L2, 667 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo T7300, 2.00 GHz (4 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo T7250, 2.00 GHz (2 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo T7200, 2.00 GHz (4 MB L2, 667 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo T7100, 1.80 GHz (2 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo T5600, 1.83 GHz (2 MB L2, 667 MHz FSB) Family 6, Model 15, Stepping 6
*** Core 2 Duo T5550, 1.83 GHz (2 MB L2, 667 MHz FSB, no VT)
*** Core 2 Duo T5500, 1.66 GHz (2 MB L2, 667 MHz FSB, no VT)
*** Core 2 Duo T5470, 1.60 GHz (2 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB, no VT) Family 6, Model 15, Stepping 13
*** Core 2 Duo T5450, 1.66 GHz (2 MB L2, 667 MHz FSB, no VT)
*** Core 2 Duo T5300, 1.73 GHz (2 MB L2, 533 MHz FSB, no VT)
*** Core 2 Duo T5270, 1.40 GHz (2 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB, no VT)
*** Core 2 Duo T5250, 1.50 GHz (2 MB L2, 667 MHz FSB, no VT)
*** Core 2 Duo T5200, 1.60 GHz (2 MB L2, 533 MHz FSB, no VT)
*** Core 2 Duo L7700, 1.80 GHz (4 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB) (low voltage) Family 6, Model 15, Stepping 11
*** Core 2 Duo L7500, 1.60 GHz (4 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB) (low voltage)
*** Core 2 Duo L7400, 1.50 GHz (4 MB L2, 667 MHz FSB) (low voltage)
*** Core 2 Duo L7300, 1.40 GHz (4 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB) (low voltage)
*** Core 2 Duo L7200, 1.33 GHz (4 MB L2, 667 MHz FSB) (low voltage)
*** Core 2 Duo U7700, 1.33 GHz (2 MB L2, 533 MHz FSB) (ultra low voltage)
*** Core 2 Duo U7600, 1.20 GHz (2 MB L2, 533 MHz FSB) (ultra low voltage)
*** Core 2 Duo U7500, 1.06 GHz (2 MB L2, 533 MHz FSB) (ultra low voltage)
*** Core 2 Duo U7100, 1.20 GHz (4 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB) (ultra low voltage) Family 6, Model 15, Stepping 11
*** Core 2 Solo U2100, 1.06 GHz (1 MB L2, 533 MHz FSB) (ultra low voltage)
*** Core 2 Solo U2200, 1.20 GHz (1 MB L2, 533 MHz FSB) (ultra low voltage)
* Kentsfield – 65 nm process technology
** Two dual-core CPU dies in one package
** Desktop CPU quad-core (SMP support restricted to 4 CPUs)
** Introduced December 13, 2006
** Same features as Conroe but with 4 CPU cores
** 586 million transistors
** LGA 775
** Family 6, Model 15, Stepping 11
** Variants
*** Core 2 Extreme QX6850, 3 GHz (2×4 MB L2 cache, 1333 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Extreme QX6800, 2.93 GHz (2×4 MB L2 cache, 1066 MHz FSB) (April 9, 2007)
*** Core 2 Extreme QX6700, 2.66 GHz (2×4 MB L2 cache, 1066 MHz FSB) (November 14, 2006)
*** Core 2 Quad Q6700, 2.66 GHz (2×4 MB L2 cache, 1066 MHz FSB) (July 22, 2007)
*** Core 2 Quad Q6600, 2.40 GHz (2×4 MB L2 cache, 1066 MHz FSB) (January 7, 2007)
* Wolfdale – 45 nm process technology
** Die shrink of Conroe
** Same features as Conroe with the addition of:
*** 50% more cache, 6 MB as opposed to 4 MB
*** Intel Trusted Execution Technology
*** SSE4 SIMD instructions
** 410 million transistors
** Variants
*** Core 2 Duo E8600, 3.33 GHz (6 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo E8500, 3.16 GHz (6 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo E8435, 3.07 GHz (6 MB L2, 1066 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo E8400, 3.00 GHz (6 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo E8335, 2.93 GHz (6 MB L2, 1066 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo E8300, 2.83 GHz (6 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo E8235, 2.80 GHz (6 MB L2, 1066 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo E8200, 2.66 GHz (6 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo E8135, 2.66 GHz (6 MB L2, 1066 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo E8190, 2.66 GHz (6 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB, no TXT, no VT)
* Wolfdale-3M (Intel Core 2) – 45 nm process technology
** Intel Trusted Execution Technology
** Variants
*** Core 2 Duo E7600, 3.06 GHz (3 MB L2, 1066 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo E7500, 2.93 GHz (3 MB L2, 1066 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo E7400, 2.80 GHz (3 MB L2, 1066 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo E7300, 2.66 GHz (3 MB L2, 1066 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Duo E7200, 2.53 GHz (3 MB L2, 1066 MHz FSB)
* Yorkfield, 45 nm process technology
** Quad-core CPU
** Die shrink of Kentsfield
** Contains 2× Wolfdale dual-core dies in one package
** Same features as Wolfdale
** 820 million transistors
** Variants
*** Core 2 Extreme QX9770, 3.20 GHz (2×6 MB L2, 1600 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Extreme QX9650, 3.00 GHz (2×6 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Quad Q9705, 3.16 GHz (2×3 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Quad Q9700, 3.16 GHz (2×3 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Quad Q9650, 3 GHz (2×6 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB)
*** Core 2 Quad Q9550, 2.83 GHz (2×6 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB, 95 W TDP)
*** Core 2 Quad Q9550s, 2.83 GHz (2×6 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB, 65 W TDP)
*** Core 2 Quad Q9450, 2.66 GHz (2×6 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB, 95 W TDP)
*** Core 2 Quad Q9505, 2.83 GHz (2×3 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB, 95 W TDP)
*** Core 2 Quad Q9505s, 2.83 GHz (2×3 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB, 65 W TDP)
*** Core 2 Quad Q9500, 2.83 GHz (2×3 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB, 95 W TDP, no TXT)
*** Core 2 Quad Q9400, 2.66 GHz (2×3 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB, 95 W TDP)
*** Core 2 Quad Q9400s, 2.66 GHz (2×3 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB, 65 W TDP)
*** Core 2 Quad Q9300, 2.50 GHz (2×3 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB, 95 W TDP)
*** Core 2 Quad Q8400, 2.66 GHz (2×2 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB, 95 W TDP)
*** Core 2 Quad Q8400s, 2.66 GHz (2×2 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB, 65 W TDP)
*** Core 2 Quad Q8300, 2.50 GHz (2×2 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB, 95 W TDP)
*** Core 2 Quad Q8300s, 2.50 GHz (2×2 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB, 65 W TDP)
*** Core 2 Quad Q8200, 2.33 GHz (2×2 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB, 95 W TDP)
*** Core 2 Quad Q8200s, 2.33 GHz (2×2 MB L2, 1333 MHz FSB, 65 W TDP)
*** Core 2 Quad Q7600, 2.70 GHz (2×1 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB, no SSE4) (no Q7600 listed here)
* Intel Core2 Quad Mobile processor family – 45 nm process technology
** Quad-core CPU
** Variants
*** Core 2 Quad Q9100, 2.26 GHz (2×6 MB L2, 1066 MHz FSB, 45 W TDP)
*** Core 2 Quad Q9000, 2.00 GHz (2×3 MB L2, 1066 MHz FSB, 45 W TDP)

====Pentium Dual-Core====
* Allendale (Pentium Dual-Core) – 65 nm process technology
** Desktop CPU (SMP support restricted to 2 CPUs)
** Two cores on one die
** Introduced January 21, 2007
** SSSE3 SIMD instructions
** 167 million transistors
** TXT, enhanced security hardware extensions
** Execute Disable Bit
** EIST (Enhanced Intel SpeedStep Technology)
** Variants
*** Intel Pentium E2220, 2.40 GHz (1 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
*** Intel Pentium E2200, 2.20 GHz (1 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
*** Intel Pentium E2180, 2.00 GHz (1 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
*** Intel Pentium E2160, 1.80 GHz (1 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
*** Intel Pentium E2140, 1.60 GHz (1 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
* Wolfdale-3M (Pentium Dual-Core) – 45 nm process technology
** Intel Pentium E6800, 3.33 GHz (2 MB L2,1066 MHz FSB)
** Intel Pentium E6700, 3.20 GHz (2 MB L2,1066 MHz FSB)
** Intel Pentium E6600, 3.06 GHz (2 MB L2,1066 MHz FSB)
** Intel Pentium E6500, 2.93 GHz (2 MB L2,1066 MHz FSB)
** Intel Pentium E6300, 2.80 GHz (2 MB L2,1066 MHz FSB)
** Intel Pentium E5800, 3.20 GHz (2 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
** Intel Pentium E5700, 3.00 GHz (2 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
** Intel Pentium E5500, 2.80 GHz (2 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
** Intel Pentium E5400, 2.70 GHz (2 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
** Intel Pentium E5300, 2.60 GHz (2 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
** Intel Pentium E5200, 2.50 GHz (2 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
** Intel Pentium E2210, 2.20 GHz (1 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB)

====Celeron (64-bit Core microarchitecture)====
* Allendale (Celeron, 64-bit Core microarchitecture) – 65 nm process technology
** Variants
*** Intel Celeron E1600, 2.40 GHz (512 KB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
*** Intel Celeron E1500, 2.20 GHz (512 KB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
*** Intel Celeron E1400, 2.00 GHz (512 KB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
*** Intel Celeron E1200, 1.60 GHz (512 KB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
* Wolfdale-3M (Celeron, 64-bit Core microarchitecture) – 45 nm process technology
** Variants
*** Intel Celeron E3500, 2.70 GHz (1 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
*** Intel Celeron E3400, 2.60 GHz (1 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
*** Intel Celeron E3300, 2.50 GHz (1 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
*** Intel Celeron E3200, 2.40 GHz (1 MB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
* Conroe-L (Celeron, 64-bit Core microarchitecture) – 65 nm process technology
** Variants
*** Intel Celeron 450, 2.20 GHz (512 KB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
*** Intel Celeron 440, 2.00 GHz (512 KB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
*** Intel Celeron 430, 1.80 GHz (512 KB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
*** Intel Celeron 420, 1.60 GHz (512 KB L2, 800 MHz FSB)
*** Intel Celeron 220, 1.20 GHz (512 KB L2, 533 MHz FSB)
* Conroe-CL (Celeron, 64-bit Core microarchitecture) – 65 nm process technology
** LGA 771 package
** Variants
*** Intel Celeron 445, 1.87 GHz (512 KB L2, 1066 MHz FSB)

====Celeron M (64-bit Core microarchitecture)====
* Merom-L 65 nm process technology
** 64 KB L1 cache
** 1 MB L2 cache (integrated)
** SSE3 SIMD instructions, 533 MHz/667 MHz front-side bus, execute-disable bit, 64-bit
** No SpeedStep technology, is not part of the &#x27;Centrino&#x27; package
** Variants
*** 520, 1.60 GHz
*** 530, 1.73 GHz
*** 540, 1.86 GHz
*** 550, 2.00 GHz
*** 560, 2.13 GHz
*** 570, 2.26 GHz
*** 667 MHz FSB
**** 575, 2.00 GHz
**** 585, 2.16 GHz

===64-bit processors: Intel 64 – Nehalem microarchitecture===

====Intel Pentium (Nehalem)====
* Clarkdale (Pentium, Nehalem microarchitecture) – 32 nm process technology (manufacturing 7 Jan 2010)
** 2 physical cores/2 threads
** 32+32 KB L1 cache
** 256 KB L2 cache
** 3 MB L3 cache
** Introduced January 2010
** Socket 1156 LGA
** 2-channel DDR3
** Integrated HD GPU
** Variants
*** G6950, 2.8 GHz (no Hyper-Threading)
*** G6960, 2.933 GHz (no Hyper-Threading)

====Core i3 (1st generation)====
* Clarkdale (Core i3 1st generation) – 32 nm process technology
** 2 physical cores/4 threads
** 32+32 KB L1 cache
** 256 KB L2 cache
** 4 MB L3 cache
** Introduced on January 7, 2010
** Socket 1156 LGA
** 2-channel DDR3
** Integrated HD GPU
** Variants
*** 530, 2.93 GHz Hyper-Threading
*** 540, 3.06 GHz Hyper-Threading
*** 550, 3.2 GHz Hyper-Threading
*** 560, 3.33 GHz Hyper-Threading

====Core i5 (1st generation)====
* Lynnfield (Core i5 1st generation) – 45 nm process technology
** 4 physical cores/4 threads
** 32+32 KB L1 cache
** 256 KB L2 cache
** 8 MB L3 cache
** Introduced September 8, 2009
** Family 6 Model E (Ext. Model 1E)
** Socket 1156 LGA
** 2-channel DDR3
** Variants
*** 750S, 2.40 GHz/3.20 GHz Turbo Boost
*** 750, 2.66 GHz/3.20 GHz Turbo Boost
*** 760, 2.80 GHz/3.33 GHz Turbo Boost
* Clarkdale (Core i5 1st generation) – 32 nm process technology
** 2 physical cores/4 threads
** 32+32 KB L1 cache
** 256 KB L2 cache
** 4 MB L3 cache
** Introduced January, 2010
** Socket 1156 LGA
** 2-channel DDR3
** Integrated HD GPU
** AES Support
** Variants
*** 650/655K, 3.2 GHz Hyper-Threading Turbo Boost
*** 660/661, 3.33 GHz Hyper-Threading Turbo Boost
*** 670, 3.46 GHz Hyper-Threading Turbo Boost
*** 680, 3.60 GHz Hyper-Threading Turbo Boost

====Core i7 (1st generation)====
* Bloomfield (Core i7 1st generation) – 45 nm process technology
** 4 physical cores/8 threads
** 256 KB L2 cache
** 8 MB L3 cache
** Front-side bus replaced with QuickPath up to 6.4 GT/s
** Hyper-Threading is again included. This had previously been removed at the introduction of Core line
** 781 million transistors
** Intel Turbo Boost Technology
** TDP 130 W
** Introduced November 17, 2008
** Socket 1366 LGA
** 3-channel DDR3
** Variants
*** 975 (extreme edition), 3.33 GHz/3.60 GHz Turbo Boost
*** 965 (extreme edition), 3.20 GHz/3.46 GHz Turbo Boost
*** 960, 3.20 GHz/3.46 GHz Turbo Boost
*** 950, 3.06 GHz/3.33 GHz Turbo Boost
*** 940, 2.93 GHz/3.20 GHz Turbo Boost
*** 930, 2.80 GHz/3.06 GHz Turbo Boost
*** 920, 2.66 GHz/2.93 GHz Turbo Boost
* Lynnfield (Core i7 1st generation) – 45 nm process technology
** 4 physical cores/8 threads
** 32+32 KB L1 cache
** 256 KB L2 cache
** 8 MB L3 cache
** No QuickPath, instead compatible with slower DMI interface
** Hyper-Threading is included
** Introduced September 8, 2009
** Socket 1156 LGA
** 2-channel DDR3
** Variants
*** 880, 3.06 GHz/3.73 GHz Turbo Boost (TDP 95 W)
*** 870/875K, 2.93 GHz/3.60 GHz Turbo Boost (TDP 95 W)
*** 870S, 2.67 GHz/3.60 GHz Turbo Boost (TDP 82 W)
*** 860, 2.80 GHz/3.46 GHz Turbo Boost (TDP 95 W)
*** 860S, 2.53 GHz/3.46 GHz Turbo Boost (TDP 82 W)

Westmere
* Gulftown, 32 nm process technology
** 6 physical cores
** 256 KB L2 cache
** 12 MB L3 cache
** Front-side bus replaced with QuickPath up to 6.4 GT/s
** Hyper-Threading is included
** Intel Turbo Boost Technology
** Socket 1366 LGA
** TDP 130 W
** Introduced 16 March 2010
** Variants
*** 990X Extreme Edition, 3.46 GHz/3.73 GHz Turbo Boost
*** 980X Extreme Edition, 3.33 GHz/3.60 GHz Turbo Boost
*** 970, 3.20 GHz/3.46 GHz Turbo Boost
* Clarksfield – Intel Core i7 Mobile processor family – 45 nm process technology
** 4 physical cores
** Hyper-Threading is included
** Intel Turbo Boost Technology
** Variants
*** 940XM Extreme Edition, 2.13 GHz/3.33 GHz Turbo Boost (8 MB L3, TDP 55 W)
*** 920XM Extreme Edition, 2.00 GHz/3.20 GHz Turbo Boost (8 MB L3, TDP 55 W)
*** 840QM, 1.86 GHz/3.20 GHz Turbo Boost (8 MB L3, TDP 45 W)
*** 820QM, 1.73 GHz/3.06 GHz Turbo Boost (8 MB L3, TDP 45 W)
*** 740QM, 1.73 GHz/2.93 GHz Turbo Boost (6 MB L3, TDP 45 W)
*** 720QM, 1.60 GHz/2.80 GHz Turbo Boost (6 MB L3, TDP 45 W)

====Xeon (Nehalem microarchitecture)====
* Gainestown – 45 nm process technology
** Same processor dies as Bloomfield
** 256 KB L2 cache
** 8 MB L3 cache, 4 MB may be disabled
** QuickPath up to 6.4 GT/s
** Hyper-Threading is included in some models
** 781 million transistors
** Introduced March 29, 2009
** Variants
*** W5590, X5570, X5560, X5550, E5540, E5530, L5530, E5520, L5520, L5518, 4 cores, 8 MB L3 cache, HT
*** E5506, L5506, E5504, 4 cores, 4 MB L3 cache, no HT
*** L5508, E5502, E5502, 2 cores, 4 MB L3 cache, no HT

===64-bit processors: Intel 64 – Sandy Bridge / Ivy Bridge microarchitecture===

====Celeron (Sandy Bridge/Ivy Bridge microarchitecture)====
* Sandy Bridge (Celeron-branded) – 32 nm process technology
** 2 physical cores/2 threads (500 series), 1 physical core/1 thread (model G440) or 1 physical core/2 threads (models G460 &amp; G465)
** 2 MB L3 cache (500 series), 1 MB (model G440) or 1.5 MB (models G460 &amp; G465)
** Introduced 3rd quarter, 2011
** Socket 1155 LGA
** 2-channel DDR3-1066
** 400 series has max TDP of 35 W
** 500-series variants ending in &#x27;T&#x27; have a peak TDP of 35 W; others, 65 W
** Integrated GPU
*** All variants have peak GPU turbo frequencies of 1 GHz
*** Variants in the 400 series have GPUs running at a base frequency of 650 MHz
*** Variants in the 500 series ending in &#x27;T&#x27; have GPUs running at a base frequency of 650 MHz; others at 850 MHz
*** All variants have 6 GPU execution units
** Variants
*** G440, 1.6 GHz
*** G460, 1.8 GHz
*** G465, 1.9 GHz
*** G470, 2.0 GHz
*** G530T, 2.0 GHz
*** G540T, 2.1 GHz
*** G550T, 2.2 GHz
*** G530, 2.4 GHz
*** G540, 2.5 GHz
*** G550, 2.6 GHz
*** G555, 2.7 GHz

====Pentium (Sandy Bridge/Ivy Bridge microarchitecture)====
* Sandy Bridge (Pentium-branded) – 32 nm process technology
** 2 physical cores/2 threads
** 3 MB L3 cache
** 624 million transistors
** Introduced May, 2011
** Socket 1155 LGA
** 2-channel DDR3-1333 (800 series) or DDR3-1066 (600 series)
** Variants ending in &#x27;T&#x27; have a peak TDP of 35 W, others 65 W
** Integrated GPU (HD 2000)
*** All variants have peak GPU turbo frequencies of 1.1 GHz
*** Variants ending in &#x27;T&#x27; have GPUs running at a base frequency of 650 MHz; others at 850 MHz
*** All variants have 6 GPU execution units
** Variants
*** G620T, 2.2 GHz
*** G630T, 2.3 GHz
*** G640T, 2.4 GHz
*** G645T, 2.5 GHz
*** G860T, 2.6 GHz
*** G620, 2.6 GHz
*** G622, 2.6 GHz
*** G630, 2.7 GHz
*** G632, 2.7 GHz
*** G640, 2.8 GHz
*** G840, 2.8 GHz
*** G645, 2.9 GHz
*** G850, 2.9 GHz
*** G860, 3.0 GHz
*** G870, 3.1 GHz
* Ivy Bridge (Pentium-branded) – 22 nm tri-gate transistor process technology
** 2 physical cores/2 threads
** 32+32 KB (per core) L1 cache
** 256 KB (per core) L2 cache
** 3 MB L3 cache
** Introduced September, 2012
** Socket 1155 LGA
** 2-channel DDR3-1333 for G2000 series
** 2-channel DDR3-1600 for G2100 series 
** All variants have GPU base frequencies of 650 MHz and peak GPU turbo frequencies of 1.05 GHz
** Variants ending in &#x27;T&#x27; have a peak TDP of 35 W; others, TDP of 55 W
** Variants
*** G2020T, 2.5 GHz
*** G2030T, 2.6 GHz
*** G2100T, 2.6 GHz
*** G2120T, 2.7 GHz
*** G2010, 2.8 GHz
*** G2020, 2.9 GHz
*** G2030, 3.0 GHz
*** G2120, 3.1 GHz
*** G2130, 3.2 GHz
*** G2140, 3.3 GHz

====Core i3 (2nd and 3rd generation)====
* Sandy Bridge (Core i3 2nd generation) – 32 nm process technology
** 2 physical cores/4 threads
** 32+32 KB (per core) L1 cache
** 256 KB (per core) L2 cache
** 3 MB L3 cache
** 624 million transistors
** Introduced January, 2011
** Socket 1155 LGA
** 2-channel DDR3-1333
** Variants ending in &#x27;T&#x27; have a peak TDP of 35 W, others 65 W
** Integrated GPU
*** All variants have peak GPU turbo frequencies of 1.1 GHz
*** Variants ending in &#x27;T&#x27; have GPUs running at a base frequency of 650 MHz; others at 850 MHz
*** Variants ending in &#x27;5&#x27; have Intel HD Graphics 3000 (12 execution units); others have Intel HD Graphics 2000 (6 execution units)
** Variants
*** i3-2100T, 2.5 GHz
*** i3-2120T, 2.6 GHz
*** i3-2100, 3.1 GHz
*** i3-2102, 3.1 GHz
*** i3-2105, 3.1 GHz
*** i3-2120, 3.3 GHz
*** i3-2125, 3.3 GHz
*** i3-2130, 3.4 GHz
* Ivy Bridge (Core i3 3rd generation) – 22 nm tri-gate transistor process technology
** 2 physical cores/4 threads
** 32+32 KB (per core) L1 cache
** 256 KB (per core) L2 cache
** 3 MB L3 cache
** Introduced September, 2012
** Socket 1155 LGA
** 2-channel DDR3-1600
** Variants ending in &#x27;5&#x27; have Intel HD Graphics 4000; others have Intel HD Graphics 2500
** All variants have GPU base frequencies of 650 MHz and peak GPU turbo frequencies of 1.05 GHz
** TDP 55 W
** Variants
*** i3-3220T, 2.8 GHz
*** i3-3240T, 2.9 GHz
*** i3-3210, 3.2 GHz
*** i3-3220, 3.3 GHz
*** i3-3225, 3.3 GHz
*** i3-3240, 3.4 GHz
*** i3-3250, 3.5 GHz

====Core i5 (2nd and 3rd generation)====
* Sandy Bridge (Core i5 2nd generation) – 32 nm process technology
** 4 physical cores/4 threads (except for i5-2390T which has 2 physical cores/4 threads)
** 32+32 KB (per core) L1 cache
** 256 KB (per core) L2 cache
** 6 MB L3 cache (except for i5-2390T which has 3 MB)
** 995 million transistors
** Introduced January, 2011
** Socket 1155 LGA
** 2-channel DDR3-1333
** Variants ending in &#x27;S&#x27; have a peak TDP of 65 W; others, 95 W except where noted
** Variants ending in &#x27;K&#x27; have unlocked multipliers; others cannot be overclocked
** Integrated GPU
*** i5-2500T has a peak GPU turbo frequency of 1.25 GHz, others 1.1 GHz
*** Variants ending in &#x27;T&#x27; have GPUs running at a base frequency of 650 MHz; others at 850 MHz
*** Variants ending in &#x27;5&#x27; or &#x27;K&#x27; have Intel HD Graphics 3000 (12 execution units), except i5-2550K which has no GPU; others have Intel HD Graphics 2000 (6 execution units)
*** Variants ending in &#x27;P&#x27; and the i5-2550K have no GPU
** Variants
*** i5-2390T, 2.7 GHz/3.5 GHz Turbo Boost (35 W max. TDP)
*** i5-2500T, 2.3 GHz/3.3 GHz Turbo Boost (45 W max. TDP)
*** i5-2400S, 2.5 GHz/3.3 GHz Turbo Boost
*** i5-2405S, 2.5 GHz/3.3 GHz Turbo Boost
*** i5-2500S, 2.7 GHz/3.7 GHz Turbo Boost
*** i5-2300, 2.8 GHz/3.1 GHz Turbo Boost
*** i5-2310, 2.9 GHz/3.2 GHz Turbo Boost
*** i5-2320, 3.0 GHz/3.3 GHz Turbo Boost
*** i5-2380P, 3.1 GHz/3.4 GHz Turbo Boost
*** i5-2400, 3.1 GHz/3.4 GHz Turbo Boost
*** i5-2450P, 3.2 GHz/3.5 GHz Turbo Boost
*** i5-2500, 3.3 GHz/3.7 GHz Turbo Boost
*** i5-2500K, 3.3 GHz/3.7 GHz Turbo Boost
*** i5-2550K, 3.4 GHz/3.8 GHz Turbo Boost
* Ivy Bridge (Core i5 3rd generation) – 22 nm Tri-gate transistor process technology
** 4 physical cores/4 threads (except for i5-3470T which has 2 physical cores/4 threads)
** 32+32 KB (per core) L1 cache
** 256 KB (per core) L2 cache
** 6 MB L3 cache (except for i5-3470T which has 3 MB)
** Introduced April, 2012
** Socket 1155 LGA
** 2-channel DDR3-1600
** Variants ending in &#x27;S&#x27; have a peak TDP of 65 W, Variants ending in &#x27;T&#x27; have a peak TDP of 35 or 45 W (see variants); others, 77 W except where noted
** Variants ending in &#x27;K&#x27; have unlocked multipliers; others cannot be overclocked
** Variants ending in &#x27;P&#x27; have no integrated GPU; others have Intel HD Graphics 2500 or Intel HD Graphics 4000 (i5-3475S and i5-3570K only)
** Variants
*** i5-3470T, 2.9 GHz/3.6 GHz max Turbo Boost (35 W TDP)
*** i5-3570T, 2.3 GHz/3.3 GHz max Turbo Boost (45 W TDP)
*** i5-3330S, 2.7 GHz/3.2 GHz max Turbo Boost
*** i5-3450S, 2.8 GHz/3.5 GHz max Turbo Boost
*** i5-3470S, 2.9 GHz/3.6 GHz max Turbo Boost
*** i5-3475S, 2.9 GHz/3.6 GHz max Turbo Boost
*** i5-3550S, 3.0 GHz/3.7 GHz max Turbo Boost
*** i5-3570S, 3.1 GHz/3.8 GHz max Turbo Boost
*** i5-3330, 3.0 GHz/3.2 GHz max Turbo Boost
*** i5-3350P, 3.1 GHz/3.3 GHz max Turbo Boost (69 W TDP)
*** i5-3450, 3.1 GHz/3.5 GHz max Turbo Boost
*** i5-3470, 3.2 GHz/3.6 GHz max Turbo Boost
*** i5-3550, 3.3 GHz/3.7 GHz max Turbo Boost
*** i5-3570, 3.4 GHz/3.8 GHz max Turbo Boost
*** i5-3570K, 3.4 GHz/3.8 GHz max Turbo Boost

====Core i7 (2nd and 3rd generation)====
* Sandy Bridge (Core i7 2nd generation) – 32 nm process technology
** 4 physical cores/8 threads
** 32+32 KB (per core) L1 cache
** 256 KB (per core) L2 cache
** 8 MB L3 cache
** 995 million transistors
** Introduced January, 2011
** Socket 1155 LGA
** 2-channel DDR3-1333
** Variants ending in &#x27;S&#x27; have a peak TDP of 65 W, others – 95 W
** Variants ending in &#x27;K&#x27; have unlocked multipliers; others cannot be overclocked
** Integrated GPU
*** All variants have base GPU frequencies of 850 MHz and peak GPU turbo frequencies of 1.35 GHz
*** Variants ending in &#x27;K&#x27; have Intel HD Graphics 3000 (12 execution units); others have Intel HD Graphics 2000 (6 execution units)
** Variants
*** i7-2600S, 2.8 GHz/3.8 GHz Turbo Boost
*** i7-2600, 3.4 GHz/3.8 GHz Turbo Boost
*** i7-2600K, 3.4 GHz/3.8 GHz Turbo Boost
*** i7-2700K, 3.5 GHz/3.9 GHz Turbo Boost
* Sandy Bridge-E (Core i7 3rd generation X-Series) – 32 nm process technology
** Up to 6 physical cores/12 threads depending on model number
** 32+32 KB (per core) L1 cache
** 256 KB (per core) L2 cache
** Up to 20 MB L3 cache depending on model number
** 2.27 billion transistors
** Introduced November, 2011
** Socket 2011 LGA
** 4-channel DDR3-1600
** All variants have a peak TDP of 130 W
** No integrated GPU
** Variants (all marketed under &quot;Intel Core X-series processors&quot;)
*** i7-3820, 3.6 GHz/3.8 GHz Turbo Boost, 4 cores, 10 MB L3 cache
*** i7-3930K, 3.2 GHz/3.8 GHz Turbo Boost, 6 cores, 12 MB L3 cache
*** i7-3960X, 3.3 GHz/3.9 GHz Turbo Boost, 6 cores, 15 MB L3 cache
*** i7-3970X, 3.5 GHz/4.0 GHz Turbo Boost, 6 cores, 15 MB L3 cache
* Ivy Bridge (Core i7 3rd generation) – 22 nm Tri-gate transistor process technology
** 4 physical cores/8 threads
** 32+32 KB (per core) L1 cache
** 256 KB (per core) L2 cache
** 8 MB L3 cache
** Introduced April, 2012
** Socket 1155 LGA
** 2-channel DDR3-1600
** Variants ending in &#x27;S&#x27; have a peak TDP of 65 W, variants ending in &#x27;T&#x27; have a peak TDP of 45 W, others – 77 W
** Variants ending in &#x27;K&#x27; have unlocked multipliers; others cannot be overclocked
** Integrated GPU Intel HD Graphics 4000
** Variants
*** i7-3770T – 2.5 GHz/3.7 GHz Turbo Boost
*** i7-3770S – 3.1 GHz/3.9 GHz Turbo Boost
*** i7-3770 – 3.4 GHz/3.9 GHz Turbo Boost
*** i7-3770K – 3.5 GHz/3.9 GHz Turbo Boost

===64-bit processors: Intel 64 – Haswell microarchitecture===

====Core i3 (4th generation)====
* Haswell (Core i3 4th generation) – 22nm process technology

===64-bit processors: Intel 64 – Broadwell microarchitecture===

====Core i3 (5th generation)====
* Broadwell (Core i3 5th generation) – 14nm process technology

====Core i5 (5th generation)====
* Broadwell (Core i5 5th generation) – 14nm process technology
** 4 physical cores/4 threads
** 4 MB L3 cache
** Introduced Q2&#x27;15
** Socket 1150 LGA
** 2-channel DDR3L-1333/1600
** Integrated GPU
** Variants
*** i5-5575R – 2.80 GHz/3.30 GHz Turbo Boost
*** i5-5675C – 3.10 GHz/3.60 GHz Turbo Boost
*** i5-5675R – 3.10 GHz/3.60 GHz Turbo Boost

====Core i7 (5th generation, Including Core-X Series)====
* Broadwell (Core i7 5th generation) – 14nm process technology
** 4 physical cores/8 threads
** 6 MB L3 cache
** Introduced Q2&#x27;15
** Socket 1150 LGA
** 2-channel DDR3L-1333/1600
** Integrated GPU
** Variants
*** i7-5775C – 3.30 GHz/3.70 GHz Turbo Boost
*** i7-5775R – 3.30 GHz/3.80 GHz Turbo Boost
* Broadwell-E – 14nm process technology
** 6–10 physical cores/12–20 threads
** 15–25 MB L3 cache
** Introduced Q2&#x27;16
** Socket 2011-v3 LGA
** 4-channel DDR4-2133/2400
** No Integrated GPU
** Variants (all marketed under &quot;Intel Core X-series processors&quot;)
*** i7-6800K – 3.40 GHz/3.60 GHz Turbo Boost/3.80 GHz Turbo Boost Max Technology 3.0 Frequency 15 MB L3 cache
*** i7-6850K – 3.60 GHz/3.80 GHz Turbo Boost/4.00 GHz Turbo Boost Max Technology 3.0 Frequency 15 MB L3 cache
*** i7-6900K – 3.20 GHz/3.70 GHz Turbo Boost/4.00 GHz Turbo Boost Max Technology 3.0 Frequency 20 MB L3 cache
*** i7-6950X – 3.00 GHz/3.50 GHz Turbo Boost/4.00 GHz Turbo Boost Max Technology 3.0 Frequency 25 MB L3 cache

====Other Broadwell CPUs====
Not listed (yet) are several Broadwell-based CPU models:
* Server and workstation CPUs
** single-CPU: Pentium D15nn, Xeon D-15nn, Xeon E3-12nn v4, Xeon E5-16nn v4
** dual-CPU: Xeon E5-26nn v4
** quad-CPU: Xeon E5-46nn v4, Xeon E7-48nn v4
** octo-CPU: Xeon E7-88nn v4
* Embedded CPUs
** Core i7-57nnEQ, Core i7-58nnEQ
* Mobile CPUs
** Celeron 32nnU, Celeron 37nnU
** Pentium 38nnU
** Core M-5Ynn
** Core i3-50nnU
** Core i5-5nnnU
** Core i7-55nnU, Core i7-56nnU, Core i7-57nnHQ, Core i7-59nnHQ
Note: this list does not say that all processors that match these patterns are Broadwell-based or fit into this scheme. The model numbers may have suffixes that are not shown here.

===64-bit processors: Intel 64 – Skylake microarchitecture===

====Core i3 (6th generation)====
* Skylake (Core i3 6th generation) – 14 nm process technology
** 2 physical cores/4 threads
** 3–4 MB L3 cache
** Introduced Q3&#x27;15
** Socket 1151 LGA
** 2-channel DDR3L-1333/1600, DDR4-1866/2133
** Integrated GPU Intel HD Graphics 530 (only i3-6098P have HD Graphics 510)
** Variants
*** i3-6098P – 3.60 GHz
*** i3-6100T – 3.20 GHz
*** i3-6100 – 3.70 GHz
*** i3-6300T – 3.30 GHz
*** i3-6300 – 3.80 GHz
*** i3-6320 – 3.90 GHz

====Core i5 (6th generation)====
* Skylake (Core i5 6th generation) – 14nm process technology
** 4 physical cores/4 threads
** 6 MB L3 cache
** Introduced Q3&#x27;15
** Socket 1151 LGA
** 2-channel DDR3L-1333/1600, DDR4-1866/2133
** Integrated GPU Intel HD Graphics 530
** Variants
*** i5-6300HQ – 2.30/3.20 GHz Turbo Boost
***i5-6400T – 2.20 GHz/2.80 GHz Turbo Boost
*** i5-6400 – 2.70 GHz/3.30 GHz Turbo Boost
*** i5-6440hq
*** i5-6500T – 2.50 GHz/3.10 GHz Turbo Boost
*** i5-6500 – 3.20 GHz/3.60 GHz Turbo Boost
*** i5-6600T – 2.70 GHz/3.50 GHz Turbo Boost
*** i5-6600 – 3.30 GHz/3.90 GHz Turbo Boost
*** i5-6600K – 3.50 GHz/3.90 GHz Turbo Boost

====Core i7 (6th generation)====
* Skylake (Core i7 6th generation) – 14nm process technology
** 4 physical cores/8 threads
** 8 MB L3 cache
** Introduced Q3&#x27;15
** Socket 1151 LGA
** 2-channel DDR3L-1333/1600, DDR4-1866/2133
** Integrated GPU Intel HD Graphics 530
** Variants
*** i7-6700T – 2.80 GHz/3.60 GHz Turbo Boost
*** i7-6700 – 3.40 GHz/4.00 GHz Turbo Boost
*** i7-6700K – 4.00 GHz/4.20 GHz Turbo Boost

====Other Skylake processors====
Many Skylake-based processors are not yet listed in this section: mobile i3/i5/i7 processors (U, H, and M suffixes), embedded i3/i5/i7 processors (E suffix), certain i7-67nn/i7-68nn/i7-69nn.
Skylake-based &quot;Core X-series&quot; processors (certain i7-78nn and i9-79nn models) can be found under current models.

===64-bit processors: Intel 64 (7th generation) – Kaby Lake microarchitecture===
===64-bit processors: Intel 64 (8th and 9th generation) – Coffee Lake microarchitecture===
===64-bit processors: Intel 64 – Cannon Lake microarchitecture===
===64-bit processors: Intel 64 (10th generation) – Ice Lake microarchitecture===
=== 64-bit processors: Intel 64 (10th generation) – Comet Lake microarchitecture ===
=== 64-bit processors: Intel 64 (11th generation) – Tiger Lake microarchitecture ===
=== 64-bit processors: Intel 64 (12th generation) – Alder Lake microarchitecture ===
=== 64-bit processors: Intel 64 (13th generation) – Raptor Lake microarchitecture ===
===Intel Tera-Scale===
* 2007: Teraflops Research Chip, an 80 core processor prototype.
* 2009: Single-chip Cloud Computer, a research microprocessor containing the most Intel Architecture cores ever integrated on a silicon CPU chip: 48.

===Intel 805xx product codes===
Intel discontinued the use of part numbers such as 80486 in the marketing of mainstream x86-architecture processors with the introduction of the Pentium brand in 1993. However, numerical codes, in the 805xx range, continued to be assigned to these processors for internal and part numbering uses. The following is a list of such product codes in numerical order:

===Intel 806xx product codes===

=== Intel 807xx product codes ===
==See also==
* List of AMD processors
* List of PowerPC processors
* List of NXP products
* List of Intel Atom processors
* List of Intel Xeon processors
* List of Intel Itanium processors
* List of Intel Celeron processors
* List of Intel Pentium processors
** List of Intel Pentium Pro processors
** List of Intel Pentium II processors
** List of Intel Pentium III processors
** List of Intel Pentium 4 processors
** List of Intel Pentium D processors
** List of Intel Pentium M processors
* List of Intel Core processors
* List of Intel Core 2 processors
* List of Intel Core M processors
* List of Intel Core i3 processors
* List of Intel Core i5 processors
* List of Intel Core i7 processors
* List of Intel Core i9 processors
* List of Intel CPU microarchitectures
* List of Intel graphics processing units
* List of quantum processors
* Apple silicon

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* Intel Museum: History of the Microprocessor
*Intel Processors information</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q921015" start="18" end="42" title="List of Intel processors" label="list of Intel processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="70" end="75" title="Intel Corporation" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="83" end="92" title="microprocessor" label="processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q229932" start="103" end="108" title="4-bit computing" label="4-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q205509" start="109" end="113" title="Intel 4004" label="4004"/>
<link wikidata="Q111303806" start="313" end="324" title="Raptor Lake" label="Raptor Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q111303806" start="693" end="704" title="Raptor Lake" label="Raptor Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q111303806" start="889" end="900" title="Raptor Lake" label="Raptor Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q111303806" start="953" end="964" title="Raptor Lake" label="Raptor Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q96417607" start="1047" end="1057" title="Alder Lake (microprocessor)" label="Alder Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q96417607" start="1099" end="1109" title="Alder Lake (microprocessor)" label="Alder Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359551" start="1183" end="1194" title="Rocket Lake" label="Rocket Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q25024949" start="1236" end="1246" title="Tiger Lake" label="Tiger Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q66660880" start="1319" end="1329" title="Comet Lake (microprocessor)" label="Comet Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q66660880" start="1371" end="1381" title="Comet Lake (microprocessor)" label="Comet Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q31888920" start="1395" end="1403" title="Ice Lake (microprocessor)" label="Ice Lake"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1421" end="1431" title="Amber Lake (microprocessor)#List of 10th_generation Amber Lake Y processors" label="Amber Lake"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1503" end="1522" title="Coffee Lake#List of 9th generation Coffee Lake processors (Coffee Lake Refresh)" label="Coffee Lake Refresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q27995423" start="1594" end="1605" title="Coffee Lake" label="Coffee Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q27995423" start="1648" end="1659" title="Coffee Lake" label="Coffee Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q20671116" start="1673" end="1683" title="Amber Lake (microprocessor)" label="Amber Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q53700422" start="1700" end="1712" title="Whiskey Lake" label="Whiskey Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q20671116" start="1784" end="1793" title="Kaby Lake" label="Kaby Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058943" start="1810" end="1819" title="Skylake-X" label="Skylake-X"/>
<link wikidata="Q20671116" start="1862" end="1871" title="Kaby Lake" label="Kaby Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351469" start="1888" end="1899" title="Apollo Lake" label="Apollo Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q229932" start="1990" end="1995" title="4-bit computing" label="4-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q205509" start="2016" end="2026" title="Intel 4004" label="Intel 4004"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="2061" end="2075" title="microprocessor" label="microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="2152" end="2155" title="kilohertz" label="kHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q71486" start="2164" end="2168" title="million instructions per second" label="MIPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q173605" start="2238" end="2242" title="PMOS logic" label="PMOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="2269" end="2271" title="micrometre" label="μm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830907" start="2274" end="2292" title="Computer memory" label="Addressable memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="2297" end="2301" title="byte" label="byte"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="2305" end="2319" title="Read-only memory" label="Program memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q79726" start="2322" end="2324" title="kilobyte" label="KB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017523" start="2370" end="2377" title="Busicom" label="Busicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="2412" end="2415" title="CPU" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="2425" end="2428" title="Read-only memory" label="ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="2455" end="2458" title="RAM" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q330255" start="2954" end="2964" title="Intel 4040" label="Intel 4040"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="3206" end="3211" title="8-bit computing" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q319509" start="3230" end="3234" title="8008" label="8008"/>
<link wikidata="Q173605" start="3403" end="3413" title="PMOS logic" label="PMOS logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172276" start="3635" end="3649" title="Datapoint 2200" label="Datapoint 2200"/>
<link wikidata="Q324610" start="3762" end="3766" title="8080" label="8080"/>
<link wikidata="Q83908" start="3920" end="3930" title="NMOS logic" label="NMOS logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="3961" end="3978" title="Assembly language" label="Assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q223493" start="4109" end="4120" title="Altair 8800" label="Altair 8800"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004" start="4122" end="4135" title="traffic light" label="traffic light"/>
<link wikidata="Q181860" start="4148" end="4162" title="cruise missile" label="cruise missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q468451" start="4221" end="4225" title="8085" label="8085"/>
<link wikidata="Q71486" start="4280" end="4284" title="instructions per second" label="MIPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q83908" start="4349" end="4359" title="NMOS logic" label="NMOS logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135970" start="4383" end="4387" title="3 μm process" label="3 μm"/>
<link wikidata="Q13912071" start="4390" end="4407" title="Binary compatible" label="Binary compatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q680186" start="4441" end="4454" title="Mettler Toledo" label="Toledo scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q173431" start="4541" end="4545" title="CMOS" label="CMOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770537" start="4555" end="4569" title="Mars Sojourner" label="Mars Sojourner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759510" start="4571" end="4601" title="TRS-80 Model 100 line" label="Radio Shack Model 100 portable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753717" start="4717" end="4727" title="Intel 8048" label="Intel 8048"/>
<link wikidata="Q420105" start="4741" end="4752" title="accumulator (computing)" label="accumulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q641044" start="4753" end="4773" title="Harvard architecture" label="Harvard architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753717" start="4775" end="4781" title="MCS-48" label="MCS-48"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6799" end="6803" title="chip carrier#Plastic-leaded chip carrier" label="PLCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q330086" start="6995" end="7005" title="Intel 8051" label="Intel 8051"/>
<link wikidata="Q420105" start="7019" end="7030" title="accumulator (computing)" label="accumulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q641044" start="7031" end="7051" title="Harvard architecture" label="Harvard architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q330086" start="7053" end="7059" title="MCS-51" label="MCS-51"/>
<link wikidata="Q330086" start="7889" end="7900" title="Intel 80151" label="Intel 80151"/>
<link wikidata="Q420105" start="7914" end="7925" title="accumulator (computing)" label="accumulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q641044" start="7926" end="7946" title="Harvard architecture" label="Harvard architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q330086" start="7948" end="7955" title="MCS-151" label="MCS-151"/>
<link wikidata="Q330086" start="8299" end="8310" title="Intel 80251" label="Intel 80251"/>
<link wikidata="Q420105" start="8324" end="8335" title="accumulator (computing)" label="accumulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q641044" start="8336" end="8356" title="Harvard architecture" label="Harvard architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q330086" start="8358" end="8365" title="MCS-251" label="MCS-251"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="8389" end="8395" title="32-bit computing" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510146" start="8607" end="8613" title="Intel MCS-96" label="MCS-96"/>
<link wikidata="Q194368" start="8729" end="8735" title="16-bit computing" label="16-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q878691" start="9774" end="9785" title="bit-slicing" label="bit-slicing"/>
<link wikidata="Q188946" start="9802" end="9809" title="bipolar transistor" label="bipolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466064" start="9873" end="9882" title="Processor (computing)" label="processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q194368" start="11117" end="11123" title="16-bit computing" label="16-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q207539" start="11157" end="11161" title="Intel 8086" label="8086"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="11658" end="11661" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q284518" start="11662" end="11666" title="IBM PS/2" label="PS/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q12745432" start="11667" end="11675" title="IBM PS/2 Model 25" label="Model 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q111955162" start="11680" end="11688" title="IBM PS/2 Model 30" label="Model 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088938" start="11707" end="11737" title="Olivetti M24" label="AT&amp;amp;T PC6300 / Olivetti M24"/>
<link wikidata="Q796829" start="11804" end="11820" title="segment register" label="segment register"/>
<link wikidata="Q657808" start="11990" end="11994" title="Intel 8088" label="8088"/>
<link wikidata="Q202712" start="12425" end="12431" title="IBM PC" label="IBM PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q725524" start="12490" end="12495" title="Intel 80186" label="80186"/>
<link wikidata="Q210813" start="12600" end="12614" title="DMA controller" label="DMA controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756494" start="12623" end="12643" title="interrupt controller" label="interrupt controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q170434" start="13266" end="13269" title="DOS" label="DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277116" start="13290" end="13299" title="RM Nimbus" label="RM Nimbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682524" start="13301" end="13311" title="Tandy 2000" label="Tandy 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q725524" start="13380" end="13385" title="Intel 80188" label="80188"/>
<link wikidata="Q622888" start="13480" end="13485" title="Intel 80286" label="80286"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135912" start="13829" end="13835" title="1.5 μm process" label="1.5 μm"/>
<link wikidata="Q79735" start="13860" end="13862" title="megabyte" label="MB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141670" start="13997" end="14006" title="IBM PC AT" label="IBM PC AT"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="14044" end="14050" title="32-bit computing" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q971102" start="14099" end="14107" title="Intel iAPX 432" label="iAPX 432"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="14163" end="14169" title="32-bit computing" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q277482" start="14707" end="14724" title="Intel i960" label="i960 a.k.a. 80960"/>
<link wikidata="Q189376" start="14758" end="14762" title="RISC" label="RISC"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="14768" end="14774" title="32-bit computing" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907134" start="14887" end="14891" title="BiiN" label="BiiN"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="14911" end="14918" title="Siemens" label="Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q338518" start="14974" end="14991" title="Intel i860" label="i860 a.k.a. 80860"/>
<link wikidata="Q189376" start="15053" end="15057" title="RISC" label="RISC"/>
<link wikidata="Q252132" start="15061" end="15067" title="64-bit computing" label="64-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q108649754" start="15168" end="15182" title="Intel iPSC/860" label="Intel iPSC/860"/>
<link wikidata="Q213723" start="15183" end="15192" title="Hypercube" label="Hypercube"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15344" end="15355" title="Intel Delta" label="Intel Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="15412" end="15446" title="California Institute of Technology" label="California Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q652367" start="15461" end="15474" title="Intel Paragon" label="Intel Paragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736748" start="15521" end="15547" title="Sandia National Laboratory" label="Sandia National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q133493" start="15553" end="15559" title="XScale" label="XScale"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="15595" end="15601" title="32-bit computing" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q189376" start="15602" end="15606" title="RISC" label="RISC"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="15635" end="15651" title="ARM architecture" label="ARM architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="15781" end="15787" title="32-bit computing" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q237794" start="15824" end="15831" title="Intel 80386" label="80386DX"/>
<link wikidata="Q79738" start="16184" end="16186" title="gigabyte" label="GB"/>
<link wikidata="Q189401" start="16202" end="16216" title="Virtual memory" label="Virtual memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="16220" end="16222" title="Terabyte" label="TB"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="16264" end="16270" title="32-bit computing" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q656083" start="16341" end="16361" title="Paging" label="paged virtual memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q589680" start="16416" end="16421" title="Xenix" label="Xenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="16426" end="16430" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q189794" start="16499" end="16503" title="OS/2" label="OS/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="16571" end="16576" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="16578" end="16585" title="Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="16591" end="16596" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q115858001" start="16627" end="16638" title="Compaq Deskpro 386" label="Deskpro 386"/>
<link wikidata="Q237794" start="16779" end="16786" title="Intel 80386SX" label="80386SX"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152989" start="17423" end="17428" title="Intel 80376" label="80376"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17653" end="17660" title="#80386EX" label="80386EX"/>
<link wikidata="Q237794" start="17676" end="17683" title="Intel 80386SL" label="80386SL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066421" start="18110" end="18117" title="Intel 80386EX" label="80386EX"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="18181" end="18196" title="embedded system" label="embedded system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334191" start="18371" end="18385" title="Watchdog timer" label="Watchdog timer"/>
<link wikidata="Q210813" start="18443" end="18446" title="Direct memory access" label="DMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q545306" start="18465" end="18469" title="JTAG" label="JTAG"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18612" end="18623" title="FlightLinux" label="FlightLinux"/>
<link wikidata="Q213423" start="18678" end="18685" title="Intel 80486DX" label="80486DX"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19104" end="19117" title="Level 1 cache" label="Level 1 cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635535" start="19286" end="19293" title="Intel 80486SX" label="80486SX"/>
<link wikidata="Q763656" start="20301" end="20326" title="Intel 80486 OverDrive" label="Intel OverDrive processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272893" start="20351" end="20359" title="Intel 80486DX2" label="80486DX2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152990" start="20573" end="20580" title="Intel 80486SL" label="80486SL"/>
<link wikidata="Q10748030" start="20878" end="20886" title="Intel 80486DX4" label="80486DX4"/>
<link wikidata="Q925874" start="21202" end="21210" title="Socket 3" label="Socket 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q130985" start="21219" end="21230" title="pin grid array" label="PGA Package"/>
<link wikidata="Q676152" start="21239" end="21246" title="QFP" label="sq. ftP"/>
<link wikidata="Q12353724" start="21397" end="21399" title="P5 (microarchitecture)" label="P5"/>
<link wikidata="Q12353724" start="21435" end="21442" title="Pentium (original)" label="Pentium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045706" start="21607" end="21618" title="Superscalar" label="Superscalar"/>
<link wikidata="Q352090" start="21743" end="21748" title="CPU cache" label="cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135952" start="21777" end="21802" title="800 nanometer" label="0.8 μm process technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049156" start="21900" end="21908" title="Socket 4" label="Socket 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050797" start="22155" end="22180" title="600 nanometer" label="0.6 μm process technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q903483" start="22184" end="22192" title="Socket 5" label="Socket 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050761" start="22574" end="22600" title="350 nanometer" label="0.35 μm process technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q903483" start="22604" end="22612" title="Socket 5" label="Socket 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050761" start="22788" end="22814" title="350 nanometer" label="0.35 μm process technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q903483" start="22896" end="22904" title="Socket 5" label="Socket 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q732345" start="23116" end="23124" title="Socket 7" label="Socket 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q12353724" start="23238" end="23265" title="Pentium MMX" label="Pentium with MMX Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050761" start="23279" end="23305" title="350 nanometer" label="0.35 μm process technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q904336" start="23345" end="23366" title="MMX (instruction set)" label="MMX (instruction set)"/>
<link wikidata="Q732345" start="23378" end="23386" title="Socket 7" label="Socket 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="23880" end="23886" title="32-bit computing" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364041" start="23899" end="23901" title="P6 (microarchitecture)" label="P6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364041" start="23902" end="23911" title="Pentium M (microarchitecture)" label="Pentium M"/>
<link wikidata="Q628189" start="23937" end="23948" title="Pentium Pro" label="Pentium Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q376234" start="24081" end="24089" title="Socket 8" label="Socket 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050797" start="24177" end="24202" title="600 nanometer" label="0.6 μm process technology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24242" end="24250" title="L2 cache" label="L2 cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050761" start="24309" end="24335" title="350 nanometer" label="0.35 μm process technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q221257" start="25015" end="25025" title="Pentium II" label="Pentium II"/>
<link wikidata="Q904336" start="25074" end="25077" title="MMX (instruction set)" label="MMX"/>
<link wikidata="Q194368" start="25091" end="25097" title="16-bit computing" label="16-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q962194" start="25120" end="25126" title="Slot 1" label="Slot 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050761" start="25381" end="25407" title="350 nanometer" label="0.35 μm process technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050773" start="25551" end="25577" title="250 nanometer" label="0.25 μm process technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q271868" start="26145" end="26152" title="Celeron" label="Celeron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050773" start="26190" end="26216" title="250 nanometer" label="0.25 μm process technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q962194" start="26257" end="26263" title="Slot 1" label="Slot 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050773" start="26503" end="26529" title="250 nanometer" label="0.25 μm process technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q962194" start="26571" end="26577" title="Slot 1" label="Slot 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q835872" start="26616" end="26626" title="Socket 370" label="Socket 370"/>
<link wikidata="Q83382" start="27368" end="27379" title="Pentium III" label="Pentium III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050773" start="27395" end="27421" title="250 nanometer" label="0.25 μm process technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q741291" start="27505" end="27530" title="Streaming SIMD Extensions" label="Streaming SIMD Extensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q962194" start="27628" end="27634" title="Slot 1" label="Slot 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q867398" start="27995" end="28021" title="180 nanometer" label="0.18 μm process technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q130985" start="28231" end="28237" title="FC-PGA" label="FC-PGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q775523" start="29423" end="29449" title="130 nanometer" label="0.13 μm process technology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29605" end="29612" title="FC-PGA2" label="FC-PGA2"/>
<link wikidata="Q656154" start="29870" end="29874" title="Xeon" label="Xeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050773" start="30618" end="30633" title="250 nanometer" label="0.25 μm process"/>
<link wikidata="Q867398" start="30731" end="30746" title="180 nanometer" label="0.18 μm process"/>
<link wikidata="Q271868" start="31289" end="31296" title="Celeron" label="Celeron"/>
<link wikidata="Q741291" start="31406" end="31431" title="Streaming SIMD Extensions" label="Streaming SIMD Extensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q835872" start="31441" end="31451" title="Socket 370" label="Socket 370"/>
<link wikidata="Q130985" start="31453" end="31459" title="FC-PGA" label="FC-PGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q775523" start="32588" end="32614" title="130 nanometer" label="0.13 μm process technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q271868" start="32784" end="32791" title="Celeron" label="Celeron"/>
<link wikidata="Q775523" start="32846" end="32872" title="130 nanometer" label="0.13 μm process technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q856732" start="33073" end="33082" title="Pentium M" label="Pentium M"/>
<link wikidata="Q775523" start="33096" end="33122" title="130 nanometer" label="0.13 μm process technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q900402" start="33231" end="33235" title="SSE2" label="SSE2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071376" start="33303" end="33314" title="Micro-FCPGA" label="Micro-FCPGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q570628" start="33316" end="33327" title="Micro-FCBGA" label="Micro-FCBGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q658464" start="33381" end="33389" title="Centrino" label="Centrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051638" start="33666" end="33671" title="90 nanometer" label="90 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053879" start="33834" end="33837" title="thermal design power" label="TDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051638" start="34482" end="34487" title="90 nanometer" label="90 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053879" start="34605" end="34608" title="thermal design power" label="TDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051638" start="34814" end="34819" title="90 nanometer" label="90 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q271868" start="34939" end="34948" title="Celeron" label="Celeron M"/>
<link wikidata="Q775523" start="34966" end="34973" title="130 nanometer" label="0.13 μm"/>
<link wikidata="Q900402" start="35071" end="35075" title="SSE2" label="SSE2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152875" start="35100" end="35109" title="SpeedStep" label="SpeedStep"/>
<link wikidata="Q658464" start="35147" end="35155" title="Centrino" label="Centrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051638" start="35288" end="35293" title="90 nanometer" label="90 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q900402" start="35364" end="35368" title="SSE2" label="SSE2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152875" start="35393" end="35402" title="SpeedStep" label="SpeedStep"/>
<link wikidata="Q658464" start="35440" end="35448" title="Centrino" label="Centrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572526" start="35771" end="35776" title="Yonah (microprocessor)" label="Yonah"/>
<link wikidata="Q869122" start="35782" end="35787" title="65 nanometer" label="65 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152888" start="35858" end="35862" title="SSE3" label="SSE3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152875" start="35932" end="35941" title="SpeedStep" label="SpeedStep"/>
<link wikidata="Q658464" start="35979" end="35987" title="Centrino" label="Centrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481932" start="36186" end="36196" title="Intel Core" label="Intel Core"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572526" start="36203" end="36208" title="Yonah (microprocessor)" label="Yonah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36219" end="36224" title="65 nm" label="65 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q272695" start="36287" end="36301" title="front-side bus" label="front-side bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152888" start="36338" end="36342" title="SSE3" label="SSE3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053879" start="36368" end="36371" title="Thermal Design Power" label="TDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053879" start="36773" end="36776" title="thermal design power" label="TDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q656154" start="37084" end="37088" title="Xeon" label="Xeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q656154" start="37098" end="37106" title="Sossaman (microprocessor)" label="Sossaman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37117" end="37122" title="65 nm" label="65 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152888" start="37197" end="37201" title="SSE3" label="SSE3"/>
<link wikidata="Q272695" start="37231" end="37244" title="frontside bus" label="frontside bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062113" start="37316" end="37324" title="NetBurst" label="NetBurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q237757" start="37351" end="37360" title="Pentium 4" label="Pentium 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q900402" start="37588" end="37592" title="SSE2" label="SSE2"/>
<link wikidata="Q339387" start="37593" end="37597" title="SIMD" label="SIMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q830955" start="38741" end="38756" title="Hyper-Threading" label="Hyper-Threading"/>
<link wikidata="Q656154" start="39023" end="39027" title="Xeon" label="Xeon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39252" end="39275" title="Organic Land Grid Array" label="Organic Land Grid Array"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39599" end="39609" title="#Itanium" label="main entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251396" start="39757" end="39760" title="double data rate" label="DDR"/>
<link wikidata="Q379523" start="39787" end="39791" title="Advanced Configuration and Power Interface" label="ACPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q379704" start="39800" end="39803" title="Advanced Power Management" label="APM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152875" start="39845" end="39854" title="SpeedStep" label="SpeedStep"/>
<link wikidata="Q237757" start="40283" end="40295" title="P4EE" label="Pentium 4 EE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051638" start="40501" end="40506" title="90 nanometer" label="90 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q830955" start="40762" end="40777" title="Hyper-Threading" label="Hyper-Threading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192422" start="40873" end="40893" title="pipeline (computing)" label="instruction pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q610702" start="41020" end="41027" title="LGA 775" label="LGA 775"/>
<link wikidata="Q272629" start="41150" end="41158" title="Intel 64" label="Intel 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q252132" start="41163" end="41169" title="64-bit computing" label="64-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q916994" start="41182" end="41187" title="IA-64" label="IA-64"/>
<link wikidata="Q864328" start="41277" end="41286" title="Montecito (processor)" label="Montecito"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41354" end="41360" title="Itanium#Market reception" label="slowly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41375" end="41391" title="Itanium#Market reception" label="market reception"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41401" end="41422" title="Itanium#Architectural changes" label="architectural changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q390389" start="41429" end="41436" title="Itanium (original)" label="Itanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q390389" start="41576" end="41585" title="Itanium 2" label="Itanium 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q555032" start="41965" end="41974" title="dual-core" label="dual-core"/>
<link wikidata="Q252132" start="41994" end="42000" title="64-bit computing" label="64-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q128896" start="42117" end="42120" title="Advanced Micro Devices" label="AMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q272629" start="42128" end="42133" title="AMD64" label="AMD64"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051638" start="42273" end="42278" title="90 nanometer" label="90 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q252132" start="42449" end="42455" title="64-bit computing" label="64-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152875" start="42474" end="42483" title="SpeedStep" label="SpeedStep"/>
<link wikidata="Q869122" start="42534" end="42539" title="65 nanometer" label="65 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q749081" start="42720" end="42729" title="Pentium D" label="Pentium D"/>
<link wikidata="Q555032" start="42737" end="42746" title="Dual-core" label="Dual-core"/>
<link wikidata="Q272695" start="42801" end="42815" title="front-side bus" label="front-side bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q610702" start="42818" end="42825" title="LGA 775" label="LGA 775"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051638" start="42864" end="42869" title="90 nanometer" label="90 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q749081" start="43308" end="43315" title="Presler" label="Presler"/>
<link wikidata="Q869122" start="43330" end="43335" title="65 nanometer" label="65 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q749081" start="43592" end="43615" title="Pentium Extreme Edition" label="Pentium Extreme Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q272695" start="43691" end="43705" title="front-side bus" label="front-side bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051638" start="43747" end="43752" title="90 nanometer" label="90 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q869122" start="43876" end="43881" title="65 nanometer" label="65 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q272695" start="44012" end="44026" title="front-side bus" label="front-side bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q272695" start="44067" end="44081" title="front-side bus" label="front-side bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q656154" start="44087" end="44091" title="Xeon" label="Xeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049460" start="44903" end="44910" title="LGA 771" label="LGA 771"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195792" start="45118" end="45122" title="Intel Core (microarchitecture)" label="Core"/>
<link wikidata="Q656154" start="45191" end="45200" title="Woodcrest (microprocessor)" label="Woodcrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q869122" start="45203" end="45208" title="65 nanometer" label="65 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471952" start="45323" end="45333" title="Intel VT-x" label="Intel VT-x"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="45344" end="45346" title="operating system" label="OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152875" start="45379" end="45388" title="SpeedStep" label="SpeedStep"/>
<link wikidata="Q911952" start="45432" end="45451" title="NX Bit" label="Execute Disable Bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q744862" start="45455" end="45458" title="Trusted Execution Technology" label="TXT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366124" start="45501" end="45506" title="SSSE3" label="SSSE3"/>
<link wikidata="Q339387" start="45507" end="45511" title="SIMD" label="SIMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q656154" start="46014" end="46024" title="Clovertown (microprocessor)" label="Clovertown"/>
<link wikidata="Q869122" start="46027" end="46032" title="65 nanometer" label="65 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q555032" start="46151" end="46160" title="Multi-core processor" label="Quad-core"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471952" start="46164" end="46174" title="Intel VT-x" label="Intel VT-x"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="46185" end="46187" title="Operating System" label="OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152875" start="46220" end="46229" title="SpeedStep" label="SpeedStep"/>
<link wikidata="Q911952" start="46261" end="46280" title="NX Bit" label="Execute Disable Bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q744862" start="46284" end="46287" title="Trusted Execution Technology" label="TXT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366124" start="46330" end="46335" title="SSSE3" label="SSSE3"/>
<link wikidata="Q339387" start="46336" end="46340" title="SIMD" label="SIMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q216334" start="46809" end="46821" title="Intel Core 2" label="Intel Core 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054315" start="46828" end="46834" title="Conroe (microprocessor)" label="Conroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q869122" start="46837" end="46842" title="65 nanometer" label="65 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366124" start="46967" end="46972" title="SSSE3" label="SSSE3"/>
<link wikidata="Q339387" start="46973" end="46977" title="SIMD" label="SIMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471952" start="47068" end="47078" title="Intel VT-x" label="Intel VT-x"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="47089" end="47091" title="Operating System" label="OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q744862" start="47103" end="47106" title="Trusted Execution Technology" label="TXT"/>
<link wikidata="Q911952" start="47149" end="47168" title="NX Bit" label="Execute Disable Bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152875" start="47193" end="47202" title="SpeedStep" label="SpeedStep"/>
<link wikidata="Q42915608" start="47291" end="47314" title="Intel Management Engine" label="Intel Management Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q610702" start="47329" end="47336" title="LGA 775" label="LGA 775"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47944" end="47953" title="Conroe (microprocessor)#Conroe XE" label="Conroe XE"/>
<link wikidata="Q869122" start="47956" end="47961" title="65 nanometer" label="65 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q610702" start="48105" end="48112" title="LGA 775" label="LGA 775"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48187" end="48196" title="Conroe (microprocessor)#Allendale" label="Allendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q869122" start="48214" end="48219" title="65 nanometer" label="65 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366124" start="48346" end="48351" title="SSSE3" label="SSSE3"/>
<link wikidata="Q339387" start="48352" end="48356" title="SIMD" label="SIMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q744862" start="48400" end="48403" title="Trusted Execution Technology" label="TXT"/>
<link wikidata="Q911952" start="48446" end="48465" title="NX Bit" label="Execute Disable Bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152875" start="48490" end="48499" title="SpeedStep" label="SpeedStep"/>
<link wikidata="Q610702" start="48588" end="48595" title="LGA 775" label="LGA 775"/>
<link wikidata="Q597648" start="48911" end="48916" title="Merom (microprocessor)" label="Merom"/>
<link wikidata="Q869122" start="48919" end="48924" title="65 nanometer" label="65 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071376" start="49073" end="49081" title="Socket M" label="Socket M"/>
<link wikidata="Q204329" start="49084" end="49092" title="Socket P" label="Socket P"/>
<link wikidata="Q658464" start="49297" end="49316" title="Santa Rosa platform" label="Santa Rosa platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740833" start="51207" end="51217" title="Kentsfield (microprocessor)" label="Kentsfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q869122" start="51220" end="51225" title="65 nanometer" label="65 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q610702" start="51456" end="51463" title="LGA 775" label="LGA 775"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057260" start="51912" end="51920" title="Wolfdale (microprocessor)" label="Wolfdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652372" start="51923" end="51928" title="45 nanometer" label="45 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011196" start="52108" end="52112" title="SSE4" label="SSE4"/>
<link wikidata="Q339387" start="52113" end="52117" title="SIMD" label="SIMD"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52737" end="52748" title="Wolfdale (microprocessor)#Wolfdale-3M" label="Wolfdale-3M"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652372" start="52766" end="52771" title="45 nanometer" label="45 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058975" start="53118" end="53127" title="Yorkfield" label="Yorkfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652372" start="53129" end="53134" title="45 nanometer" label="45 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652372" start="54784" end="54789" title="45 nanometer" label="45 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q378640" start="54979" end="54996" title="Pentium Dual-Core" label="Pentium Dual-Core"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55003" end="55012" title="Conroe (microprocessor)#Allendale" label="Allendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q869122" start="55035" end="55040" title="65 nanometer" label="65 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366124" start="55168" end="55173" title="SSSE3" label="SSSE3"/>
<link wikidata="Q339387" start="55174" end="55178" title="SIMD" label="SIMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q744862" start="55222" end="55225" title="Trusted Execution Technology" label="TXT"/>
<link wikidata="Q911952" start="55268" end="55287" title="NX Bit" label="Execute Disable Bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152875" start="55312" end="55321" title="SpeedStep" label="SpeedStep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057260" start="55633" end="55644" title="Wolfdale (microprocessor)" label="Wolfdale-3M"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652372" start="55667" end="55672" title="45 nanometer" label="45 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q271868" start="56369" end="56376" title="Intel Celeron" label="Celeron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56415" end="56424" title="Conroe (microprocessor)#Allendale" label="Allendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q869122" start="56468" end="56473" title="65 nanometer" label="65 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057260" start="56743" end="56754" title="Wolfdale (microprocessor)" label="Wolfdale-3M"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652372" start="56798" end="56803" title="45 nanometer" label="45 nm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57065" end="57073" title="Conroe (microprocessor)#Conroe-L" label="Conroe-L"/>
<link wikidata="Q869122" start="57117" end="57122" title="65 nanometer" label="65 nm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57441" end="57450" title="Conroe (microprocessor)#Conroe-CL" label="Conroe-CL"/>
<link wikidata="Q869122" start="57494" end="57499" title="65 nanometer" label="65 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q271868" start="57613" end="57622" title="Celeron M" label="Celeron M"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57661" end="57668" title="Merom (microprocessor)#Merom-L" label="Merom-L"/>
<link wikidata="Q869122" start="57669" end="57674" title="65 nanometer" label="65 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152888" start="57745" end="57749" title="SSE3" label="SSE3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152875" start="57835" end="57844" title="SpeedStep" label="SpeedStep"/>
<link wikidata="Q658464" start="57882" end="57890" title="Centrino" label="Centrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q425484" start="58113" end="58120" title="Nehalem (microarchitecture)" label="Nehalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q214314" start="58147" end="58160" title="Intel Pentium" label="Intel Pentium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623419" start="58177" end="58186" title="Clarkdale (microprocessor)" label="Clarkdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652244" start="58226" end="58231" title="32 nanometer" label="32 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q830955" start="58485" end="58500" title="Hyper-Threading" label="Hyper-Threading"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481932" start="58549" end="58556" title="Core i3" label="Core i3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623419" start="58580" end="58589" title="Clarkdale (microprocessor)" label="Clarkdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652244" start="58617" end="58622" title="32 nanometer" label="32 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481932" start="58972" end="58979" title="Intel Core i5" label="Core i5"/>
<link wikidata="Q370855" start="59003" end="59012" title="Lynnfield (microprocessor)" label="Lynnfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652372" start="59040" end="59045" title="45 nanometer" label="45 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141658" start="59223" end="59234" title="Socket 1156" label="Socket 1156"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623419" start="59389" end="59398" title="Clarkdale (microprocessor)" label="Clarkdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652244" start="59426" end="59431" title="32 nanometer" label="32 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141658" start="59569" end="59580" title="Socket 1156" label="Socket 1156"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481932" start="59848" end="59855" title="Intel Core i7" label="Core i7"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907041" start="59879" end="59889" title="Bloomfield (microprocessor)" label="Bloomfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652372" start="59917" end="59922" title="45 nanometer" label="45 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q272695" start="60011" end="60025" title="Front-side bus" label="Front-side bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196272" start="60040" end="60049" title="QuickPath" label="QuickPath"/>
<link wikidata="Q830955" start="60068" end="60083" title="Hyper-Threading" label="Hyper-Threading"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481932" start="60159" end="60163" title="Intel Core" label="Core"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="60184" end="60195" title="transistors" label="transistors"/>
<link wikidata="Q370855" start="60633" end="60642" title="Lynnfield (microprocessor)" label="Lynnfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652372" start="60670" end="60675" title="45 nanometer" label="45 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196272" start="60788" end="60797" title="QuickPath" label="QuickPath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195515" start="60830" end="60833" title="Direct Media Interface" label="DMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q830955" start="60847" end="60862" title="Hyper-Threading" label="Hyper-Threading"/>
<link wikidata="Q656154" start="61214" end="61222" title="Westmere-EX" label="Westmere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324219" start="61225" end="61233" title="Gulftown" label="Gulftown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652244" start="61235" end="61240" title="32 nanometer" label="32 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q272695" start="61320" end="61334" title="Front-side bus" label="Front-side bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196272" start="61349" end="61358" title="QuickPath" label="QuickPath"/>
<link wikidata="Q830955" start="61377" end="61392" title="Hyper-Threading" label="Hyper-Threading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053322" start="61440" end="61451" title="LGA 1366" label="Socket 1366"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652372" start="61716" end="61721" title="45 nanometer" label="45 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q830955" start="61764" end="61779" title="Hyper-Threading" label="Hyper-Threading"/>
<link wikidata="Q656154" start="62239" end="62243" title="Xeon" label="Xeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q656154" start="62278" end="62288" title="Gainestown (microprocessor)" label="Gainestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652372" start="62291" end="62296" title="45 nanometer" label="45 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196272" start="62414" end="62423" title="QuickPath" label="QuickPath"/>
<link wikidata="Q830955" start="62442" end="62457" title="Hyper-Threading" label="Hyper-Threading"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="62500" end="62511" title="transistors" label="transistors"/>
<link wikidata="Q278624" start="62798" end="62810" title="Sandy Bridge" label="Sandy Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q70475" start="62813" end="62823" title="Ivy Bridge (microarchitecture)" label="Ivy Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q271868" start="62850" end="62857" title="Celeron" label="Celeron"/>
<link wikidata="Q278624" start="62908" end="62920" title="Sandy Bridge" label="Sandy Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652244" start="62941" end="62946" title="32 nanometer" label="32 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q136257" start="63221" end="63232" title="LGA 1155" label="Socket 1155"/>
<link wikidata="Q214314" start="63920" end="63927" title="Pentium" label="Pentium"/>
<link wikidata="Q278624" start="63978" end="63990" title="Sandy Bridge" label="Sandy Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652244" start="64011" end="64016" title="32 nanometer" label="32 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q136257" start="64137" end="64148" title="LGA 1155" label="Socket 1155"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665604" start="64307" end="64314" title="Intel HD Graphics" label="HD 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q70475" start="64814" end="64824" title="Ivy Bridge (microarchitecture)" label="Ivy Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059061" start="64845" end="64850" title="22 nanometer" label="22 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119749" start="64851" end="64870" title="tri-gate transistor" label="tri-gate transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q136257" start="65032" end="65043" title="LGA 1155" label="Socket 1155"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481932" start="65517" end="65524" title="Core i3" label="Core i3"/>
<link wikidata="Q278624" start="65556" end="65568" title="Sandy Bridge" label="Sandy Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652244" start="65596" end="65601" title="32 nanometer" label="32 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q136257" start="65788" end="65799" title="LGA 1155" label="Socket 1155"/>
<link wikidata="Q70475" start="66409" end="66419" title="Ivy Bridge (microarchitecture)" label="Ivy Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059061" start="66447" end="66452" title="22 nanometer" label="22 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119749" start="66453" end="66472" title="tri-gate transistor" label="tri-gate transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q136257" start="66634" end="66645" title="LGA 1155" label="Socket 1155"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481932" start="67047" end="67054" title="Intel Core i5" label="Core i5"/>
<link wikidata="Q278624" start="67086" end="67098" title="Sandy Bridge" label="Sandy Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652244" start="67126" end="67131" title="32 nanometer" label="32 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q136257" start="67414" end="67425" title="LGA 1155" label="Socket 1155"/>
<link wikidata="Q70475" start="68721" end="68731" title="Ivy Bridge (microarchitecture)" label="Ivy Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059061" start="68759" end="68764" title="22 nanometer" label="22 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119749" start="68765" end="68784" title="Tri-gate transistor" label="Tri-gate transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q136257" start="69038" end="69049" title="LGA 1155" label="Socket 1155"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481932" start="70226" end="70233" title="Intel Core i7" label="Core i7"/>
<link wikidata="Q278624" start="70265" end="70277" title="Sandy Bridge" label="Sandy Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652244" start="70305" end="70310" title="32 nanometer" label="32 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q136257" start="70497" end="70508" title="LGA 1155" label="Socket 1155"/>
<link wikidata="Q107619317" start="71141" end="71155" title="Sandy Bridge-E" label="Sandy Bridge-E"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652244" start="71192" end="71197" title="32 nanometer" label="32 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q748697" start="71452" end="71463" title="LGA 2011" label="Socket 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q70475" start="71898" end="71908" title="Ivy Bridge (microarchitecture)" label="Ivy Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059061" start="71936" end="71941" title="22 nanometer" label="22 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119749" start="71942" end="71961" title="Tri-gate transistor" label="Tri-gate transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q136257" start="72119" end="72130" title="LGA 1155" label="Socket 1155"/>
<link wikidata="Q59069" start="72641" end="72648" title="Haswell (microarchitecture)" label="Haswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481932" start="72675" end="72682" title="Core i3" label="Core i3"/>
<link wikidata="Q59069" start="72706" end="72713" title="Haswell (microarchitecture)" label="Haswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059061" start="72741" end="72745" title="22 nanometer" label="22nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q764978" start="72799" end="72808" title="Broadwell (microarchitecture)" label="Broadwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481932" start="72835" end="72842" title="Core i3" label="Core i3"/>
<link wikidata="Q764978" start="72866" end="72875" title="Broadwell (microarchitecture)" label="Broadwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750603" start="72903" end="72907" title="14 nanometer" label="14nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481932" start="72932" end="72939" title="Core i5" label="Core i5"/>
<link wikidata="Q764978" start="72963" end="72972" title="Broadwell (microarchitecture)" label="Broadwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750603" start="73000" end="73004" title="14 nanometer" label="14nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586433" start="73099" end="73110" title="LGA 1150" label="Socket 1150"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481932" start="73314" end="73321" title="Core i7" label="Core i7"/>
<link wikidata="Q764978" start="73370" end="73379" title="Broadwell (microarchitecture)" label="Broadwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750603" start="73407" end="73411" title="14 nanometer" label="14nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586433" start="73506" end="73517" title="LGA 1150" label="Socket 1150"/>
<link wikidata="Q764978" start="73673" end="73684" title="Broadwell-E" label="Broadwell-E"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750603" start="73687" end="73691" title="14 nanometer" label="14nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q748697" start="73797" end="73811" title="LGA 2011-v3" label="Socket 2011-v3"/>
<link wikidata="Q252132" start="75089" end="75095" title="64-bit computing" label="64-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058943" start="75119" end="75126" title="Skylake (microarchitecture)" label="Skylake"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481932" start="75153" end="75160" title="Core i3" label="Core i3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058943" start="75184" end="75191" title="Skylake (microarchitecture)" label="Skylake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750603" start="75219" end="75224" title="14 nanometer" label="14 nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939146" start="75321" end="75332" title="LGA 1151" label="Socket 1151"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481932" start="75617" end="75624" title="Core i5" label="Core i5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058943" start="75648" end="75655" title="Skylake (microarchitecture)" label="Skylake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750603" start="75683" end="75687" title="14 nanometer" label="14nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939146" start="75782" end="75793" title="LGA 1151" label="Socket 1151"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481932" start="76267" end="76274" title="Core i7" label="Core i7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058943" start="76298" end="76305" title="Skylake (microarchitecture)" label="Skylake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750603" start="76333" end="76337" title="14 nanometer" label="14nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939146" start="76432" end="76443" title="LGA 1151" label="Socket 1151"/>
<link wikidata="Q20671116" start="77078" end="77087" title="Kaby Lake (microarchitecture)" label="Kaby Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q27995423" start="77167" end="77178" title="Coffee Lake" label="Coffee Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962657" start="77233" end="77244" title="Cannon Lake (microarchitecture)" label="Cannon Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q31888920" start="77317" end="77325" title="Ice Lake (microarchitecture)" label="Ice Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q66660880" start="77399" end="77409" title="Comet Lake" label="Comet Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q25024949" start="77484" end="77494" title="Tiger Lake" label="Tiger Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q96417607" start="77569" end="77579" title="Alder Lake (microarchitecture)" label="Alder Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q111303806" start="77654" end="77665" title="Raptor Lake" label="Raptor Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q682327" start="77691" end="77707" title="Intel Tera-Scale" label="Intel Tera-Scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q753616" start="77719" end="77742" title="Teraflops Research Chip" label="Teraflops Research Chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571735" start="77784" end="77810" title="Single-chip Cloud Computer" label="Single-chip Cloud Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q214314" start="78104" end="78111" title="Pentium" label="Pentium"/>
<link wikidata="Q432852" start="78405" end="78427" title="List of AMD processors" label="List of AMD processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594553" start="78430" end="78456" title="List of PowerPC processors" label="List of PowerPC processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839919" start="78459" end="78479" title="List of NXP products" label="List of NXP products"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574280" start="78482" end="78511" title="List of Intel Atom processors" label="List of Intel Atom processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q846384" start="78514" end="78543" title="List of Intel Xeon processors" label="List of Intel Xeon processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574286" start="78546" end="78578" title="List of Intel Itanium processors" label="List of Intel Itanium processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566976" start="78581" end="78613" title="List of Intel Celeron processors" label="List of Intel Celeron processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4434712" start="78616" end="78648" title="List of Intel Pentium processors" label="List of Intel Pentium processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574289" start="78652" end="78688" title="List of Intel Pentium Pro processors" label="List of Intel Pentium Pro processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328254" start="78692" end="78727" title="List of Intel Pentium II processors" label="List of Intel Pentium II processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q11932925" start="78731" end="78767" title="List of Intel Pentium III processors" label="List of Intel Pentium III processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723872" start="78771" end="78805" title="List of Intel Pentium 4 processors" label="List of Intel Pentium 4 processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4434716" start="78809" end="78843" title="List of Intel Pentium D processors" label="List of Intel Pentium D processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574288" start="78847" end="78881" title="List of Intel Pentium M processors" label="List of Intel Pentium M processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574285" start="78884" end="78913" title="List of Intel Core processors" label="List of Intel Core processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574285" start="78916" end="78947" title="List of Intel Core 2 processors" label="List of Intel Core 2 processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574285" start="78950" end="78981" title="List of Intel Core M processors" label="List of Intel Core M processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574285" start="78984" end="79016" title="List of Intel Core i3 processors" label="List of Intel Core i3 processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574285" start="79019" end="79051" title="List of Intel Core i5 processors" label="List of Intel Core i5 processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574285" start="79054" end="79086" title="List of Intel Core i7 processors" label="List of Intel Core i7 processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574285" start="79089" end="79121" title="List of Intel Core i9 processors" label="List of Intel Core i9 processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574282" start="79124" end="79160" title="List of Intel CPU microarchitectures" label="List of Intel CPU microarchitectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155738" start="79163" end="79202" title="List of Intel graphics processing units" label="List of Intel graphics processing units"/>
<link wikidata="Q43301967" start="79205" end="79231" title="List of quantum processors" label="List of quantum processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q406283" start="79234" end="79247" title="Apple silicon" label="Apple silicon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="60528" wikidata="Q1456154" url="?curid=60528" title="List of colleges and universities in California">
<text>This is a list of colleges and universities in California.

==Federal institutions==

===Graduate institutions===
* Naval Postgraduate School (Monterey)

===Other academic institutions===
* Defense Language Institute (Monterey)

==State institutions==

===Two-year institutions===
* See: List of California Community Colleges

===Four-year institutions===

====University of California====
*University of California, Los Angeles was founded in 1882 as the southern branch of the California State Normal School. It joined the University of California system in 1919 as the southern branch of the University of California.

**University of California, Santa Barbara was founded in 1891 as an independent teachers&#x27; college. It joined the University of California system in 1944.

====California State University====
*California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo was founded as a vocational high school. It became a vocational school in 1924, and then started awarding bachelor&#x27;s degrees in 1940.

**California State Polytechnic University, Pomona, was founded as a southern branch of California State Polytechnic University, San Luis Obispo in 1938, but became independent in 1966.

===State graduate institutions===
==Private colleges and universities==
== List of defunct institutions ==
==See also==

* List of college athletic programs in California
* Higher education in the United States
* List of American institutions of higher education
* List of recognized higher education accreditation organizations
* List of colleges and universities
* List of colleges and universities by country
* List of colleges and universities in San Francisco
* List of colleges and universities in the San Francisco Bay Area
* List of colleges and universities in southern California

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* Department of Education listing of accredited institutions in California</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1456154" start="10" end="57" title="List of colleges and universities in California" label="list of colleges and universities in California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515048" start="116" end="141" title="Naval Postgraduate School" label="Naval Postgraduate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q487315" start="143" end="151" title="Monterey, California" label="Monterey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102209" start="190" end="216" title="Defense Language Institute" label="Defense Language Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q487315" start="218" end="226" title="Monterey, California" label="Monterey"/>
<link wikidata="Q24765345" start="288" end="325" title="List of California Community Colleges" label="List of California Community Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="391" end="428" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021051" start="479" end="509" title="California State Normal School" label="California State Normal School"/>
<link wikidata="Q184478" start="525" end="549" title="University of California" label="University of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q263064" start="624" end="663" title="University of California, Santa Barbara" label="University of California, Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q184478" start="740" end="764" title="University of California" label="University of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026846" start="819" end="875" title="California Polytechnic State University" label="California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026868" start="1018" end="1065" title="California State Polytechnic University, Pomona" label="California State Polytechnic University, Pomona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026846" start="1103" end="1159" title="California State Polytechnic University, San Luis Obispo" label="California State Polytechnic University, San Luis Obispo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6610410" start="1325" end="1372" title="List of college athletic programs in California" label="List of college athletic programs in California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887889" start="1375" end="1412" title="Higher education in the United States" label="Higher education in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849445" start="1415" end="1464" title="List of American institutions of higher education" label="List of American institutions of higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636154" start="1467" end="1530" title="List of recognized higher education accreditation organizations" label="List of recognized higher education accreditation organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846117" start="1533" end="1566" title="List of colleges and universities" label="List of colleges and universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682368" start="1569" end="1613" title="List of colleges and universities by country" label="List of colleges and universities by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q6610648" start="1616" end="1666" title="List of colleges and universities in San Francisco" label="List of colleges and universities in San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456154" start="1669" end="1732" title="List of colleges and universities in the San Francisco Bay Area" label="List of colleges and universities in the San Francisco Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456154" start="1735" end="1791" title="List of colleges and universities in southern California" label="List of colleges and universities in southern California"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="60529" wikidata="Q202397" url="?curid=60529" title="USS Wasp">
<text>USS &quot;Wasp&quot; may refer to the following ships of the Continental and United States navies: 

* was a merchant schooner purchased by the Continental Navy in late 1775 and destroyed in 1777
* was a sloop constructed in 1806 and captured during the War of 1812
* was a schooner built in 1810 and sold after 1814
* was a sloop chartered in 1813 and returned to her owners in 1814
* was a sloop-of-war constructed in 1813 and lost in a storm at sea in 1814.
*, originally the captured Confederate &quot;Emma Henry&quot;, renamed &quot;Wasp&quot; in June 1865 and found unfit for further service in 1876
*, was the first steam yacht &quot;Columbia&quot; launched 1893 by William Cramp, acquired and commissioned in 1898 by the Navy and used as a training ship until sold in 1919
*, a steel-hulled motorboat, was leased by the U.S. Navy and performed patrol duties in 1917
*, laid down in 1936, was an aircraft carrier that saw action in World War II until sunk by in September 1942
* an aircraft carrier launched in 1943 and served until 1972
* is lead ship of the s and was launched in 1989 and in active service</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2367216" start="61" end="72" title="Continental Navy" label="Continental"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="77" end="90" title="United States Navy" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q204577" start="118" end="126" title="schooner" label="schooner"/>
<link wikidata="Q928235" start="204" end="209" title="Sloop-of-war" label="sloop"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="254" end="265" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124986" start="488" end="499" title="Confederate States Navy" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q170173" start="629" end="634" title="yacht" label="yacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q622416" start="799" end="808" title="motorboat" label="motorboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="903" end="919" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="60530" wikidata="Q13644717" url="?curid=60530" title="List of professional sports teams in California">
<text>There are many professional sports teams based in California, participating in sports such as baseball, American football, soccer, basketball, ice hockey, lacrosse, and ultimate.

==Major men&#x27;s professional sports teams==
=== National Hockey League ===
====Anaheim Ducks====
:&quot;based in Anaheim&quot; 
::*Expansion team in 1993
::*Previously known as the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim 
::*Play at Honda Center 
::*No previous arenas 
::*Stanley Cup Championships: 2007

====Los Angeles Kings====
:&quot;based in Los Angeles&quot; 
::*Expansion team in 1967
::*No previous monikers
::*Play at Crypto.com Arena 
::*Previously played at Long Beach Arena , Los Angeles Memorial Sports Arena , The Forum 
::*Stanley Cup Championships: 2012, 2014

====San Jose Sharks ====
:&quot;based in San Jose&quot; 
::*Expansion team in 1991
::*No previous monikers
::*Play at SAP Center at San Jose 
::*Previously played at Cow Palace 
::*Stanley Cup Championships: None

===Major League Baseball===
====Los Angeles Angels====
:&quot;based in Anaheim&quot; 
::*Expansion team in 1961
::*Previously known as the Los Angeles Angels , California Angels , Anaheim Angels , and Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim 
::*Play at Angel Stadium of Anaheim 
::*Previously played at Wrigley Field and Dodger Stadium 
::*World Series Championships: 2002

====Los Angeles Dodgers====
:&quot;based in Los Angeles&quot; 
::*Relocated from Brooklyn in 1958
::*Previously known as the Brooklyn Dodgers and others 
::*Play at Dodger Stadium 
::*Previously played at Ebbets Field , Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum , and others 
::*World Series Championships: 1959, 1963, 1965, 1981, 1988, 2020, 2024

====San Diego Padres====
:&quot;based in San Diego&quot; 
::*Expansion team in 1969
::*No previous monikers
::*Play at Petco Park 
::*Previously played at San Diego Stadium 
::*World Series Championships: None

====San Francisco Giants====
:&quot;based in San Francisco&quot; 
::*Relocated from New York City in 1958
::*Previously known as the New York Gothams and New York Giants 
::*Play at Oracle Park 
::*Previously played at the New York Polo Grounds , Seals Stadium , Candlestick Park , and others 
::*World Series Championships: 2010, 2012, 2014

===National Football League===
====Los Angeles Chargers====
:&quot;play in Inglewood; headquarters in Costa Mesa&quot; 
::*Expansion team in 1960, played in San Diego from 1961 to 2016
::*Previously known as the San Diego Chargers 
::*Play at SoFi Stadium 
::*Previously played at Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum , Balboa Stadium , San Diego Stadium , and Dignity Health Sports Park 
::*Championships: 1963

====Los Angeles Rams====
:&quot;play in Inglewood; headquarters in Agoura Hills&quot; 
::*Expansion team in 1936, played in Cleveland from 1936 to 1945 and St. Louis from 1995 to 2015
::*Previously known as the Cleveland Rams and St. Louis Rams 
::*Play at SoFi Stadium 
::*Previously played at Cleveland Stadium , League Park , Shaw Stadium , Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum , Anaheim Stadium , Busch Memorial Stadium , and Edward Jones Dome 
::*Championships: 1951, 2021 (LVI)

====San Francisco 49ers====
:&quot;based in Santa Clara (stadium and HQ)&quot; 
::*Expansion team in 1946 (AAFC), joined NFL in 1950
::*No previous moniker
::*Play at Levi&#x27;s Stadium 
::*Previously played at Kezar Stadium and Candlestick Park 
::*Championships: 1981 (XVI), 1984 (XIX), 1988 (XXIII), 1989 (XXIV), 1994 (XXIX)

===National Basketball Association===
====Golden State Warriors====
:&quot;based in San Francisco&quot; 
::*Relocated from Philadelphia in 1962
::*Previously known as the Philadelphia Warriors and San Francisco Warriors 
::*Play at Chase Center .
::*Previously played at Cow Palace , San Francisco Civic Auditorium , USF War Memorial Gymnasium , HP Pavilion at San Jose , Oracle Arena , and others 
::*NBA Championships: 1975, 2015, 2017, 2018, 2022

====Los Angeles Clippers====
:&quot;based in Los Angeles&quot; 
::*Relocated from Buffalo in 1978 to San Diego, then relocated to Los Angeles in 1984
::*Previously known as the Buffalo Braves and San Diego Clippers 
::*Play at Intuit Dome 
::*Previously played at Buffalo Memorial Auditorium , San Diego Sports Arena , Los Angeles Memorial Sports Arena , and Arrowhead Pond 
::*NBA Championships: None

====Los Angeles Lakers====
:&quot;based in Los Angeles&quot; 
::*Relocated from Minnesota in 1960
::*Previously known as the Detroit Gems and Minneapolis Lakers 
::*Play at Crypto.com Arena 
::*Previously played at Minneapolis Auditorium , Los Angeles Memorial Sports Arena , The Forum 
::*NBA Championships: 1972, 1980, 1982, 1985, 1987, 1988, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2009, 2010, 2020

====Sacramento Kings====
:&quot;based in Sacramento&quot; 
::*Relocated from Kansas City in 1985
::*Previously known as the Rochester Royals , Cincinnati Royals, Kansas City-Omaha Kings , Kansas City Kings 
::*Play at the Golden 1 Center 
::*Previously played at Kansas City Municipal Auditorium Omaha Civic Auditorium , Kemper Arena , ARCO Arena I , Sleep Train Arena (and others) 
::*NBA Championships: None

===Major League Soccer===
====LA Galaxy====
:&quot;based in Carson&quot; 
::*Original team in league&#x27;s 1996 inaugural season
::*No previous monikers
::*Play at Dignity Health Sports Park &quot;(Dignity Health Sports Park was formerly known as The Home Depot Center)&quot;
::*Previously played at Rose Bowl plus Titan Stadium 
::*Championships: MLS Cup (2002, 2005, 2011, 2012, 2014) Supporters&#x27; Shield (1998, 2002, 2010, 2011), Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup (2001, 2005), CONCACAF Champions Cup (2000)

====Los Angeles FC====
:&quot;based in Los Angeles&quot; 
::*Expansion team in 2018
::*No previous monikers
::*Play at BMO Stadium 
::*No previous stadiums
::*Championships: MLS Cup (2022); Supporters&#x27; Shield (2019, 2022), Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup (2024)

====San Jose Earthquakes====
:&quot;based in San Jose&quot; 
::*Original team in league&#x27;s 1996 inaugural season
::*Previously known as the San Jose Clash 
::*Franchise on hiatus in the 2006 and 2007 seasons; the original ownership relocated the team to Houston after the 2005 season as the Houston Dynamo, but MLS kept the name and history of the original franchise in San Jose for a new ownership group
::*Play at PayPal Park , plus other venues for select games
::*Previously played at Spartan Stadium , Buck Shaw Stadium , and other venues for select games
::*Championships: MLS Cup (2001, 2003), Supporters&#x27; Shield (2005, 2012)

====San Diego FC====
:&quot;based in San Diego&quot; 
::*Expansion team to begin play in 2025
::*No previous monikers
::*Play at Snapdragon Stadium 
::*Championships: None

==Major women&#x27;s professional sports teams==
===Women&#x27;s National Basketball Association===
====Golden State Valkyries====
:&quot;based in San Francisco&quot; 
::*Expansion team in 2025
::*No previous monikers
::*Play at Chase Center 
::*No previous stadiums
::*Championships: None

====Los Angeles Sparks====
:&quot;based in Los Angeles&quot; 
::*Inaugural WNBA team in 1997
::*No previous monikers
::*Play at Crypto.com Arena 
::*Previously played at The Forum 
::*Championships: 2001, 2002, 2016

===National Women&#x27;s Soccer League===
====Angel City FC====
:&quot;based in Los Angeles&quot; 
::*Expansion team in 2022
::*No previous monikers
::*Play at BMO Stadium , plus Titan Stadium for NWSL Challenge Cup home matches
::*No previous stadiums
::*Championships: None

====San Diego Wave FC====
:&quot;based in San Diego&quot; 
::*Expansion team in 2022
::*No previous monikers
::*Play at Snapdragon Stadium 
::*Previously played at Torero Stadium 
::*Championships: None

====Bay FC====
:&quot;based in San Jose&quot; 
::*Expansion team in 2024
::*No previous monikers
::*Play at PayPal Park 
::*No previous stadiums
::*Championships: None

==Other professional sports teams==


==See also==
* Sports in California

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1369650" start="15" end="33" title="professional sport" label="professional sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="50" end="60" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="94" end="102" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="104" end="121" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="123" end="129" title="Association football" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="131" end="141" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="143" end="153" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q185851" start="155" end="163" title="lacrosse" label="lacrosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q244700" start="169" end="177" title="ultimate (sport)" label="ultimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q49247" start="296" end="303" title="Anaheim, California" label="Anaheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q774138" start="400" end="412" title="Honda Center" label="Honda Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968224" start="467" end="471" title="2007 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q49614" start="575" end="582" title="moniker" label="moniker"/>
<link wikidata="Q186080" start="595" end="611" title="Crypto.com Arena" label="Crypto.com Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757660" start="637" end="653" title="Long Beach Arena" label="Long Beach Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571403" start="656" end="689" title="Los Angeles Memorial Sports Arena" label="Los Angeles Memorial Sports Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q639129" start="692" end="701" title="The Forum (Inglewood, California)" label="The Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071940" start="733" end="737" title="2012 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958416" start="739" end="743" title="2014 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="786" end="794" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q49614" start="843" end="850" title="moniker" label="moniker"/>
<link wikidata="Q261863" start="863" end="885" title="SAP Center at San Jose" label="SAP Center at San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q604015" start="911" end="921" title="Cow Palace" label="Cow Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q49247" start="1030" end="1037" title="Anaheim, California" label="Anaheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q531897" start="1202" end="1226" title="Angel Stadium" label="Angel Stadium of Anaheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297716" start="1252" end="1265" title="Wrigley Field (Los Angeles)" label="Wrigley Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187726" start="1317" end="1321" title="2002 World Series" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="1404" end="1412" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869184" start="1448" end="1464" title="History of the Brooklyn Dodgers" label="Brooklyn Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1469" end="1475" title="Los Angeles Dodgers#Team history" label="others"/>
<link wikidata="Q247420" start="1488" end="1502" title="Dodger Stadium" label="Dodger Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278537" start="1528" end="1540" title="Ebbets Field" label="Ebbets Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q849784" start="1543" end="1572" title="Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum" label="Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1579" end="1585" title="Los Angeles Dodgers#Team history" label="others"/>
<link wikidata="Q4295884" start="1618" end="1622" title="1959 World Series" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q4295885" start="1624" end="1628" title="1963 World Series" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572071" start="1630" end="1634" title="1965 World Series" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983763" start="1636" end="1640" title="1981 World Series" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526568" start="1642" end="1646" title="1988 World Series" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q79465885" start="1648" end="1652" title="2020 World Series" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q124543265" start="1654" end="1658" title="2024 World Series" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="1701" end="1710" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q49614" start="1759" end="1766" title="moniker" label="moniker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194586" start="1779" end="1789" title="Petco Park" label="Petco Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q956072" start="1815" end="1832" title="San Diego Stadium" label="San Diego Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024169" start="2025" end="2040" title="History of the New York Giants (baseball)" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q298585" start="2053" end="2064" title="Oracle Park" label="Oracle Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276360" start="2103" end="2115" title="Polo Grounds" label="Polo Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440659" start="2118" end="2131" title="Seals Stadium" label="Seals Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033076" start="2134" end="2150" title="Candlestick Park" label="Candlestick Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024169" start="2157" end="2163" title="History of the New York Giants (baseball)" label="others"/>
<link wikidata="Q928040" start="2196" end="2200" title="2010 World Series" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190373" start="2202" end="2206" title="2012 World Series" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514457" start="2208" end="2212" title="2014 World Series" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q621549" start="2289" end="2298" title="Inglewood, California" label="Inglewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q499196" start="2316" end="2326" title="Costa Mesa, California" label="Costa Mesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q19520501" start="2457" end="2469" title="SoFi Stadium" label="SoFi Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q849784" start="2495" end="2524" title="Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum" label="Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850213" start="2527" end="2541" title="Balboa Stadium" label="Balboa Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q956072" start="2544" end="2561" title="San Diego Stadium" label="San Diego Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q200684" start="2568" end="2594" title="Dignity Health Sports Park" label="Dignity Health Sports Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015405" start="2614" end="2618" title="1963 American Football League playoffs" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q395793" start="2687" end="2699" title="Agoura Hills, California" label="Agoura Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q19520501" start="2877" end="2889" title="SoFi Stadium" label="SoFi Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113078" start="2915" end="2932" title="Cleveland Stadium" label="Cleveland Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q870897" start="2935" end="2946" title="League Park" label="League Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491193" start="2949" end="2961" title="Shaw Stadium" label="Shaw Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q849784" start="2964" end="2993" title="Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum" label="Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q531897" start="2996" end="3011" title="Angel Stadium" label="Anaheim Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017286" start="3014" end="3036" title="Busch Memorial Stadium" label="Busch Memorial Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292739" start="3043" end="3060" title="The Dome at America&amp;#x27;s Center" label="Edward Jones Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567170" start="3080" end="3084" title="1951 NFL Championship Game" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q30114464" start="3092" end="3095" title="Super Bowl LVI" label="LVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q159260" start="3142" end="3153" title="Santa Clara, California" label="Santa Clara"/>
<link wikidata="Q389307" start="3205" end="3209" title="All-America Football Conference" label="AAFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="3219" end="3222" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q49614" start="3246" end="3253" title="moniker" label="moniker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419343" start="3265" end="3284" title="Levi&amp;#x27;s Stadium" label="Levi&amp;#x27;s Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4263361" start="3310" end="3323" title="Kezar Stadium" label="Kezar Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033076" start="3328" end="3344" title="Candlestick Park" label="Candlestick Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q912929" start="3370" end="3373" title="Super Bowl XVI" label="XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965838" start="3382" end="3385" title="Super Bowl XIX" label="XIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307150" start="3394" end="3399" title="Super Bowl XXIII" label="XXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064807" start="3408" end="3412" title="Super Bowl XXIV" label="XXIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064815" start="3421" end="3425" title="Super Bowl XXIX" label="XXIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="3512" end="3525" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="3551" end="3563" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262098" start="3660" end="3672" title="Chase Center" label="Chase Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q604015" start="3699" end="3709" title="Cow Palace" label="Cow Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909197" start="3712" end="3742" title="San Francisco Civic Auditorium" label="San Francisco Civic Auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q781955" start="3749" end="3771" title="The Sobrato Center" label="War Memorial Gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q261863" start="3774" end="3797" title="SAP Center" label="HP Pavilion at San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139021" start="3800" end="3812" title="Oracle Arena" label="Oracle Arena"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3819" end="3825" title="Golden State Warriors#Home arenas" label="others"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576696" start="3849" end="3853" title="1975 NBA Finals" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q19877916" start="3855" end="3859" title="2015 NBA Finals" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q29096468" start="3861" end="3865" title="2017 NBA Finals" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q54203445" start="3867" end="3871" title="2018 NBA Finals" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q112083544" start="3873" end="3877" title="2022 NBA Finals" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="3961" end="3968" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="3980" end="3989" title="San Diego, CA" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958436" start="4106" end="4117" title="Intuit Dome" label="Intuit Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927640" start="4143" end="4170" title="Buffalo Memorial Auditorium" label="Buffalo Memorial Auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106621" start="4173" end="4195" title="Pechanga Arena" label="San Diego Sports Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571403" start="4198" end="4231" title="Los Angeles Memorial Sports Arena" label="Los Angeles Memorial Sports Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q774138" start="4238" end="4252" title="Honda Center" label="Arrowhead Pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="4362" end="4371" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q186080" start="4455" end="4471" title="Crypto.com Arena" label="Crypto.com Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q125537911" start="4497" end="4519" title="Minneapolis Auditorium" label="Minneapolis Auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571403" start="4522" end="4555" title="Los Angeles Memorial Sports Arena" label="Los Angeles Memorial Sports Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q639129" start="4558" end="4567" title="The Forum (Inglewood, California)" label="The Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575074" start="4591" end="4595" title="1972 NBA Finals" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579314" start="4597" end="4601" title="1980 NBA Finals" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580529" start="4603" end="4607" title="1982 NBA Finals" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072478" start="4609" end="4613" title="1985 NBA Finals" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072482" start="4615" end="4619" title="1987 NBA Finals" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584557" start="4621" end="4625" title="1988 NBA Finals" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597667" start="4627" end="4631" title="2000 NBA Finals" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598928" start="4633" end="4637" title="2001 NBA Finals" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q4600307" start="4639" end="4643" title="2002 NBA Finals" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959941" start="4645" end="4649" title="2009 NBA Finals" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q644353" start="4651" end="4655" title="2010 NBA Finals" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q99624227" start="4657" end="4661" title="2020 NBA Finals" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="4704" end="4714" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="4740" end="4751" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011384" start="4885" end="4900" title="Golden 1 Center" label="Golden 1 Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q14704450" start="4926" end="4958" title="Kansas City Municipal Auditorium" label="Kansas City Municipal Auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7089414" start="4959" end="4981" title="Omaha Civic Auditorium" label="Omaha Civic Auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489399" start="4984" end="4996" title="Kemper Arena" label="Kemper Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653610" start="4999" end="5011" title="ARCO Arena (1985)" label="ARCO Arena I"/>
<link wikidata="Q93831" start="5014" end="5031" title="Sleep Train Arena" label="Sleep Train Arena"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5037" end="5043" title="Sacramento Kings#Home arenas" label="others"/>
<link wikidata="Q494690" start="5134" end="5140" title="Carson, California" label="Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q49614" start="5219" end="5226" title="moniker" label="moniker"/>
<link wikidata="Q200684" start="5239" end="5265" title="Dignity Health Sports Park" label="Dignity Health Sports Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q582280" start="5375" end="5384" title="Rose Bowl (stadium)" label="Rose Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587494" start="5390" end="5403" title="Titan Stadium (Cal State Fullerton)" label="Titan Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q577698" start="5423" end="5430" title="MLS Cup" label="MLS Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065079" start="5462" end="5485" title="Supporters&amp;#x27; Shield" label="Supporters&amp;#x27; Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q27192" start="5512" end="5536" title="Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup" label="Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q83335" start="5551" end="5573" title="CONCACAF Champions Cup" label="CONCACAF Champions Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q49614" start="5681" end="5688" title="moniker" label="moniker"/>
<link wikidata="Q22096111" start="5701" end="5712" title="BMO Stadium" label="BMO Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q577698" start="5756" end="5763" title="MLS Cup" label="MLS Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065079" start="5772" end="5795" title="Supporters&amp;#x27; Shield" label="Supporters&amp;#x27; Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q27192" start="5810" end="5834" title="Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup" label="Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="5888" end="5896" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="6101" end="6108" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q328313" start="6138" end="6152" title="Houston Dynamo FC" label="Houston Dynamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046470" start="6263" end="6274" title="PayPal Park" label="PayPal Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6282" end="6311" title="San Jose Earthquakes#Stadium" label="other venues for select games"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165358" start="6336" end="6351" title="CEFCU Stadium" label="Spartan Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q999392" start="6354" end="6371" title="Buck Shaw Stadium" label="Buck Shaw Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q577698" start="6426" end="6433" title="MLS Cup" label="MLS Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065079" start="6448" end="6471" title="Supporters&amp;#x27; Shield" label="Supporters&amp;#x27; Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="6523" end="6532" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q100272042" start="6615" end="6633" title="Snapdragon Stadium" label="Snapdragon Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="6806" end="6819" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262098" start="6888" end="6900" title="Chase Center" label="Chase Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="6993" end="7004" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q186080" start="7078" end="7094" title="Crypto.com Arena" label="Crypto.com Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q639129" start="7120" end="7129" title="The Forum (Inglewood, California)" label="The Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599223" start="7149" end="7153" title="2001 WNBA Championship" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q4600627" start="7155" end="7159" title="2002 WNBA Finals" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058782" start="7161" end="7165" title="2016 WNBL Finals" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="7247" end="7258" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q22096111" start="7327" end="7338" title="BMO Stadium" label="BMO Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587494" start="7346" end="7359" title="Titan Stadium (Cal State Fullerton)" label="Titan Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q102227732" start="7364" end="7382" title="NWSL Challenge Cup" label="NWSL Challenge Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="7486" end="7495" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q100272042" start="7564" end="7582" title="Snapdragon Stadium" label="Snapdragon Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825672" start="7608" end="7622" title="Torero Stadium" label="Torero Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="7679" end="7687" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046470" start="7756" end="7767" title="PayPal Park" label="PayPal Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5557822" start="7870" end="7890" title="Sports in California" label="Sports in California"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="60531" wikidata="Q234244" url="?curid=60531" title="Anna Leonowens">
<text>Anna Harriette Leonowens (born Ann Hariett Emma Edwards; 5 November 1831 – 19 January 1915) was an Anglo-Indian or Indian-born British travel writer, educator, and social activist.

She became well known with the publication of her memoirs, beginning with &quot;The English Governess at the Siamese Court&quot; (1870), which chronicled her experiences in Siam (modern Thailand), as teacher to the children of the Siamese King Mongkut. Leonowens&#x27;s own account was fictionalised in Margaret Landon&#x27;s best-selling novel &quot;Anna and the King of Siam&quot; (1944), as well as adaptations for other media such as Rodgers and Hammerstein&#x27;s 1951 musical &quot;The King and I&quot;.

During the course of her life, Leonowens also lived in Western Australia, Singapore and Penang, the United States, Canada and Germany. In later life, she was a lecturer of Indology and a suffragist. Among other achievements, she co-founded the Nova Scotia College of Art and Design.

==Early life and family==
Anna Leonowens&#x27;s mother, Mary Ann Glascott, married her father, Sergeant Thomas Edwards, a non-commissioned officer in the East India Company&#x27;s Corps of Sappers and Miners, on 15 March 1829 in St James&#x27;s Church, Tannah, Bombay Presidency, British India. Edwards was from London and a former cabinetmaker. Anna was born in Ahmednagar in the Bombay Presidency of Company-ruled India, on 5 November 1831, three months after the death of her father. While she was christened Ann Hariett Emma Edwards, Leonowens later changed Ann to &quot;Anna&quot; and Hariett to &quot;Harriette&quot; and ceased using her third given name (Emma).

Leonowens&#x27;s maternal grandfather, William Vawdrey (or Vaudrey) Glascott, was an English-born commissioned officer of the 4th Regiment, Bombay Native Infantry, in the Bombay Army. Glascott arrived in India in 1810, and was apparently married in 1815, although his wife&#x27;s name is not known. According to biographer Susan Morgan, the only viable explanation for the complete and deliberate lack of information regarding Glascott&#x27;s wife in official British records is that she &quot;was not European&quot;. Morgan suggests that she was &quot;most likely ... Anglo-Indian (of mixed race) born in India.&quot; Anna&#x27;s mother, Mary Anne Glascott, was born in 1815 or 1816.

For most of her adult life, Anna Leonowens had no contact with her family and took pains to disguise her origins by claiming that she had been born with the surname &quot;Crawford&quot; in Caernarfon, Wales, and giving her father&#x27;s rank as captain. By doing so, she protected not only herself but her children, who would have had greater opportunities if their possibly mixed-race heritage remained unknown. Investigations uncovered no record of her birth at Caernarfon, news which came as a shock to the town that had long claimed her as one of its most famous natives.

A few months after Anna&#x27;s birth, her mother remarried. The stepfather was Patrick Donohoe, an Irish Catholic corporal of the Royal Engineers. The family relocated repeatedly within Western India, following the stepfather&#x27;s regiment. In 1841, they settled in Deesa, Gujarat. Anna attended the Bombay Education Society&#x27;s girls school in Byculla (now a neighbourhood of Mumbai) that admitted &quot;mixed-race&quot; children whose military fathers were either dead or absent. Leonowens later said she had attended a British boarding school and had arrived in India, a supposedly &quot;strange land&quot; to her, only at the age of 15. Anna&#x27;s relationship with her stepfather, Donohoe, was not a happy one, and she later accused him of putting pressure on her, like her sister, to marry a much older man. In 1847, Donohoe was seconded as assistant supervisor of public works in Aden, Yemen. Whether the rest of the family went with him or stayed in India is unsure.

On 24 April 1845, Anna&#x27;s 15-year-old sister, Eliza Julia Edwards, married James Millard, a sergeant-major with the 4th Troop Artillery, Indian Army in Deesa. Anna served as a witness to this marriage. Their daughter, Eliza Sarah Millard, born in 1848 in India, married on 7 October 1864 in Surat, Gujarat, India. Her husband was Edward John Pratt, a 38-year-old British civil servant. One of their sons, William Henry Pratt, born 23 November 1887 upon their return to London, was better known by his stage name of Boris Karloff; Anna was thus his great-aunt. Anna Edwards never approved of her sister&#x27;s marriage, and her self-imposed separation from the family was so complete that, a decade later, when Eliza contacted her during her stay in Siam, she replied by threatening suicide if she persisted.

Leonowens later said she had gone on a three-year tour through Egypt and the Middle East with the orientalist Reverend George Percy Badger and his wife. However, recent biographies consider this episode to be fictitious. Anna may have met Badger in India and listened to or read reports about his travels.

==Marriage, Western Australia and widowhood==
Anna Edwards&#x27;s husband-to-be, Thomas Leon Owens, an Irish Protestant from Enniscorthy, County Wexford, went to India with the 28th Regiment of Foot in 1843. From a private, he rose to the position of paymaster&#x27;s clerk (rather than the army officer suggested by her memoir) in 1844, serving first in Poona, and from December 1845 until 1847 in Deesa. Biographer Alfred Habegger characterises him as &quot;well read and articulate, strongly opinionated, historically informed, and almost a gentleman&quot;. Anna Edwards, who was seven years his junior, fell in love with him. However, her mother and stepfather objected to the relationship, as the suitor had poor prospects for gainful employment, and had been temporarily downgraded from sergeant to private for an unspecified offense. Nevertheless, Anna and Thomas Leon Owens married on Christmas Day 1849 in the Anglican church of Poona. In the marriage certificate, Thomas merged his second and last names to &#x27;LeonOwens&#x27;. Patrick Donohoe signed the document as well, contradicting Leonowens&#x27;s account that her stepfather had violently opposed the marriage. She gave birth to her first daughter, Selina, in December 1850. The girl died at just seventeen months.

In 1852, the young couple, accompanied by Anna&#x27;s uncle, Glasscott, sailed to Australia via Singapore, where they boarded the barque . The journey from Singapore was long and, while on board, Anna gave birth to a son, also named Thomas. On 8 March 1853, nearing the Western Australian coast, the &quot;Alibi&quot; was almost wrecked on a reef. Ten days later, Anna, Thomas, their newborn son and Glasscott arrived in Perth. Glasscott and Thomas Leonowens quickly found employment as clerks in the colonial administration. Later in 1853, Glasscott accepted a position as government commissariat storekeeper at Lynton, a small and remote settlement that was the site of Lynton Convict Depot. Glasscott became involved in frequent disagreements with the abrasive resident magistrate, William Burges. Within three years, Glasscott had returned to India and taken up a career in teaching, before dying suddenly in 1856.

Anna Leonowens – using her middle name of Harriett – tried to establish a school for young ladies. In March 1854, the infant Thomas died at the age of 13 months, and, later that year, a daughter, Avis Annie, was born. In 1855, Thomas Leonowens was appointed to Glasscott&#x27;s former position with the commissariat at Lynton, and the family moved there. At Lynton, Anna Leonowens gave birth to a son, Louis. During late 1856, Thomas Leonowens also served briefly as magistrate&#x27;s clerk under William Burges. Like Glasscott, Thomas clashed with Burges but survived until the Convict Depot was closed in 1857, and he was transferred to a more senior position with the Commissariat in Perth.

The Leonowens family left Australia abruptly in April 1857, sailing to Singapore, and then moving to Penang, where Thomas found work as a hotel keeper. In or before the first week of May 1859, Thomas Leonowens died of &quot;apoplexy&quot; and was buried (7 May 1859) in the Protestant Cemetery in Penang. His death left Anna Leonowens an impoverished widow. Of their four children, two had died in infancy. She returned to Singapore, where she created a new identity as a Welsh-born lady and widow of a British army major. To support her surviving daughter Avis and son Louis, Leonowens again took up teaching and opened a school for the children of British officers in Singapore. While the enterprise was not a financial success, it established her reputation as an educator.

==Teacher at the Siamese court==
In 1862, Leonowens accepted an offer made by the consul in Singapore, Tan Kim Ching, to teach the wives and children of Mongkut, King of Siam. The king wished to give his 39 wives and concubines and 82 children a modern Western education on scientific secular lines, which earlier missionaries&#x27; wives had not provided. Leonowens sent her daughter Avis to school in England, and took her son Louis with her to Bangkok. She succeeded Dan Beach Bradley, an American missionary, as teacher to the Siamese court.
Leonowens served at court until 1867, a period of nearly six years, first as a teacher and later as language secretary for the King. Although her position carried great respect and even a degree of political influence, she did not find the terms and conditions of her employment to her satisfaction. And, despite her position at the king&#x27;s court, she was never invited into the social circle of the British merchants and traders of the area.

In 1868, Leonowens was on leave for her health in England and had been negotiating a return to the court on better terms when Mongkut fell ill and died. The King mentioned Leonowens and her son in his will, though they did not receive a legacy. The new monarch, fifteen-year-old Chulalongkorn, who succeeded his father, wrote Leonowens a warm letter of thanks for her services. He did not invite her to resume her post, but they corresponded amicably for many years. At the age of 27, Louis Leonowens returned to Siam and was granted a commission of Captain in the Royal Cavalry. Chulalongkorn made reforms for which his former tutor claimed some of the credit, including the abolition of the practice of prostration before the royal person. However, many of those same reforms were goals that had been established by his father.

==Literary career==
By 1869, Leonowens was in New York City, where she briefly opened a school for girls in the West New Brighton section of Staten Island, and she began contributing travel articles to a Boston journal, &quot;The Atlantic Monthly&quot;, including &quot;The Favorite of the Harem&quot;, reviewed by &quot;The New York Times&quot; as &quot;an Eastern love story, having apparently a strong basis of truth&quot;. She expanded her articles into two volumes of memoirs, beginning with &quot;The English Governess at the Siamese Court&quot; (1870), which earned her immediate fame but also brought charges of sensationalism. In her writing, she casts a critical eye over court life; the account is not always a flattering one, and has become the subject of controversy in Thailand, and she has also been accused of exaggerating her influence with the king.

There have also been claims of fabrication: the likelihood of the argument over slavery, for example, when King Mongkut was for 27 years a Buddhist monk and later abbot, before ascending to the throne. It is thought that his religious training and vocation would never have permitted the views expressed by Leonowens&#x27;s cruel, eccentric and self-indulgent monarch. Even the title of her memoir is inaccurate, as she was neither English nor did she work as a governess: Her task was to teach English, not to educate and care for the royal children comprehensively. Leonowens claimed to have spoken Thai fluently, but the examples of that language presented in her books are unintelligible, even if one allows for clumsy transcription.

Leonowens was a feminist, and in her writings she tended to focus on what she saw as the subjugated status of Siamese women, including those sequestered within the &quot;Nang Harm&quot;, or royal harem. She emphasised that although Mongkut had been a forward-looking ruler, he had desired to preserve customs such as prostration and sexual slavery that seemed unenlightened and degrading. The sequel, &quot;Romance of the Harem&quot; (1873), incorporates tales based on palace gossip, including the king&#x27;s alleged torture and execution of one of his concubines, Tuptim. The story lacks independent corroboration and is dismissed as out of character for the king by some critics. A great-granddaughter, Princess Vudhichalerm Vudhijaya (b. 21 May 1934), stated in a 2001 interview, &quot;King Mongkut was in the monk&#x27;s hood for 27 years before he was king. He would never have ordered an execution. It is not the Buddhist way.&quot; She added that the same Tuptim was her grandmother and had married Chulalongkorn as one of his minor wives. Moreover, there were no dungeons below the Grand Palace or anywhere else in Bangkok as the high ground-water level would not allow this. Nor are there any accounts of a public burning by other foreigners staying in Siam during the same period as Leonowens.

While in the United States, Leonowens also earned much-needed money through popular lecture tours. At venues such as the house of Mrs. Sylvanus Reed in Fifty-third Street, New York City, in the regular members&#x27; course at Association Hall, or under the auspices of bodies such as the Long Island Historical Society, she lectured on subjects including &quot;Christian Missions to Pagan Lands&quot; and &quot;The Empire of Siam, and the City of the Veiled Women&quot;. &quot;The New York Times&quot; reported: &quot;Mrs. Leonowens&#x27; purpose is to awaken an interest, and enlist sympathies, in behalf of missionary labors, particularly in their relation to the destiny of Asiatic women.&quot; She joined the literary circles of New York and Boston and made the acquaintance of local lights on the lecture circuit, such as Oliver Wendell Holmes, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow and Harriet Beecher Stowe, author of &quot;Uncle Tom&#x27;s Cabin&quot;, a book whose anti-slavery message Leonowens had brought to the attention of the royal household. She said the book influenced Chulalongkorn&#x27;s reform of slavery in Siam, a process he had begun in 1868, and which would end with its total abolition in 1915. Meanwhile, Louis had accumulated debts in the U.S. by 1874 and fled the country. He became estranged from his mother and did not see her for 19 years. In the summer of 1878, she taught Sanskrit at Amherst College.

==Canada and Germany==
In 1878, Leonowens&#x27;s daughter Avis Annie Crawford Connybeare married Thomas Fyshe, a Scottish banker and the cashier (general manager) of the Bank of Nova Scotia in Halifax, where she resided for nineteen years as she continued to travel the world. This marriage ended the family&#x27;s money worries. Leonowens resumed her teaching career and taught daily from 9 am to 12 noon for an autumn half at the Berkeley School of New York at 252 Madison Avenue, Manhattan, beginning on 5 October 1880; this was a new preparatory school for colleges and schools of science and her presence was advertised in the press. On behalf of &quot;The Youth&#x27;s Companion&quot; magazine, Leonowens visited Russia in 1881, shortly after the assassination of Tsar Alexander II, and other European countries, and continued to publish travel articles and books. This established her position as an orientalist scholar.

Having returned to Halifax, she again became involved in women&#x27;s education, and was a suffragist. She initiated a reading circle and a Shakespeare club, was one of the founders of the Local Council of Women of Halifax and the Victoria School of Art and Design (now the Nova Scotia College of Art and Design). From 1888 to 1893, Anna Leonowens lived with her daughter Avis and her grandchildren in Kassel, Germany. 

On her way back to Canada, she met her son Louis again, after nineteen years of separation. He had returned to Siam in 1881, had become an officer in the Siamese royal cavalry and a teak trader. From his marriage to Caroline Knox—a daughter of Sir Thomas George Knox, the British consul-general in Bangkok, and his Thai wife, Prang Yen—he had two children, aged two and five years. After the death of his wife, he entrusted them to his mother&#x27;s care, who took them with her to Canada, while Louis returned to Siam.

Anna Leonowens met Chulalongkorn again when both visited London in 1897, thirty years after she had left Siam. During this audience, the king took the opportunity to express his thanks in person, but he also voiced his dismay at the inaccuracies in Leonowens&#x27;s books. According to Leonowens&#x27; granddaughter Anna Fyshe, who had accompanied her, the king asked: &quot;why did you write such a wicked book about my father King Mongkut? You know that you have made him utterly ridiculous&quot;. In response, according to Fyshe, Leonowens insisted that she had written &quot;the whole truth&quot; and that Mongkut had indeed been &quot;a ridiculous and a cruel, wicked man&quot;. With her granddaughter Anna, Leonowens stayed in Leipzig, Germany, until 1901. She studied Sanskrit and classical Indian literature with the renowned Indology professor Ernst Windisch of Leipzig University, while her granddaughter studied piano at the Royal Conservatory of Music.
In 1901, she moved to Montreal, Quebec, where she lectured Sanskrit at McGill University. She delivered her last lecture at the age of 78. Anna Leonowens died on 19 January 1915, at 83 years of age. She was interred in Mount Royal Cemetery in Montreal. The headstone identifies her as the &quot;Beloved Wife of Major Thomas Lorne Leonowens&quot;, despite her husband never having risen beyond the rank of paymaster sergeant.

==In popular culture==
Margaret Landon&#x27;s novel &quot;Anna and the King of Siam&quot; (1944) provides a fictionalised look at Anna Leonowens&#x27;s years at the royal court and develops the abolitionist theme that resonated with her American readership. In 1946, Talbot Jennings and Sally Benson adapted it into the screenplay for a dramatic film of the same name, starring Irene Dunne and Rex Harrison. In response, Thai authors Seni and Kukrit Pramoj wrote their own account in 1948 and sent it to American politician and diplomat Abbot Low Moffat (1901–1996), who drew on it for his biography &quot;Mongkut, the King of Siam&quot; (1961). Moffat donated the Pramoj brothers&#x27; manuscript to the Library of Congress in 1961.
Landon had, however, created the iconic image of Leonowens, and &quot;in the mid-20th century she came to personify the eccentric Victorian female traveler&quot;. The novel was adapted as a hit musical by Rodgers and Hammerstein, &quot;The King and I&quot; (1951), starring Gertrude Lawrence and Yul Brynner, which ran 1,246 performances on Broadway and was also a hit in London and on tour. In 1956, a film version was released, with Deborah Kerr starring in the role of Leonowens and Brynner reprising his role as the king. Brynner starred in many revivals until his death in 1985.

The humorous depiction of Mongkut as a polka-dancing despot, as well as the king&#x27;s and Anna&#x27;s apparent romantic feelings for each other, is condemned as disrespectful in Thailand, where the Rodgers and Hammerstein film and musical were banned by the government. The 1946 film version of &quot;Anna and the King of Siam&quot;, starring Rex Harrison as Mongkut and Irene Dunne as Anna, was allowed to be shown in Thailand, although it was banned in newly independent India as an inaccurate insult by Westerners to an Eastern king. In 1950, the Thai government did not permit the film to be shown for the second time in Thailand. The books &quot;Romance in the Harem&quot; and &quot;An English Governess at the Siamese Court&quot; were not banned in Thailand. There were even Thai translations of these books by Ob Chaivasu, a Thai humor writer.

During a visit to the United States in 1960, the monarch of Thailand, King Bhumibol (a great-grandson of Mongkut), and his entourage explained that from what they could gather from the reviews of the musical, the characterisation of Mongkut seemed &quot;90 percent exaggerated. My great-grandfather was really quite a mild and nice man.&quot; Years later, during her 1985 visit to New York, Bhumibol&#x27;s wife, Queen Sirikit, went to see the Broadway musical at the invitation of Yul Brynner. The then ambassador of Thailand to the U.S. gave another reason for Thailand&#x27;s disapproval of &quot;The King and I&quot;: its ethno-centric attitude and its barely hidden insult to the whole Siamese nation by portraying its people as childish and inferior to the Westerners.

In 1972, Twentieth Century Fox produced a non-musical American TV series for CBS, &quot;Anna and the King&quot;, with Samantha Eggar taking the part of Leonowens and Brynner reprising his role as the king. Margaret Landon charged the makers with &quot;inaccurate and mutilated portrayals&quot; of her literary property and sued unsuccessfully for copyright infringement. The series was not a success and was cancelled after only 13 episodes. In 1999 an animated film using the songs of the musical was released by Warner Bros. Animation. In the same year, Jodie Foster and Chow Yun-fat starred in a new feature-length cinematic adaptation of Leonowens&#x27;s books, also titled &quot;Anna and the King&quot;. One Thai critic complained that the filmmakers had made Mongkut &quot;appear like a cowboy&quot;; this version was also banned by censors in Thailand.

Leonowens appears as a character in Paul Marlowe&#x27;s novel &quot;Knights of the Sea&quot;, in which she travels from Halifax to Baddeck in 1887 to take part in a campaign to promote women&#x27;s suffrage during a by-election.

==Later research==
Leonowens kept the actual facts of her early life a closely guarded secret throughout her life, and never disclosed them to anybody, including her family. They were uncovered by researchers long after her death; their scrutiny began with her writings, especially following the popularity of the musical&#x27;s 1956 film adaptation. D. G. E. Hall, writing in his 1955 book &quot;A History of South-East Asia&quot;, commented that Leonowens &quot;was gifted with more imagination than insight&quot;, and from 1957 to 1961 A. B. Griswold published several articles and a monograph sharply criticizing her depictions of King Mongkut and Siam, writing that &quot;she would seize on a lurid story that appealed to her... remove it from its context and transpose it to Bangkok in the 1860&#x27;s; and... re-write it with a wealth of circumstantial detail&quot;. Moffat noted in his biography of King Mongkut that Leonowens &quot;carelessly leaves proof of her transposed plagiarism&quot;.

The fact that Leonowens&#x27;s claimed birth in Caernarfon was fabricated was first uncovered by W. S. Bristowe, an arachnologist and frequent visitor to Thailand, who was researching a biography of her son Louis. Bristowe failed to locate Louis&#x27;s certificate of birth in London (as claimed by Anna), prompting further research that led to him identifying her origins in India. His findings were published in the 1976 book &quot;Louis and the King of Siam&quot;, and later writers have expanded on this line of research, including Leslie Smith Dow in &quot;Anna Leonowens: A Life Beyond The King and I&quot; (1991) and Susan Kepner in her 1996 paper &quot;Anna (and Margaret) and the King of Siam&quot;. More recent full-length scholarly biographies by Susan Morgan (&quot;Bombay Anna&quot;, 2008) and Alfred Habegger (&quot;Masked: The Life of Anna Leonowens, Schoolmistress at the Court of Siam&quot;, 2014) brought widespread attention to Leonowens&#x27;s actual life story.

==See also==
* Reginald Johnston—the Scottish tutor to Aisin-Gioro Puyi the last emperor of China. His story was also dramatised in films such as &quot;The Last Emperor&quot;.
* Joseph Caulfield James—the English tutor to King Vajiravudh of Siam
* Katharine Carl—an American painter and author at the court of the Empress Dowager Cixi of China
* Maria Guyomar de Pinha—Siamese woman of mixed Japanese-Portuguese-Bengali ancestry credited for having introduced new dessert recipes in Siamese cuisine at the Ayutthaya court, some of them influenced by Portuguese cuisine.

==Notes==
==References==
*Bristowe, W. S. &quot;Louis and the King of Siam&quot;, Chatto &amp; Windus, 1976, 
*Dow, Leslie Smith. &quot;Anna Leonowens: A Life Beyond The King and I&quot;, Pottersfield Press, 1992, 
*
*Morgan, Susan. &quot;Bombay Anna: The Real Story and Remarkable Adventures of the King and I Governess&quot;, University of California Press, 2008, 
*Seni Pramoj and Kukrit Pramoj. &quot;The King of Siam speaks&quot; 

==External links==

* Biography at the &quot;Dictionary of Canadian Biography Online&quot;
* 
* 
*Louis T. Leonowens (Thailand) Ltd., the company founded by Leonowens&#x27;s son
*(Thai) &quot;Anna Leonowens: Who says she&#x27;s a compulsive liar?&quot; – &quot;Art and Culture Magazine&quot;
*(Thai) &quot;Art and Culture Magazine&quot;, English translation here.
*(Thai) &quot;King Mongkut set up &#x27;secret mission&#x27; disguising Sir John and Anna, hid Laos in Khmer&quot; – &quot;Art and Culture Magazine&quot;
*(Thai) &quot;King Mongkut&#x27;s letters to Anna: When Madame Teacher plays political negotiator&quot; – &quot;Art and Culture Magazine&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q234244" start="0" end="24" title="Anna Leonowens" label="Anna Harriette Leonowens"/>
<link wikidata="Q234244" start="31" end="55" title="Anna Leonowens" label="Ann Hariett Emma Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q368125" start="99" end="111" title="Anglo-Indian" label="Anglo-Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001966" start="115" end="121" title="Company rule in India" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155700" start="355" end="359" title="Rattanakosin Kingdom" label="Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="368" end="376" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q312849" start="421" end="433" title="Mongkut" label="King Mongkut"/>
<link wikidata="Q465216" start="485" end="500" title="Margaret Landon" label="Margaret Landon"/>
<link wikidata="Q268796" start="533" end="558" title="Anna and the King of Siam (novel)" label="Anna and the King of Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275079" start="620" end="643" title="Rodgers and Hammerstein" label="Rodgers and Hammerstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431690" start="670" end="684" title="The King and I" label="The King and I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="748" end="765" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q376178" start="767" end="787" title="Straits Settlement" label="Singapore and Penang"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="793" end="806" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="808" end="814" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="819" end="826" title="German Empire" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q625510" start="865" end="873" title="Indology" label="Indology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131966" start="937" end="974" title="Nova Scotia College of Art and Design" label="Nova Scotia College of Art and Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q157696" start="1072" end="1080" title="Sergeant" label="Sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q158950" start="1099" end="1123" title="non-commissioned officer" label="non-commissioned officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="1131" end="1149" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q207749" start="1230" end="1236" title="Thane" label="Tannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741056" start="1309" end="1321" title="cabinetmaker" label="cabinetmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q223517" start="1340" end="1350" title="Ahmednagar" label="Ahmednagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q891827" start="1358" end="1375" title="Bombay Presidency" label="Bombay Presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001966" start="1379" end="1398" title="Company rule in India" label="Company-ruled India"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="1745" end="1765" title="commissioned officer" label="commissioned officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633830" start="1773" end="1809" title="Rajputana Rifles" label="4th Regiment, Bombay Native Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093057" start="1818" end="1829" title="Bombay Army" label="Bombay Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q368125" start="2216" end="2228" title="Anglo-Indian" label="Anglo-Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378555" start="2233" end="2243" title="mixed race" label="mixed race"/>
<link wikidata="Q428829" start="2522" end="2532" title="Caernarfon" label="Caernarfon"/>
<link wikidata="Q56019" start="2570" end="2574" title="military rank" label="rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q19100" start="2578" end="2585" title="captain (armed forces)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098650" start="3040" end="3055" title="Royal Engineers" label="Royal Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192618" start="3178" end="3183" title="Deesa" label="Deesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003979" start="3260" end="3267" title="Byculla" label="Byculla"/>
<link wikidata="Q627364" start="3787" end="3799" title="public works" label="public works"/>
<link wikidata="Q131694" start="3803" end="3807" title="Aden" label="Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="3809" end="3814" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771944" start="4267" end="4280" title="civil servant" label="civil servant"/>
<link wikidata="Q203219" start="4411" end="4424" title="Boris Karloff" label="Boris Karloff"/>
<link wikidata="Q476294" start="4803" end="4814" title="oriental studies" label="orientalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543327" start="4824" end="4843" title="George Percy Badger" label="George Percy Badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q987759" start="5137" end="5148" title="Enniscorthy" label="Enniscorthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q184599" start="5150" end="5164" title="County Wexford" label="County Wexford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632742" start="5189" end="5210" title="28th (North Gloucestershire) Regiment of Foot" label="28th Regiment of Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538" start="5367" end="5372" title="Pune" label="Poona"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="6379" end="6388" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="6393" end="6402" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183" start="6718" end="6723" title="Perth" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q29956065" start="6882" end="6894" title="commissariat" label="commissariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935854" start="6910" end="6916" title="Lynton, Western Australia" label="Lynton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931619" start="6969" end="6989" title="Lynton Convict Depot" label="Lynton Convict Depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315443" start="7061" end="7080" title="resident magistrate" label="resident magistrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428745" start="7082" end="7096" title="William Burges (Australian politician)" label="William Burges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871822" start="7619" end="7624" title="Louis T. Leonowens" label="Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188096" start="8013" end="8019" title="Penang" label="Penang"/>
<link wikidata="Q8264724" start="8136" end="8144" title="apoplexy" label="apoplexy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8509985" start="8186" end="8205" title="Old Protestant Cemetery, George Town" label="Protestant Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q207978" start="8772" end="8778" title="consul (representative)" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q16062332" start="8793" end="8806" title="Tan Kim Ching" label="Tan Kim Ching"/>
<link wikidata="Q312849" start="8843" end="8850" title="Mongkut" label="Mongkut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663787" start="8852" end="8864" title="Monarchy of Thailand" label="King of Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q188790" start="8907" end="8916" title="concubine" label="concubine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258534" start="8936" end="8960" title="liberal education" label="modern Western education"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485457" start="8964" end="8974" title="science education" label="scientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647484" start="8975" end="8982" title="secular education" label="secular"/>
<link wikidata="Q51647" start="9004" end="9022" title="Mission (Christian)" label="missionaries&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871822" start="9115" end="9124" title="Louis T. Leonowens" label="son Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="9137" end="9144" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158990" start="9160" end="9177" title="Dan Beach Bradley" label="Dan Beach Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134237" start="9229" end="9234" title="Noble court" label="court"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9810" end="9835" title="Mongkut#Death and legacy" label="Mongkut fell ill and died"/>
<link wikidata="Q158861" start="9963" end="9976" title="Chulalongkorn" label="Chulalongkorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113454" start="10389" end="10400" title="prostration" label="prostration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986057" start="10627" end="10644" title="West New Brighton, Staten Island" label="West New Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18432" start="10656" end="10669" title="Staten Island" label="Staten Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="10719" end="10725" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="10741" end="10761" title="The Atlantic Monthly" label="The Atlantic Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="10836" end="10854" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q427532" start="11135" end="11149" title="sensationalism" label="sensationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="11298" end="11306" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517986" start="12139" end="12147" title="first-wave feminism" label="feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q165853" start="12319" end="12324" title="harem" label="harem"/>
<link wikidata="Q875521" start="12456" end="12470" title="sexual slavery" label="sexual slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q854997" start="12938" end="12949" title="Bhikkhu" label="monk&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="13044" end="13052" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640404" start="13582" end="13615" title="53rd Street (Manhattan)" label="Fifty-third Street, New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974851" start="13718" end="13748" title="Brooklyn Historical Society" label="Long Island Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q319829" start="14257" end="14278" title="Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr." label="Oliver Wendell Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q152513" start="14280" end="14306" title="Henry Wadsworth Longfellow" label="Henry Wadsworth Longfellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q102513" start="14311" end="14332" title="Harriet Beecher Stowe" label="Harriet Beecher Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222" start="14350" end="14372" title="Uncle Tom&amp;#x27;s Cabin" label="Uncle Tom&amp;#x27;s Cabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="14393" end="14405" title="Abolitionism in the United States" label="anti-slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="14825" end="14833" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q49165" start="14837" end="14852" title="Amherst College" label="Amherst College"/>
<link wikidata="Q181634" start="14968" end="14976" title="Scottish people" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q22687" start="14977" end="14981" title="bank" label="bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q451476" start="15025" end="15044" title="Bank of Nova Scotia" label="Bank of Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141" start="15048" end="15055" title="Halifax Regional Municipality" label="Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532207" start="15287" end="15302" title="Berkeley School For Boys" label="Berkeley School"/>
<link wikidata="Q109849" start="15322" end="15347" title="Madison Avenue (Manhattan)" label="Madison Avenue, Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q428602" start="15393" end="15411" title="University-preparatory school" label="preparatory school"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776838" start="15513" end="15539" title="The Youth&amp;#x27;s Companion" label="The Youth&amp;#x27;s Companion"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="15574" end="15580" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83171" start="15625" end="15642" title="Alexander II of Russia" label="Tsar Alexander II"/>
<link wikidata="Q185387" start="15875" end="15885" title="suffragist" label="suffragist"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="15924" end="15935" title="William Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005697" start="15973" end="16006" title="Local Council of Women of Halifax" label="Local Council of Women of Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131966" start="16058" end="16095" title="Nova Scotia College of Art and Design" label="Nova Scotia College of Art and Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865" start="16186" end="16192" title="Kassel" label="Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="16316" end="16320" title="Siam" label="Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="16373" end="16380" title="cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q156938" start="16387" end="16391" title="teak" label="teak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424193" start="16453" end="16471" title="Thomas George Knox" label="Thomas George Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q207978" start="16485" end="16499" title="consul-general" label="consul-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="17459" end="17466" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q76535" start="17579" end="17593" title="Ernst Windisch" label="Ernst Windisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q154804" start="17597" end="17615" title="Leipzig University" label="Leipzig University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17662" end="17689" title="University of Music and Theatre Leipzig#History" label="Royal Conservatory of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="17713" end="17721" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q201492" start="17762" end="17779" title="McGill University" label="McGill University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457377" start="17910" end="17930" title="Mount Royal Cemetery" label="Mount Royal Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="17934" end="17942" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q465216" start="18140" end="18155" title="Margaret Landon" label="Margaret Landon"/>
<link wikidata="Q268796" start="18175" end="18200" title="Anna and the King of Siam (book)" label="Anna and the King of Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="18311" end="18323" title="Abolitionism in the United States" label="abolitionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3469973" start="18404" end="18416" title="Sally Benson" label="Sally Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q103076" start="18437" end="18447" title="screenplay" label="screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q563731" start="18454" end="18484" title="Anna and the King of Siam (film)" label="dramatic film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q230099" start="18495" end="18506" title="Irene Dunne" label="Irene Dunne"/>
<link wikidata="Q181887" start="18511" end="18523" title="Rex Harrison" label="Rex Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q714042" start="18551" end="18555" title="Seni Pramoj" label="Seni"/>
<link wikidata="Q959588" start="18560" end="18573" title="Kukrit Pramoj" label="Kukrit Pramoj"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013705" start="18654" end="18670" title="Abbot Low Moffat" label="Abbot Low Moffat"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="18822" end="18841" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="18981" end="18990" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275079" start="19056" end="19079" title="Rodgers and Hammerstein" label="Rodgers and Hammerstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431690" start="19087" end="19101" title="The King and I" label="The King and I"/>
<link wikidata="Q433053" start="19125" end="19142" title="Gertrude Lawrence" label="Gertrude Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q102813" start="19147" end="19158" title="Yul Brynner" label="Yul Brynner"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="19192" end="19200" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q27149" start="19254" end="19266" title="The King and I (1956 film)" label="film version"/>
<link wikidata="Q104146" start="19286" end="19298" title="Deborah Kerr" label="Deborah Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q153071" start="19475" end="19480" title="polka" label="polka"/>
<link wikidata="Q179352" start="19489" end="19495" title="Despotism" label="despot"/>
<link wikidata="Q563731" start="19739" end="19764" title="Anna and the King of Siam (film)" label="Anna and the King of Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q181887" start="19781" end="19793" title="Rex Harrison" label="Rex Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q230099" start="19809" end="19820" title="Irene Dunne" label="Irene Dunne"/>
<link wikidata="Q855252" start="20360" end="20373" title="Bhumibol Adulyadej" label="King Bhumibol"/>
<link wikidata="Q164518" start="20703" end="20716" title="Sirikit" label="Queen Sirikit"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="21075" end="21096" title="Twentieth Century Fox" label="Twentieth Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="21143" end="21146" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850640" start="21148" end="21177" title="Anna and the King (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Anna and the King&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q231385" start="21184" end="21198" title="Samantha Eggar" label="Samantha Eggar"/>
<link wikidata="Q467516" start="21519" end="21532" title="The King and I (1999 film)" label="animated film"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416804" start="21580" end="21602" title="Warner Bros. Animation" label="Warner Bros. Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41351" start="21622" end="21634" title="Jodie Foster" label="Jodie Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q181425" start="21639" end="21651" title="Chow Yun-fat" label="Chow Yun-fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q563743" start="21750" end="21767" title="Anna and the King" label="Anna and the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q932586" start="21811" end="21821" title="filmmakers" label="filmmakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152211" start="21963" end="21975" title="Paul Marlowe" label="Paul Marlowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057954" start="22143" end="22154" title="by-election" label="by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161026" start="22508" end="22521" title="D. G. E. Hall" label="D. G. E. Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312512" start="22696" end="22710" title="A. B. Griswold" label="A. B. Griswold"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568983" start="23256" end="23270" title="W. S. Bristowe" label="W. S. Bristowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q557192" start="24158" end="24175" title="Reginald Johnston" label="Reginald Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q185152" start="24198" end="24214" title="Aisin-Gioro Puyi" label="Aisin-Gioro Puyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q268218" start="24224" end="24240" title="emperor of China" label="emperor of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q212775" start="24295" end="24311" title="The Last Emperor" label="The Last Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282047" start="24321" end="24343" title="Joseph Caulfield James" label="Joseph Caulfield James"/>
<link wikidata="Q161389" start="24365" end="24388" title="Vajiravudh" label="King Vajiravudh of Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092556" start="24391" end="24405" title="Katharine Carl" label="Katharine Carl"/>
<link wikidata="Q47842" start="24457" end="24477" title="Empress Dowager Cixi" label="Empress Dowager Cixi"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="24481" end="24486" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924610" start="24489" end="24511" title="Maria Guyomar de Pinha" label="Maria Guyomar de Pinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="24512" end="24519" title="Thailand" label="Siamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q161652" start="24535" end="24543" title="Japanese people" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q178630" start="24544" end="24554" title="Portuguese people" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q402913" start="24555" end="24562" title="Bengali people" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q182940" start="24607" end="24614" title="dessert" label="dessert"/>
<link wikidata="Q219239" start="24615" end="24621" title="recipe" label="recipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q841984" start="24626" end="24641" title="Siamese cuisine" label="Siamese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="24649" end="24658" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q180817" start="24693" end="24711" title="Portuguese cuisine" label="Portuguese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q714042" start="25082" end="25093" title="Seni Pramoj" label="Seni Pramoj"/>
<link wikidata="Q959588" start="25098" end="25111" title="Kukrit Pramoj" label="Kukrit Pramoj"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="60533" wikidata="Q5014345" url="?curid=60533" title="CSS Scorpion">
<text>CSS &quot;Scorpion&quot; was a &quot;Squib&quot;-class torpedo boat that served in the Confederate States Navy during the American Civil War. Armed with a single spar torpedo, she originally served guard duty on the James River after being built in late 1864. Along with the rest of the James River Squadron, &quot;Scorpion&quot; moved downriver on January 23, 1865, and participated in the Battle of Trent&#x27;s Reach. After performing depth soundings near Union obstructions, &quot;Scorpion&quot; moved to get a lantern from the ironclad CSS &quot;Virginia II&quot;, but ran into a hawser and then ran aground. At 07:10 on the morning of January 24, Union fire struck the abandoned tender CSS &quot;Drewry&quot;, which then exploded. The force of the explosion swept &quot;Scorpion&quot; out of control downriver. An attempt to rescue her that night failed, and she was captured by Union forces.

==Construction and characteristics==
During the American Civil War, the Union blockade was slowly destroying the economy of the rebelling Confederate States of America. The first use of torpedo boats in attempting to break the blockade came in October 1863. The attack damaged a Union vessel, and the partial success led the Confederates to build additional torpedo boats. Multiple designs were used, including a group known as the &quot;Squib&quot;-class built at Richmond, Virginia. Lieutenant Hunter Davidson playing a significant role in the design.

CSS &quot;Scorpion&quot;, one of the &quot;Squib&quot;-class, was constructed in late 1864, and was long, had a beam of , and a depth of hold of . Tonnage for the class is unknown. The &quot;Squib&quot;-class ships were powered by two oscillating condensing engines, which had a diameter cylinder and a stroke, as well a single boiler. According to a Union engineer, she could go at &quot;a fair speed for a boat of her kind&quot;. Her crew of five or six operated steer gear that was located towards the front of the vessel. Her armament was a single spar torpedo mounted to a spar shaft that measured or long. The spar could be raised or lowered by the ship&#x27;s crew using a chain and tackle system. Thin plates of iron served as armor on the ships&#x27;s sides.

==Service history==

After construction, &quot;Scorpion&quot; entered Confederate service with the James River Squadron. Under the command of Lieutenant Edward Lakin, she performed guard duty in the James River. Beginning on January 23, 1865, the James River Squadron began an offensive against the Union supply depot at City Point, Virginia. To reduce the chance of collisions in the narrow river, the wooden vessels of the fleet were lashed to the ironclads. Overall, the Confederates had 11 ships present: three ironclads, three gunboats, three torpedo boats, and two tenders. &quot;Scorpion&quot; was towed by the tender CSS &quot;Torpedo&quot;, which was in turn lashed to the ironclad CSS &quot;Virginia II&quot;. Moving during the night, the Confederate vessels passed a Union shore position known as Fort Brady, which fired upon them. At around 09:00, the Confederate vessels reached Union obstructions in the river at Trent&#x27;s Reach.

&quot;Scorpion&quot; was then sent forward to perform depth sounding, with a pilot from &quot;Virginia II&quot; aboard. The pilot claimed that the channel was not open, but Charles Read, who commanded all of the torpedo boats in the James River Squadron, found that a passage could be made; the pilot may have become unnerved by Union shore fire. The ironclad CSS &quot;Fredericksburg&quot; then managed to clear the obstructions at around 01:30 on January 24. Read later took &quot;Scorpion&quot; to look for the gunboat CSS &quot;Hampton&quot;, but after not finding her, took the ship to &quot;Virginia II&quot; to get a lantern for lighting the passage. &quot;Virginia II&quot; had run aground, and the same fate had befallen the ironclad CSS &quot;Richmond&quot; as well. The tender CSS &quot;Drewry&quot; then ran aground trying to free &quot;Richmond&quot;. Moving towards &quot;Virginia II&quot;, &quot;Scorpion&quot; ran into a hawser strung between the former ship and the gunboat CSS &quot;Beaufort&quot;, losing her torpedo and spar in the process. Not long afterwards, she ran aground. The torpedo boat CSS &quot;Hornet&quot; then ran aground trying to free &quot;Scorpion&quot;. The Confederate vessels that were not aground withdrew upriver before daylight. At 06:55, the crew of &quot;Drewry&quot; was taken onto &quot;Richmond&quot;, and at 07:10, Union fire caused &quot;Drewry&quot; to explode. The force of the explosion knocked &quot;Scorpion&quot; downriver out of control; two men on board were killed and four others swept overboard. After dark on January 24, Read tried to take &quot;Beaufort&quot; downriver to rescue &quot;Scorpion&quot;, but as &quot;Beaufort&quot; could not be controlled due to a strong wind, and a smaller vessel was sent to &quot;Scorpion&quot;. &quot;Scorpion&quot; was found to have taken on water, and after the Union illuminated the area with a Drummond light, the efforts to rescue the vessel were abandoned. She was later captured by Union forces, and may have been burned.

==References==
==Sources==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5014345" start="0" end="18" title="CSS Scorpion" label="CSS &amp;quot;Scorpion"/>
<link wikidata="Q111334457" start="31" end="54" title="Squib-class torpedo boat" label="&amp;quot;Squib&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q324233" start="55" end="67" title="torpedo boat" label="torpedo boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124986" start="87" end="110" title="Confederate States Navy" label="Confederate States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="122" end="140" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784338" start="162" end="174" title="spar torpedo" label="spar torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q422487" start="216" end="227" title="James River" label="James River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872589" start="391" end="419" title="Battle of Trent&amp;#x27;s Reach" label="Battle of Trent&amp;#x27;s Reach"/>
<link wikidata="Q115691024" start="438" end="452" title="depth sounding" label="depth sounding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410980" start="532" end="540" title="ironclad" label="ironclad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014364" start="541" end="568" title="CSS Virginia II" label="CSS &amp;quot;Virginia II&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164761" start="585" end="591" title="hawser" label="hawser"/>
<link wikidata="Q14920473" start="601" end="612" title="ran aground" label="ran aground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317983" start="685" end="691" title="tender ship" label="tender"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014281" start="692" end="714" title="CSS Drewry" label="CSS &amp;quot;Drewry&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="948" end="966" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493703" start="972" end="986" title="Union blockade" label="Union blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="1038" end="1067" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q324233" start="1086" end="1098" title="torpedo boat" label="torpedo boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q111334457" start="1332" end="1355" title="Squib-class torpedo boat" label="&amp;quot;Squib&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="1365" end="1383" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q186024" start="1385" end="1395" title="Lieutenant" label="Lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376482" start="1567" end="1571" title="beam (nautical)" label="beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626877" start="1583" end="1596" title="depth of hold" label="depth of hold"/>
<link wikidata="Q491774" start="1602" end="1609" title="Tonnage" label="Tonnage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064978" start="1690" end="1720" title="oscillating engine" label="oscillating condensing engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q245656" start="1743" end="1751" title="cylinder (engine)" label="cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q671554" start="1758" end="1764" title="stroke (engine)" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195517" start="1783" end="1789" title="boiler" label="boiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784338" start="2007" end="2019" title="spar torpedo" label="spar torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949640" start="2323" end="2343" title="James River Squadron" label="James River Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q422487" start="2423" end="2434" title="James River" label="James River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123368" start="2545" end="2565" title="City Point, Virginia" label="City Point, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410980" start="2674" end="2682" title="ironclad" label="ironclad"/>
<link wikidata="Q214196" start="2756" end="2763" title="gunboat" label="gunboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317983" start="2795" end="2802" title="tender ship" label="tenders"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2849" end="2872" title="CSS Torpedo" label="CSS &amp;quot;Torpedo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014364" start="2915" end="2942" title="CSS Virginia II" label="CSS &amp;quot;Virginia II&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3151" end="3169" title="Trent&amp;#x27;s Reach" label="Trent&amp;#x27;s Reach"/>
<link wikidata="Q115691024" start="3226" end="3240" title="depth sounding" label="depth sounding"/>
<link wikidata="Q475604" start="3249" end="3254" title="maritime pilot" label="pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081955" start="3345" end="3357" title="Charles Read (naval officer)" label="Charles Read"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014286" start="3532" end="3562" title="CSS Fredericksburg" label="CSS &amp;quot;Fredericksburg&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014302" start="3694" end="3717" title="CSS Hampton" label="CSS &amp;quot;Hampton&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014338" start="3915" end="3939" title="CSS Richmond" label="CSS &amp;quot;Richmond&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014281" start="3960" end="3982" title="CSS Drewry" label="CSS &amp;quot;Drewry&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164761" start="4109" end="4115" title="hawser" label="hawser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014266" start="4163" end="4187" title="CSS Beaufort" label="CSS &amp;quot;Beaufort&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q111334457" start="4288" end="4310" title="CSS Hornet" label="CSS &amp;quot;Hornet&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q555987" start="5070" end="5084" title="Drummond light" label="Drummond light"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="60534" wikidata="Q213142" url="?curid=60534" title="Shilling">
<text>The shilling is a historical coin, and the name of a unit of modern currencies formerly used in the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, other British Commonwealth countries and Ireland, where they were generally equivalent to 12 pence or one-twentieth of a pound before being phased out during the 1960s and 1970s.

Currently the shilling is used as a currency in five east African countries: Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Somalia, and the &quot;de facto&quot; country of Somaliland. The East African Community additionally plans to introduce an East African shilling.

==History==


The word &quot;shilling&quot; comes from Anglo-Saxon phrase &quot;Scilling&quot;, a monetary term meaning literally &quot;twentieth of a pound&quot;, from the Proto-Germanic root skiljaną meaning literally &quot;to separate, split, divide&quot;, from (s)kelH- meaning &quot;to cut, split.&quot; The word &quot;Scilling&quot; is mentioned in the earliest recorded Germanic law codes, the Law of Æthelberht ().

The Germanic root of the term Shilling, (s)kelH-, has been theorized to come from a foreign currency; most probably the Phoenician shekel. Discoveries in 2019 of antique British tin off the coasts of Israel and Turkey has confirmed probable trade between the Middle East and the British Isles.

In origin, the word &quot;&quot; designated the &quot;solidus&quot; of Late Antiquity, the gold coin that replaced the aureus in the 4th century. The Anglo-Saxon &quot;scillingas&quot; of the 7th century were still small gold coins.

In 796, Charlemagne passed a monetary reform, based on the Carolingian silver pound (about 406.5 grams). The &quot;schilling&quot; was one-twentieth of a pound or about 20.3 grams of silver. One &quot;schilling&quot; had 12 &quot;denarii&quot; or &quot;deniers&quot; (&quot;pennies&quot;). There were, however, no silver &quot;schilling&quot; coins in the Carolingian period, and gold &quot;schillings&quot; (equivalent to twelve silver &quot;pfennigs&quot;) were very rare.

In the 12th century, larger silver coins of multiple &quot;pfennig&quot; weight were minted, known as &quot;denarii grossi&quot; or &quot;groschen&quot; (groats). These heavier coins were valued at between 4 and 20 of the silver &quot;denarii&quot;. In the late medieval period, states of the Holy Roman Empire began minting similar silver coins of multiple &quot;pfennig&quot; weight, some of them denominated as &quot;schilling&quot;.

In the 16th century, numerous different types of &quot;schilling&quot; were minted in Europe. The English shilling was a successor of the testoon coin first minted during the reign of Edward VI in 1551, which consisted of 92.5% &quot;sterling&quot; silver.

By the 17th century, further devaluation resulted in &quot;schillings&quot; in the Holy Roman Empire being minted in billon (majority base metal content) instead of silver, with 48 &quot;schillings&quot; to one &quot;Reichsthaler&quot;. The English (later British) shilling continued to be minted as a silver coin until 1946, although the silver content was debased from 1920 onwards.

==Countries==

===Unrecognized countries===

==British Isles==

===Kingdom of England===

A shilling was a coin used in England from the reign of Henry VII (or Edward VI around 1550). The shilling continued in use after the Acts of Union of 1707 created a new United Kingdom from the Kingdoms of England and Scotland, and under Article 16 of the Articles of Union, a common currency for the new United Kingdom was created.

===Kingdom of Scotland===
The term &quot;shilling&quot; () was in use in Scotland from early medieval times.

===Great Britain, then the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland===
The common currency for Great Britain, created in 1707 by Article 16 of the Articles of Union between England and Scotland, continued in use until decimalisation in 1971. During the Great Recoinage of 1816 (following the Acts of Union 1800 that united the Kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland), the mint was instructed to coin one troy pound (weighing 5760 grains or 373 g) of sterling silver (0.925 fine) into 66 shillings, or its equivalent in other denominations. This set the weight of the shilling at 87.2727 grains or 5.655 grams from 1816 until 1990, when it was demonetised in favour of a new smaller 5p coin of the same value.

At decimalisation in 1971, the shilling coin was superseded by the new five-pence piece, which initially was of identical size and weight and had the same value. Shillings remained in circulation until the five pence coin was reduced in size in 1991.

Three coins denominated in multiple shillings were also in circulation at this time. They were:
* the florin, two shillings (2/–), which adopted the value of 10 new pence (10p) at decimalisation;
* the half-crown, two shillings and sixpence (2/6) or one-eighth of a pound, which was abolished at decimalisation (otherwise it would have had the value of 12p);
* the crown (five shillings or one-fourth of a pound), the highest-denominated non-bullion UK coin in circulation at decimalisation (in practice, crowns were commemorative coins not used in everyday transactions).

===Irish shillings===
Between 1701 and the unification of the currencies in 1825, the Irish shilling was valued at 13 pence and known as the &quot;black hog&quot;, as opposed to the 12-pence English shillings which were known as &quot;white hogs&quot;.

In the Irish Free State and Republic of Ireland, the shilling coin was issued as (the Irish language equivalent). It was worth 1/20 of an Irish pound, and was interchangeable at the same value to the British coin, which continued to be used in Northern Ireland. The coin featured a bull on the reverse side. The first minting, from 1928 until 1941, contained 75% silver, more than the equivalent British coin. The pre-decimal Irish shilling coin (which was retained for some time after decimalisation) was withdrawn from circulation on 1 January 1993, when a smaller five-pence coin was introduced.

===Abbreviation and slang===

One abbreviation for shilling is s (for , see £sd). Often it was expressed by a solidus symbol () (which may have begun as a substitute for ) thus &#x27;1/9&#x27; means &quot;one shilling and ninepence&quot;. A price expressed as a number of shillings with no additional pence was often written as the number, a solidus and a dash: thus for example ten shillings was written &#x27;10/-&#x27;. Two shillings and sixpence (half a crown, or an eighth of a £) was written as &#x27;2/6&#x27;, rarely as &#x27;2s6d&#x27; (&#x27;d&#x27; being the abbreviation for , a penny). The shilling itself was equal to twelve pence. In the traditional pounds, shillings and pence system, there were 20 shillings per pound and 12 pence per shilling, making 240 pence in a pound.

Slang terms for the old shilling coins include &quot;bob&quot; and &quot;hog&quot;. While the derivation of &quot;bob&quot; is uncertain, John Camden Hotten in his 1864 &quot;Slang Dictionary&quot; says the original version was &quot;bobstick&quot; and speculates that it may be connected with Sir Robert Walpole.

==British Empire==
===Australian shillings===

Australian shillings, twenty of which made up one Australian pound, were first issued in 1910, with the Australian coat of arms on the reverse and King Edward VII on the face. The coat of arms design was retained through the reign of King George V until a new ram&#x27;s head design was introduced for the coins of King George VI. This design continued until the last year of issue in 1963. In 1966, Australia&#x27;s currency was decimalised and the shilling was replaced by a ten cent coin (Australian), where 10 shillings made up one Australian dollar.

The slang term for a shilling coin in Australia was &quot;deener&quot;. The slang term for a shilling as currency unit was &quot;bob&quot;, the same as in the United Kingdom.

After 1966, shillings continued to circulate, as they were replaced by ten-cent coins of the same size and weight.

===New Zealand shilling===
New Zealand shillings, twenty of which made up one New Zealand pound, were first issued in 1933 and featured the image of a Maori warrior carrying a taiaha &quot;in a warlike attitude&quot; on the reverse. In 1967, New Zealand&#x27;s currency was decimalised and the shilling was replaced by a ten-cent coin of the same size and weight. Ten-cent coins minted through the remainder of the 1960s included the legend &quot;ONE SHILLING&quot; on the reverse. Smaller ten-cent coins were introduced in 2006.

=== Maltese shillings ===
The shilling (, pl. &quot;xelini&quot;) was used in Malta, prior to decimalisation in 1972, and had a face value of five Maltese cents.

=== Ceylonese shillings ===
In British Ceylon, a shilling (, ) was equivalent to eight fanams. With the replacement of the rixdollar by the rupee in 1852, a shilling was deemed to be equivalent to half a rupee. On the decimalisation of the currency in 1969, a shilling was deemed to be equivalent to 50 Ceylon cents. The term continued to be used colloquially until the late 20th century.

===East African shillings===

The East African shilling was in use in the British colonies and protectorates of British Somaliland, Kenya, Tanganyika, Uganda and Zanzibar from 1920, when it replaced the rupee, until after those countries became independent, and in Tanzania after that country was formed by the merger of Tanganyika and Zanzibar in 1964. Upon independence in 1960, the East African shilling in the British Somaliland and the Somali somalo in the Trust Territory of Somalia were replaced by the Somali shilling.

In 1966, the East African Monetary Union broke up, and the member countries replaced their currencies with the Kenyan shilling, the Ugandan shilling and the Tanzanian shilling, respectively. Though all these currencies have different values at present, there were plans to reintroduce the East African shilling as a new common currency by 2009, although this has not come about.

=== North America ===

In the thirteen British colonies that became the United States in 1776, British money was often in circulation. Each colony issued its own paper money, with pounds, shillings, and pence used as the standard units of account. Some coins were minted in the colonies, such as the pine tree shilling in the Massachusetts Bay Colony. After the United States adopted the dollar as its unit of currency and accepted the gold standard, one British shilling was worth 24 US cents. Due to ongoing shortages of US coins in some regions, shillings continued to circulate well into the nineteenth century. Shillings are described as the standard monetary unit throughout the autobiography of Solomon Northup (1853) and mentioned several times in the Horatio Alger Jr. story &quot;Ragged Dick&quot; (1868). Prices in an 1859 advertisement in a Chicago newspaper were given in dollars and shillings.

In Canada, £sd currencies were in use both during the French period (New France livre) and after the British conquest (Canadian pound). Between the 1760s and 1840s in Lower Canada, both French and British-based pounds coexisted as units of account, the French livre being close in value to the British shilling. A variety of coinage circulated. By 1858, a decimal Canadian dollar came into use. Other parts of British North America decimalized shortly afterwards and Canadian confederation in 1867 passed control of currency to the federal government.

===Somali shilling===

The Somali shilling is the official currency of Somalia. It is subdivided into 100 &quot;cents&quot; (English), &quot;senti&quot; (Somali, also سنت) or &quot;centesimi&quot; (Italian).

The Somali shilling has been the currency of parts of Somalia since 1921, when the East African shilling was introduced to the former British Somaliland protectorate. Following independence in 1960, the somalo of Italian Somaliland and the East African shilling (which were equal in value) were replaced at par in 1962 by the Somali shilling. Names used for the denominations were cent, centesimo (plural: centesimi) and سنت (plurals: سنتيمات and سنتيما) together with shilling, scellino (plural: scellini) and شلن.

That same year, the &quot;Banca Nazionale Somala&quot; issued notes for 5, 10, 20 and 100 scellini/shillings. In 1975, the &quot;Bankiga Qaranka Soomaaliyeed&quot; (Somali National Bank) introduced notes for 5, 10, 20 and 100 shilin/shillings. These were followed in 1978 by notes of the same denominations issued by the &quot;Bankiga Dhexe Ee Soomaaliya&quot; (Central Bank of Somalia). 50 shilin/shillings notes were introduced in 1983, followed by 500 shilin/shillings in 1989 and 1000 shilin/shillings in 1990. Also in 1990 there was an attempt to reform the currency at 100 to 1, with new banknotes of 20 and 50 new shilin prepared for the redenomination.

Following the breakdown in central authority that accompanied the civil war, which began in the early 1990s, the value of the Somali shilling was disrupted. The Central Bank of Somalia, the nation&#x27;s monetary authority, also shut down operations. Rival producers of the local currency, including autonomous regional entities such as the Somaliland territory, subsequently emerged.

Somalia&#x27;s newly established Transitional Federal Government revived the defunct Central Bank of Somalia in the late 2000s. In terms of financial management, the monetary authority is in the process of assuming the task of both formulating and implementing monetary policy. Owing to a lack of confidence in the Somali shilling, the US dollar is widely accepted as a medium of exchange alongside the Somali shilling. Dollarization notwithstanding, the large issuance of the Somali shilling has increasingly fueled price hikes, especially for low value transactions. This inflationary environment, however, is expected to come to an end as soon as the Central Bank assumes full control of monetary policy and replaces the presently circulating currency introduced by the private sector.

===Somaliland shilling===
The Somaliland shilling is the official currency of Somaliland, a self-declared republic that is internationally recognised as an autonomous region of Somalia. The currency is not recognised as legal tender by the international community, and it currently has no official exchange rate. It is regulated by the Bank of Somaliland, Somaliland&#x27;s central bank. Although the authorities in Somaliland have attempted to bar usage of the Somali shilling, Somalia&#x27;s official currency is still in circulation in some regions.

===Other===
Elsewhere in the former British Empire, forms of the word &quot;shilling&quot; remain in informal use.
In Vanuatu and Solomon Islands, &quot;selen&quot; is used in Bislama and Pijin to mean &quot;money&quot;; in Malaysia, &quot;syiling&quot; (pronounced like &quot;shilling&quot;) means &quot;coin&quot;. In Egypt and Jordan the &quot;shillin&quot; () is equal to 1/20 (five &quot;qirshes&quot; — , ) of the Egyptian pound or the Jordanian dinar. In Belize, the term &quot;shilling&quot; is commonly used to refer to twenty-five cents.

==Other countries==

*The Austrian schilling was the currency of Austria between 1 March 1924 and 1938 and again between 1945 and 2002. It was replaced by the euro at a fixed parity of €1 = 13.7603 schilling. The schilling was divided into 100 groschen.
*In the principalities covering present Netherlands, Belgium and Luxemburg, the cognate term &quot;schelling&quot; was used as an equivalent &#x27;arithmetic&#x27; currency, a &#x27;solidus&#x27; representing 12 &#x27;denarii&#x27; or 1/20 &#x27;pound&#x27;, while actual coins were rarely physical multiples of it, but still expressed in these terms.
*Shillings were issued in the Scandinavian countries &quot;(skilling)&quot; until the Scandinavian Monetary Union of 1873, and in the city of Hamburg, Germany.
*In Poland &quot;szeląg&quot; was used.
*The &quot;soll&quot;, later the &quot;sou&quot;, both also derived from the Roman solidus, were the equivalent coins in France, while the sol (PEN) remains the currency of Peru.
*As in France, the Peruvian sol was originally named after the Roman solidus, but the name of the Peruvian currency is now much more closely linked to the Spanish word for the sun (&quot;sol&quot;). This helps explain the name of its temporary replacement, the inti, named for the Incan sun god.

==References==
==Further reading==
* Mays, James O. &quot;The Romance of the English Shilling&quot;, &quot;History Today&quot; (December 1971), Vol. 21 Issue 12, pp 848–855, online. Covers 1504 to 1971.

==External links==
* British Coins – information about British coins.
* The History of the Shilling</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q213142" start="4" end="12" title="Shilling" label="shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q8142" start="68" end="78" title="currency" label="currencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="100" end="114" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="116" end="125" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="127" end="138" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="146" end="166" title="British Commonwealth" label="British Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="181" end="188" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q234129" start="233" end="238" title="pence" label="pence"/>
<link wikidata="Q339180" start="261" end="266" title="Pound (currency)" label="pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q202882" start="397" end="402" title="Kenyan shilling" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589" start="404" end="412" title="Tanzanian shilling" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598" start="414" end="420" title="Ugandan shilling" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4603" start="422" end="429" title="Somali shilling" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q737384" start="471" end="481" title="Somaliland shilling" label="Somaliland"/>
<link wikidata="Q337456" start="487" end="509" title="East African Community" label="East African Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275499" start="545" end="566" title="East African shilling" label="East African shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="624" end="635" title="Anglo-Saxon language" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="742" end="756" title="Proto-Germanic" label="Proto-Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="762" end="770" title=":wikt:Reconstruction:Proto-Germanic/skiljaną" label="skiljaną"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="834" end="842" title=":wikt:Reconstruction:Proto-Indo-European/(s)kelH-" label="(s)kelH-"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="946" end="954" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184958" start="970" end="987" title="Law of Æthelberht" label="Law of Æthelberht"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1033" end="1041" title=":wikt:Reconstruction:Proto-Indo-European/(s)kelH-" label="(s)kelH-"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907080" start="1113" end="1130" title="Carthaginian coinage" label="Phoenician shekel"/>
<link wikidata="Q231455" start="1336" end="1355" title="Solidus (coin)" label="&amp;quot;solidus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q860641" start="1379" end="1388" title="gold coin" label="gold coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q476078" start="1407" end="1413" title="aureus" label="aureus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="1530" end="1541" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q187776" start="1746" end="1765" title="denarius" label="&amp;quot;denarii&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q526050" start="1769" end="1788" title="French denier" label="&amp;quot;deniers&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q165717" start="1965" end="1972" title="pfennig" label="pfennig"/>
<link wikidata="Q159505" start="2136" end="2144" title="groschen" label="groschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547176" start="2152" end="2157" title="Groat (coin)" label="groat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="2291" end="2308" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="2522" end="2528" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q25182621" start="2534" end="2550" title="Shilling (English coin)" label="English shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q83229" start="2620" end="2629" title="Edward VI of England" label="Edward VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="2777" end="2794" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q911380" start="2811" end="2817" title="billon (alloy)" label="billon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="2859" end="2865" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q15944605" start="2911" end="2923" title="Reichsthaler" label="Reichsthaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q675493" start="3226" end="3235" title="Henry VII of England" label="Henry VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q83229" start="3240" end="3249" title="Edward VI of England" label="Edward VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="3304" end="3325" title="Acts of Union of 1707" label="Acts of Union of 1707"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="3712" end="3725" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q682403" start="3764" end="3781" title="Treaty of Union" label="Articles of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704511" start="3835" end="3849" title="Decimal Day" label="decimalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599849" start="3870" end="3893" title="Great Recoinage of 1816" label="Great Recoinage of 1816"/>
<link wikidata="Q343100" start="3909" end="3927" title="Acts of Union 1800" label="Acts of Union 1800"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974806" start="4020" end="4030" title="troy pound" label="troy pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q31576" start="4066" end="4081" title="sterling silver" label="sterling silver"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4259" end="4270" title="Legal tender#Demonetization" label="demonetised"/>
<link wikidata="Q368743" start="4298" end="4300" title="Five pence (British coin)" label="5p"/>
<link wikidata="Q368743" start="4393" end="4413" title="British five pence coin" label="new five-pence piece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809396" start="4680" end="4686" title="Two shillings (British coin)" label="florin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551154" start="4780" end="4790" title="Half crown (British coin)" label="half-crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141751" start="4943" end="4948" title="Crown (British coin)" label="crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="5238" end="5243" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="5413" end="5429" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="5434" end="5453" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7496667" start="5459" end="5472" title="Shilling (Irish coin)" label="shilling coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="5492" end="5506" title="Irish language" label="Irish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q270642" start="5544" end="5555" title="Irish pound" label="Irish pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="5650" end="5666" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q123344782" start="6082" end="6085" title="£sd" label="£sd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684340" start="6116" end="6130" title="solidus (punctuation)" label="solidus symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593203" start="6307" end="6312" title="Penny (British pre-decimal coin)" label="pence"/>
<link wikidata="Q123344782" start="6671" end="6698" title="£sd" label="pounds, shillings and pence"/>
<link wikidata="Q14981941" start="6936" end="6954" title="John Camden Hotten" label="John Camden Hotten"/>
<link wikidata="Q104190" start="7092" end="7110" title="Sir Robert Walpole" label="Sir Robert Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="7160" end="7169" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q783373" start="7210" end="7226" title="Australian pound" label="Australian pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="7275" end="7287" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="7312" end="7322" title="Edward VII" label="Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="7399" end="7407" title="George V" label="George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="7480" end="7489" title="George VI" label="George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q385545" start="7590" end="7601" title="decimalisation" label="decimalised"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7637" end="7663" title="ten cent coin (Australian)" label="ten cent coin (Australian)"/>
<link wikidata="Q259502" start="7696" end="7713" title="Australian dollar" label="Australian dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="7875" end="7889" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="8035" end="8046" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887019" start="8086" end="8103" title="New Zealand pound" label="New Zealand pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q385545" start="8282" end="8293" title="decimalisation" label="decimalised"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="8617" end="8622" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q385545" start="8633" end="8647" title="decimalisation" label="decimalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q58093" start="8694" end="8699" title="Cent (currency)" label="cents"/>
<link wikidata="Q918153" start="8733" end="8747" title="British Ceylon" label="British Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543447" start="8789" end="8795" title="Madras fanam" label="fanams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057988" start="8825" end="8834" title="Ceylonese rixdollar" label="rixdollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q178843" start="8842" end="8847" title="rupee" label="rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275499" start="9126" end="9147" title="East African shilling" label="East African shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="9166" end="9173" title="uK" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q133156" start="9174" end="9182" title="colony" label="colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="9187" end="9199" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q662653" start="9204" end="9222" title="British Somaliland" label="British Somaliland"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="9224" end="9229" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q158725" start="9231" end="9241" title="Tanganyika (territory)" label="Tanganyika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="9243" end="9249" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774" start="9254" end="9262" title="Zanzibar" label="Zanzibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q178843" start="9295" end="9300" title="rupee" label="rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="9357" end="9365" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q662653" start="9506" end="9524" title="British Somaliland" label="British Somaliland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273865" start="9533" end="9546" title="Somali somalo" label="Somali somalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q616221" start="9554" end="9580" title="Trust Territory of Somalia" label="Trust Territory of Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4603" start="9602" end="9617" title="Somali shilling" label="Somali shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q202882" start="9731" end="9746" title="Kenyan shilling" label="Kenyan shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598" start="9752" end="9768" title="Ugandan shilling" label="Ugandan shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589" start="9777" end="9795" title="Tanzanian shilling" label="Tanzanian shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275499" start="9909" end="9930" title="East African shilling" label="East African shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="10030" end="10055" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="thirteen British colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029329" start="10158" end="10173" title="early American currency" label="own paper money"/>
<link wikidata="Q123344782" start="10180" end="10208" title="£sd" label="pounds, shillings, and pence"/>
<link wikidata="Q747699" start="10230" end="10246" title="units of account" label="units of account"/>
<link wikidata="Q104848673" start="10296" end="10318" title="the pine tree shilling" label="the pine tree shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="10326" end="10350" title="Massachusetts Bay Colony" label="Massachusetts Bay Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q14083" start="10388" end="10394" title="dollar" label="dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q173509" start="10436" end="10449" title="gold standard" label="gold standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q58093" start="10488" end="10493" title="cent (currency)" label="cents"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489578" start="10702" end="10717" title="Solomon Northup" label="Solomon Northup"/>
<link wikidata="Q453251" start="10760" end="10777" title="Horatio Alger Jr." label="Horatio Alger Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7282890" start="10790" end="10801" title="Ragged Dick" label="Ragged Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="10912" end="10918" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007692" start="10978" end="10994" title="New France livre" label="New France livre"/>
<link wikidata="Q429230" start="11010" end="11026" title="Conquest of New France (1758–1760)" label="British conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328829" start="11028" end="11042" title="Canadian pound" label="Canadian pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134180" start="11076" end="11088" title="Lower Canada" label="Lower Canada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11273" end="11288" title="Canadian dollar#History" label="Canadian dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q248452" start="11319" end="11340" title="British North America" label="British North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="11376" end="11398" title="Canadian confederation" label="Canadian confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8142" start="11521" end="11529" title="currency" label="currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="11533" end="11540" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275499" start="11754" end="11775" title="East African shilling" label="East African shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q662653" start="11805" end="11823" title="British Somaliland" label="British Somaliland"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="11824" end="11836" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273865" start="11874" end="11880" title="Somali somalo" label="somalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q319984" start="11884" end="11902" title="Italian Somaliland" label="Italian Somaliland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299534" start="12550" end="12573" title="Central Bank of Somalia" label="Central Bank of Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q243620" start="12916" end="12925" title="Somali Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q34754" start="13191" end="13201" title="Somaliland" label="Somaliland"/>
<link wikidata="Q332065" start="13269" end="13300" title="Transitional Federal Government" label="Transitional Federal Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907597" start="13656" end="13669" title="Dollarization" label="Dollarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q737384" start="14056" end="14075" title="Somaliland shilling" label="Somaliland shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q34754" start="14104" end="14114" title="Somaliland" label="Somaliland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059108" start="14182" end="14199" title="States and regions of Somalia" label="autonomous region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="14203" end="14210" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643989" start="14246" end="14258" title="legal tender" label="legal tender"/>
<link wikidata="Q66100" start="14324" end="14337" title="exchange rate" label="exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q797484" start="14362" end="14380" title="Bank of Somaliland" label="Bank of Somaliland"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="14400" end="14412" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="14698" end="14705" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="14710" end="14725" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q35452" start="14756" end="14763" title="Bislama" label="Bislama"/>
<link wikidata="Q36699" start="14768" end="14773" title="Pijin language" label="Pijin"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="14804" end="14812" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="14900" end="14905" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="14910" end="14916" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q199462" start="15000" end="15014" title="Egyptian pound" label="Egyptian pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q203722" start="15022" end="15037" title="Jordanian dinar" label="Jordanian dinar"/>
<link wikidata="Q242" start="15042" end="15048" title="Belize" label="Belize"/>
<link wikidata="Q208730" start="15155" end="15173" title="Austrian schilling" label="Austrian schilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="15288" end="15292" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q159505" start="15373" end="15381" title="groschen" label="groschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441769" start="15795" end="15803" title="Skilling (Scandinavian monetary unit)" label="skilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q60812" start="15821" end="15848" title="Scandinavian Monetary Union" label="Scandinavian Monetary Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="15877" end="15884" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="15899" end="15905" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q231455" start="16018" end="16025" title="solidus (coin)" label="solidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="16056" end="16062" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q204656" start="16074" end="16077" title="Peruvian sol" label="sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="16108" end="16112" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531048" start="16375" end="16379" title="Peruvian inti" label="inti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122657" start="16395" end="16400" title="Andean civilizations" label="Incan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="60536" wikidata="Q2661460" url="?curid=60536" title="Geography of California">
<text>California is a U.S. state on the western coast of North America. Covering an area of , California is among the most geographically diverse states. The Sierra Nevada, the fertile farmlands of the Central Valley, and the arid Mojave Desert of the south are some of the geographic features of this U.S. state. It is home to some of the world&#x27;s most exceptional trees: the tallest (coast redwood), most massive (Giant Sequoia), and oldest (bristlecone pine). It is also home to both the highest (Mount Whitney) and lowest (Death Valley) points in the 48 contiguous states.

The state is generally divided into Northern and Southern California, although the boundary between the two is not well defined. San Francisco is decidedly a Northern California city and Los Angeles is a Southern California one but areas in between do not often share their confidence in geographic identity. The US Geological Survey defines the geographic center of California about 7.1 miles (11.4 km) driving distance from the United States Forest Service office in the community of North Fork. Earth scientists typically divide the state into eleven geomorphic provinces with clearly defined boundaries. They are, from north to south, the Klamath Mountains, the Cascade Range, the Modoc Plateau, the Basin and Range, the Coast Ranges, the Central Valley, the Sierra Nevada, the Transverse Ranges, the Mojave Desert, the Peninsular Ranges, and the Colorado Desert.

==State boundaries==
The boundaries of California were defined by Spanish claims of Mexico, as part of the province of Alta California. The northern boundary of Spanish claims was set at 42 degrees latitude by the Adams–Onis Treaty of 1819. The states of Nevada and Utah, also originally part of Alta California, also use that line for their northern boundaries. The southern boundary, between California and Mexico, was established by the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo that ended the Mexican–American War in 1848. The line is about north of the former Alta California southern boundary. The eastern boundary consists of two straight lines: a north–south line from the northern border to the middle of Lake Tahoe, and a second line angling southeast to the Colorado River. From that point, south-southwest of Davis Dam on Lake Mohave, the southeast boundary follows the Colorado River to the international border west of Yuma, Arizona. The eastern and south-eastern boundaries were decided upon during the debates of the California Constitutional Convention in 1849.

==Northern California==

Northern California usually refers to the state&#x27;s northernmost 48 counties.

The main population centers of Northern California include San Francisco Bay Area (which includes the cities of San Francisco, Oakland, and the largest city of the region, San Jose), and Sacramento (the state capital) as well as its metropolitan area. It also contains redwood forests, along with the Sierra Nevada including Yosemite Valley and Lake Tahoe, Mount Shasta (the second-highest peak in the Cascade Range after Mount Rainier in Washington), and the northern half of the Central Valley, one of the world&#x27;s most productive agricultural regions. The climate can be generally characterized by its marine to warm Mediterranean climates along the coast, to a somewhat continental Mediterranean climate in the valley to alpine climate zones in the high mountains. Apart from the San Francisco Bay Area and Sacramento metropolitan areas (and some other cities in the Central Valley), it is a region of relatively low population density. Northern California&#x27;s economy is noted for being the de facto world leader in industries such as high technology (both software and semiconductor), as well as being known for clean power, biomedical, government, and finance.

===Klamath Mountains===

The Klamath Mountains are a range in northwest California and southwest Oregon, the highest peak being Mount Eddy in Trinity County, California, at . The range has a varied geology, with substantial areas of serpentine and marble. The climate is characterized by moderately cold winters with heavy snowfall and warm, very dry summers with limited rainfall. As a consequence of the geology, the mountains have a unique flora, including several endemic or near-endemic species, such as Lawson&#x27;s Cypress (Chamaecyparis lawsoniana) and Foxtail Pine (Pinus balfouriana). Brewer&#x27;s Spruce &quot;(Picea breweriana)&quot; and Kalmiopsis &quot;(Kalmiopsis leachiana)&quot; are relict species, remaining since the last ice age.

===Cascade Range===

The Cascade Range is a mountainous region stretching from the Fraser River in British Columbia, Canada down to south of Lassen Peak, California. The Cascades (as they are called for short) are part of the Pacific Ring of Fire, the ring of volcanoes around the Pacific Ocean. All of the known historic eruptions in the contiguous United States have been from either Cascade volcanoes or near Mono Lake. Lassen Peak was the last Cascade volcano to erupt in California, from 1914 to 1921. Lassen is the most southerly active volcano of the Cascade chain.

This region is located in the northeastern section of the state bordering Oregon and Nevada, mostly north of the Central Valley and the Sierra Nevada mountain range. The area is centered on Mount Shasta, near the Trinity Alps. Mount Shasta is a dormant volcano, but there is some evidence that it erupted in the 18th century.

===Modoc Plateau===
In the northeast corner of the state lies the Modoc Plateau, an expanse of lava flows that formed a million years ago and now lie at an altitude of . The plateau has many cinder cones, juniper flats, pine forests, and seasonal lakes. The plateau lies between the Cascade Range to the west and the Warner Mountains to the east. The Lost River watershed drains the north part of the plateau, while southern watersheds either collect in basin reservoirs or flow into Big Sage Reservoir and thence to the Pit River.

Nine percent of the plateau is protected as reserves or wilderness areas, such as the Modoc National Wildlife Refuge. The plateau supports large herds of mule deer (&quot;Odocoileus hemionus&quot;), Rocky Mountain Elk (&quot;Cervus canadensis&quot;), and pronghorn (&quot;Antilocapra americana&quot;). Herds of wild horses and livestock grazing have altered the original high desert ecosystem of the plateau.

===Basin and Range===

To the east of the Sierra is the Basin and Range geological province, which extends into Nevada. The Basin and Range is a series of mountains and valleys (specifically horsts and grabens), caused by the extension of the Earth&#x27;s crust. One notable feature of the Basin and Range is Mono Lake, which is the oldest lake in North America. The Basin and Range also contains the Owens Valley, the deepest valley in North America (more than 10,000 feet (3 km) deep, as measured from the top of Mount Whitney).

In the eastern part of the state, below the Sierra Nevada, there is a series of dry lake beds that were filled with water during the last ice age (fed by ice melt from alpine glaciers but never directly affected by glaciation; see pluvial). Many of these lakes have extensive evaporite deposits that contain a variety of different salts. In fact, the salt sediments of many of these lake beds have been mined for many years for various salts, most notably borax (this is most famously true for Owens Lake and Death Valley).

In this province reside the White Mountains, which are home to the oldest living organism in the world, the bristlecone pine

===Coast Ranges===
To the west of the Central Valley lies the Coast Ranges, including the Diablo Range, just east of San Francisco, and the Santa Cruz Mountains, to the south of San Francisco. The Coast Ranges north of San Francisco become increasingly foggy and rainy. These mountains are noted for their coast redwoods, the tallest trees on earth, which live within the range of the coastal fog.

===Central Valley===
California&#x27;s geography is largely defined by its central feature—the Central Valley, a huge, fertile valley between the coastal mountain ranges and the Sierra Nevada. The northern part of the Central Valley is called the Sacramento Valley, after its main river, and the southern part is called the San Joaquin Valley , after its main river. The whole Central Valley is watered by mountain-fed rivers (notably the San Joaquin, Kings, and Sacramento) that drain to the San Francisco Bay system. The rivers are sufficiently large and deep that several inland cities, notably Stockton, and Sacramento are seaports.

The southern tip of the valley has interior drainage and thus is not technically part of the valley at all. Tulare Lake, with an area of , once filled much of the area. In modern times, it is usually a dry lake and partially covered with agricultural fields. The lake reappears during unusually high levels of rainfall or snow melt such as the winter of 2022 and early spring of 2023.

===Sierra Nevada===

In the east of the state lies the Sierra Nevada, which runs north–south for . The highest peak in the contiguous United States, Mount Whitney at 14,505 feet (4.42 km), lies within the Sierra Nevada. The topography of the Sierra is shaped by uplift and glacial action.

The Sierra has 200–250 sunny days each year, warm summers, fierce winters, and varied terrain, a rare combination of rugged variety and pleasant weather. The famous Yosemite Valley lies in the Central Sierra. The large, deep freshwater Lake Tahoe lies to the North of Yosemite. The Sierra is also home to the Giant Sequoia, the most massive trees on Earth.

The most famous hiking and horse-packing trail in the Sierra is the John Muir Trail, which goes from the top of Mt. Whitney to Yosemite valley. This is part of the Pacific Crest Trail that goes from Mexico to Canada. The three major national parks in this province are Yosemite National Park, Kings Canyon National Park, and Sequoia National Park.

==Southern California==

The term Southern California usually refers to the ten southernmost counties which closely match the lower one-third of California&#x27;s span of latitude. This definition coincides neatly with the county lines at 35° 47′ 28″ north latitude, which form the northern borders of San Luis Obispo, Kern, and San Bernardino counties. Another definition for Southern California uses the Transverse Ranges as geographic landmarks for the northern boundary.

Southern California consists of a heavily developed urban environment, home to some of the largest urban areas in the state, along with vast areas that have been left undeveloped. With over 22 million people, roughly 60% of California&#x27;s population resides in Southern California. It is the second-largest urbanized region in the United States, second only to the Washington/Philadelphia/New York/Boston Northeastern Megalopolis. Where these cities are dense, with major downtown populations and significant rail and transit systems, much of Southern California is famous for its large, spread-out, suburban communities and use of automobiles and highways. The dominant areas are Los Angeles, Orange County, San Diego, and Riverside-San Bernardino, each of which is the center of its respective metropolitan area, composed of numerous smaller cities and communities. The urban area is also host to an international metropolitan region in the form of San Diego–Tijuana, created by the urban area spilling over into Baja California.

Southern California is noted for industries including the film industry, residential construction, entertainment industry, and military aerospace. Other industries include software, automotive, ports, finance, tourism, biomedical, and regional logistics.

===Transverse Ranges===

Southern California is separated from the rest of the state by the east–west trending Transverse Ranges. The Transverse Ranges include a series of east–west trending mountain ranges that extend from Point Conception, at the western tip of Santa Barbara County, eastward (and a bit south) to the east end of the San Jacinto Mountains in western Riverside County.

The Santa Ynez Mountains make up the westernmost ranges, extending from Point Conception to the Ventura River just west-northwest of Ojai in Ventura County. Pine Mountain Ridge, Nordhoff Ridge–Topatopa Mountains, Rincon Peak–Red Mountain, Sulphur Mountain, Santa Paula Ridge, South Mountain–Oat Mountain–Santa Susana Mountains, Simi Hills, Conejo Mountains–Santa Monica Mountains are all part of the Western Transverse Ranges in Ventura and western Los Angeles counties. The Transverse Ranges also include the Tehachapi Mountains, which separate the Central Valley from the Mojave Desert.

The Liebre Mountains occupy the northwest corner of Los Angeles County, and represent a northwestern extension of the San Gabriel Mountains, both on the Pacific plate side of the San Andreas Fault. The fault divides the San Gabriel Mountains from the San Bernardino Mountains further to the east in San Bernardino County.

Urban Southern California occupies the valleys between the Santa Susana Mountains, Santa Monica Mountains and San Gabriel Mountains, which range from the Pacific Coast, eastward over , to the San Bernardino Mountains, north of San Bernardino. The highest point of the range is Mount San Gorgonio at . The San Gabriel Mountains have Mount Wilson observatory, where the redshift was discovered in the 1920s.

It is possible to surf in the Pacific Ocean and ski on a mountain during the same winter day in Southern California.

===Mojave Desert===
There are harsh deserts in the Southeast of California. These deserts are caused by a combination of the cold offshore current, which limits evaporation, and the rain shadow of the mountains. The prevailing winds blow from the ocean inland. When the air passes over the mountains, adiabatic cooling causes most water in the air to rain on the mountains. When the air returns to sea level on the other side of the mountains, it recompresses, warms and dries, parching the deserts. When the wind blows from inland, the resulting hot dry katabatic winds are called the Santa Ana Winds.

The Mojave Desert is bounded by the peninsular Tehachapi Mountains on the Northwest, together with the San Gabriel and the San Bernardino Mountains on the Southwest. These Western boundaries are quite distinct, forming the dominant pie-slice shaped Antelope Valley in Southern California. The outlines of this valley are caused by the two largest faults in California: the San Andreas and the Garlock. The Mojave Desert extends Eastward into the State of Nevada. The Mojave Desert receives less than 6 inches (150 mm) of rain a year and is generally between 3,000 and 6,000 feet (1,000 and 2,000 m) of elevation. Areas such as the Antelope Valley desert which is a high desert received snow each year, in the past it could snow 2–3 times a year; however, recently snow level has declined significantly to once a year or less. Most of the towns and cities in the California portion of the Mojave are relatively small, except for Palmdale and Lancaster. However, some are quite famous like Barstow, a popular stop on the famous U.S. Route 66. The Mojave Desert also contains the lowest, hottest place in the Americas: Death Valley, where temperature normally approaches 120 °F (49 °C), in late July and early August.

===Peninsular Ranges===
The southernmost mountains of California are the Peninsular Ranges, which are east of San Diego and continue into Baja California (Mexico) in the Sierra San Pedro Martir. The Peninsular Ranges contain the Laguna Mountains, the San Jacinto Mountains, the Santa Rosa Mountains, the Santa Ana Mountains and the Palomar Mountain Range, notable for its famous Palomar observatory. San Jacinto Peak&#x27;s eastern shoulder has a cable tram that runs from the desert floor to nearly the top of the mountain where riders can set off hiking or go cross-country skiing.

===Colorado Desert===

To the east of the peninsular ranges lie the Colorado and Sonoran Deserts, which extend into Arizona and Mexico.

The ground elevation is generally lower and in some areas was compressed downward, therefore the eastern Coachella and Imperial Valleys north of the U.S.-Mexican border are below sea level. The lowest community in the U.S. is Calipatria, California, at below sea level.

One feature of the desert is the Salton Sea, an inland lake that was formed in 1905 when a swollen Colorado River breached a canal near the U.S.-Mexico border and flowed into the Salton Sink (Salton Basin) for almost two years. Today, the Salton Sea, a new version of historic Lake Cahuilla, remains as California&#x27;s largest lake.

==Pacific Ocean==
The Pacific Ocean lies to the west of California. Owing to the long length of the state, Sea temperatures generally range from 50 °F (10 °C) in the northernmost parts during winter to 70 °F (21 °C) in the south coast during summer. The lower seasonal temperature variance compared to the waters of the East Coast is because of up-welling deep waters with dissolved nutrients. Therefore, sea life in and around California has examples of both Arctic and tropical, biotopes, leaning more towards the latter in the south coast and vice versa. The sea off California is remarkably fertile, a murky green filled with a massive variety of fish, rather than the clear dead blue of most tropical seas. Before 1930, there was an extremely valuable sardine (herring) fishery off Monterey, but this was depleted, an event later famous as the background to John Steinbeck&#x27;s &quot;Cannery Row&quot;.

California&#x27;s coastline is about 840 miles long, the third longest coastline in the United States after Alaska and Florida.

==Geology==
===Faults, volcanoes, and tsunamis===
Earthquakes occur due to faults that run the length of the Pacific coast, the largest being the San Andreas Fault. Major historical earthquakes include, with the magnitudes listed:
* 1906 San Francisco earthquake (magnitude 7.8–8.2)
* 1971 San Fernando earthquake (magnitude 6.6)
* 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake (magnitude 6.9–7.1)
* 1994 Northridge earthquake (magnitude 6.7)

Coastal cities are vulnerable to tsunamis from locally generated earthquakes as well as those elsewhere in the Pacific Ring of Fire. The Great Chilean earthquake tsunami (1960) killed one person and caused $500,000 to $1,000,000 of damage in Los Angeles, damaged harbors in many coastal cities, and flooded streets in Crescent City. Waves from the Alaskan Good Friday earthquake of 1964 killed twelve people in Crescent City and caused damage as far south as Los Angeles. USGS has released the UCERF California earthquake forecast which models earthquake occurrence in California.

California is also home to several volcanoes, including Lassen Peak, which erupted in 1914 and 1921, and Mount Shasta.

===Tectonics===
California, when only partially explored by the Spanish, was once thought to be an island, as when the southern Baja California peninsula is approached from the Gulf of California the land appears to the west. It is expected, through the motions of plate tectonics that the sea floor spreading now acting in the Gulf of California (also known as the Sea of Cortez) will eventually extend through Southern California and along the San Andreas fault to below San Francisco, finally forming a long island in less than 150 million years. (For comparison, this is also the approximate age of the Atlantic Ocean.) Predictions suggest that this island will eventually collide with Alaska after an additional 100 million years.

==Climate==

California&#x27;s climate varies widely, from arid to subarctic, depending on latitude, elevation, and proximity to the coast. Coastal and Southern parts of the state have a Subtropical Mediterranean climate, with somewhat rainy winters and dry summers. The influence of the ocean generally moderates temperature extremes, creating warmer winters and substantially cooler summers, especially along the coastal areas.

The state is subject to coastal storms during the winter. Eastern California is subject to summertime thunderstorms caused by the North American monsoon. Dry weather during the rest of the year produces conditions favorable to wildfires. California hurricanes occur less frequently than their counterparts on the Atlantic Ocean. Higher elevations experience snowstorms in the winter months.

Floods are occasionally caused by heavy rain, storms, and snowmelt. Steep slopes and unstable soil make certain locations vulnerable to landslides in wet weather or during earthquakes.

==See also==

*Deserts of California
*Ecology of California
*List of California 14,000-foot summits
*List of California state parks
*List of forts in California
*List of lakes in California
*List of mountain peaks of California
*List of mountain ranges of California
*List of regions of California
*List of rivers of California
*List of the major 3000-meter summits of California
*List of islands of California
*List of lakes of California
*List of beaches in California
==References==
==Further reading==

* Miller, Crane S., and Richard S. Hyslop. &quot;California, the Geography of Diversity&quot; (Mayfield Publishing Company, 1983).
* Pyne, Stephen J. &quot;California: A Fire Survey&quot; (2016) online
* Safford, Hugh D., et al. &quot;Fire ecology of the North American Mediterranean-climate zone.&quot; in &quot;Fire ecology and management: Past, present, and future of US forested ecosystems&quot; (2021): 337–392. re California and its neighbors online
* Selby, William A. &quot;Rediscovering the Golden State: California Geography&quot; (John Wiley &amp; Sons, 2018). online

==External links==
*Map of Northern California
*Map of Southern California

*CA State Geoportal</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="0" end="10" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="16" end="26" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="51" end="64" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="152" end="165" title="Sierra Nevada" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q27026" start="196" end="210" title="Central Valley (California)" label="Central Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q184355" start="225" end="238" title="Mojave Desert" label="Mojave Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="296" end="306" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q150129" start="384" end="397" title="coast redwood" label="coast redwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q149851" start="414" end="427" title="Giant Sequoia" label="Giant Sequoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q515556" start="442" end="458" title="bristlecone pine" label="bristlecone pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q235539" start="498" end="511" title="Mount Whitney" label="Mount Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q118388" start="525" end="537" title="Death Valley" label="Death Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="553" end="573" title="Continental United States" label="48 contiguous states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066807" start="612" end="620" title="Northern California" label="Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="625" end="644" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="889" end="909" title="United States Geological Survey" label="US Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="1006" end="1034" title="United States Forest Service" label="United States Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3472728" start="1062" end="1072" title="North Fork, California" label="North Fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744263" start="1219" end="1236" title="Klamath Mountains" label="Klamath Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558" start="1242" end="1255" title="Cascade Range" label="Cascade Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237377" start="1261" end="1274" title="Modoc Plateau" label="Modoc Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q810178" start="1280" end="1295" title="Basin and Range Province" label="Basin and Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q660304" start="1301" end="1313" title="Coast Ranges" label="Coast Ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q27026" start="1319" end="1333" title="Central Valley (California)" label="Central Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="1339" end="1352" title="Sierra Nevada" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q942677" start="1358" end="1375" title="Transverse Ranges" label="Transverse Ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q184355" start="1381" end="1394" title="Mojave Desert" label="Mojave Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068951" start="1400" end="1417" title="Peninsular Ranges" label="Peninsular Ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q267267" start="1427" end="1442" title="Colorado Desert" label="Colorado Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="1529" end="1535" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422806" start="1564" end="1579" title="Alta California" label="Alta California"/>
<link wikidata="Q351722" start="1659" end="1676" title="Adams–Onis Treaty" label="Adams–Onis Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q616109" start="1885" end="1912" title="Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo" label="Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="1928" end="1948" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q169962" start="2145" end="2155" title="Lake Tahoe" label="Lake Tahoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265" start="2200" end="2214" title="Colorado River" label="Colorado River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241887" start="2252" end="2261" title="Davis Dam" label="Davis Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801012" start="2265" end="2276" title="Lake Mohave" label="Lake Mohave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265" start="2313" end="2327" title="Colorado River" label="Colorado River"/>
<link wikidata="Q79820" start="2364" end="2377" title="Yuma, Arizona" label="Yuma, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164283" start="2464" end="2500" title="Constitutional Convention (California)" label="California Constitutional Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="2677" end="2699" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="San Francisco Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="2730" end="2743" title="San Francisco, California" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="2745" end="2752" title="Oakland, California" label="Oakland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="2790" end="2798" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="2805" end="2815" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q5947646" start="2847" end="2868" title="Greater Sacramento" label="its metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q150129" start="2887" end="2894" title="Sequoia sempervirens" label="redwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="2919" end="2932" title="Sierra Nevada" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996389" start="2943" end="2958" title="Yosemite Valley" label="Yosemite Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q169962" start="2963" end="2973" title="Lake Tahoe" label="Lake Tahoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q748355" start="2975" end="2987" title="Mount Shasta" label="Mount Shasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558" start="3020" end="3033" title="Cascade Range" label="Cascade Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q194057" start="3040" end="3053" title="Mount Rainier" label="Mount Rainier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="3057" end="3067" title="Washington state" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q27026" start="3099" end="3113" title="Central Valley (California)" label="Central Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="3227" end="3233" title="Oceanic climate" label="marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="3242" end="3263" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="3406" end="3428" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="San Francisco Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5947646" start="3433" end="3461" title="Sacramento metropolitan area" label="Sacramento metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="3700" end="3713" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q146326" start="3743" end="3754" title="Environmental engineering" label="clean power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744263" start="3823" end="3840" title="Klamath Mountains" label="Klamath Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q46831" start="3847" end="3852" title="mountain range" label="range"/>
<link wikidata="Q4529821" start="3922" end="3932" title="Mount Eddy" label="Mount Eddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q156188" start="3936" end="3962" title="Trinity County, California" label="Trinity County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q335249" start="4027" end="4037" title="Serpentine group" label="serpentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="4042" end="4048" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q161360" start="4303" end="4324" title="Lawson&amp;#x27;s Cypress" label="Lawson&amp;#x27;s Cypress"/>
<link wikidata="Q950688" start="4356" end="4368" title="Foxtail Pine" label="Foxtail Pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q476655" start="4390" end="4410" title="Brewer&amp;#x27;s Spruce" label="Brewer&amp;#x27;s Spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q24069" start="4446" end="4456" title="Kalmiopsis" label="Kalmiopsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094246" start="4532" end="4544" title="Wisconsin glaciation" label="last ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558" start="4572" end="4585" title="Cascade Range" label="Cascade Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q269710" start="4630" end="4642" title="Fraser River" label="Fraser River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="4646" end="4662" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q859354" start="4688" end="4699" title="Lassen Peak" label="Lassen Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q18783" start="4781" end="4793" title="Ring of Fire" label="Ring of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q335585" start="4959" end="4968" title="Mono Lake" label="Mono Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="5195" end="5201" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="5206" end="5212" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q748355" start="5311" end="5323" title="Mount Shasta" label="Mount Shasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842568" start="5334" end="5346" title="Trinity Alps" label="Trinity Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237377" start="5514" end="5527" title="Modoc Plateau" label="Modoc Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="5543" end="5547" title="lava" label="lava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806785" start="5639" end="5650" title="cinder cone" label="cinder cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q25662" start="5653" end="5660" title="juniper" label="juniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="5668" end="5672" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721679" start="5765" end="5781" title="Warner Mountains" label="Warner Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259830" start="5799" end="5809" title="Lost River (California)" label="Lost River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906259" start="5932" end="5950" title="Big Sage Reservoir" label="Big Sage Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760800" start="5969" end="5978" title="Pit River" label="Pit River"/>
<link wikidata="Q13855534" start="6067" end="6097" title="Modoc National Wildlife Refuge" label="Modoc National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q338831" start="6135" end="6144" title="mule deer" label="mule deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q742914" start="6180" end="6198" title="Rocky Mountain Elk" label="Rocky Mountain Elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q187943" start="6236" end="6245" title="pronghorn" label="pronghorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q810178" start="6447" end="6482" title="Basin and Range Province" label="Basin and Range geological province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="6503" end="6509" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q212136" start="6582" end="6587" title="Horst (geology)" label="horst"/>
<link wikidata="Q192810" start="6593" end="6599" title="graben" label="graben"/>
<link wikidata="Q335585" start="6700" end="6709" title="Mono Lake" label="Mono Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="6739" end="6752" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042674" start="6792" end="6804" title="Owens Valley" label="Owens Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="7091" end="7105" title="glacier" label="alpine glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q602963" start="7138" end="7148" title="glaciation" label="glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852115" start="7154" end="7161" title="pluvial" label="pluvial"/>
<link wikidata="Q491689" start="7199" end="7216" title="evaporite" label="evaporite deposit"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="7254" end="7258" title="salt (chemistry)" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="7326" end="7331" title="mining" label="mined"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319" start="7379" end="7384" title="borax" label="borax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780699" start="7417" end="7427" title="Owens Lake" label="Owens Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q118388" start="7432" end="7444" title="Death Valley" label="Death Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433957" start="7476" end="7491" title="White Mountains (California)" label="White Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q515556" start="7556" end="7572" title="bristlecone pine" label="bristlecone pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q636706" start="7636" end="7648" title="Coast Ranges (California)" label="Coast Ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q2241223" start="7664" end="7676" title="Diablo Range" label="Diablo Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="7691" end="7704" title="San Francisco, California" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669849" start="7714" end="7734" title="Santa Cruz Mountains" label="Santa Cruz Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q150129" start="7880" end="7893" title="coast redwood" label="coast redwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q85780910" start="7900" end="7913" title="List of tallest trees" label="tallest trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q37477" start="7967" end="7970" title="fog" label="fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q27026" start="8068" end="8082" title="California Central Valley" label="Central Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q39816" start="8100" end="8106" title="valley" label="valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="8151" end="8164" title="Sierra Nevada" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686914" start="8220" end="8237" title="Sacramento Valley" label="Sacramento Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q964198" start="8297" end="8315" title="San Joaquin Valley" label="San Joaquin Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q751347" start="8412" end="8423" title="San Joaquin River" label="San Joaquin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264687" start="8425" end="8430" title="Kings River (California)" label="Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q335575" start="8436" end="8446" title="Sacramento River" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q232264" start="8466" end="8483" title="San Francisco Bay" label="San Francisco Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q49240" start="8571" end="8579" title="Stockton, California" label="Stockton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="8585" end="8595" title="Sacramento" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459429" start="8719" end="8730" title="Tulare Lake" label="Tulare Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497768" start="8813" end="8821" title="dry lake" label="dry lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="9052" end="9065" title="Sierra Nevada" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q235539" start="9146" end="9159" title="Mount Whitney" label="Mount Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996389" start="9452" end="9467" title="Yosemite Valley" label="Yosemite Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q169962" start="9523" end="9533" title="Lake Tahoe" label="Lake Tahoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q149851" start="9596" end="9609" title="Giant Sequoia" label="Giant Sequoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q967917" start="9713" end="9728" title="John Muir Trail" label="John Muir Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003736" start="9809" end="9828" title="Pacific Crest Trail" label="Pacific Crest Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="9844" end="9850" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="9854" end="9860" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q180402" start="9914" end="9936" title="Yosemite National Park" label="Yosemite National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q936623" start="9938" end="9964" title="Kings Canyon National Park" label="Kings Canyon National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q152660" start="9970" end="9991" title="Sequoia National Park" label="Sequoia National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q49014" start="10296" end="10311" title="San Luis Obispo County, California" label="San Luis Obispo"/>
<link wikidata="Q108047" start="10313" end="10317" title="Kern County, California" label="Kern"/>
<link wikidata="Q108053" start="10323" end="10337" title="San Bernardino County, California" label="San Bernardino"/>
<link wikidata="Q942677" start="10400" end="10417" title="Transverse Ranges" label="Transverse Ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q702492" start="10522" end="10527" title="Urban area" label="urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245696" start="10569" end="10580" title="List of urbanized areas in California (by population)" label="urban areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="10838" end="10848" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="10849" end="10861" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="10862" end="10870" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="10871" end="10877" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q13422082" start="10878" end="10902" title="Northeast megalopolis" label="Northeastern Megalopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="11073" end="11079" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="11154" end="11165" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925" start="11167" end="11180" title="Orange County, California" label="Orange County"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="11182" end="11191" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q49243" start="11197" end="11206" title="Riverside, California" label="Riverside"/>
<link wikidata="Q486168" start="11207" end="11221" title="San Bernardino, California" label="San Bernardino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024431" start="11424" end="11441" title="San Diego–Tijuana" label="San Diego–Tijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="11787" end="11806" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q942677" start="11873" end="11890" title="Transverse Ranges" label="Transverse Ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074451" start="12441" end="12453" title="Oat Mountain (California)" label="Oat Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559442" start="12660" end="12679" title="Tehachapi Mountains" label="Tehachapi Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q184355" start="12724" end="12737" title="Mojave Desert" label="Mojave Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785318" start="13122" end="13144" title="Santa Susana Mountains" label="Santa Susana Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229470" start="13146" end="13168" title="Santa Monica Mountains" label="Santa Monica Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419854" start="13173" end="13194" title="San Gabriel Mountains" label="San Gabriel Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577959" start="13255" end="13279" title="San Bernardino Mountains" label="San Bernardino Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q486168" start="13290" end="13304" title="San Bernardino, California" label="San Bernardino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364408" start="13340" end="13358" title="Mount San Gorgonio" label="Mount San Gorgonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q466863" start="13395" end="13419" title="Mount Wilson observatory" label="Mount Wilson observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q76250" start="13431" end="13439" title="redshift" label="redshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q159992" start="13488" end="13492" title="Surfing" label="surf"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="13500" end="13513" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q172226" start="13518" end="13521" title="ski" label="ski"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="13566" end="13585" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="13624" end="13630" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q747173" start="13770" end="13781" title="rain shadow" label="rain shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q66900467" start="13889" end="13906" title="adiabatic lapse rate" label="adiabatic cooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q212903" start="14143" end="14157" title="katabatic wind" label="katabatic wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570423" start="14174" end="14189" title="Santa Ana winds" label="Santa Ana Winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q184355" start="14196" end="14209" title="Mojave Desert" label="Mojave Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624332" start="14441" end="14456" title="Antelope Valley, California" label="Antelope Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q191218" start="14565" end="14576" title="San Andreas Fault" label="San Andreas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738356" start="14585" end="14592" title="Garlock Fault" label="Garlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="14647" end="14653" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q488940" start="15120" end="15128" title="Palmdale, California" label="Palmdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q494711" start="15133" end="15142" title="Lancaster, California" label="Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q499174" start="15180" end="15187" title="Barstow, California" label="Barstow"/>
<link wikidata="Q79934" start="15218" end="15231" title="U.S. Route 66" label="U.S. Route 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="15298" end="15306" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q242111" start="15308" end="15320" title="Death Valley National Park" label="Death Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068951" start="15481" end="15498" title="Peninsular Ranges" label="Peninsular Ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="15518" end="15527" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q58731" start="15546" end="15561" title="Baja California" label="Baja California"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="15563" end="15569" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q372185" start="15578" end="15601" title="Sierra San Pedro Martir" label="Sierra San Pedro Martir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6472904" start="15637" end="15653" title="Laguna Mountains" label="Laguna Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337721" start="15659" end="15680" title="San Jacinto Mountains" label="San Jacinto Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340368" start="15686" end="15706" title="Santa Rosa Mountains (California)" label="Santa Rosa Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756672" start="15712" end="15731" title="Santa Ana Mountains" label="Santa Ana Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128608" start="15740" end="15762" title="Palomar Mountain Range" label="Palomar Mountain Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q191684" start="15787" end="15806" title="Mount Palomar Observatory" label="Palomar observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414344" start="15808" end="15824" title="San Jacinto Peak" label="San Jacinto Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014035" start="15957" end="15963" title="hiking" label="hiking"/>
<link wikidata="Q18544844" start="15970" end="15990" title="cross-country skiing" label="cross-country skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q267267" start="16061" end="16069" title="Colorado Desert" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q189429" start="16074" end="16088" title="Sonoran Desert" label="Sonoran Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="16109" end="16116" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331865" start="16235" end="16244" title="Coachella Valley" label="Coachella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871046" start="16249" end="16264" title="Imperial Valley" label="Imperial Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057263" start="16279" end="16298" title="U.S.-Mexican border" label="U.S.-Mexican border"/>
<link wikidata="Q931778" start="16356" end="16378" title="Calipatria, California" label="Calipatria, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q503301" start="16434" end="16444" title="Salton Sea" label="Salton Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265" start="16500" end="16514" title="Colorado River (U.S.)" label="Colorado River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705948" start="16526" end="16531" title="Alamo Canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057263" start="16541" end="16559" title="U.S.-Mexico border" label="U.S.-Mexico border"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406179" start="16580" end="16591" title="Salton Sink" label="Salton Sink"/>
<link wikidata="Q4217586" start="16678" end="16691" title="Lake Cahuilla" label="Lake Cahuilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="16759" end="16772" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q215915" start="17082" end="17092" title="upwelling" label="up-welling"/>
<link wikidata="Q175208" start="17218" end="17225" title="biotope" label="biotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141254" start="17494" end="17501" title="sardine" label="sardine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127419" start="17503" end="17510" title="herring" label="herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q487315" start="17524" end="17532" title="Monterey, California" label="Monterey"/>
<link wikidata="Q39212" start="17600" end="17614" title="John Steinbeck" label="John Steinbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216542" start="17628" end="17639" title="Cannery Row (novel)" label="Cannery Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600993" start="17705" end="17749" title="List of U.S. states by coastline" label="third longest coastline in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="17756" end="17762" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="17767" end="17774" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="17827" end="17837" title="Earthquake" label="Earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="17852" end="17858" title="fault (geology)" label="faults"/>
<link wikidata="Q191218" start="17923" end="17940" title="San Andreas Fault" label="San Andreas Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q211386" start="18010" end="18039" title="1906 San Francisco earthquake" label="1906 San Francisco earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q912835" start="18062" end="18090" title="1971 San Fernando earthquake" label="1971 San Fernando earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053476" start="18109" end="18136" title="1989 Loma Prieta earthquake" label="1989 Loma Prieta earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519015" start="18159" end="18185" title="1994 Northridge earthquake" label="1994 Northridge earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="18236" end="18243" title="tsunami" label="tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q18783" start="18322" end="18334" title="Ring of Fire" label="Ring of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q212618" start="18340" end="18364" title="Great Chilean earthquake" label="Great Chilean earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="18445" end="18456" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q166866" start="18521" end="18534" title="Crescent City, California" label="Crescent City"/>
<link wikidata="Q749610" start="18559" end="18581" title="1964 Alaska earthquake" label="Good Friday earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q25028500" start="18703" end="18733" title="California earthquake forecast" label="California earthquake forecast"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="18820" end="18827" title="volcano" label="volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q859354" start="18841" end="18852" title="Lassen Peak" label="Lassen Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q748355" start="18890" end="18902" title="Mount Shasta" label="Mount Shasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q178543" start="19033" end="19058" title="Baja California peninsula" label="Baja California peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q132811" start="19082" end="19100" title="Gulf of California" label="Gulf of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="19170" end="19185" title="plate tectonics" label="plate tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="19378" end="19391" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="19512" end="19526" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="19595" end="19601" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="19655" end="19665" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330709" start="19701" end="19705" title="arid" label="arid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342399" start="19709" end="19718" title="subarctic" label="subarctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="19733" end="19741" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633778" start="19743" end="19752" title="elevation" label="elevation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="19829" end="19840" title="Subtropical" label="Subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="19841" end="19862" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="19930" end="19935" title="ocean" label="ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q81054" start="20097" end="20110" title="coastal storm" label="coastal storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q470090" start="20203" end="20225" title="North American monsoon" label="North American monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="20300" end="20308" title="wildfire" label="wildfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306402" start="20311" end="20331" title="California hurricane" label="California hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="20386" end="20400" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q75079023" start="20431" end="20440" title="snowstorm" label="snowstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="20465" end="20470" title="Flood" label="Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q167903" start="20601" end="20611" title="landslides" label="landslides"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264114" start="20666" end="20687" title="Deserts of California" label="Deserts of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333295" start="20689" end="20710" title="Ecology of California" label="Ecology of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4129592" start="20712" end="20750" title="List of California 14,000-foot summits" label="List of California 14,000-foot summits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819508" start="20752" end="20782" title="List of California state parks" label="List of California state parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148843" start="20784" end="20811" title="List of forts in California" label="List of forts in California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215871" start="20813" end="20840" title="List of lakes in California" label="List of lakes in California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925503" start="20842" end="20878" title="List of mountain peaks of California" label="List of mountain peaks of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123824" start="20880" end="20917" title="List of mountain ranges of California" label="List of mountain ranges of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q17107949" start="20919" end="20948" title="List of regions of California" label="List of regions of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890940" start="20950" end="20978" title="List of rivers of California" label="List of rivers of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925503" start="20980" end="21030" title="List of the major 3000-meter summits of California" label="List of the major 3000-meter summits of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624450" start="21032" end="21061" title="List of islands of California" label="List of islands of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215871" start="21063" end="21090" title="List of lakes of California" label="List of lakes of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565540" start="21092" end="21121" title="List of beaches in California" label="List of beaches in California"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="60540" wikidata="Q314675" url="?curid=60540" title="Leslie Groves">
<text>Leslie Richard Groves Jr. (17 August 1896 – 13 July 1970) was a United States Army Corps of Engineers officer who oversaw the construction of the Pentagon and directed the Manhattan Project, a top secret research project that developed the atomic bomb during World War II.

The son of a U.S. Army chaplain, Groves lived at various Army posts during his childhood. In 1918, he graduated fourth in his class at the United States Military Academy at West Point and was commissioned into the United States Army Corps of Engineers. In 1929, he went to Nicaragua as part of an expedition to conduct a survey for the Inter-Oceanic Nicaragua Canal. Following the 1931 Nicaraguan earthquake, Groves took over Managua&#x27;s water supply system, for which he was awarded the Nicaraguan Presidential Medal of Merit. He attended the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, in 1935 and 1936, and the Army War College in 1938 and 1939, after which he was posted to the War Department General Staff. Groves developed &quot;a reputation as a doer, a driver, and a stickler for duty&quot;. In 1940 he became special assistant for construction to the Quartermaster General, tasked with inspecting construction sites and checking on their progress. In August 1941, he was appointed to create the gigantic office complex for the War Department&#x27;s 40,000 staff that would ultimately become the Pentagon.

In September 1942, Groves took charge of the Manhattan Project. He was involved in most aspects of the atomic bomb&#x27;s development: he participated in the selection of sites for research and production at Oak Ridge, Tennessee; Los Alamos, New Mexico; and Hanford, Washington. He directed the enormous construction effort, made critical decisions on the various methods of isotope separation, acquired raw materials, directed the collection of military intelligence on the German nuclear energy project and helped select the cities in Japan that were chosen as targets. Groves wrapped the Manhattan Project in security, but spies working within the project were able to pass some of its most important secrets to the Soviet Union.

After the war, Groves remained in charge of the Manhattan Project until responsibility for nuclear weapons production was handed over to the United States Atomic Energy Commission in 1947. He then headed the Armed Forces Special Weapons Project, which had been created to control the military aspects of nuclear weapons. He was given a dressing down by the Chief of Staff of the Army, General of the Army Dwight D. Eisenhower, on the basis of various complaints, and told that he would never be appointed Chief of Engineers. Three days later, Groves announced his intention to leave the Army. He was promoted to lieutenant general just before his retirement on 29 February 1948 in recognition of his leadership of the bomb program. By a special act of Congress, his date of rank was backdated to 16 July 1945, the date of the Trinity nuclear test. He went on to become a vice president at Sperry Rand.

== Early life ==
Leslie Richard Groves Jr. was born in Albany, New York, on 17 August 1896, the third son of four children of a pastor, Leslie Richard Groves Sr., and his wife Gwen née Griffith. He was half Welsh and half English, with some French Huguenot ancestors who came to the United States in the 17th century. Leslie Groves Sr. resigned as pastor of the Sixth Presbyterian church in Albany in December 1896 to become a United States Army chaplain. He was posted to the 14th Infantry at Vancouver Barracks in Washington state in 1897.

Following the outbreak of the Spanish–American War in 1898, Chaplain Groves was sent to Cuba with the 8th Infantry. On returning to Vancouver Barracks, he was ordered to rejoin the 14th Infantry in the Philippines. Service in the Philippine–American War and the Boxer Rebellion followed. The 14th Infantry returned to the United States in 1901 and moved to Fort Snelling, Minnesota. The family relocated to there from Vancouver, then moved to Fort Hancock, New Jersey, and returned to Vancouver in 1905. Chaplain Groves was hospitalized with tuberculosis at Fort Bayard in 1905. He decided to settle in southern California and bought a house in Altadena. His next posting was to Fort Apache, Arizona. The family spent their summers there and returned to Altadena where the children attended school.

In 1911, Chaplain Groves was ordered to return to the 14th Infantry, which was now stationed at Fort William Henry Harrison, Montana. At Fort Harrison, the younger Groves met Grace (Boo) Wilson, the daughter of Colonel Richard Hulbert Wilson, a career Army officer who had served with Chaplain Groves during the 8th Infantry&#x27;s posting to Cuba. In 1913, the 14th Infantry moved once more, this time to Fort Lawton in Seattle, Washington.

Groves entered Queen Anne High School in 1913, and graduated in 1914. While completing high school, he enrolled in courses at the University of Washington, in anticipation of attempting to gain an appointment to the United States Military Academy. He earned a nomination from the President, Woodrow Wilson, which allowed him to compete for a vacancy, but did not score a high enough mark on the examination to be admitted. Charles W. Bell from California&#x27;s 9th congressional district nominated Groves as an alternate, but the principal nominee accepted. Instead, Groves enrolled at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and planned to re-take the West Point entrance exam. In 1916, Groves tested again, attained a passing score, and was accepted. He later said &quot;Entering West Point fulfilled my greatest ambition. I had been brought up in the Army, and in the main had lived on Army posts all my life.&quot;
Groves&#x27;s class entered West Point on 15 June 1916. The United States declaration of war on Germany in April 1917 led to their program of instruction being shortened as the War Emergency Course (WEC), which graduated on 1 November 1918, a year and a half ahead of schedule. Groves finished fourth in his class, which earned him a commission as a second lieutenant in the Corps of Engineers, the first choice of most high ranking cadets.

At MIT he had played tennis informally, but at West Point he could not skate for ice hockey, did not like basketball, and was not good enough for baseball or track. So football was his only sport. He said that &quot;I was the number two center but was on the bench most of the time as in those days you didn&#x27;t have substitutes and normally the number one played the whole game. I was not very heavy, and today would be considered too light to play at all&quot;.

== Between the wars ==
After the traditional month&#x27;s leave following graduation from West Point, Groves reported to Camp A. A. Humphreys, Virginia, in December 1918, where he was promoted to first lieutenant on 1 May 1919. He was sent to France in June on an educational tour of the European battlefields of World War I. After returning from Europe, Groves became a student officer at the Engineer School at Camp Humphreys in September 1919. On graduation he was posted to the 7th Engineers at Fort Benning, Georgia, as a company commander.

He returned to Camp Humphreys in February 1921 for the Engineer Basic Officers&#x27; Course. On graduation in August 1921, he was posted to the 4th Engineers, stationed at Camp Lewis, Washington. He was then posted to Fort Worden in command of a survey detachment. This was close to Seattle, so he was able to pursue his courtship of Grace Wilson, who had become a kindergarten teacher. They were married in St. Clement&#x27;s Episcopal Church in Seattle on 10 February 1922. Their marriage produced two children: a son, Richard Hulbert, born in 1923, and a daughter, Gwen, born in 1928.

In November 1922, Groves received his first overseas posting, as a company commander with the 3rd Engineers at the Schofield Barracks in Hawaii. He earned a commendation for his work there, constructing a trail from Kahuku to Pupukea. In November 1925 he was posted to Galveston, Texas, as an assistant to the District Engineer, Major Julian Schley. Groves&#x27;s duties included opening the channel at Port Isabel and supervising dredging operations in Galveston Bay. In 1927 he became commander of Company D, 1st Engineers, at Fort DuPont, Delaware.

During the New England Flood of November 1927 he was sent to Fort Ethan Allen, Vermont, to assist with a detachment of the 1st Engineers. After a pontoon bridge they constructed was swamped and swept away by the flood waters, Groves was accused of negligence. A month later Groves and several of his men were seriously injured, one fatally, when a block of TNT prematurely detonated. Groves&#x27;s superior wrote a critical report on him, but the Chief of Engineers, Major General Edgar Jadwin, interceded, attributing blame to Groves&#x27;s superiors instead. Groves was returned to Fort DuPont.

In 1929, Groves departed for Nicaragua in charge of a company of the 1st Engineers as part of an expedition whose purpose was to conduct a survey for the Inter-Oceanic Nicaragua Canal. Following the 1931 Nicaragua earthquake, Groves took over responsibility for Managua&#x27;s water supply system, for which he was awarded the Nicaraguan Presidential Medal of Merit. Groves was promoted to captain on 20 October 1934. He attended the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, in 1935 and 1936, after which he was posted to Kansas City, Missouri, as assistant to the commander of the Missouri River Division. In 1938 and 1939 he attended the Army War College. On 1 July 1939, he was posted to the War Department General Staff in Washington, D.C.

== World War II ==
=== Construction Division ===

Groves was promoted to major on 1 July 1940. Three weeks later, he became special assistant for construction to the Quartermaster General, Major General Edmund B. Gregory. The two men had known each other a long time, as Groves&#x27;s father was a close friend of Gregory&#x27;s. At this point, the US Army was about to embark on a national mobilization, and it was the task of the Construction Division of the Quartermaster Corps to prepare the necessary accommodations and training facilities for the vast army that would be created. The enormous construction program had been dogged by bottlenecks, shortages, delays, spiralling costs, and poor living conditions at the construction sites. Newspapers began publishing accounts charging the Construction Division with incompetence, ineptitude, and inefficiency. Groves, who &quot;had a reputation as a doer, a driver, and a stickler for duty&quot;, was one of a number of engineer officers brought in to turn the project around. He was tasked with inspecting construction sites and checking on their progress.

On 12 November 1940, Gregory asked Groves to take over command of the Fixed Fee Branch of the Construction Division as soon as his promotion to colonel came through. Groves assumed his new rank and duties on 14 November 1940. Groves later recalled:
Groves instituted a series of reforms. He installed phone lines for the Supervising Construction Quartermasters, demanded weekly reports on progress, ordered that reimbursement vouchers be processed within a week, and sent expediters to sites reporting shortages. He ordered his contractors to hire whatever special equipment they needed and to pay premium prices if necessary to guarantee quick delivery. Instead of allowing construction of camps to proceed in whatever order the contractors saw fit, Groves laid down priorities for completion of camp facilities, so that the troops could begin moving in even while construction was still under way.

By mid-December, the worst of the crisis was over. Over half a million men had been mobilized and essential accommodations and facilities for two million men were 95 per cent complete. Between 1 July 1940 and 10 December 1941, the Construction Division let contracts worth $1,676,293,000 ($ with inflation), of which $1,347,991,000 ($ with inflation), or about 80 per cent, were fixed-fee contracts.

On 19 August 1941, Groves was summoned to a meeting with the head of the Construction Division, Brigadier General Brehon B. Somervell. In attendance were Captain Clarence Renshaw, one of Groves&#x27;s assistants; Major Hugh J. Casey, the chief of the Construction Division&#x27;s Design and Engineering Section; and George Bergstrom, a former president of the American Institute of Architects. Casey and Bergstrom had designed an enormous office complex to house the War Department&#x27;s 40,000 staff together in one building, a five-story, five-sided structure, which would ultimately become the Pentagon.

The Pentagon had a total square footage of  – twice that of the Empire State Building – making it the largest office building in the world. The estimated cost was $35 million ($ with inflation), and Somervell wanted of floor space available by 1 March 1942. Bergstrom became the architect-engineer with Renshaw in charge of construction, reporting directly to Groves. At its peak the project employed 13,000 persons. By the end of April, the first occupants were moving in and of space was ready by the end of May. In the end, the project cost some $63 million ($ with inflation).

Groves steadily overcame one crisis after another, dealing with strikes, shortages, competing priorities and engineers who were not up to their tasks. He worked six days a week in his office in Washington, D.C. During the week he would determine which project was in the greatest need of personal attention and pay it a visit on Sunday. Groves later recalled that he was &quot;hoping to get to a war theater so I could find a little peace.&quot;

=== Manhattan Project ===
The Manhattan Engineer District (MED) was formally established by the Chief of Engineers, Major General Eugene Reybold on 16 August 1942. The name was chosen by Groves and MED&#x27;s district engineer, Colonel James C. Marshall. Like other engineer districts, it was named after the city where its headquarters was located, at 270 Broadway. Unlike the others, it had no geographic boundaries, only a mission: to develop an atomic bomb. Marshall had the authority of a division engineer head and reported directly to Reybold.

Although Reybold was satisfied with the progress being made, Vannevar Bush was less so. He felt that aggressive leadership was required, and suggested the appointment of a prestigious officer as overall project director. Somervell, now Chief of Army Service Forces, recommended Groves. Somervell met Groves outside the hearing room where Groves had been testifying before a United States Congress committee on military housing and informed him that &quot;The Secretary of War has selected you for a very important assignment, and the President has approved the selection ... If you do the job right, it will win the war.&quot; Groves could not hide his disappointment at not receiving a combat assignment: &quot;Oh, that thing,&quot; he replied.
Groves met with Major General Wilhelm D. Styer in his office at the Pentagon to discuss the details. They agreed that in order to avoid suspicion, Groves would continue to supervise the Pentagon project. He would be promoted to brigadier general, as it was felt that the title &quot;general&quot; would hold more sway with the academic scientists working on the Manhattan Project. Groves therefore waited until his promotion came through on 23 September 1942 before assuming his new command. His orders placed him directly under Somervell rather than Reybold, with Marshall now answerable to Groves.

Groves was given authority to sign contracts for the project from 1 September 1942. The Under Secretary of War, Robert P. Patterson, retrospectively delegated his authority from the President under the War Powers Act of 1941 in a memorandum to Groves dated 17 April 1944. Groves delegated the authority to Kenneth Nichols, except for contracts of $5 million or more that required his authority. The written authority was only given in 1944 when Nichols was about to sign a contract with Du Pont, and it was found that Nichols&#x27;s original authority to sign project contracts for Marshall was based on a verbal authority from Styer, and Nichols only had the low delegated authority of a divisional engineer.

Groves soon decided to establish his project headquarters on the fifth floor of the New War Department Building, now known as the Harry S Truman Building, in Washington, D.C., where Marshall had maintained a liaison office. In August 1943, the MED headquarters moved to Oak Ridge, Tennessee, but the name of the district did not change.
Construction accounted for roughly 90 percent of the Manhattan Project&#x27;s total cost. The day after Groves took over, he and Marshall took a train to Tennessee to inspect the site that Marshall had chosen for the proposed production plant at Oak Ridge. Groves was suitably impressed with the site, and steps were taken to condemn the land. Protests, legal appeals, and congressional inquiries were to no avail. By mid-November U.S. Marshals were tacking notices to vacate on farmhouse doors, and construction contractors were moving in.
Meanwhile, Groves had met with J. Robert Oppenheimer, a physicist at the University of California, Berkeley, and discussed the creation of a laboratory where the bomb could be designed and tested. Groves was impressed with the breadth of Oppenheimer&#x27;s knowledge. He had a long conversation on a train after a meeting in Chicago on October 15, when Groves invited Oppenheimer to join Marshall and Nichols on the 20th Century Limited train returning to New York. After dinner on the train they discussed the project while squeezed into Nichols&#x27;s one-person roomette, and when Oppenheimer left the train at Buffalo, Nichols had no doubt that he should direct the new lab. Groves saw that Oppenheimer thoroughly understood the issues involved in setting up a laboratory in a remote area. These were features that Groves found lacking in other scientists, and he knew that broad knowledge would be vital in an interdisciplinary project that would involve not just physics, but chemistry, metallurgy, ordnance, and engineering.

In October 1942 Groves and Oppenheimer inspected sites in New Mexico, where they selected a suitable location for the laboratory at Los Alamos. Unlike Oak Ridge, the ranch school at Los Alamos, along with of surrounding forest and grazing land, was soon acquired. Groves also detected in Oppenheimer something that many others did not, an &quot;overweening ambition&quot; which Groves reckoned would supply the drive necessary to push the project to a successful conclusion. Groves became convinced that Oppenheimer was the best and only man to run the laboratory.

Few agreed with him in 1942. Oppenheimer had little administrative experience and, unlike other potential candidates, no Nobel Prize. There was also concern about whether Oppenheimer was a security risk, as many of his associates were communists, including his brother Frank Oppenheimer, his wife Katherine Oppenheimer, and his girlfriend Jean Tatlock. Oppenheimer&#x27;s Communist Party connections soon came to light, but Groves personally waived the security requirements and issued Oppenheimer a clearance on 20 July 1943. Groves&#x27;s faith in Oppenheimer was ultimately justified. Oppenheimer&#x27;s inspirational leadership fostered practical approaches to designing and building bombs. Asked years later why Groves chose him, Oppenheimer replied that the general &quot;had a fatal weakness for good men.&quot; Isidor Rabi considered the appointment &quot;a real stroke of genius on the part of General Groves, who was not generally considered to be a genius ...&quot;
Groves made critical decisions on prioritizing the various methods of isotope separation and acquiring raw materials needed by the scientists and engineers. By the time he assumed command of the project, it was evident that the AA-3 priority rating that Marshall had obtained was insufficient. The top ratings were AA-1 through AA-4 in descending order, although there was also a special AAA rating reserved for emergencies. Ratings AA-1 and AA-2 were for essential weapons and equipment, so Colonel Lucius D. Clay, the deputy chief of staff at Services and Supply for requirements and resources, felt that the highest rating he could assign was AA-3, although he was willing to provide an AAA rating on request for critical materials to remove bottlenecks. Groves went to Donald M. Nelson, the chairman of the War Production Board and, after threatening to take the matter to the President, obtained a AAA priority for the Manhattan project. It was agreed that the AA-3 priority would still be used where possible.

The Combined Development Trust was established by the governments of the United Kingdom, United States and Canada in June 1944, with Groves as its chairman, to procure uranium and thorium ores on international markets. In 1944, the trust purchased of uranium oxide ore from companies operating mines in the Belgian Congo. In order to avoid briefing the Treasury Secretary, Henry Morgenthau Jr., on the project, a special account not subject to the usual auditing and controls was used to hold Trust monies. Between 1944 and the time he resigned from the Trust in 1947, Groves deposited a total of $37.5 million into the Trust&#x27;s account.

Worried by the heavy losses occurring during the Battle of the Bulge, in late December 1944 President Roosevelt requested atomic bombs be dropped on Germany during his only meeting with Groves during the war. Groves informed him the first workable bomb was months away.
In 1943, the Manhattan District became responsible for collecting military intelligence on Axis atomic research. Groves created Operation Alsos, special intelligence teams that would follow in the wake of the advancing armies, rounding up enemy scientists and collecting what technical information and technology they could. Alsos teams ultimately operated in Italy, France and Germany. The security system resembled that of other engineer districts. The Manhattan District organized its own counterintelligence which gradually grew in size and scope, but strict security measures failed to prevent the Soviets from conducting a successful espionage program that stole some of its most important secrets.

Groves met with General Henry H. Arnold, the Chief of U.S. Army Air Forces, in March 1944 to discuss the delivery of the finished bombs to their targets. Groves was hoping that the Boeing B-29 Superfortress would be able to carry the finished bombs. The 509th Composite Group was duly activated on 17 December 1944 at Wendover Army Air Field, Utah, under the command of Colonel Paul W. Tibbets. A joint Manhattan District – USAAF targeting committee was established to determine which cities in Japan should be targets. It recommended Kokura, Hiroshima, Niigata, and Kyoto.

At this point, Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson intervened, announcing that he would be making the targeting decision, and that he would not authorize the bombing of Kyoto. Groves attempted to get him to change his mind several times and Stimson refused every time. Kyoto had been the capital of Japan for centuries, and was of great cultural and religious significance. In the end, Groves asked Arnold to remove Kyoto not just from the list of nuclear targets, but from targets for conventional bombing as well. Nagasaki was substituted for Kyoto as a target.
Groves was promoted to temporary major general on 9 March 1944. After the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki became public knowledge, he was awarded the Distinguished Service Medal. His citation read:
Groves had previously been nominated for the Distinguished Service Medal for his work on the Pentagon, but to avoid drawing attention to the Manhattan Project, it had not been awarded at the time. After the war, the Decorations Board decided to change it to a Legion of Merit. In recognition of his work on the project, the Belgian government made him a Commander of the Order of the Crown and the British government made him an honorary Companion of the Order of the Bath.

== After the war ==

Responsibility for nuclear power and nuclear weapons was transferred from the Manhattan District to the Atomic Energy Commission on 1 January 1947. On 29 January 1947, the Secretary of War, Robert P. Patterson, and the Secretary of the Navy, James V. Forrestal, issued a joint directive creating the Armed Forces Special Weapons Project (AFSWP) to control the military aspects of nuclear weapons. Groves was appointed its chief on 28 February 1947. In April, AFSWP moved from the New War Department Building to the fifth floor of the Pentagon. Groves had already made a start on the new mission by creating Sandia Base in 1946.

The Chief of Staff of the United States Army, General of the Army Dwight D. Eisenhower, met with Groves on 30 January 1948 to evaluate his performance. Eisenhower recounted a long list of complaints about Groves pertaining to his rudeness, arrogance, insensitivity, contempt for the rules, and maneuvering for promotion out of turn. Eisenhower made it clear that Groves would never become Chief of Engineers.

Groves realized that in the rapidly shrinking postwar military he would not be given any assignment similar in importance to the one he had held in the Manhattan Project, as such posts would go to combat commanders returning from overseas, and he decided to leave the Army. In recognition of his leadership of the Manhattan Project, he received an honorary promotion to lieutenant general by special Act of Congress, effective 24 January 1948, just before his retirement on 29 February 1948. His date of rank was backdated to 16 July 1945, the date of the Trinity nuclear test.

== Later life ==

Groves went on to become a vice president at Sperry Rand, an equipment and electronics firm, and moved to Darien, Connecticut, in 1948, and retired at age 65 in 1961. He also served as president of the West Point alumni organization, the &quot;Association of Graduates&quot;. He presented General of the Army Douglas MacArthur the Sylvanus Thayer Award in 1962, which was the occasion of MacArthur&#x27;s famous speech to the U.S. Military Academy Corps of Cadets. In retirement, Groves wrote an account of the Manhattan Project entitled &quot;Now It Can Be Told&quot;, originally published in 1962. In 1964, he moved back to Washington, D.C.

Groves suffered a heart attack caused by chronic calcification of the aortic valve on 13 July 1970. He was rushed to Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington, D.C., where he died that night at age 73. A funeral service was held in the chapel at Fort Myer, Virginia, after which Groves was interred in Arlington National Cemetery next to his brother Allen, who had died of pneumonia in 1916.

== Legacy ==
Groves is memorialized at a namesake park along the Columbia River, near the Hanford Site in Richland, Washington. At the United States Military Academy, the LTG Leslie R. Groves Award is awarded to the cadet with the highest GPA in major classes associated with nuclear engineering. 

The 1980 BBC series, &quot;Oppenheimer&quot;, featured Manning Redwood as Groves. The same year, he was played by Richard Herd in the American television movie, &quot;Enola Gay: The Men, the Mission, the Atomic Bomb&quot;. In the 1989 film &quot;Fat Man and Little Boy&quot;, he was portrayed by Paul Newman, and in the made-for-TV movie of the same year, &quot;Day One&quot;, by Brian Dennehy. In 1995, Groves was portrayed by Richard Masur in the Japanese-Canadian made-for-television movie &quot;Hiroshima&quot;. He was portrayed by Eric Owens in the 2007 Lyric Opera of Chicago&#x27;s work &quot;Doctor Atomic&quot;. The opera follows Oppenheimer, Groves, Edward Teller and others in the days preceding the Trinity test. Groves is played by Matt Damon in Christopher Nolan&#x27;s 2023 film &quot;Oppenheimer&quot;.

==Dates of rank==
==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* 11 hours of interviews with Groves on the Manhattan Project.
* Memorandum for the Secretary of War, Groves describes the first Trinity (nuclear test) in New Mexico.
* Papers of Leslie Groves at the National Archives and Records Administration 
* Arlington National Cemetery</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q314675" start="0" end="25" title="Leslie Groves" label="Leslie Richard Groves Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="64" end="101" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers" label="United States Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11208" start="142" end="154" title="the Pentagon" label="the Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="172" end="189" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="193" end="203" title="Classified information#Top_Secret_(TS)" label="top secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="240" end="251" title="atomic bomb" label="atomic bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="259" end="271" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073197" start="287" end="305" title="Chaplain Corps (United States Army)" label="U.S. Army chaplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="413" end="443" title="United States Military Academy" label="United States Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q679753" start="447" end="457" title="West Point, New York" label="West Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="547" end="556" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q19891726" start="610" end="639" title="Inter-Oceanic Nicaragua Canal" label="Inter-Oceanic Nicaragua Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4562866" start="655" end="681" title="1931 Nicaragua earthquake" label="1931 Nicaraguan earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274" start="700" end="707" title="Managua" label="Managua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115050" start="821" end="853" title="Command and General Staff School" label="Command and General Staff School"/>
<link wikidata="Q590879" start="857" end="873" title="Fort Leavenworth" label="Fort Leavenworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q635078" start="909" end="925" title="United States Army War College" label="Army War College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143596" start="977" end="991" title="United States Department of War" label="War Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269318" start="1155" end="1176" title="Quartermaster General (United States)" label="Quartermaster General"/>
<link wikidata="Q48809" start="1618" end="1638" title="Oak Ridge, Tennessee" label="Oak Ridge, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q318637" start="1640" end="1662" title="Los Alamos, New Mexico" label="Los Alamos, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284526" start="1668" end="1687" title="Hanford Site" label="Hanford, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168000" start="1856" end="1877" title="military intelligence" label="military intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q700162" start="1885" end="1914" title="German nuclear energy project" label="German nuclear energy project"/>
<link wikidata="Q290655" start="2036" end="2041" title="atomic spies" label="spies"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2129" end="2141" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q939090" start="2285" end="2323" title="United States Atomic Energy Commission" label="United States Atomic Energy Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793016" start="2352" end="2388" title="Armed Forces Special Weapons Project" label="Armed Forces Special Weapons Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q783785" start="2501" end="2527" title="Chief of Staff of the United States Army" label="Chief of Staff of the Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331037" start="2529" end="2548" title="General of the Army (United States)" label="General of the Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="2549" end="2569" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601265" start="2649" end="2667" title="Chief of Engineers" label="Chief of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046665" start="2756" end="2774" title="lieutenant general (United States)" label="lieutenant general"/>
<link wikidata="Q207342" start="2970" end="2990" title="Trinity (nuclear test)" label="Trinity nuclear test"/>
<link wikidata="Q784567" start="3033" end="3044" title="Sperry Rand" label="Sperry Rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="3102" end="3118" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q152002" start="3175" end="3181" title="pastor" label="pastor"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="3295" end="3303" title="Huguenot" label="Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="3415" end="3427" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073197" start="3474" end="3501" title="Chaplain Corps (United States Army)" label="United States Army chaplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4550032" start="3524" end="3537" title="14th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="14th Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q28153324" start="3541" end="3559" title="Vancouver Barracks" label="Vancouver Barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="3563" end="3579" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington state"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="3620" end="3640" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="3678" end="3682" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645383" start="3692" end="3704" title="8th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="8th Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="3792" end="3803" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q214456" start="3820" end="3843" title="Philippine–American War" label="Philippine–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q150229" start="3852" end="3867" title="Boxer Rebellion" label="Boxer Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q10835711" start="3947" end="3971" title="Fort Snelling, Minnesota" label="Fort Snelling, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471282" start="4033" end="4057" title="Fort Hancock, New Jersey" label="Fort Hancock, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="4132" end="4144" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470781" start="4148" end="4159" title="Fort Bayard Historic District" label="Fort Bayard"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="4202" end="4212" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q433701" start="4235" end="4243" title="Altadena, California" label="Altadena"/>
<link wikidata="Q22058650" start="4269" end="4289" title="Fort Apache (military post)" label="Fort Apache, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472342" start="4486" end="4513" title="Fort William Henry Harrison" label="Fort William Henry Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="4515" end="4522" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984198" start="4601" end="4608" title="Colonel (United States)" label="Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471489" start="4796" end="4807" title="Fort Lawton" label="Fort Lawton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="4811" end="4818" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270211" start="4848" end="4870" title="Queen Anne High School (Seattle, Washington)" label="Queen Anne High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q219563" start="4963" end="4987" title="University of Washington" label="University of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="5049" end="5079" title="United States Military Academy" label="United States Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="5113" end="5122" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="5124" end="5138" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066329" start="5256" end="5271" title="Charles W. Bell" label="Charles W. Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886679" start="5277" end="5321" title="California&amp;#x27;s 9th congressional district" label="California&amp;#x27;s 9th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="5424" end="5461" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892405" start="5821" end="5864" title="United States declaration of war on Germany (1917)" label="United States declaration of war on Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q56826567" start="6111" end="6128" title="second lieutenant" label="second lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="6136" end="6154" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers" label="Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375761" start="6792" end="6812" title="Camp A. A. Humphreys" label="Camp A. A. Humphreys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="6814" end="6822" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6867" end="6883" title="First lieutenant#United States" label="first lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="6984" end="6995" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438462" start="7170" end="7182" title="Fort Benning" label="Fort Benning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="7184" end="7191" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q102538" start="7198" end="7205" title="Company (military unit)" label="company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505731" start="7390" end="7400" title="Fort Lewis (Washington)" label="Camp Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q606315" start="7436" end="7447" title="Fort Worden" label="Fort Worden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430708" start="7922" end="7940" title="Schofield Barracks" label="Schofield Barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="7944" end="7950" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q596007" start="8023" end="8029" title="Kahuku" label="Kahuku"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000499" start="8033" end="8040" title="Pupukea" label="Pupukea"/>
<link wikidata="Q135744" start="8076" end="8092" title="Galveston, Texas" label="Galveston, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q983927" start="8136" end="8141" title="Major (rank)" label="Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q3225428" start="8142" end="8155" title="Julian Schley" label="Julian Schley"/>
<link wikidata="Q982504" start="8210" end="8221" title="Port Isabel, Texas" label="Port Isabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560406" start="8261" end="8274" title="Galveston Bay" label="Galveston Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596320" start="8318" end="8331" title="1st Engineer Battalion (United States)" label="1st Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471093" start="8336" end="8347" title="Fort DuPont" label="Fort DuPont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="8349" end="8357" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8371" end="8405" title="Floods in the United States: 1901–2000" label="New England Flood of November 1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471131" start="8421" end="8437" title="Fort Ethan Allen" label="Fort Ethan Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="8439" end="8446" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104072" start="8506" end="8520" title="pontoon bridge" label="pontoon bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q170167" start="8717" end="8720" title="Trinitrotoluene" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601265" start="8807" end="8825" title="Chief of Engineers" label="Chief of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280545" start="8827" end="8840" title="Major General (United States)" label="Major General"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337308" start="8841" end="8853" title="Edgar Jadwin" label="Edgar Jadwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="8987" end="8996" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q19891726" start="9112" end="9141" title="Inter-Oceanic Nicaragua Canal" label="Inter-Oceanic Nicaragua Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4562866" start="9157" end="9182" title="1931 Nicaragua earthquake" label="1931 Nicaragua earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274" start="9220" end="9227" title="Managua" label="Managua"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036511" start="9348" end="9355" title="Captain (US Army)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115050" start="9392" end="9424" title="Command and General Staff School" label="Command and General Staff School"/>
<link wikidata="Q590879" start="9428" end="9444" title="Fort Leavenworth" label="Fort Leavenworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="9446" end="9452" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="9501" end="9522" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316926" start="9561" end="9584" title="Mississippi Valley Division" label="Missouri River Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q635078" start="9619" end="9635" title="United States Army War College" label="Army War College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813432" start="9689" end="9702" title="General Staff" label="General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707054" start="9797" end="9802" title="Major (United States)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269318" start="9890" end="9911" title="Quartermaster General (United States)" label="Quartermaster General"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339259" start="9927" end="9944" title="Edmund B. Gregory" label="Edmund B. Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q110612665" start="10185" end="10204" title="Quartermaster Corps" label="Quartermaster Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995824" start="10907" end="10916" title="cost-plus contract" label="Fixed Fee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967196" start="12235" end="12252" title="Brigadier General (United States)" label="Brigadier General"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960406" start="12253" end="12272" title="Brehon B. Somervell" label="Brehon B. Somervell"/>
<link wikidata="Q15529659" start="12358" end="12371" title="Hugh J. Casey" label="Hugh J. Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148177" start="12455" end="12471" title="George Bergstrom" label="George Bergstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q465197" start="12499" end="12531" title="American Institute of Architects" label="American Institute of Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143596" start="12606" end="12627" title="United States Department of War" label="War Department&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q11208" start="12733" end="12745" title="the Pentagon" label="the Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9188" start="12812" end="12833" title="Empire State Building" label="Empire State Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q150737" start="13027" end="13045" title="Architectural engineering" label="architect-engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="13807" end="13834" title="Manhattan Engineer District" label="Manhattan Engineer District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407683" start="13907" end="13921" title="Eugene Reybold" label="Eugene Reybold"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197527" start="14013" end="14030" title="James C. Marshall" label="James C. Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829626" start="14130" end="14142" title="Tower 270" label="270 Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="14226" end="14237" title="atomic bomb" label="atomic bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q299595" start="14390" end="14403" title="Vannevar Bush" label="Vannevar Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794247" start="14574" end="14593" title="Army Service Forces" label="Army Service Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="14703" end="14725" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419102" start="14788" end="14804" title="Secretary of War" label="Secretary of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="14863" end="14872" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002134" start="15105" end="15121" title="Wilhelm D. Styer" label="Wilhelm D. Styer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892252" start="15764" end="15786" title="United States Under Secretary of War" label="Under Secretary of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q723287" start="15788" end="15807" title="Robert P. Patterson" label="Robert P. Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17041209" start="15878" end="15900" title="War Powers Act of 1941" label="War Powers Act of 1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390533" start="15982" end="15997" title="Kenneth Nichols" label="Kenneth Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586762" start="16471" end="16498" title="Harry S Truman Building" label="New War Department Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q48809" start="16657" end="16677" title="Oak Ridge, Tennessee" label="Oak Ridge, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="16878" end="16887" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q166332" start="17050" end="17057" title="Eminent domain" label="condemn"/>
<link wikidata="Q934866" start="17155" end="17167" title="U.S. Marshal" label="U.S. Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q132537" start="17296" end="17317" title="J. Robert Oppenheimer" label="J. Robert Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="17338" end="17372" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246565" start="17681" end="17701" title="20th Century Limited" label="20th Century Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="18234" end="18241" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="18247" end="18256" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="18258" end="18268" title="metallurgy" label="metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="18284" end="18295" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="18356" end="18366" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q318637" start="18430" end="18440" title="Los Alamos, New Mexico" label="Los Alamos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681873" start="18464" end="18476" title="Los Alamos Ranch School" label="ranch school"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="18985" end="18996" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="19099" end="19108" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396898" start="19133" end="19150" title="Frank Oppenheimer" label="Frank Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q52159113" start="19161" end="19182" title="Katherine Oppenheimer" label="Katherine Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q14859022" start="19203" end="19215" title="Jean Tatlock" label="Jean Tatlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q308714" start="19236" end="19251" title="Communist Party USA" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q165969" start="19683" end="19694" title="Isidor Rabi" label="Isidor Rabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q920846" start="19911" end="19929" title="isotope separation" label="isotope separation"/>
<link wikidata="Q369360" start="20341" end="20355" title="Lucius D. Clay" label="Lucius D. Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294734" start="20614" end="20630" title="Donald M. Nelson" label="Donald M. Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536750" start="20652" end="20672" title="War Production Board" label="War Production Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="21026" end="21033" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115" start="21038" end="21045" title="thorium" label="thorium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21142" end="21157" title="Belgian Congo in World War II#Uranium" label="operating mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q213510" start="21165" end="21178" title="Belgian Congo" label="Belgian Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215834" start="21211" end="21229" title="United States Secretary of the Treasury" label="Treasury Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q450751" start="21231" end="21251" title="Henry Morgenthau Jr." label="Henry Morgenthau Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q151018" start="21550" end="21569" title="Battle of the Bulge" label="Battle of the Bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168000" start="21837" end="21858" title="military intelligence" label="military intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q662020" start="21899" end="21914" title="Operation Alsos" label="Operation Alsos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608441" start="22493" end="22500" title="General (United States)" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q436102" start="22501" end="22516" title="Henry H. Arnold" label="Henry H. Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="22531" end="22551" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="U.S. Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q184870" start="22658" end="22683" title="Boeing B-29 Superfortress" label="Boeing B-29 Superfortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q15044227" start="22731" end="22752" title="509th Composite Group" label="509th Composite Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982548" start="22795" end="22818" title="Wendover Army Air Field" label="Wendover Army Air Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="22820" end="22824" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q294555" start="22855" end="22870" title="Paul W. Tibbets" label="Paul W. Tibbets"/>
<link wikidata="Q516373" start="23012" end="23018" title="Kokura" label="Kokura"/>
<link wikidata="Q34664" start="23020" end="23029" title="Hiroshima" label="Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q179691" start="23031" end="23038" title="Niigata (city)" label="Niigata"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="23044" end="23049" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419102" start="23067" end="23083" title="Secretary of War" label="Secretary of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q314826" start="23084" end="23100" title="Henry L. Stimson" label="Henry L. Stimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025961" start="23338" end="23354" title="capital of Japan" label="capital of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="23566" end="23574" title="Nagasaki" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280545" start="23647" end="23660" title="Major General (United States)" label="major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="23688" end="23728" title="atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774648" start="23773" end="23800" title="Distinguished Service Medal (U.S. Army)" label="Distinguished Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q724443" start="24081" end="24096" title="Legion of Merit" label="Legion of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068636" start="24192" end="24210" title="Order of the Crown (Belgium)" label="Order of the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="24259" end="24293" title="Companion of the Order of the Bath" label="Companion of the Order of the Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="24336" end="24349" title="nuclear power" label="nuclear power"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="24354" end="24369" title="nuclear weapons" label="nuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q939090" start="24421" end="24445" title="United States Atomic Energy Commission" label="Atomic Energy Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q723287" start="24507" end="24526" title="Robert P. Patterson" label="Robert P. Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q940135" start="24536" end="24557" title="Secretary of the Navy" label="Secretary of the Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q463385" start="24559" end="24577" title="James V. Forrestal" label="James V. Forrestal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793016" start="24617" end="24653" title="Armed Forces Special Weapons Project" label="Armed Forces Special Weapons Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416321" start="24924" end="24935" title="Sandia Base" label="Sandia Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q783785" start="24950" end="24990" title="Chief of Staff of the United States Army" label="Chief of Staff of the United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331037" start="24992" end="25011" title="General of the Army (United States)" label="General of the Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="25012" end="25032" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601265" start="25335" end="25353" title="List of United States Army Corps of Engineers Chiefs of Engineers" label="Chief of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046665" start="25726" end="25744" title="Lieutenant general (United States)" label="lieutenant general"/>
<link wikidata="Q207342" start="25912" end="25932" title="Trinity (nuclear test)" label="Trinity nuclear test"/>
<link wikidata="Q784567" start="25998" end="26009" title="Sperry Rand" label="Sperry Rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q165613" start="26059" end="26078" title="Darien, Connecticut" label="Darien, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="26155" end="26165" title="West Point" label="West Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331037" start="26242" end="26261" title="General of the Army (United States)" label="General of the Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q127417" start="26262" end="26279" title="Douglas MacArthur" label="Douglas MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4311715" start="26284" end="26305" title="Sylvanus Thayer Award" label="Sylvanus Thayer Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="26615" end="26627" title="Myocardial infarction" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q933382" start="26646" end="26659" title="calcification" label="calcification"/>
<link wikidata="Q616071" start="26667" end="26679" title="aortic valve" label="aortic valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473658" start="26714" end="26745" title="Walter Reed Army Medical Center" label="Walter Reed Army Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748478" start="26847" end="26866" title="Fort Myer, Virginia" label="Fort Myer, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q216344" start="26903" end="26930" title="Arlington National Cemetery" label="Arlington National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="26974" end="26983" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251" start="27059" end="27073" title="Columbia River" label="Columbia River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284526" start="27084" end="27096" title="Hanford Site" label="Hanford Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q693638" start="27100" end="27120" title="Richland, Washington" label="Richland, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671270" start="27233" end="27236" title="Academic grading in the United States" label="GPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="27302" end="27305" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098548" start="27320" end="27331" title="Oppenheimer (TV series)" label="Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390515" start="27407" end="27419" title="Richard Herd" label="Richard Herd"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27460" end="27508" title="Enola Gay: The Men, the Mission, the Atomic Bomb" label="Enola Gay: The Men, the Mission, the Atomic Bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215976" start="27539" end="27561" title="Fat Man and Little Boy (film)" label="Fat Man and Little Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41871" start="27589" end="27600" title="Paul Newman" label="Paul Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3019303" start="27655" end="27662" title="Day One (1989 film)" label="Day One"/>
<link wikidata="Q313545" start="27673" end="27686" title="Brian Dennehy" label="Brian Dennehy"/>
<link wikidata="Q979778" start="27721" end="27734" title="Richard Masur" label="Richard Masur"/>
<link wikidata="Q12124784" start="27792" end="27801" title="Hiroshima (1995 film)" label="Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387226" start="27829" end="27839" title="Eric Owens (bass-baritone)" label="Eric Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q653885" start="27852" end="27874" title="Lyric Opera of Chicago" label="Lyric Opera of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233821" start="27893" end="27906" title="Doctor Atomic" label="Doctor Atomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6733" start="27953" end="27966" title="Edward Teller" label="Edward Teller"/>
<link wikidata="Q175535" start="28038" end="28048" title="Matt Damon" label="Matt Damon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25191" start="28052" end="28069" title="Christopher Nolan" label="Christopher Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q108839994" start="28093" end="28104" title="Oppenheimer (film)" label="Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q207342" start="28325" end="28347" title="Trinity (nuclear test)" label="Trinity (nuclear test)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="60541" wikidata="Q68743" url="?curid=60541" title="Hannelore Kohl">
<text>Johanna Klara Eleonore &quot;Hannelore&quot; Kohl ( Renner; 7 March 1933 – 5 July 2001) was the first wife of German Chancellor Helmut Kohl. She met him for the first time at a school party in Ludwigshafen, Allied-occupied Germany in 1948, when she was 15 years old, and they became engaged in 1953. They were married from 1960 until her death in 2001, a span which included his entire political career. They were the parents of Walter Kohl and Peter Kohl.

As the first lady of Rhineland-Palatinate (1969–1976) and later as the wife of the Chancellor (1982–1998) she undertook official duties, and was engaged in philanthropic work. According to their sons she was an important adviser for her husband during his chancellorship, especially concerning the German reunification and in international relations. Her fluency in foreign languages aided her husband in personal diplomacy.

==Life and work==
Johanna Klara Eleonore Renner was born and christened in Berlin. Her father Wilhelm Renner who joined the Nazi Party (NSDAP) in 1933, became an engineer, business executive, at Hugo Schneider AG and also headed the employment office that developed the anti-tank weapon . Later, she chose &quot;Hannelore&quot; to be used as her first name.

In the days following Germany&#x27;s defeat in World War II, at the age of 12, Hannelore Kohl was &quot;one of the girls battered and defiled by Stalin&#x27;s soldiers&quot;, multiple times raped by multiple Soviet soldiers and then thrown out of a window. In addition to psychological trauma, the attacks left her with a fractured vertebra and back pain for the rest of her life. In order to help others with similar injuries, in 1983 she founded the , a foundation that helps those with trauma-induced injuries to the central nervous system, and became its president.

Hannelore Kohl had trained as an interpreter of English and French, which she spoke fluently. She had to end her studies in 1952, when her father died, and worked for some years as a foreign-language secretary. She later utilized her fluency in English and French in personal diplomacy alongside her husband, who spoke no foreign languages.

On 5 July 2001, Kohl was found dead at age 68 in her Ludwigshafen home. She had apparently died by suicide with an overdose of sleeping pills, after years of suffering from what she had claimed to be a very rare and painful photoallergy induced by an earlier penicillin treatment that had forced her to avoid practically all sunlight for years. Hannelore&#x27;s biographer, , cited &quot;medical experts to support his theory that the bizarre light allergy of her later years may have been a psychosomatic reaction to the suppressed traumas of the war.&quot; In 2005, the was renamed in her honor.

Kohl&#x27;s collection of German-style cooking recipes, (&quot;Culinary Journey through German Regions&quot;), was published in 1996.

==Honours==
* Bambi Award, 1985
* USO International Service Award of the United Service Organizations, 1987
* Order of Merit of Rhineland-Palatinate, 1988
* honorary doctorate, University of Greifswald, 1995
* Knight Commander of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany, 1999

== Publications ==
=== Edited by ===

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q68743" start="0" end="22" title="Hannelore Kohl" label="Johanna Klara Eleonore"/>
<link wikidata="Q68743" start="29" end="38" title="Hannelore Kohl" label="Hannelore"/>
<link wikidata="Q68743" start="45" end="49" title="Hannelore Kohl" label="Kohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q68743" start="52" end="58" title="Hannelore Kohl" label="Renner"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="117" end="127" title="Chancellor of Germany (Federal Republic)" label="Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518" start="128" end="139" title="Helmut Kohl" label="Helmut Kohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910" start="193" end="205" title="Ludwigshafen" label="Ludwigshafen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415901" start="207" end="230" title="Allied-occupied Germany" label="Allied-occupied Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q112607" start="429" end="440" title="Walter Kohl" label="Walter Kohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q17126556" start="445" end="455" title="Peter Kohl" label="Peter Kohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200" start="479" end="499" title="Rhineland-Palatinate" label="Rhineland-Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248582" start="529" end="551" title="List of spouses of German presidents and chancellors" label="wife of the Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="756" end="776" title="German reunification" label="German reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="959" end="965" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="1020" end="1025" title="NSDAP" label="NSDAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q473429" start="1079" end="1096" title="Hugo Schneider AG" label="Hugo Schneider AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1290" end="1302" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q536034" start="1347" end="1410" title="Rape during the occupation of Germany" label="one of the girls battered and defiled by Stalin&amp;#x27;s soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="1763" end="1785" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910" start="2209" end="2221" title="Ludwigshafen" label="Ludwigshafen"/>
<link wikidata="Q608085" start="2380" end="2392" title="photoallergy" label="photoallergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12190" start="2415" end="2425" title="penicillin" label="penicillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q630018" start="2904" end="2915" title="Bambi Award" label="Bambi Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972821" start="2963" end="2991" title="United Service Organizations" label="United Service Organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q470078" start="3000" end="3038" title="Order of Merit of Rhineland-Palatinate" label="Order of Merit of Rhineland-Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q165528" start="3067" end="3091" title="University of Greifswald" label="University of Greifswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q21164" start="3124" end="3173" title="Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany" label="Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="60542" wikidata="Q351971" url="?curid=60542" title="Adams State University">
<text>Adams State University is a public university in Alamosa, Colorado, United States. The university&#x27;s Adams State Grizzlies athletic teams compete in the Rocky Mountain Athletic Conference.

==History==
Adams State was founded in 1921 as a teacher&#x27;s college. Billy Adams, a Colorado legislator who would later become a three-term governor of Colorado, worked for three decades before obtaining the authorization to found Adams State Normal School in 1921, to provide higher education opportunities for teachers from remote and rural areas of Colorado, such as the San Luis Valley, and see them work in those same areas. In 1926, Harriet Dalzell Hester became the university&#x27;s first graduate. She became the school&#x27;s first librarian and an Alamosa County school superintendent. The school adopted the name Adams State College in 1946, corresponding with the expansion of its undergraduate and graduate programs.

In 2012, the institution&#x27;s name changed again, to Adams State University.

The university gained some national attention in 2016 when its online classes came under scrutiny. The university&#x27;s accreditor, the Higher Learning Commission, placed the university on probation. In 2018, the probation was lifted and the university&#x27;s status was restored to &quot;Accredited&quot;.

The university also came into the national spotlight when it placed president Beverlee McClure on leave after employees lodged complaints about her &quot;caustic behavior&quot;. Cheryl D. Lovell was named the interim president and appointed to serve a 12-month term beginning July 1, 2018.

== Academics ==
Adams State offers bachelor&#x27;s degrees in 16 different academic programs, with nearly 60 emphases, 5 teacher licensure programs, and 10 pre-professional programs, in addition to 7 master&#x27;s degrees and 1 doctoral degree. Students can also earn an associate of art or science degree at Adams State.

==Campus==


Adams State University&#x27;s campus is located in the heart of the San Luis Valley. All of the university&#x27;s academic and residential buildings are located on its contiguous campus.

===Academic buildings===
The main administration building and oldest building on campus is Richardson Hall, named after the school&#x27;s first president, Ira Richardson. The home of the math and science curriculum, Porter Hall, is named for alumnus William A. Porter, the creator of E-Trade and a major benefactor of the school. McDaniel Hall, named for donor and emeritus faculty member John McDaniel, is the main venue for English, psychology, history, sociology, and teacher education classes.

Campus edifices for the performing arts include the Adams State University Theater (erected in 2001), the Music Building (which underwent major renovations in 2011) and the Leon Memorial Concert Hall.

===Athletic facilities===
There are two gyms and an indoor pool. The Rex Activity Center for student recreation includes weights, exercise bikes, rock climbing wall, and racquet ball courts. Plachy Hall includes the gym and indoor pool and field house as part of the Athletics Department.

The Rex Stadium has undergone major renovation including the addition of the Residence at the Rex. The new complex includes suites for game viewing. The new residence hall provides one of the most impressive views, with a view of Mount Blanca (one of the 14ers of Colorado) to the east and overlooking the track and football field to the west. A new $750,000 video-tron screen displays action and replays at one end of the field.

===Residences===
There are currently six on-campus apartment complexes (Houtchens, McCurry, Moffat, Petteys, Savage and Residence at the Rex) that include private bedrooms for two to three students, a kitchen/living room and private bath, in addition to three traditional dormitory halls (Conour, Coronado and Girault). Most entering freshmen are housed in Coronado and Girault Halls. The main cafeteria, La Mesa Dining Hall, in the Student Union Building is newly renovated.

==Athletics==
The Adams State Grizzlies compete in the Rocky Mountain Athletic Conference (RMAC) at the NCAA Division II level. Grizzly teams compete in men&#x27;s baseball, basketball, cross country, football, lacrosse, soccer, swimming, track and field, and wrestling; and women&#x27;s  basketball, cross country, golf, lacrosse, soccer, softball, swimming, track and field, and volleyball.

The Grizzlies have won 222 RMAC team championships and 64 team National Championships. Individually, Adams State has produced 268 national champions and 1,937 All-Americans.

The school&#x27;s sports teams are now called the Grizzlies and were formerly known as the Indians.

==Notable alumni==
*Tony Case, former professional football player
*David E. Clemmer, named to the &quot;Popular Science&quot; &quot;10 Most Brilliant List&quot; in 2002
*Don Cockroft, former American football punter and placekicker for the Cleveland Browns
*Robert E. DeNier, member of the Colorado House of Representatives and the Colorado Senate
*Gary W. Gallagher, historian of U. S. Civil War, professor at University of Virginia
*Carlos Lucero, federal judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit
*Neal Nelson, Hall of Fame Basketball Coach
*Chris Perry, former professional football player
*Pat Porter, two-time Olympian runner
*William A. Porter, co-founder of E-Trade
*Shakir Smith, professional basketball player
*Bill Stone, former football running back for the Chicago Bruisers (arena football)
*Myron Thompson, Member of Parliament (1993-2008) in the Canadian House of Commons
*Donald Valdez, Colorado State Representative representing Colorado&#x27;s 62nd district
*Joe Vigil, PhD, track and field coach; Olympic long-distance running coach (1998)
*Travante Williams, professional basketball player

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q351971" start="0" end="22" title="Adams State University" label="Adams State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="28" end="45" title="public university" label="public university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010247" start="49" end="66" title="Alamosa, Colorado" label="Alamosa, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971121" start="105" end="126" title="Adams State Grizzlies" label="Adams State Grizzlies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355873" start="157" end="191" title="Rocky Mountain Athletic Conference" label="Rocky Mountain Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q627006" start="243" end="265" title="normal school" label="teacher&amp;#x27;s college"/>
<link wikidata="Q884113" start="267" end="278" title="Billy Adams (politician)" label="Billy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="282" end="290" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q29514964" start="338" end="358" title="governor of Colorado" label="governor of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q649768" start="572" end="587" title="San Luis Valley" label="San Luis Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q311901" start="757" end="771" title="Alamosa County" label="Alamosa County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758323" start="1131" end="1141" title="Higher education accreditation in the United States" label="accreditor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739633" start="1147" end="1173" title="Higher Learning Commission" label="Higher Learning Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004027" start="2384" end="2401" title="William A. Porter" label="William A. Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607502" start="2418" end="2425" title="E-Trade" label="E-Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q670233" start="3355" end="3367" title="Mount Blanca" label="Mount Blanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567569" start="3380" end="3397" title="14ers of Colorado" label="14ers of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822038" start="4723" end="4732" title="Tony Case" label="Tony Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233162" start="4771" end="4787" title="David E. Clemmer" label="David E. Clemmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292432" start="4874" end="4886" title="Don Cockroft" label="Don Cockroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q127449260" start="4962" end="4978" title="Robert E. DeNier" label="Robert E. DeNier"/>
<link wikidata="Q28036945" start="5053" end="5070" title="Gary W. Gallagher" label="Gary W. Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042058" start="5139" end="5152" title="Carlos Lucero" label="Carlos Lucero"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984156" start="5229" end="5240" title="Neal Nelson" label="Neal Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107736" start="5273" end="5284" title="Chris Perry (American football)" label="Chris Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143927" start="5323" end="5333" title="Pat Porter" label="Pat Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004027" start="5361" end="5378" title="William A. Porter" label="William A. Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607502" start="5394" end="5401" title="E-Trade" label="E-Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q48973314" start="5403" end="5415" title="Shakir Smith (basketball)" label="Shakir Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q14950158" start="5449" end="5459" title="Billy Stone (arena football)" label="Bill Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331616" start="5533" end="5547" title="Myron Thompson" label="Myron Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q32985086" start="5616" end="5629" title="Donald Valdez" label="Donald Valdez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494548" start="5631" end="5660" title="Colorado House of Representatives" label="Colorado State Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q67935834" start="5705" end="5714" title="Joe Vigil" label="Joe Vigil"/>
<link wikidata="Q66725914" start="5788" end="5805" title="Travante Williams" label="Travante Williams"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="60543" wikidata="Q104244" url="?curid=60543" title="Pope Theodore I">
<text>Pope Theodore I (; died 14 May 649) was the bishop of Rome from 24 November 642 to his death. His pontificate was dominated by the struggle with Monothelitism.

==Early career==

According to the &quot;Liber Pontificalis&quot;, Theodore was a Greek man from Jerusalem whose father, Theodore, had been a bishop in the city; he is the only pope to have been a native of that city. He was among the many Syrian clergy who fled to Rome following the Muslim conquest of the Levant. He was made a cardinal deacon possibly around 640 and a full cardinal by Pope John IV.

==Pontificate==
Theodore I&#x27;s election was supported by the exarch of Ravenna, who governed Italy in the name of the emperor in Constantinople. He was installed on 24 November 642, succeeding John IV. 
The main focus of his pontificate was the continued struggle against the heretical Monothelites. He refused to recognize Paul II as the patriarch of Constantinople because Paul&#x27;s predecessor, Pyrrhus I, had not been correctly replaced. He pressed Emperor Constans II to withdraw the &quot;Ecthesis&quot; of Heraclius. While his efforts made little impression on Constantinople, it increased the opposition to the teaching in the West; Pyrrhus even briefly recanted Monothelitism in 645, but was excommunicated in 648. Paul was excommunicated in 649. In response, Paul destroyed the Roman altar in the palace of Placidia and exiled or imprisoned the papal apocrisiarius. He also sought to end the issue with the emperor by promulgating the Type of Constans, ordering that the &quot;Ecthesis&quot; be taken down and seeking to end discussion on the doctrine.

Theodore planned the Lateran Council of 649 to condemn the &quot;Ecthesis&quot;, but died before he could convene it. His successor, Martin I, did so instead. Theodore was buried in Old St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica. His feast day in the Eastern Orthodox Church is on 18 May.

==Notes==
==References==
*

==External links==
*Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q104244" start="0" end="15" title="Pope Theodore I" label="Pope Theodore I"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="44" end="58" title="bishop of Rome" label="bishop of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q238459" start="145" end="158" title="Monothelitism" label="Monothelitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q309061" start="202" end="220" title="Liber Pontificalis" label="Liber Pontificalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="258" end="267" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q248984" start="446" end="475" title="Muslim conquest of the Levant" label="Muslim conquest of the Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="491" end="506" title="cardinal deacon" label="cardinal deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="538" end="546" title="Cardinal (Catholicism)" label="cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q199491" start="550" end="562" title="Pope John IV" label="Pope John IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132454" start="599" end="607" title="papal selection before 1059" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079213" start="612" end="621" title="Byzantine Papacy" label="supported"/>
<link wikidata="Q694740" start="629" end="646" title="exarch of Ravenna" label="exarch of Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="697" end="711" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q238459" start="854" end="866" title="Monothelites" label="Monothelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273458" start="892" end="899" title="Paul II of Constantinople" label="Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q60719" start="907" end="934" title="patriarch of Constantinople" label="patriarch of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286697" start="968" end="977" title="Pyrrhus I of Constantinople" label="Pyrrhus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q41613" start="1031" end="1042" title="Constans II" label="Constans II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528618" start="1065" end="1073" title="Ecthesis" label="Ecthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41852" start="1083" end="1092" title="Heraclius" label="Heraclius"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="1271" end="1285" title="excommunicated" label="excommunicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q174323" start="1387" end="1395" title="Placidia" label="Placidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132430" start="1425" end="1444" title="papal apocrisiarius" label="papal apocrisiarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4457982" start="1515" end="1531" title="Type of Constans" label="Type of Constans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642234" start="1655" end="1677" title="Lateran Council of 649" label="Lateran Council of 649"/>
<link wikidata="Q172390" start="1767" end="1775" title="Pope Martin I" label="Martin I"/>
<link wikidata="Q810126" start="1816" end="1845" title="Old St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="Old St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="1851" end="1860" title="feast day" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="1868" end="1891" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950945" start="1898" end="1904" title="May 18 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)" label="18 May"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="60545" wikidata="Q1577753" url="?curid=60545" title="NewtonScript">
<text>NewtonScript is a prototype-based programming language created to write programs for the Newton platform. It is heavily influenced by the Self programming language, but modified to be more suited to needs of mobile and embedded devices.

== History ==
On August 3, 1993, Apple unveiled the Apple Newton MessagePad. The device had 640 KB RAM, 4 MB ROM, and a 20 MHz ARM 610 microprocessor.

The main intention behind Newton project, was to develop a device capable of replacing a computer while being portable. With limited battery and memory, the developers were looking for programming language capable of meeting these challenges.

The developers looked at the C++ programming language but realized that it lacked flexibility. They started focusing on prototype based languages and were impressed with Smalltalk and Self. Concurrently Apple was developing another dynamic programming language called Dylan, which was a strong candidate for the Newton platform.

However, both Self and Dylan were dropped out of consideration, as they were both in nascent stage for proper integration.

Instead, a team headed by Walter R. Smith developed a new language called NewtonScript. It was influenced by dynamic language like Smalltalk and prototype model based like Self.

== Features ==
Although NewtonScript was heavily influenced by Self, there were some differences in both the languages.

Differences arose due to three perceived problems with Self.
# One is that the typical Self snapshot requires 32 MB of RAM to run in, whereas the Newton platform was designed to use only 128 KB for the operating system. This required some serious paring down of the engine to make it fit and still have room for applications.
# Another issue was performance. Since the language would be used for the entire system, as opposed to just running on an existing operating system, it needed to run as fast as possible.
# Finally, the inheritance system in the normal Self engine had a single parent object, whereas GUIs typically have two — one for the objects and another for the GUI layout that is typically handled via the addition of a slot in some sort of GUI-hierarchy object (like View).
The syntax was also modified to allow a more text-based programming style, as opposed to Self&#x27;s widespread use of a GUI environment for programming. This allowed Newton programs to be developed on a computer running the Toolkit, where the programs would be compiled and then downloaded to a Newton device for running.

One of the advantages of NewtonScript&#x27;s prototype based inheritance was reduced memory usage, a key consideration in the 128 KB Newton. The prototype of a GUI object could actually be stored in ROM, so there was no need to copy default data or functions into working memory.

Unlike class-based languages, where creation of an object involves memory being allocated to all of its attributes, NewtonScripts&#x27; use of prototype inheritance allowed it to allocated memory to few fields like _proto and _parent instead of creating whole new object. Here, _proto and _parent signifies whether the object is using prototype or parent inheritance.

An example to illustrate above concept, a developer might create a new button instance. If the button uses the default font, accessing its font &quot;slot&quot; (i.e., property or member variable) will return a value that is actually stored in ROM; the button instance in RAM does not have a value in its own font slot, so the prototype inheritance chain is followed until a value is found. If the developer then changes the button&#x27;s font, setting its font slot to a new value will override the prototype; this override value is stored in RAM. NewtonScript&#x27;s &quot;differential inheritance&quot; therefore made efficient use of the Newton&#x27;s expensive flash RAM by storing the bulk of the default data and code in the PDA&#x27;s cheaper and much larger ROM.

== Important terms ==
Views: They are objects created by Newton View System, which are created on run-time to render views.

Template: It is a blueprint from which views are created.

Protos: They can be blueprint for a template or a view, and are elements of NewtonScript code libraries.

Frame and Slot: Frame is a dynamic collection of slots, and one element of frame is called as a slot. A slot is made up of name and value. The value can be of any type. It is worthwhile to note that all objects in NewtonScript are frames.

Soup and Entry: It is a related collection of frames/ data. Entry is an individual frame in a soup.

Frame Heap: RAM allocated dynamically by NewtonScript.

Base View: It is the main view of application, consisting of all the variables and methods used in the application.

== Advantages and disadvantages ==
;Advantages
* NewtonScript is a dynamic prototype based programming language, which uses differential inheritance. This means that it is very effective in using memory space. Being dynamic, it is easy to modify objects, type checking, etc. at run time, giving great flexibility for developers.
* Objects created can be stored in permanent memory like flash card or internal memory. The RAM is used only for storing attributes whose values change during runtime. This reduces memory consumption.
* Writing interfaces for GUI applications can be implemented effectively using the prototype model, since we can directly write an object for a GUI control rather than creating a class and instantiating it.
* Garbage collection is carried automatically by the system. This helped the developers to focus more on application development rather than worrying about memory management. Garbage collection also helped in mitigating problem of dangling pointers where a pointer erroneously points to a memory location that was deallocated.

;Disadvantages
* Since NewtonScript code was written on one platform and run on another, it was practically impossible to debug. Better debugging code in the Newton engine would have helped offset this problem to some degree, but the limited memory made this difficult. Instead the developer would get a vague indication along with an error code, without any ability to match it to lines in the original code.
* Another disadvantage is that, dynamic variable reduces the speed of operation since simple pointer dereference cannot be used as in statically typed like C++ and Java.

== Influences ==
With the cancellation of the Newton project by Apple in 1998, all further mainstream developments on NewtonScript were stopped. However, the features used in NewtonScript would continue to inspire other programming models and languages.

The prototype-based object model of Self and NewtonScript was used in JavaScript, the most popular and visible language to use the concept so far.

NewtonScript is also one of the conceptual ancestors (together with Smalltalk, Self, Act1, Lisp and Lua) of a general-purpose programming language called Io which implements the same differential inheritance model, which was used in NewtonScript to conserve memory.

== See also ==
* Prototype-based programming
* Dynamic programming language
* JavaScript

== References ==
== External links ==
* SELF and the Origins of NewtonScript , by Walter Smith, 1994.
* Using a Prototype-based Language for User Interface: The Newton Project’s Experience (PDF), by Walter Smith, 1995.
* Class-based NewtonScript Programming by Walter Smith, 1993.
* Additional Newton-related papers by Walter Smith.
* The NewtonScript Programming Language (archive.org cache; original link dead as of 10/15/04.)
* NEWT/0 A portable NewtonScript compiler/interpreter
* NewtDevEnv, a NewtonScript development environment that enables development to be carried out directly on the Newton by Steve Weyer.
* DyneTK, a NewtonScript development environment that replaces the original Newton ToolKit (NTK); works on MS Windows and Mac OS X by Matthias Melcher.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1577753" start="0" end="12" title="NewtonScript" label="NewtonScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q180868" start="18" end="33" title="prototype-based programming" label="prototype-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="34" end="54" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q420772" start="89" end="95" title="Newton (platform)" label="Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864529" start="138" end="142" title="Self (computer language)" label="Self"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="208" end="214" title="Mobile phone" label="mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="219" end="235" title="Embedded system" label="embedded devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q4147219" start="303" end="313" title="MessagePad" label="MessagePad"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="365" end="368" title="ARM architecture" label="ARM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="663" end="666" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268744" start="902" end="907" title="Dylan (programming language)" label="Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268980" start="1197" end="1213" title="Dynamic programming language" label="dynamic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q235086" start="1219" end="1228" title="Smalltalk" label="Smalltalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="1507" end="1510" title="Random-access memory" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="1997" end="2000" title="Graphical user interface" label="GUI"/>
<link wikidata="Q925858" start="2170" end="2174" title="View model" label="View"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275354" start="3726" end="3750" title="differential inheritance" label="differential inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="3817" end="3826" title="flash memory" label="flash RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="3918" end="3921" title="Read-only memory" label="ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077724" start="4022" end="4030" title="Run time (program lifecycle phase)" label="run-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q815844" start="4694" end="4701" title="Method (computer programming)" label="methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q322202" start="5467" end="5485" title="Garbage collection (computer science)" label="Garbage collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642293" start="5696" end="5712" title="dangling pointer" label="dangling pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="6699" end="6709" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q132874" start="6868" end="6872" title="Lisp (programming language)" label="Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q207316" start="6877" end="6880" title="Lua (programming language)" label="Lua"/>
<link wikidata="Q756175" start="6931" end="6933" title="Io (programming language)" label="Io"/>
<link wikidata="Q180868" start="7061" end="7088" title="Prototype-based programming" label="Prototype-based programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268980" start="7091" end="7119" title="Dynamic programming language" label="Dynamic programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="7122" end="7132" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="60546" wikidata="Q1052579" url="?curid=60546" title="Unique factorization domain">
<text>In mathematics, a unique factorization domain (UFD) (also sometimes called a factorial ring following the terminology of Bourbaki) is a ring in which a statement analogous to the fundamental theorem of arithmetic holds. Specifically, a UFD is an integral domain (a nontrivial commutative ring in which the product of any two non-zero elements is non-zero) in which every non-zero non-unit element can be written as a product of irreducible elements, uniquely up to order and units.

Important examples of UFDs are the integers and polynomial rings in one or more variables with coefficients coming from the integers or from a field.

Unique factorization domains appear in the following chain of class inclusions:
== Definition ==
Formally, a unique factorization domain is defined to be an integral domain &quot;R&quot; in which every non-zero element &quot;x&quot; of &quot;R&quot; which is not a unit can be written as a finite product of irreducible elements &quot;p&quot;&quot;i&quot; of &quot;R&quot;:
: &quot;x&quot; = &quot;p&quot;1 &quot;p&quot;2 ⋅⋅⋅ &quot;p&quot;&quot;n&quot; with 
and this representation is unique in the following sense:
If &quot;q&quot;1, ..., &quot;q&quot;&quot;m&quot; are irreducible elements of &quot;R&quot; such that
: &quot;x&quot; = &quot;q&quot;1 &quot;q&quot;2 ⋅⋅⋅ &quot;q&quot;&quot;m&quot; with ,
then , and there exists a bijective map such that &quot;p&quot;&quot;i&quot; is associated to &quot;q&quot;&quot;φ&quot;(&quot;i&quot;) for .

== Examples ==
Most rings familiar from elementary mathematics are UFDs:
* All principal ideal domains, hence all Euclidean domains, are UFDs. In particular, the integers (also see &quot;Fundamental theorem of arithmetic&quot;), the Gaussian integers and the Eisenstein integers are UFDs.
* If &quot;R&quot; is a UFD, then so is &quot;R&quot;[&quot;X&quot;], the ring of polynomials with coefficients in &quot;R&quot;. Unless &quot;R&quot; is a field, &quot;R&quot;[&quot;X&quot;] is not a principal ideal domain. By induction, a polynomial ring in any number of variables over any UFD (and in particular over a field or over the integers) is a UFD.
* The formal power series ring over a field &quot;K&quot; (or more generally over a regular UFD such as a PID) is a UFD. On the other hand, the formal power series ring over a UFD need not be a UFD, even if the UFD is local. For example, if &quot;R&quot; is the localization of at the prime ideal then &quot;R&quot; is a local ring that is a UFD, but the formal power series ring &quot;R&quot; over &quot;R&quot; is not a UFD.
* The Auslander–Buchsbaum theorem states that every regular local ring is a UFD.
* formula_1 is a UFD for all integers , but not for .
* Mori showed that if the completion of a Zariski ring, such as a Noetherian local ring, is a UFD, then the ring is a UFD. The converse of this is not true: there are Noetherian local rings that are UFDs but whose completions are not. The question of when this happens is rather subtle: for example, for the localization of at the prime ideal , both the local ring and its completion are UFDs, but in the apparently similar example of the localization of at the prime ideal the local ring is a UFD but its completion is not.
* Let formula_2 be a field of any characteristic other than 2. Klein and Nagata showed that the ring is a UFD whenever &quot;Q&quot; is a nonsingular quadratic form in the &quot;X&quot;s and &quot;n&quot; is at least 5. When , the ring need not be a UFD. For example, is not a UFD, because the element &quot;XY&quot; equals the element &quot;ZW&quot; so that &quot;XY&quot; and &quot;ZW&quot; are two different factorizations of the same element into irreducibles.
* The ring is a UFD, but the ring is not. On the other hand, The ring is not a UFD, but the ring is. Similarly the coordinate ring of the 2-dimensional real sphere is a UFD, but the coordinate ring of the complex sphere is not.
* Suppose that the variables &quot;X&quot;&quot;i&quot; are given weights &quot;w&quot;&quot;i&quot;, and is a homogeneous polynomial of weight &quot;w&quot;. Then if &quot;c&quot; is coprime to &quot;w&quot; and &quot;R&quot; is a UFD and either every finitely generated projective module over &quot;R&quot; is free or &quot;c&quot; is 1 mod &quot;w&quot;, the ring is a UFD.

=== Non-examples ===
* The quadratic integer ring formula_3 of all complex numbers of the form formula_4, where &quot;a&quot; and &quot;b&quot; are integers, is not a UFD because 6 factors as both 2×3 and as formula_5. These truly are different factorizations, because the only units in this ring are 1 and −1; thus, none of 2, 3, formula_6, and formula_7 are associate. It is not hard to show that all four factors are irreducible as well, though this may not be obvious. See also &quot;Algebraic integer&quot;.
* For a square-free positive integer &quot;d&quot;, the ring of integers of formula_8 will fail to be a UFD unless &quot;d&quot; is a Heegner number.
* The ring of formal power series over the complex numbers is a UFD, but the subring of those that converge everywhere, in other words the ring of entire functions in a single complex variable, is not a UFD, since there exist entire functions with an infinity of zeros, and thus an infinity of irreducible factors, while a UFD factorization must be finite, e.g.:
*: formula_9

== Properties ==
Some concepts defined for integers can be generalized to UFDs:
* In UFDs, every irreducible element is prime. (In any integral domain, every prime element is irreducible, but the converse does not always hold. For instance, the element is irreducible, but not prime.) Note that this has a partial converse: a domain satisfying the ACCP is a UFD if and only if every irreducible element is prime.
* Any two elements of a UFD have a greatest common divisor and a least common multiple. Here, a greatest common divisor of &quot;a&quot; and &quot;b&quot; is an element &quot;d&quot; that divides both &quot;a&quot; and &quot;b&quot;, and such that every other common divisor of &quot;a&quot; and &quot;b&quot; divides &quot;d&quot;. All greatest common divisors of &quot;a&quot; and &quot;b&quot; are associated.
* Any UFD is integrally closed. In other words, if &quot;R&quot; is a UFD with quotient field &quot;K&quot;, and if an element &quot;k&quot; in &quot;K&quot; is a root of a monic polynomial with coefficients in &quot;R&quot;, then &quot;k&quot; is an element of &quot;R&quot;.
* Let &quot;S&quot; be a multiplicatively closed subset of a UFD &quot;A&quot;. Then the localization &quot;S&quot;−1&quot;A&quot; is a UFD. A partial converse to this also holds; see below.

== Equivalent conditions for a ring to be a UFD ==
A Noetherian integral domain is a UFD if and only if every height 1 prime ideal is principal (a proof is given at the end). Also, a Dedekind domain is a UFD if and only if its ideal class group is trivial. In this case, it is in fact a principal ideal domain.

In general, for an integral domain &quot;A&quot;, the following conditions are equivalent:
# &quot;A&quot; is a UFD.
# Every nonzero prime ideal of &quot;A&quot; contains a prime element.
# &quot;A&quot; satisfies ascending chain condition on principal ideals (ACCP), and the localization &quot;S&quot;−1&quot;A&quot; is a UFD, where &quot;S&quot; is a multiplicatively closed subset of &quot;A&quot; generated by prime elements. (Nagata criterion)
# &quot;A&quot; satisfies ACCP and every irreducible is prime.
# &quot;A&quot; is atomic and every irreducible is prime.
# &quot;A&quot; is a GCD domain satisfying ACCP.
# &quot;A&quot; is a Schreier domain, and atomic.
# &quot;A&quot; is a pre-Schreier domain and atomic.
# &quot;A&quot; has a divisor theory in which every divisor is principal.
# &quot;A&quot; is a Krull domain in which every divisorial ideal is principal (in fact, this is the definition of UFD in Bourbaki.)
# &quot;A&quot; is a Krull domain and every prime ideal of height 1 is principal.

In practice, (2) and (3) are the most useful conditions to check. For example, it follows immediately from (2) that a PID is a UFD, since every prime ideal is generated by a prime element in a PID.

For another example, consider a Noetherian integral domain in which every height one prime ideal is principal. Since every prime ideal has finite height, it contains a height one prime ideal (induction on height) that is principal. By (2), the ring is a UFD.

== See also ==
* Parafactorial local ring
* Noncommutative unique factorization domain

== Citations ==
== References ==
* 
* Chap. 4.
* Chapter II.5
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052579" start="18" end="45" title="Unique factorization domain" label="unique factorization domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052579" start="47" end="50" title="Unique factorization domain" label="UFD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052579" start="77" end="91" title="Unique factorization domain" label="factorial ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q190529" start="121" end="129" title="Nicolas Bourbaki" label="Bourbaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q161172" start="136" end="140" title="Ring (mathematics)" label="ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q670235" start="179" end="212" title="fundamental theorem of arithmetic" label="fundamental theorem of arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q628792" start="246" end="261" title="integral domain" label="integral domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652969" start="265" end="275" title="zero ring" label="nontrivial"/>
<link wikidata="Q858656" start="276" end="292" title="commutative ring" label="commutative ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q118084" start="384" end="388" title="Unit (ring theory)" label="unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989575" start="428" end="447" title="irreducible element" label="irreducible element"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455652" start="531" end="546" title="polynomial ring" label="polynomial ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q190109" start="626" end="631" title="Field (mathematics)" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965271" start="696" end="712" title="subclass (set theory)" label="class inclusions"/>
<link wikidata="Q628792" start="791" end="806" title="integral domain" label="integral domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989575" start="942" end="961" title="irreducible element" label="irreducible element"/>
<link wikidata="Q180907" start="1366" end="1379" title="bijective" label="bijective map"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1420" end="1430" title="Unit_(ring_theory)#Associatedness" label="associated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143969" start="1562" end="1584" title="principal ideal domain" label="principal ideal domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q867345" start="1597" end="1613" title="Euclidean domain" label="Euclidean domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="1645" end="1653" title="integers" label="integers"/>
<link wikidata="Q670235" start="1670" end="1703" title="Fundamental theorem of arithmetic" label="Fundamental theorem of arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q724975" start="1716" end="1732" title="Gaussian integer" label="Gaussian integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q262370" start="1742" end="1760" title="Eisenstein integer" label="Eisenstein integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455652" start="1846" end="1865" title="Polynomial ring" label="ring of polynomials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003025" start="2139" end="2158" title="formal power series" label="formal power series"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2217" end="2224" title="Regular_local_ring#Regular_ring" label="regular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142704" start="2351" end="2356" title="local ring" label="local"/>
<link wikidata="Q863912" start="2418" end="2429" title="prime ideal" label="prime ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822774" start="2566" end="2593" title="Auslander–Buchsbaum theorem" label="Auslander–Buchsbaum theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138875" start="2612" end="2630" title="regular local ring" label="regular local ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066799" start="2737" end="2749" title="Zariski ring" label="Zariski ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q582271" start="2761" end="2782" title="Noetherian ring" label="Noetherian local ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q289093" start="3003" end="3015" title="Localization of a ring" label="localization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554813" start="3800" end="3815" title="coordinate ring" label="coordinate ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="3837" end="3848" title="sphere" label="real sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474074" start="4024" end="4046" title="homogeneous polynomial" label="homogeneous polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q942423" start="4185" end="4202" title="projective module" label="projective module"/>
<link wikidata="Q803531" start="4318" end="4340" title="quadratic integer ring" label="quadratic integer ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="4358" end="4372" title="complex number" label="complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q118084" start="4651" end="4660" title="Unit (ring theory)" label="associate"/>
<link wikidata="Q646245" start="4779" end="4796" title="Algebraic integer" label="Algebraic integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q50706" start="4812" end="4840" title="Square-free integer" label="square-free positive integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358313" start="4860" end="4876" title="ring of integers" label="ring of integers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322644" start="4938" end="4952" title="Heegner number" label="Heegner number"/>
<link wikidata="Q929536" start="5031" end="5038" title="subring" label="subring"/>
<link wikidata="Q847600" start="5101" end="5116" title="entire function" label="entire function"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989575" start="5428" end="5447" title="irreducible element" label="irreducible element"/>
<link wikidata="Q240651" start="5451" end="5456" title="prime element" label="prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803817" start="5679" end="5683" title="Ascending chain condition on principal ideals" label="ACCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q131752" start="5779" end="5802" title="greatest common divisor" label="greatest common divisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q102761" start="5809" end="5830" title="least common multiple" label="least common multiple"/>
<link wikidata="Q50708" start="5932" end="5939" title="divisor" label="divides"/>
<link wikidata="Q628792" start="6145" end="6155" title="associated element" label="associated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851427" start="6170" end="6187" title="integrally closed domain" label="integrally closed"/>
<link wikidata="Q774579" start="6236" end="6250" title="quotient field" label="quotient field"/>
<link wikidata="Q214604" start="6320" end="6324" title="Polynomial root" label="root"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099696" start="6330" end="6346" title="monic polynomial" label="monic polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q50700" start="6352" end="6364" title="coefficients" label="coefficients"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917823" start="6459" end="6489" title="multiplicatively closed subset" label="multiplicatively closed subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q289093" start="6523" end="6535" title="localization of a ring" label="localization"/>
<link wikidata="Q582271" start="6679" end="6689" title="Noetherian ring" label="Noetherian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225713" start="6736" end="6742" title="height (ring theory)" label="height"/>
<link wikidata="Q863912" start="6745" end="6756" title="prime ideal" label="prime ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q254347" start="6809" end="6824" title="Dedekind domain" label="Dedekind domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q912083" start="6853" end="6870" title="ideal class group" label="ideal class group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143969" start="6913" end="6935" title="principal ideal domain" label="principal ideal domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q863912" start="7071" end="7082" title="prime ideal" label="prime ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q240651" start="7111" end="7124" title="prime element" label="prime element"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803817" start="7152" end="7197" title="ascending chain condition on principal ideals" label="ascending chain condition on principal ideals"/>
<link wikidata="Q289093" start="7214" end="7226" title="localization of a ring" label="localization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917823" start="7291" end="7321" title="multiplicatively closed subset" label="multiplicatively closed subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803817" start="7413" end="7417" title="Ascending chain condition on principal ideals" label="ACCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989575" start="7428" end="7439" title="irreducible element" label="irreducible"/>
<link wikidata="Q240651" start="7443" end="7448" title="prime element" label="prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q257414" start="7469" end="7475" title="atomic domain" label="atomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989575" start="7486" end="7497" title="irreducible element" label="irreducible"/>
<link wikidata="Q240651" start="7501" end="7506" title="prime element" label="prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851438" start="7529" end="7539" title="GCD domain" label="GCD domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803817" start="7551" end="7555" title="Ascending chain condition on principal ideals" label="ACCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432871" start="7578" end="7593" title="Schreier domain" label="Schreier domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q257414" start="7599" end="7605" title="atomic domain" label="atomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432871" start="7628" end="7647" title="Schreier domain" label="pre-Schreier domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q257414" start="7652" end="7658" title="atomic domain" label="atomic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7682" end="7696" title="divisor theory" label="divisor theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q623257" start="7755" end="7767" title="Krull domain" label="Krull domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497184" start="7783" end="7799" title="divisorial ideal" label="divisorial ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134519" start="8426" end="8450" title="Parafactorial local ring" label="Parafactorial local ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049230" start="8453" end="8495" title="Noncommutative unique factorization domain" label="Noncommutative unique factorization domain"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="60547" wikidata="Q398033" url="?curid=60547" title="UFD">
<text>UFD may refer to:
* Union of the Democratic Forces (France), a defunct electoral coalition ()
* Unique factorization domain, in abstract algebra
* United Front Department, a North Korean government body
* Upfield railway station, Melbourne
* Ural Federal District, Russia
* USB flash drive, in computing
* Ultra faint dwarf, a type of dwarf spheroidal galaxy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3550144" start="20" end="59" title="Union of the Democratic Forces (France)" label="Union of the Democratic Forces (France)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052579" start="96" end="123" title="Unique factorization domain" label="Unique factorization domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12621268" start="147" end="170" title="United Front Department" label="United Front Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898276" start="205" end="228" title="Upfield railway station" label="Upfield railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q41964" start="242" end="263" title="Ural Federal District" label="Ural Federal District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647694" start="274" end="289" title="USB flash drive" label="USB flash drive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="306" end="323" title="Ultra faint dwarf" label="Ultra faint dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q654754" start="335" end="358" title="dwarf spheroidal galaxy" label="dwarf spheroidal galaxy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="60548" wikidata="Q148319" url="?curid=60548" title="Planetarium">
<text>A planetarium (: planetariums or planetaria) is a theatre built primarily for presenting educational and entertaining shows about astronomy and the night sky, or for training in celestial navigation.

A dominant feature of most planetariums is the large dome-shaped projection screen onto which scenes of stars, planets, and other celestial objects can be made to appear and move realistically to simulate their motion. The projection can be created in various ways, such as a star ball, slide projector, video, fulldome projector systems, and lasers. Typical systems can be set to simulate the sky at any point in time, past or present, and often to depict the night sky as it would appear from any point of latitude on Earth.

Planetaria range in size from the 37 meter dome in St. Petersburg, Russia (called &quot;Planetarium No 1&quot;) to three-meter inflatable portable domes where attendees sit on the floor. The largest planetarium in the Western Hemisphere is the Jennifer Chalsty Planetarium at Liberty Science Center in New Jersey, its dome measuring 27 meters in diameter. The Birla Planetarium in Kolkata, India is the largest by seating capacity, having 630 seats. In North America, the Hayden Planetarium at the American Museum of Natural History in New York City has the greatest number of seats, at 423.

The term &quot;planetarium&quot; is sometimes used generically to describe other devices which illustrate the Solar System, such as a computer simulation or an orrery. &quot;Planetarium software&quot; refers to a software application that renders a three-dimensional image of the sky onto a two-dimensional computer screen, or in a virtual reality headset for a 3D representation. The term &quot;planetarian&quot; is used to describe a member of the professional staff of a planetarium.

==History==
===Early===

The ancient Greek polymath Archimedes is attributed with creating a primitive planetarium device that could predict the movements of the Sun and the Moon and the planets. The discovery of the Antikythera mechanism proved that such devices already existed during antiquity, though likely after Archimedes&#x27; lifetime. Campanus of Novara described a planetary equatorium in his &quot;Theorica Planetarum&quot;, and included instructions on how to build one. The Globe of Gottorf built around 1650 had constellations painted on the inside. These devices would today usually be referred to as orreries (named for the Earl of Orrery). In fact, many planetariums today have projection orreries, which project onto the dome the Solar System (including the Sun and planets up to Saturn) in their regular orbital paths.

In 1229, following the conclusion of the Fifth Crusade, Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II of Hohenstaufen brought back a tent with scattered holes representing stars or planets. The device was operated internally with a spinnable table that rotated the tent.

The small size of typical 18th century orreries limited their impact, and towards the end of that century a number of educators attempted to create a larger sized version. The efforts of Adam Walker (1730–1821) and his sons are noteworthy in their attempts to fuse theatrical illusions with education. Walker&#x27;s Eidouranion was the heart of his public lectures or theatrical presentations. Walker&#x27;s son describes this &quot;Elaborate Machine&quot; as &quot;twenty feet high, and twenty-seven in diameter: it stands vertically before the spectators, and its globes are so large, that they are distinctly seen in the most distant parts of the Theatre. Every Planet and Satellite seems suspended in space, without any support; performing their annual and diurnal revolutions without any apparent cause&quot;. Other lecturers promoted their own devices: R E Lloyd advertised his Dioastrodoxon, or Grand Transparent Orrery, and by 1825 William Kitchener was offering his Ouranologia, which was in diameter. These devices most probably sacrificed astronomical accuracy for crowd-pleasing spectacle and sensational and awe-provoking imagery.

The oldest still-working planetarium can be found in the Frisian city of Franeker. It was built by Eise Eisinga (1744–1828) in the living room of his house. It took Eisinga seven years to build his planetarium, which was completed in 1781.

=== 20th century ===
In 1905 Oskar von Miller (1855–1934) of the &quot;Deutsches Museum&quot; in Munich commissioned updated versions of a geared orrery and planetarium from M Sendtner, and later worked with Franz Meyer, chief engineer at the Carl Zeiss optical works in Jena, on the largest mechanical planetarium ever constructed, capable of displaying both heliocentric and geocentric motion. This was displayed at the Deutsches Museum in 1924, construction work having been interrupted by the war. The planets travelled along overhead rails, powered by electric motors: the orbit of Saturn was 11.25 m in diameter. 180 stars were projected onto the wall by electric bulbs.

While this was being constructed, von Miller was also working at the Zeiss factory with German astronomer Max Wolf, director of the Landessternwarte Heidelberg-Königstuhl observatory of the University of Heidelberg, on a new and novel design, inspired by Wallace W. Atwood&#x27;s work at the Chicago Academy of Sciences and by the ideas of Walther Bauersfeld and Rudolf Straubel at Zeiss. The result was a planetarium design which would generate all the necessary movements of the stars and planets inside the optical projector, and would be mounted centrally in a room, projecting images onto the white surface of a hemisphere. In August 1923, the first (Model I) Zeiss planetarium projected images of the night sky onto the white plaster lining of a 16 m hemispherical concrete dome, erected on the roof of the Zeiss works. The first official public showing was at the Deutsches Museum in Munich on October 21, 1923.

Zeiss Planetarium became popular, and attracted a lot of attention. Next Zeiss planetariums were opened in Rome (1928, in Aula Ottagona, part of the Baths of Diocletian), Chicago (1930), Osaka (1937, in the Osaka City Electricity Science Museum).

===After World War II===

When Germany was divided into East and West Germany after the war, the Zeiss firm was also split. Part remained in its traditional headquarters at Jena, in East Germany, and part migrated to West Germany. The designer of the first planetariums for Zeiss, Walther Bauersfeld, also migrated to West Germany with the other members of the Zeiss management team. There he remained on the Zeiss West management team until his death in 1959.

The West German firm resumed making large planetariums in 1954, and the East German firm started making small planetariums a few years later. Meanwhile, the lack of planetarium manufacturers had led to several attempts at construction of unique models, such as one built by the California Academy of Sciences in Golden Gate Park, San Francisco, which operated 1952–2003. The Korkosz brothers built a large projector for the Boston Museum of Science, which was unique in being the first (and for a very long time only) planetarium to project the planet Uranus. Most planetariums ignore Uranus as being at best marginally visible to the naked eye.

A great boost to the popularity of the planetarium worldwide was provided by the Space Race of the 1950s and 60s when fears that the United States might miss out on the opportunities of the new frontier in space stimulated a massive program to install over 1,200 planetariums in U.S. high schools.
Armand Spitz recognized that there was a viable market for small inexpensive planetaria. His first model, the Spitz A, was designed to project stars from a dodecahedron, thus reducing machining expenses in creating a globe. Planets were not mechanized, but could be shifted by hand. Several models followed with various upgraded capabilities, until the A3P, which projected well over a thousand stars, had motorized motions for latitude change, daily motion, and annual motion for Sun, Moon (including phases), and planets. This model was installed in hundreds of high schools, colleges, and even small museums from 1964 to the 1980s.
Japan entered the planetarium manufacturing business in the 1960s, with Goto and Minolta both successfully marketing a number of different models. Goto was particularly successful when the Japanese Ministry of Education put one of their smallest models, the E-3 or E-5 (the numbers refer to the metric diameter of the dome) in every elementary school in Japan.

Phillip Stern, as former lecturer at New York City&#x27;s Hayden Planetarium, had the idea of creating a small planetarium which could be programmed. His Apollo model was introduced in 1967 with a plastic program board, recorded lecture, and film strip. Unable to pay for this himself, Stern became the head of the planetarium division of Viewlex, a mid-size audio-visual firm on Long Island. About thirty canned programs were created for various grade levels and the public, while operators could create their own or run the planetarium live. Purchasers of the Apollo were given their choice of two canned shows, and could purchase more. A few hundred were sold, but in the late 1970s Viewlex went bankrupt for reasons unrelated to the planetarium business.

During the 1970s, the OmniMax movie system (now known as IMAX Dome) was conceived to operate on planetarium screens. More recently, some planetariums have re-branded themselves as &quot;dome theaters&quot;, with broader offerings including wide-screen or &quot;wraparound&quot; films, fulldome video, and laser shows that combine music with laser-drawn patterns.

Learning Technologies Inc. in Massachusetts offered the first easily portable planetarium in 1977. Philip Sadler designed this patented system which projected stars, constellation figures from many mythologies, celestial coordinate systems, and much else, from removable cylinders (Viewlex and others followed with their own portable versions).

When Germany reunified in 1989, the two Zeiss firms did likewise, and expanded their offerings to cover many different size domes.

===Computerized planetaria===
In 1983, Evans &amp; Sutherland installed the first digital planetarium projector displaying computer graphics (Hansen planetarium, Salt Lake City, Utah)—the Digistar I projector used a vector graphics system to display starfields as well as line art. This gives the operator great flexibility in showing not only the modern night sky as visible from Earth, but as visible from points far distant in space and time. The newest generations of planetarium projectors, beginning with Digistar 3, offer fulldome video technology. This allows for the projection of any image.

==Technology ==

=== Domes ===
Planetarium domes range in size from 3 to 35 m in diameter, accommodating from 1 to 500 people. They can be permanent or portable, depending on the application. 
* Portable inflatable domes can be inflated in minutes. Such domes are often used for touring planetariums visiting, for example, schools and community centres.
* Temporary structures using glass-reinforced plastic (GRP) segments bolted together and mounted on a frame are possible. As they may take some hours to construct, they are more suitable for applications such as exhibition stands, where a dome will stay up for a period of at least several days.
* Negative-pressure inflated domes are suitable in some semi-permanent situations. They use a fan to extract air from behind the dome surface, allowing atmospheric pressure to push it into the correct shape.
* Smaller permanent domes are frequently constructed from glass reinforced plastic. This is inexpensive but, as the projection surface reflects sound as well as light, the acoustics inside this type of dome can detract from its utility. Such a solid dome also presents issues connected with heating and ventilation in a large-audience planetarium, as air cannot pass through it.
* Older planetarium domes were built using traditional construction materials and surfaced with plaster. This method is relatively expensive and suffers the same acoustic and ventilation issues as GRP.
* Most modern domes are built from thin aluminium sections with ribs providing a supporting structure behind. The use of aluminium makes it easy to perforate the dome with thousands of tiny holes. This reduces the reflectivity of sound back to the audience (providing better acoustic characteristics), lets a sound system project through the dome from behind (offering sound that seems to come from appropriate directions related to a show), and allows air circulation through the projection surface for climate control.

The realism of the viewing experience in a planetarium depends significantly on the dynamic range of the image, i.e., the contrast between dark and light. This can be a challenge in any domed projection environment, because a bright image projected on one side of the dome will tend to reflect light across to the opposite side, &quot;lifting&quot; the black level there and so making the whole image look less realistic. Since traditional planetarium shows consisted mainly of small points of light (i.e., stars) on a black background, this was not a significant issue, but it became an issue as digital projection systems started to fill large portions of the dome with bright objects (e.g., large images of the sun in context). For this reason, modern planetarium domes are often not painted white but rather a mid grey colour, reducing reflection to perhaps 35-50%. This increases the perceived level of contrast.

A major challenge in dome construction is to make seams as invisible as possible. Painting a dome after installation is a major task, and if done properly, the seams can be made almost to disappear.

Traditionally, planetarium domes were mounted horizontally, matching the natural horizon of the real night sky. However, because that configuration requires highly inclined chairs for comfortable viewing &quot;straight up&quot;, increasingly domes are being built tilted from the horizontal by between 5 and 30 degrees to provide greater comfort. Tilted domes tend to create a favoured &quot;sweet spot&quot; for optimum viewing, centrally about a third of the way up the dome from the lowest point. Tilted domes generally have seating arranged stadium-style in straight, tiered rows; horizontal domes usually have seats in circular rows, arranged in concentric (facing center) or epicentric (facing front) arrays.

Planetaria occasionally include controls such as buttons or joysticks in the arm rests of seats to allow audience feedback that influences the show in real time.

Often around the edge of the dome (the &quot;cove&quot;) are:
* Silhouette models of geography or buildings like those in the area round the planetarium building.
* Lighting to simulate the effect of twilight or urban light pollution.

Traditionally, planetariums needed many incandescent lamps around the cove of the dome to help audience entry and exit, to simulate sunrise and sunset, and to provide working light for dome cleaning. More recently, solid-state LED lighting has become available that significantly decreases power consumption and reduces the maintenance requirement as lamps no longer have to be changed on a regular basis.

The world&#x27;s largest mechanical planetarium is located in Monico, Wisconsin. The &quot;Kovac Planetarium&quot;. It is 22 feet in diameter and weighs two tons. The globe is made of wood and is driven with a variable speed motor controller. This is the largest mechanical planetarium in the world, larger than the &quot;Atwood Globe&quot; in Chicago (15 feet in diameter) and one third the size of the Hayden.

Some new planetariums now feature a glass floor, which allows spectators to stand near the center of a sphere surrounded by projected images in all directions, giving the impression of floating in outer space. For example, a small planetarium at AHHAA in Tartu, Estonia features such an installation, with special projectors for images below the feet of the audience, as well as above their heads.

===Traditional electromechanical/optical projectors===
Traditional planetarium projection apparatus use a hollow ball with a light inside, and a pinhole for each star, hence the name &quot;star ball&quot;. With some of the brightest stars (e.g. Sirius, Canopus, Vega), the hole must be so big to let enough light through that there must be a small lens in the hole to focus the light to a sharp point on the dome. In later and modern planetarium star balls, the individual bright stars often have individual projectors, shaped like small hand-held torches, with focusing lenses for individual bright stars. Contact breakers prevent the projectors from projecting below the &quot;horizon&quot;.

The star ball is usually mounted so it can rotate as a whole to simulate the Earth&#x27;s daily rotation, and to change the simulated latitude on Earth. There is also usually a means of rotating to produce the effect of precession of the equinoxes. Often, one such ball is attached at its south ecliptic pole. In that case, the view cannot go so far south that any of the resulting blank area at the south is projected on the dome. Some star projectors have two balls at opposite ends of the projector like a dumbbell. In that case all stars can be shown and the view can go to either pole or anywhere between. But care must be taken that the projection fields of the two balls match where they meet or overlap.

Smaller planetarium projectors include a set of fixed stars, Sun, Moon, and planets, and various nebulae. Larger projectors also include comets and a far greater selection of stars. Additional projectors can be added to show twilight around the outside of the screen (complete with city or country scenes) as well as the Milky Way. Others add coordinate lines and constellations, photographic slides, laser displays, and other images.

Each planet is projected by a sharply focused spotlight that makes a spot of light on the dome. Planet projectors must have gearing to move their positioning and thereby simulate the planets&#x27; movements. These can be of these types:-
*Copernican. The axis represents the Sun. The rotating piece that represents each planet carries a light that must be arranged and guided to swivel so it always faces towards the rotating piece that represents the Earth. This presents mechanical problems including:
*:The planet lights must be powered by wires, which have to bend about as the planets rotate, and repeatedly bending copper wire tends to cause wire breakage through metal fatigue.
*:When a planet is at opposition to the Earth, its light is liable to be blocked by the mechanism&#x27;s central axle. (If the planet mechanism is set 180° rotated from reality, the lights are carried by the Earth and shine towards each planet, and the blocking risk happens at conjunction with Earth.)
*Ptolemaic. Here the central axis represents the Earth. Each planet light is on a mount which rotates only about the central axis, and is aimed by a guide which is steered by a deferent and an epicycle (or whatever the planetarium maker calls them). Here Ptolemy&#x27;s number values must be revised to remove the daily rotation, which in a planetarium is catered for otherwise. (In one planetarium, this needed Ptolemaic-type orbital constants for Uranus, which was unknown to Ptolemy.)
*Computer-controlled. Here all the planet lights are on mounts which rotate only about the central axis, and are aimed by a computer.

Despite offering a good viewer experience, traditional star ball projectors suffer several inherent limitations. From a practical point of view, the low light levels require several minutes for the audience to &quot;dark adapt&quot; its eyesight. &quot;Star ball&quot; projection is limited in education terms by its inability to move beyond an Earth-bound view of the night sky. Finally, in most traditional projectors the various overlaid projection systems are incapable of proper occultation. This means that a planet image projected on top of a star field (for example) will still show the stars shining through the planet image, degrading the quality of the viewing experience. For related reasons, some planetariums show stars below the horizon projecting on the walls below the dome or on the floor, or (with a bright star or a planet) shining in the eyes of someone in the audience.

However, the new breed of Optical-Mechanical projectors using fiber-optic technology to display the stars show a much more realistic view of the sky.

===Digital projectors===

An increasing number of planetariums are using digital technology to replace the entire system of interlinked projectors traditionally employed around a star ball to address some of their limitations. Digital planetarium manufacturers claim reduced maintenance costs and increased reliability from such systems compared with traditional &quot;star balls&quot; on the grounds that they employ few moving parts and do not generally require synchronisation of movement across the dome between several separate systems. Some planetariums mix both traditional opto-mechanical projection and digital technologies on the same dome.

In a fully digital planetarium, the dome image is generated by a computer and then projected onto the dome using a variety of technologies including cathode-ray tube, LCD, DLP, or laser projectors. Sometimes a single projector mounted near the centre of the dome is employed with a fisheye lens to spread the light over the whole dome surface, while in other configurations several projectors around the horizon of the dome are arranged to blend together seamlessly.

Digital projection systems all work by creating the image of the night sky as a large array of pixels. Generally speaking, the more pixels a system can display, the better the viewing experience. While the first generation of digital projectors were unable to generate enough pixels to match the image quality of the best traditional &quot;star ball&quot; projectors, high-end systems now offer a resolution that approaches the limit of human visual acuity.

LCD projectors have fundamental limits on their ability to project true black as well as light, which has tended to limit their use in planetaria. LCOS and modified LCOS projectors have improved on LCD contrast ratios while also eliminating the &quot;screen door&quot; effect of small gaps between LCD pixels. &quot;Dark chip&quot; DLP projectors improve on the standard DLP design and can offer relatively inexpensive solution with bright images, but the black level requires physical baffling of the projectors. As the technology matures and reduces in price, laser projection looks promising for dome projection as it offers bright images, large dynamic range and a very wide color space.

==Show content==

Worldwide, most planetariums provide shows to the general public. Traditionally, shows for these audiences with themes such as &quot;What&#x27;s in the sky tonight?&quot;, or shows which pick up on topical issues such as a religious festival (often the Christmas star) linked to the night sky, have been popular. Live format is preferred by many venues as a live speaker or presenter can answer questions raised by the audience.

Since the early 1990s, fully featured 3-D digital planetariums have added an extra degree of freedom to a presenter giving a show because they allow simulation of the view from any point in space, not only the Earth-bound view which we are most familiar with. This new virtual reality capability to travel through the universe provides important educational benefits because it vividly conveys that space has depth, helping audiences to leave behind the ancient misconception that the stars are stuck on the inside of a giant celestial sphere and instead to understand the true layout of the Solar System and beyond. For example, a planetarium can now &#x27;fly&#x27; the audience towards one of the familiar constellations such as Orion, revealing that the stars which appear to make up a co-ordinated shape from an Earth-bound viewpoint are at vastly different distances from Earth and so not connected, except in human imagination and mythology. For especially visual or spatially aware people, this experience can be more educationally beneficial than other demonstrations.

== See also ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==References==
== External links ==

* IPS (International Planetarium Society)
* WPD (Worldwide Planetariums Database)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q148319" start="2" end="13" title="Planetarium" label="planetarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q148319" start="17" end="29" title="Planetarium" label="planetariums"/>
<link wikidata="Q148319" start="33" end="43" title="Planetarium" label="planetaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q24354" start="50" end="57" title="Theater (structure)" label="theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153173" start="89" end="117" title="educational entertainment" label="educational and entertaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="130" end="139" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153471" start="148" end="157" title="night sky" label="night sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063512" start="178" end="198" title="celestial navigation" label="celestial navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12493" start="254" end="258" title="dome" label="dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q12134" start="266" end="283" title="celestial sphere" label="projection screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="305" end="309" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="312" end="319" title="planets" label="planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q6999" start="331" end="348" title="astronomical object" label="celestial objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364435" start="477" end="486" title="Planetarium projector" label="star ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q846668" start="488" end="503" title="slide projector" label="slide projector"/>
<link wikidata="Q34508" start="505" end="510" title="video" label="video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473738" start="512" end="520" title="fulldome" label="fulldome"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="709" end="717" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541946" start="1005" end="1027" title="Liberty Science Center" label="Liberty Science Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="1031" end="1041" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q217717" start="1227" end="1261" title="American Museum of Natural History" label="American Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1265" end="1278" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="1432" end="1444" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759299" start="1482" end="1488" title="orrery" label="orrery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201225" start="1496" end="1516" title="Planetarium software" label="Planetarium software"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="1839" end="1852" title="Hellenistic period" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q270141" start="1853" end="1861" title="polymath" label="polymath"/>
<link wikidata="Q8739" start="1862" end="1872" title="Archimedes" label="Archimedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="1972" end="1975" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="1984" end="1988" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q182324" start="2027" end="2048" title="Antikythera mechanism" label="Antikythera mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q41493" start="2097" end="2106" title="Ancient history" label="antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q560868" start="2155" end="2173" title="Campanus of Novara" label="Campanus of Novara"/>
<link wikidata="Q255849" start="2196" end="2206" title="equatorium" label="equatorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q535891" start="2298" end="2314" title="Globe of Gottorf" label="Globe of Gottorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759299" start="2427" end="2435" title="Orrery" label="orreries"/>
<link wikidata="Q65962015" start="2451" end="2465" title="Earl of Orrery" label="Earl of Orrery"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="2559" end="2571" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="2587" end="2590" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="2609" end="2615" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="2634" end="2639" title="orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q51659" start="2691" end="2704" title="Fifth Crusade" label="Fifth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="2706" end="2724" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="2725" end="2753" title="Frederick II of Hohenstaufen" label="Frederick II of Hohenstaufen"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="2808" end="2812" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="2817" end="2823" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679934" start="3095" end="3106" title="Adam Walker (inventor)" label="Adam Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302694" start="3224" end="3235" title="Eidouranion" label="Eidouranion"/>
<link wikidata="Q601223" start="4057" end="4089" title="Eise Eisinga Planetarium" label="oldest still-working planetarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q770" start="4110" end="4117" title="Friesland" label="Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41974" start="4126" end="4134" title="Franeker" label="Franeker"/>
<link wikidata="Q983980" start="4152" end="4164" title="Eise Eisinga" label="Eise Eisinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q76456" start="4323" end="4339" title="Oskar von Miller" label="Oskar von Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q131617" start="4365" end="4381" title="Deutsches Museum" label="Deutsches Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="4391" end="4397" title="Munich, Germany" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q282186" start="4542" end="4547" title="Carl Zeiss AG" label="Zeiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150" start="4565" end="4569" title="Jena" label="Jena"/>
<link wikidata="Q103983" start="4654" end="4666" title="heliocentric" label="heliocentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q165800" start="4671" end="4681" title="geocentric" label="geocentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q76712" start="5078" end="5086" title="Max Wolf" label="Max Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q27115" start="5104" end="5142" title="Landessternwarte Heidelberg-Königstuhl" label="Landessternwarte Heidelberg-Königstuhl"/>
<link wikidata="Q151510" start="5162" end="5186" title="University of Heidelberg" label="University of Heidelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962920" start="5227" end="5244" title="Wallace W. Atwood" label="Wallace W. Atwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160706" start="5264" end="5291" title="Chicago Academy of Sciences" label="Chicago Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q86780" start="5312" end="5330" title="Walther Bauersfeld" label="Walther Bauersfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q22669830" start="5335" end="5350" title="Rudolf Straubel" label="Rudolf Straubel"/>
<link wikidata="Q282186" start="5354" end="5359" title="Carl Zeiss AG" label="Zeiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q320440" start="5637" end="5654" title="Zeiss-Planetarium Jena" label="Zeiss planetarium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6014" end="6027" title="Aula Ottagona" label="Aula Ottagona"/>
<link wikidata="Q836108" start="6041" end="6060" title="Baths of Diocletian" label="Baths of Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6099" end="6136" title="Osaka City Electricity Science Museum" label="Osaka City Electricity Science Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150" start="6313" end="6317" title="Jena" label="Jena"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="6322" end="6334" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="6357" end="6369" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q86780" start="6421" end="6439" title="Walther Bauersfeld" label="Walther Bauersfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q965731" start="6880" end="6910" title="California Academy of Sciences" label="California Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q635559" start="6914" end="6930" title="Golden Gate Park" label="Golden Gate Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="6932" end="6945" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139748" start="7026" end="7050" title="Boston Museum of Science" label="Boston Museum of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q324" start="7154" end="7160" title="Uranus" label="Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932" start="7330" end="7340" title="Space Race" label="Space Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q15486110" start="7547" end="7559" title="Armand Spitz" label="Armand Spitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q178296" start="7703" end="7715" title="dodecahedron" label="dodecahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="8182" end="8187" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q354578" start="8263" end="8270" title="Minolta" label="Minolta"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="8515" end="8532" title="elementary school" label="elementary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="8581" end="8594" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397171" start="8602" end="8620" title="Hayden Planetarium" label="Hayden Planetarium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8883" end="8890" title="Viewlex" label="Viewlex"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="8924" end="8935" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q188575" start="9326" end="9333" title="OmniMax" label="OmniMax"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="9334" end="9339" title="Film" label="movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473738" start="9589" end="9603" title="fulldome" label="fulldome video"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9668" end="9694" title="Learning Technologies Inc." label="Learning Technologies Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="9698" end="9711" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8928" start="9834" end="9847" title="constellation" label="constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="9866" end="9877" title="mythologies" label="mythologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="10019" end="10036" title="German reunification" label="Germany reunified"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415876" start="10185" end="10207" title="Evans &amp;amp; Sutherland" label="Evans &amp;amp; Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q173285" start="10228" end="10235" title="Digital data" label="digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q14711848" start="10288" end="10306" title="Old Hansen Planetarium" label="Hansen planetarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275747" start="10334" end="10344" title="Digistar" label="Digistar I"/>
<link wikidata="Q170130" start="10362" end="10377" title="vector graphics" label="vector graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q365552" start="10418" end="10426" title="line art" label="line art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="10527" end="10532" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415876" start="10657" end="10667" title="Digistar 3" label="Digistar 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473738" start="10675" end="10689" title="fulldome" label="fulldome video"/>
<link wikidata="Q37221" start="10829" end="10837" title="diameter" label="diameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162595" start="10952" end="10962" title="inflatable" label="inflatable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="11131" end="11155" title="glass-reinforced plastic" label="glass-reinforced plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q81809" start="11550" end="11570" title="atmospheric pressure" label="atmospheric pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q82811" start="11778" end="11787" title="acoustics" label="acoustics"/>
<link wikidata="Q274988" start="12081" end="12088" title="plaster" label="plaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q82811" start="12147" end="12155" title="Acoustics" label="acoustic"/>
<link wikidata="Q584049" start="12160" end="12171" title="Ventilation (architecture)" label="ventilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="12227" end="12236" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161699" start="12793" end="12806" title="dynamic range" label="dynamic range"/>
<link wikidata="Q10855169" start="13062" end="13073" title="black level" label="black level"/>
<link wikidata="Q178805" start="14604" end="14612" title="joystick" label="joystick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988" start="14695" end="14704" title="Real-time computing" label="real time"/>
<link wikidata="Q898700" start="14771" end="14781" title="Silhouette" label="Silhouette"/>
<link wikidata="Q180644" start="14925" end="14940" title="light pollution" label="light pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q47616" start="14983" end="15001" title="Incandescent light bulb" label="incandescent lamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q193294" start="15075" end="15082" title="sunrise" label="sunrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q166564" start="15087" end="15093" title="sunset" label="sunset"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="15170" end="15173" title="LED" label="LED"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567111" start="15799" end="15810" title="glass floor" label="glass floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="15866" end="15872" title="sphere" label="sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q4169" start="15960" end="15971" title="outer space" label="outer space"/>
<link wikidata="Q3741056" start="16009" end="16014" title="AHHAA" label="AHHAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q13972" start="16018" end="16023" title="Tartu" label="Tartu"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="16025" end="16032" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364435" start="16229" end="16261" title="planetarium projector" label="planetarium projection apparatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409" start="16407" end="16413" title="Sirius" label="Sirius"/>
<link wikidata="Q12189" start="16415" end="16422" title="Canopus" label="Canopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427" start="16424" end="16428" title="Vega" label="Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q83094" start="17077" end="17104" title="precession of the equinoxes" label="precession of the equinoxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q79852" start="17152" end="17160" title="ecliptic" label="ecliptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q465453" start="17366" end="17374" title="dumbbell" label="dumbbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q42372" start="17667" end="17673" title="nebula" label="nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="17707" end="17712" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="17891" end="17900" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q8928" start="17934" end="17947" title="constellation" label="constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="17971" end="17976" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18052" end="18061" title="Stage lighting instrument#Spotlights" label="spotlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q103983" start="18245" end="18255" title="Heliocentrism" label="Copernican"/>
<link wikidata="Q507234" start="18676" end="18689" title="metal fatigue" label="metal fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q105562" start="18713" end="18723" title="Opposition (astronomy)" label="opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q191536" start="18969" end="18980" title="conjunction (astronomy)" label="conjunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q165800" start="18995" end="19004" title="Geocentric model" label="Ptolemaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q324" start="19443" end="19449" title="Uranus" label="Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="19606" end="19614" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q352374" start="19827" end="19849" title="Adaptation (eye)" label="&amp;quot;dark adapt&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q202746" start="20101" end="20112" title="occultation" label="occultation"/>
<link wikidata="Q173285" start="20734" end="20741" title="Digital data" label="digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="21378" end="21386" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="21462" end="21478" title="cathode-ray tube" label="cathode-ray tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="21480" end="21483" title="LCD" label="LCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q523366" start="21485" end="21488" title="Digital Light Processing" label="DLP"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="21493" end="21498" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q121567" start="21595" end="21607" title="fisheye lens" label="fisheye lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q355198" start="21876" end="21882" title="pixels" label="pixels"/>
<link wikidata="Q555066" start="22224" end="22237" title="visual acuity" label="visual acuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758065" start="22387" end="22391" title="LCOS" label="LCOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q353268" start="22442" end="22456" title="contrast ratio" label="contrast ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q166863" start="22919" end="22930" title="color space" label="color space"/>
<link wikidata="Q211221" start="23204" end="23218" title="Star of Bethlehem" label="Christmas star"/>
<link wikidata="Q189177" start="23419" end="23422" title="3-D computer graphics" label="3-D"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="23650" end="23665" title="virtual reality" label="virtual reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q8434" start="23727" end="23736" title="education" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q12134" start="23907" end="23923" title="celestial sphere" label="celestial sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="23973" end="23985" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q8860" start="24113" end="24118" title="Orion (constellation)" label="Orion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="24319" end="24328" title="mythology" label="mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129066" start="24355" end="24370" title="kinesthetic" label="spatially aware"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="60549" wikidata="Q1759299" url="?curid=60549" title="Orrery">
<text>An orrery is a mechanical model of the Solar System that illustrates or predicts the relative positions and motions of the planets and moons, usually according to the heliocentric model. It may also represent the relative sizes of these bodies; however, since accurate scaling is often not practical due to the actual large ratio differences, it may use a scaled-down approximation. The Greeks had working planetaria, but the first modern example was produced by John Rowley. He named it &quot;orrery&quot; for his patron Charles Boyle, 4th Earl of Orrery (in County Cork, Ireland). The plaque on it reads &quot;Orrery invented by Graham 1700 improved by Rowley and presented by him to John [sic] Earl of Orrery after whom it was named at the suggestion of Richard Steele.&quot;

Orreries are typically driven by a clockwork mechanism with a globe representing the Sun at the centre, and with a planet at the end of each of a series of arms.

==History==
===Ancient===
The Antikythera mechanism, discovered in 1901 in a wreck off the Greek island of Antikythera in the Mediterranean Sea, exhibited the diurnal motions of the Sun, Moon, and the five planets known to the ancient Greeks. It has been dated between 205 to 87 BC. The mechanism is considered one of the first orreries. It was geocentric and used as a mechanical calculator to calculate astronomical positions.

Cicero, the Roman philosopher and politician writing in the first century BC, has references describing planetary mechanical models. According to him, the Greek polymaths Thales and Posidonius both constructed a device modeling celestial motion.

===Early Modern===

In 1348, Giovanni Dondi built the first known clock driven mechanism of the system. It displays the ecliptic position of the Moon, Sun, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn according to the complicated geocentric Ptolemaic planetary theories. The clock itself is lost, but Dondi left a complete description of its astronomic gear trains.

As late as 1650, P. Schirleus built a geocentric planetarium with the Sun as a planet, and with Mercury and Venus revolving around the Sun as its moons.

At the court of William IV, Landgrave of Hesse-Kassel two complicated astronomic clocks were built in 1561 and 1563–1568. These use four sides to show the ecliptical positions of the Sun, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, the Moon, Sun and Dragon (Nodes of the Moon) according to Ptolemy, a calendar, the sunrise and sunset, and an automated celestial sphere with an animated Sun symbol which, for the first time on a celestial globe, shows the real position of the Sun, including the equation of time. The clocks are now on display in Kassel at the Astronomisch-Physikalisches Kabinett and in Dresden at the Mathematisch-Physikalischer Salon.

In &quot;De revolutionibus orbium coelestium&quot;, published in Nuremberg in 1543, Nicolaus Copernicus challenged the Western teaching of a geocentric universe in which the Sun revolved daily around the Earth. He observed that some Greek philosophers such as Aristarchus of Samos had proposed a heliocentric universe. This simplified the apparent epicyclic motions of the planets, making it feasible to represent the planets&#x27; paths as simple circles. This could be modeled by the use of gears. Tycho Brahe&#x27;s improved instruments made precise observations of the skies (1576–1601), and from these Johannes Kepler (1621) deduced that planets orbited the Sun in ellipses. In 1687 Isaac Newton explained the cause of elliptic motion in his theory of gravitation.

===Modern===

There is an orrery built by clock makers George Graham and Thomas Tompion dated in the History of Science Museum, Oxford. Graham gave the first model, or its design, to the celebrated instrument maker John Rowley of London to make a copy for Prince Eugene of Savoy. Rowley was commissioned to make another copy for his patron Charles Boyle, 4th Earl of Orrery, from which the device took its name in English. This model was presented to Charles&#x27; son John, later the 5th Earl of Cork and 5th Earl of Orrery. Independently, Christiaan Huygens published in 1703 details of a heliocentric planetary machine which he had built while living in Paris between 1665 and 1681. He calculated the gear trains needed to represent a year of 365.242 days, and used that to produce the cycles of the principal planets.

Joseph Wright&#x27;s painting &quot;A Philosopher giving a Lecture on the Orrery&quot; (), which hangs in the Derby Museum and Art Gallery, depicts a group listening to a lecture by a natural philosopher. The Sun in a brass orrery provides the only light in the room. The orrery depicted in the painting has rings, which give it an appearance similar to that of an armillary sphere. The demonstration was thereby able to depict eclipses.

To put this in chronological context, in 1762 John Harrison&#x27;s marine chronometer first enabled accurate measurement of longitude. In 1766, astronomer Johann Daniel Titius first demonstrated that the mean distance of each planet from the Sun could be represented by the following progression:

formula_1

That is, 0.4, 0.7, 1.0, 1.6, 2.8, ... The numbers refer to astronomical units, the mean distance between Sun and Earth, which is 1.496 × 108 km (93 × 106 miles). The Derby Orrery does not show mean distance, but demonstrated the relative planetary movements.

The Eisinga Planetarium was built from 1774 to 1781 by Eise Eisinga in his home in Franeker, in the Netherlands. It displays the planets across the width of a room&#x27;s ceiling, and has been in operation almost continually since it was created. This orrery is a planetarium in both senses of the word: a complex machine showing planetary orbits, and a theatre for depicting the planets&#x27; movement. Eisinga house was bought by the Dutch Royal family who gave him a pension.
In 1764, Benjamin Martin devised a new type of planetary model, in which the planets were carried on brass arms leading from a series of concentric or coaxial tubes. With this construction it was difficult to make the planets revolve, and to get the moons to turn around the planets. Martin suggested that the conventional orrery should consist of three parts: the planetarium where the planets revolved around the Sun, the tellurion (also &quot;tellurian&quot; or &quot;tellurium&quot;) which showed the inclined axis of the Earth and how it revolved around the Sun, and the lunarium which showed the eccentric rotations of the Moon around the Earth. In one orrery, these three motions could be mounted on a common table, separately using the central spindle as a prime mover.
== Workings ==
All orreries are &quot;planetariums&quot;. The term &quot;orrery&quot; has only existed since 1714. A &quot;grand orrery&quot; is one that includes the outer planets known at the time of its construction. The word planetarium has shifted meaning, and now usually refers to hemispherical theatres in which images of the night sky are projected onto an overhead surface. Orreries can range widely in size from hand-held to room-sized. An orrery is used to demonstrate the motion of the planets, while a mechanical device used to predict eclipses and transits is called an astrarium.

An orrery should properly include the Sun, the Earth and the Moon (plus optionally other planets). A model that only includes the Earth, the Moon, and the Sun is called a tellurion or tellurium, and one which only includes the Earth and the Moon is a lunarium. A jovilabe is a model of Jupiter and its moons.

A planetarium will show the orbital period of each planet and the &quot;rotation rate&quot;, as shown in the table above. A tellurion will show the Earth with the Moon revolving around the Sun. It will use the angle of &quot;inclination of the equator&quot; from the table above to show how it rotates around its own axis. It will show the Earth&#x27;s Moon, rotating around the Earth. A lunarium is designed to show the complex motions of the Moon as it revolves around the Earth.

Orreries are usually not built to scale. Human orreries, where humans move about as the planets, have also been constructed, but most are temporary. There is a permanent human orrery at Armagh Observatory in Northern Ireland, which has the six ancient planets, Ceres, and comets Halley and Encke. Uranus and beyond are also shown, but in a fairly limited way. Another is at Sky&#x27;s the Limit Observatory and Nature Center in Twentynine Palms, California; it is a true to scale (20 billion to one), true to position (accurate to within four days) human orrery. The first four planets are relatively close to one another, but the next four require a certain amount of hiking in order to visit them. A census of all permanent human orreries has been initiated by the French group F-HOU with a new effort to study their impact for education in schools. A map of known human orreries is available.

A normal mechanical clock could be used to produce an extremely simple orrery to demonstrate the principle, with the Sun in the centre, Earth on the minute hand and Jupiter on the hour hand; Earth would make 12 revolutions around the Sun for every 1 revolution of Jupiter. As Jupiter&#x27;s actual year is 11.86 Earth years long, the model would lose accuracy rapidly.

===Projection===
Many planetariums have a projection orrery, which projects onto the dome of the planetarium a Sun with either dots or small images of the planets. These usually are limited to the planets from Mercury to Saturn, although some include Uranus. The light sources for the planets are projected onto mirrors which are geared to a motor which drives the images on the dome. Typically the Earth will circle the Sun in one minute, while the other planets will complete an orbit in time periods proportional to their actual motion. Thus Venus, which takes 224.7 days to orbit the Sun, will take 37 seconds to complete an orbit on an orrery, and Jupiter will take 11 minutes, 52 seconds.

Some planetariums have taken advantage of this to use orreries to simulate planets and their moons. Thus Mercury orbits the Sun in 0.24 of an Earth year, while Phobos and Deimos orbit Mars in a similar 4:1 time ratio. Planetarium operators wishing to show this have placed a red cap on the Sun (to make it resemble Mars) and turned off all the planets but Mercury and Earth. Similar approximations can be used to show Pluto and its five moons.

==Notable examples==
Shoemaker John Fulton of Fenwick, Ayrshire, built three between 1823 and 1833. The last is in Glasgow&#x27;s Kelvingrove Art Gallery and Museum.

The Eisinga Planetarium built by a wool carder named Eise Eisinga in his own living room, in the small city of Franeker in Friesland, is in fact an orrery. It was constructed between 1774 and 1781. The base of the model faces down from the ceiling of the room, with most of the mechanical works in the space above the ceiling. It is driven by a pendulum clock, which has 9 weights or ponds. The planets move around the model in real time.

An innovative concept is to have people play the role of the moving planets and other Solar System objects. Such a model, called a human orrery, has been laid out at the Armagh Observatory.

==In popular culture==
* The construction system Meccano is a popular tool for constructing highly accurate orreries. Model 391, the first Meccano Orrery, was described in the June 1918 Meccano Manual.
* In &quot;Dune Messiah&quot;, the 1969 sequel to &quot;Dune&quot;, there is a description of a desktop orrery representing the two moons of the fictional planet Arrakis and its sun.
* In the backstory of the 1982 film &quot;The Dark Crystal&quot;, the UrSkek TekTih made a giant automatic orrery, with the help of his fellow UrSkek ShodYod, for Aughra, in the mountaintop observatory where she lives.
* In the 1999 version of Tarzan, the title character studies an orrery with planets on it.
* In the 2000 science fiction film &quot;Pitch Black&quot;, an orrery was used to demonstrate a pending eclipse of the planet.
*In the 2020 historical novel &quot;A Room Made of Leaves&quot; by Kate Grenville, a makeshift orrery is made from scraps found in the early colony of New South Wales by its first astronomer, William Dawes.

==See also==

* Apparent retrograde motion
* Armillary sphere
* Astrarium
* Astrolabe
* Astronomical clock
* Celestial globe
* Clockwork universe
* Eidouranion
* Ephemeris
* Equatorium
* Eratosthenes
* John Fulton (instrument maker)
* List of astronomical instruments
* Orbit of the Moon
* Stability of the Solar System
* Tellurion
* Torquetum
==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==

* JPL Solar System Simulator
* Long Now Foundation Orrery
* University of Pennsylvania Orrery</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1759299" start="3" end="9" title="Orrery" label="orrery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941852" start="26" end="51" title="Solar System model" label="model of the Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="123" end="129" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537" start="135" end="139" title="natural satellite" label="moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q103983" start="167" end="185" title="heliocentric model" label="heliocentric model"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390452" start="383" end="393" title="Ancient Greek astronomy" label="The Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q148319" start="406" end="416" title="planetarium" label="planetaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805655" start="522" end="555" title="Charles Boyle, 4th Earl of Orrery" label="Charles Boyle, 4th Earl of Orrery"/>
<link wikidata="Q162475" start="560" end="571" title="County Cork" label="County Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q333148" start="757" end="771" title="Richard Steele" label="Richard Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400734" start="815" end="824" title="clockwork" label="clockwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="865" end="868" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q182324" start="973" end="994" title="Antikythera mechanism" label="Antikythera mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q213730" start="1050" end="1061" title="Antikythera" label="Antikythera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195520" start="1102" end="1116" title="diurnal motion" label="diurnal motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="1125" end="1128" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="1130" end="1134" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="1149" end="1155" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="1170" end="1184" title="Ancient Greece" label="ancient Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q165800" start="1288" end="1298" title="geocentric" label="geocentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="1373" end="1379" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q36303" start="1544" end="1550" title="Thales" label="Thales"/>
<link wikidata="Q185770" start="1555" end="1565" title="Posidonius" label="Posidonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296705" start="1649" end="1663" title="Giovanni Dondi dell&amp;#x27;Orologio" label="Giovanni Dondi"/>
<link wikidata="Q500348" start="1740" end="1757" title="Ecliptic coordinate system" label="ecliptic position"/>
<link wikidata="Q308" start="1776" end="1783" title="Mercury (planet)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="1785" end="1790" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="1792" end="1796" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="1798" end="1805" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="1810" end="1816" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q165800" start="1846" end="1856" title="Geocentric model" label="geocentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644088" start="1969" end="1979" title="gear train" label="gear train"/>
<link wikidata="Q148319" start="2032" end="2043" title="planetarium" label="planetarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537" start="2129" end="2133" title="Natural satellite" label="moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q696040" start="2153" end="2190" title="William IV, Landgrave of Hesse-Kassel" label="William IV, Landgrave of Hesse-Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="2422" end="2429" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12134" start="2484" end="2500" title="celestial sphere" label="celestial sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q186058" start="2627" end="2643" title="equation of time" label="equation of time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865" start="2678" end="2684" title="Kassel" label="Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="2736" end="2743" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q321088" start="2751" end="2784" title="Mathematisch-Physikalischer Salon" label="Mathematisch-Physikalischer Salon"/>
<link wikidata="Q845981" start="2796" end="2831" title="De revolutionibus orbium coelestium" label="De revolutionibus orbium coelestium"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="2871" end="2890" title="Nicolaus Copernicus" label="Nicolaus Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="2991" end="2996" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q140188" start="3047" end="3067" title="Aristarchus of Samos" label="Aristarchus of Samos"/>
<link wikidata="Q961202" start="3135" end="3144" title="epicycle" label="epicyclic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36620" start="3287" end="3298" title="Tycho Brahe" label="Tycho Brahe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963" start="3394" end="3409" title="Johannes Kepler" label="Johannes Kepler"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="3457" end="3464" title="ellipse" label="ellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="3475" end="3487" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q134465" start="3534" end="3555" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s law of universal gravitation" label="theory of gravitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q964704" start="3613" end="3626" title="George Graham (clockmaker)" label="George Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427688" start="3631" end="3645" title="Thomas Tompion" label="Thomas Tompion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941088" start="3659" end="3692" title="History of Science Museum, Oxford" label="History of Science Museum, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q152428" start="3814" end="3836" title="Prince Eugene of Savoy" label="Prince Eugene of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805655" start="3898" end="3931" title="Charles Boyle, 4th Earl of Orrery" label="Charles Boyle, 4th Earl of Orrery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032335" start="4043" end="4082" title="John Boyle, 5th Earl of Cork" label="5th Earl of Cork and 5th Earl of Orrery"/>
<link wikidata="Q39599" start="4099" end="4117" title="Christiaan Huygens" label="Christiaan Huygens"/>
<link wikidata="Q214062" start="4381" end="4394" title="Joseph Wright of Derby" label="Joseph Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651874" start="4417" end="4461" title="A Philosopher Lecturing on the Orrery" label="A Philosopher giving a Lecture on the Orrery"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012" start="4491" end="4519" title="Derby Museum and Art Gallery" label="Derby Museum and Art Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q269323" start="4565" end="4584" title="natural philosophy" label="natural philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q328720" start="4746" end="4762" title="armillary sphere" label="armillary sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q141022" start="4809" end="4816" title="eclipse" label="eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q314335" start="4866" end="4879" title="John Harrison" label="John Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307829" start="4887" end="4905" title="marine chronometer" label="marine chronometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="4944" end="4953" title="longitude" label="longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q375195" start="4975" end="4995" title="Johann Daniel Titius" label="Johann Daniel Titius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="5188" end="5205" title="astronomical unit" label="astronomical unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q601223" start="5393" end="5412" title="Eisinga Planetarium" label="Eisinga Planetarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q983980" start="5444" end="5456" title="Eise Eisinga" label="Eise Eisinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q41974" start="5472" end="5480" title="Franeker" label="Franeker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749551" start="6292" end="6301" title="tellurion" label="tellurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q148319" start="6684" end="6695" title="planetarium" label="planetarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="6813" end="6825" title="outer planet" label="outer planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888" start="7209" end="7217" title="Astronomical transit" label="transits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868533" start="7231" end="7240" title="astrarium" label="astrarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749551" start="7414" end="7423" title="tellurion" label="tellurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q104847789" start="7494" end="7502" title="lunarium" label="lunarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3768537" start="7506" end="7514" title="jovilabe" label="jovilabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q37640" start="7581" end="7595" title="orbital period" label="orbital period"/>
<link wikidata="Q809690" start="7701" end="7720" title="Barycenter" label="Earth with the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q210539" start="7974" end="8001" title="Orbit of the Moon" label="complex motions of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498959" start="8070" end="8075" title="scale model" label="scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q676709" start="8222" end="8240" title="Armagh Observatory" label="Armagh Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="8244" end="8260" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q596" start="8297" end="8302" title="Ceres (dwarf planet)" label="Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q23054" start="8315" end="8321" title="Halley&amp;#x27;s Comet" label="Halley"/>
<link wikidata="Q166940" start="8326" end="8331" title="Comet Encke" label="Encke"/>
<link wikidata="Q846582" start="8464" end="8492" title="Twentynine Palms, California" label="Twentynine Palms, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q148319" start="9325" end="9336" title="planetarium" label="planetarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364435" start="9345" end="9362" title="Planetarium projector" label="projection orrery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547" start="10159" end="10165" title="Phobos (moon)" label="Phobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548" start="10170" end="10176" title="Deimos (moon)" label="Deimos"/>
<link wikidata="Q339" start="10417" end="10422" title="Pluto" label="Pluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6234398" start="10475" end="10486" title="John Fulton (instrument maker)" label="John Fulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443668" start="10490" end="10507" title="Fenwick, East Ayrshire" label="Fenwick, Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061094" start="10574" end="10608" title="Kelvingrove Art Gallery and Museum" label="Kelvingrove Art Gallery and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411858" start="10646" end="10657" title="Carding" label="wool carder"/>
<link wikidata="Q41974" start="10722" end="10730" title="Franeker" label="Franeker"/>
<link wikidata="Q770" start="10734" end="10743" title="Friesland" label="Friesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183277" start="11291" end="11298" title="Meccano" label="Meccano"/>
<link wikidata="Q437383" start="11455" end="11467" title="Dune Messiah" label="Dune Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q261636" start="11484" end="11490" title="sequel" label="sequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q190192" start="11500" end="11504" title="Dune (novel)" label="Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q940030" start="11606" end="11613" title="Arrakis" label="Arrakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198483" start="11669" end="11685" title="The Dark Crystal" label="The Dark Crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q208696" start="11855" end="11877" title="Tarzan (1999 film)" label="1999 version of Tarzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170241" start="11883" end="11898" title="Tarzan" label="title character"/>
<link wikidata="Q429934" start="11978" end="11989" title="Pitch Black (film)" label="Pitch Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q141022" start="12041" end="12048" title="eclipse" label="eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919671" start="12131" end="12145" title="Kate Grenville" label="Kate Grenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="12215" end="12230" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007674" start="12256" end="12269" title="William Dawes (British Marines officer)" label="William Dawes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15354235" start="12288" end="12314" title="Apparent retrograde motion" label="Apparent retrograde motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q328720" start="12317" end="12333" title="Armillary sphere" label="Armillary sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868533" start="12336" end="12345" title="Astrarium" label="Astrarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q164992" start="12348" end="12357" title="Astrolabe" label="Astrolabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275" start="12360" end="12378" title="Astronomical clock" label="Astronomical clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425895" start="12381" end="12396" title="Celestial globe" label="Celestial globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134841" start="12399" end="12417" title="Clockwork universe" label="Clockwork universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302694" start="12420" end="12431" title="Eidouranion" label="Eidouranion"/>
<link wikidata="Q120200" start="12434" end="12443" title="Ephemeris" label="Ephemeris"/>
<link wikidata="Q255849" start="12446" end="12456" title="Equatorium" label="Equatorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q43182" start="12459" end="12471" title="Eratosthenes" label="Eratosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6234398" start="12474" end="12504" title="John Fulton (instrument maker)" label="John Fulton (instrument maker)"/>
<link wikidata="Q100564159" start="12507" end="12539" title="List of astronomical instruments" label="List of astronomical instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q210539" start="12542" end="12559" title="Orbit of the Moon" label="Orbit of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497813" start="12562" end="12591" title="Stability of the Solar System" label="Stability of the Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749551" start="12594" end="12603" title="Tellurion" label="Tellurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372190" start="12606" end="12615" title="Torquetum" label="Torquetum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="60554" wikidata="Q805983" url="?curid=60554" title="Bamburgh">
<text>Bamburgh ( ) is a village and civil parish on the coast of Northumberland, England. It had a population of 454 in 2001, decreasing to 414 at the 2011 census.

Bamburgh was the centre of an independent north Northumbrian territory between 867 and 954. Bamburgh Castle was built by the Normans on the site of an Anglo-Saxon fort. The Victorian era heroine Grace Darling is buried there.

The extensive beach by the village was awarded the Blue Flag rural beach award in 2005. The Bamburgh Dunes, a Site of Special Scientific Interest, stand behind the beach. Bamburgh is popular with holidaymakers and is within the Northumberland Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty.

==History==
The site now occupied by Bamburgh Castle was previously home to a fort of the Celtic Britons known as &quot;Din Guarie&quot; and may have been the capital of the kingdom of Bernicia, the realm of the Gododdin people, from the realm&#x27;s foundation in c. 420 until 547, the year of the first written reference to the castle. In that year, the citadel was captured by the Anglo-Saxon ruler Ida of Bernicia (Beornice) and became Ida&#x27;s seat. The Anglo-Saxons called the place &quot;Bebbanburh&quot;, meaning &quot;Queen Bebba&#x27;s stronghold&quot;; this was later corrupted into the modern &quot;Bamburgh&quot;. Aidan of Lindisfarne came to this area from the monastery of Iona in 635 on behalf of King Oswald of Northumbria.

Following the defeat of Northumbrian forces by the Viking Great Heathen Army, at York in 867, the Kingdom of Northumbria disintegrated. Southern Northumbria became the Viking-ruled Kingdom of York, while north remained under Anglo-Saxon control under the high reeves of Bamburgh. The territory finally became part of the Kingdom of England in 954.

The late medieval village began to develop near the castle. During the dissolution of the monasteries the property of the friars, including the castle, was seized on behalf of Henry VIII.

Late medieval British author Thomas Malory identified Bamburgh Castle with Joyous Gard, the mythical castle home of Sir Lancelot in Arthurian legend.

Lionel Lukin&#x27;s first purpose-built lifeboat was stationed here in 1786. The Royal National Lifeboat Institution re-established a lifeboat station here in 1882 but it closed in 1897.

==St Aidan&#x27;s Church==

According to Bede, St Aidan built a wooden church outside the castle wall in AD 635, and he died here in AD 652. A wooden beam preserved inside the church is traditionally said to be the one on which he rested as he died. The present church dates from the late 12th century, though some pre-conquest stonework survives in the north aisle. The chancel, said to be the second-longest in the country (), was added in 1230; it contains an 1895 reredos in Caen stone by W.S. Hicks, depicting northern saints of the 7th and 8th centuries. There is an effigy of local heroine Grace Darling in the north aisle. This formed part of the original monument to Grace Darling but was removed due to weathering of the stonework. Her memorial is sited in the churchyard in such a position that passing ships can see it.

The property has been Grade I listed since December 1969. The listing summary includes this description:&quot;Parish church. C12, C13 and C14. Restored 1830 and later C19. Squared stone and ashlar; chancel and north transept have stone slate roofs; other roofs not visible. West tower, nave, aisles, transepts and chancel&quot;.

After the dissolution of the monasteries in the mid-1500s, the monks were forced to leave and St Aidan&#x27;s became the parish church for the village. Over the subsequent centuries there were major repairs and restorations. 
The church&#x27;s crypt holds the remains of 110 individuals who died in the 7th and 8th centuries; they had initially been buried in the castle&#x27;s Bowl Hole graveyard. The remains were found during a project between 1998 and 2007. In 2016, they were moved into the crypt. Since November 2019, the crypt can be viewed by visitors through a small gate.

==Governance==
An electoral ward of the same name exists. This ward includes Belford and also stretches south to Ellingham with a total population taken at the 2011 census of 4,846.

== In popular culture ==

Bamburgh Castle, under its Saxon name Bebbanburg, is the ancestral home of Uhtred, the main character in Bernard Cornwell&#x27;s historical 13-novel series &quot;The Saxon Stories&quot;, published 2004–2020, which was made into the BBC and Netflix five-season series &quot;The Last Kingdom&quot; 2015–2022.

Bamburgh is also featured in the open-world video game series &quot;Forza Horizon 4&quot; released in October 2018.

Additionally, Bamburgh is featured in the Realtime Strategy video game &quot;Ancestors Legacy&quot; released in 2018.

==Notable people==
*Æthelfrith of Northumbria
*William George Armstrong
*Joe Baker-Cresswell
*Ida of Bernicia
*Prideaux John Selby
*Grace Darling
*Uhtred the Bold

==Photo gallery==
==Bamburgh Lighthouse==
==See also==

*Bamburgh Coast and Hills, a Site of Special Scientific Interest along the coast north-east of Bamburgh
*List of lighthouses in England

==References==

== External links ==
* Bamburgh Photos
* Local History and Information on Bamburgh, The Farne Islands and surrounding areas.
* Stained glass windows at St. Aidan&#x27;s Church, Photos by Peter Loud
* Bamburgh Tourist Attractions
* Bamburgh Online
* GENUKI 
* Northumberland Communities 
* Trinity House</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q805983" start="0" end="8" title="Bamburgh" label="Bamburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="30" end="42" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23079" start="59" end="73" title="Northumberland" label="Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4437800" start="201" end="229" title="Rulers of Bamburgh" label="north Northumbrian territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026185" start="251" end="266" title="Bamburgh Castle" label="Bamburgh Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="332" end="345" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q461882" start="354" end="367" title="Grace Darling" label="Grace Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q458651" start="437" end="446" title="Blue Flag beach" label="Blue Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853458" start="478" end="492" title="Bamburgh Dunes" label="Bamburgh Dunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q422211" start="496" end="531" title="Site of Special Scientific Interest" label="Site of Special Scientific Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262582" start="614" end="634" title="Northumberland Coast National Landscape" label="Northumberland Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q174945" start="635" end="669" title="Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty" label="Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026185" start="709" end="724" title="Bamburgh Castle" label="Bamburgh Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q849967" start="762" end="776" title="Celtic Britons" label="Celtic Britons"/>
<link wikidata="Q623751" start="857" end="865" title="Bernicia" label="Bernicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345964" start="884" end="892" title="Gododdin" label="Gododdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q88291" start="1028" end="1035" title="citadel" label="citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="1056" end="1067" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q437743" start="1074" end="1089" title="Ida of Bernicia" label="Ida of Bernicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132148" start="1301" end="1321" title="Aidan of Lindisfarne" label="Aidan of Lindisfarne"/>
<link wikidata="Q336016" start="1392" end="1413" title="Oswald of Northumbria" label="Oswald of Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419965" start="1474" end="1492" title="Great Heathen Army" label="Great Heathen Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q889970" start="1597" end="1612" title="Scandinavian York" label="Kingdom of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q4437800" start="1671" end="1694" title="Rulers of Bamburgh" label="high reeves of Bamburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="1737" end="1755" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="1836" end="1866" title="dissolution of the monasteries" label="dissolution of the monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="1941" end="1951" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q309907" start="1983" end="1996" title="Thomas Malory" label="Thomas Malory"/>
<link wikidata="Q99337605" start="2029" end="2040" title="Joyous Gard" label="Joyous Gard"/>
<link wikidata="Q215681" start="2070" end="2082" title="Lancelot" label="Sir Lancelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q507738" start="2086" end="2102" title="Matter of Britain" label="Arthurian legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555709" start="2105" end="2117" title="Lionel Lukin" label="Lionel Lukin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361551" start="2145" end="2153" title="Lifeboat (rescue)" label="lifeboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166873" start="2186" end="2221" title="Royal National Lifeboat Institution" label="Royal National Lifeboat Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q125762585" start="2237" end="2260" title="Bamburgh Castle Lifeboat Station" label="a lifeboat station here"/>
<link wikidata="Q154938" start="2334" end="2338" title="Bede" label="Bede"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="2612" end="2620" title="Norman Conquest" label="conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q46686" start="2761" end="2768" title="reredos" label="reredos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421807" start="2772" end="2782" title="Caen stone" label="Caen stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q461882" start="2890" end="2903" title="Grace Darling" label="Grace Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q17546734" start="2957" end="2982" title="monument to Grace Darling" label="monument to Grace Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="3466" end="3496" title="dissolution of the monasteries" label="dissolution of the monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q589282" start="4057" end="4071" title="Wards and electoral divisions of the United Kingdom" label="electoral ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617115" start="4116" end="4123" title="Belford, Northumberland" label="Belford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793234" start="4152" end="4161" title="Ellingham, Northumberland" label="Ellingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026185" start="4248" end="4263" title="Bamburgh Castle" label="Bamburgh Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q446605" start="4353" end="4369" title="Bernard Cornwell" label="Bernard Cornwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762369" start="4410" end="4427" title="The Saxon Stories" label="The Saxon Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q18085820" start="4521" end="4537" title="The Last Kingdom (TV series)" label="The Last Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q54893555" start="4624" end="4639" title="Forza Horizon 4" label="Forza Horizon 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q62595375" start="4750" end="4766" title="Ancestors Legacy" label="Ancestors Legacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q272196" start="4812" end="4837" title="Æthelfrith of Northumbria" label="Æthelfrith of Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q335115" start="4839" end="4863" title="William George Armstrong" label="William George Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6208462" start="4865" end="4884" title="Joe Baker-Cresswell" label="Joe Baker-Cresswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q437743" start="4886" end="4901" title="Ida of Bernicia" label="Ida of Bernicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q716834" start="4903" end="4922" title="Prideaux John Selby" label="Prideaux John Selby"/>
<link wikidata="Q461882" start="4924" end="4937" title="Grace Darling" label="Grace Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738090" start="4939" end="4954" title="Uhtred the Bold" label="Uhtred the Bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q27990674" start="5013" end="5037" title="Bamburgh Coast and Hills" label="Bamburgh Coast and Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q422211" start="5041" end="5076" title="Site of Special Scientific Interest" label="Site of Special Scientific Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q920649" start="5117" end="5147" title="List of lighthouses in England" label="List of lighthouses in England"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="60555" wikidata="Q461882" url="?curid=60555" title="Grace Darling">
<text>Grace Horsley Darling (24 November 1815 – 20 October 1842) was an English lighthouse keeper&#x27;s daughter. Her participation in the rescue of survivors from the shipwrecked &quot;Forfarshire&quot; in 1838 brought her national fame. The paddlesteamer ran aground on the Farne Islands off the coast of Northumberland in northeast England; eight members of the crew and one passenger, Sarah Dawson, were saved.

==Early life==

Grace Darling was born on 24 November 1815 at her grandfather&#x27;s house in Northumberland. She was the seventh of nine children (four brothers and four sisters) born to William and Thomasin Darling, and when only a few weeks old, she was taken to live on Brownsman Island, one of the Farne Islands, in a small cottage attached to the lighthouse. Her father ran the lighthouse (built in 1795) for Trinity House, and earned a salary of £70 per year () with a bonus of £10 for satisfactory service. The accommodation was basic, and the lighthouse was not located in a good place to guide shipping to safety, so in 1826, the family moved to the newly constructed lighthouse on Longstone Island.

Longstone Lighthouse had better accommodation, but the island itself was slightly less hospitable, so William would row back to Brownsman to gather vegetables from their former garden and to feed the animals. The family spent most of their time on the ground floor of the lighthouse, which consisted of a large room, heated by a wooden stove. The room was their living room, dining room, and kitchen in one, and had a spiral staircase leading to three bedrooms above and the light at the top of the tower.

==Shipwreck==
In the early hours of 7 September 1838, Darling, looking from an upstairs window, spotted the wreck and survivors of the &quot;Forfarshire&quot; on Big Harcar, a nearby low, rocky island. The &quot;Forfarshire&quot; had foundered on the rocks and broken in half; one of the halves had sunk during the night.
Darling and her father, William, determined that the weather was too rough for the lifeboat to put out from Seahouses (then North Sunderland), so they took a rowing boat (a , four-man Northumberland coble) across to the survivors, taking a long route that kept to the lee side of the islands, a distance of nearly a mile (about ). Darling kept the coble steady in the water, while her father helped four men and the lone surviving woman, Sarah Dawson, into the boat. Although she survived the sinking, Mrs. Dawson had lost her two young children (James, 7, and Matilda, 5) during the night. William and three of the rescued men then rowed the boat back to the lighthouse. Darling then remained at the lighthouse while William and three of the rescued crew members rowed back and recovered four more survivors.

Meanwhile, the lifeboat had set out from Seahouses, but arrived at Big Harcar rock after Darling and her father had completed their rescue operation; all they found were the bodies of Mrs Dawson&#x27;s children and of a clergyman. Returning to North Sunderland was too dangerous, so they rowed to the lighthouse to take shelter. Darling&#x27;s brother, William Brooks Darling, was one of the seven fishermen in the lifeboat. The weather deteriorated to the extent that everyone was obliged to remain at the lighthouse for three days before returning to shore.

The &quot;Forfarshire&quot; had been carrying 62 people. The vessel broke in two almost immediately upon hitting the rocks. Those rescued by Darling and her father were from the bow section of the vessel, which had been held by the rocks for some time before sinking. All that remained at daybreak was the portside paddlebox casing. Nine other passengers and crew had managed to float off a lifeboat from the stern section before it, too, sank, and were picked up in the night by a passing Montrose sloop, and brought into South Shields that same night.

As news of her role in the rescue reached the public, her combination of bravery and simple virtue set her out as exemplary, and led to an uneasy role as the nation&#x27;s heroine. Grace and her father were awarded the Silver Medal for Bravery by the Royal National Institution for the Preservation of Life from Shipwreck, later named the Royal National Lifeboat Institution (RNLI). Subscriptions and donations totaling over £700 (equivalent to about £ in ) were raised for her, including £50 from Queen Victoria; more than a dozen portrait painters sailed to her island home to capture her likeness, and hundreds of gifts, letters, and even marriage proposals were delivered to her. Her unexpected wealth and fame were such that the Duke of Northumberland took on a role as her self-appointed guardian and founder of a trust, established to look after the donations offered to her. His personal gifts to her family were a timepiece and a silver teapot.
==Death==

In 1842, Darling fell ill with Tuberculosis while visiting the mainland. According to letters at Northumberland Archives, Grace stayed with the Shields family in Wooler during late August and early September in an attempt to improve her health. A later letter shows that she moved to Alnwick with her mother in early October 1842. She then convalesced with her cousins, the MacFarlanes, in their house in Narrowgate, Alnwick. When the Duchess of Northumberland heard of her situation, she arranged for Darling to be moved to better accommodation close to Alnwick Castle. The Duchess tended to her in person, as well as providing her with the services of the ducal family physician. 

However, Darling&#x27;s condition declined and she was conveyed to the place of her birth in Bamburgh, where she died, aged 26, of consumption in October 1842. She is buried in the churchyard of St Aidan&#x27;s Church, Bamburgh. The Monument to Grace Darling was completed in 1842. It represents a sleeping effigy of her holding an oar, and lies to the north of her grave at the western edge of the churchyard so it would be visible to passing seafarers. The original effigy, which was sculpted by Charles Raymond Smith son of James Smith, was moved into the church in 1895 due to weathering.

Within the St Aidan&#x27;s Church there is also a stained-glass window dedicated to the memory of Grace Darling.

==Legacy==
Darling&#x27;s achievement was celebrated in her lifetime; she received a large financial reward in addition to the plaudits of the nation. A number of fictionalised depictions propagated the Grace Darling legend, such as &quot;Grace Darling, or the Maid of the Isles&quot; by Jerrold Vernon (1839), which gave birth to the legend of &quot;the girl with windswept hair&quot;. Her deed was committed to verse by William Wordsworth in his poem &quot;Grace Darling&quot; (1843). In 1882 a four-act drama, &quot;Humanity, or a Passage in the Life of Grace Darling&quot;, premiered at the Theatre Royal, Leicester and immediately transferred to the vast Standard Theatre in London&#x27;s Shoreditch. The play by Leonard Rae and Hugh Marston included a realistic representation of the sea rescue. A lifeboat with her name was presented to Holy Island. One of a series of Victorian paintings by William Bell Scott at Wallington Hall in Northumberland depicts her rescue efforts. The McManus Galleries in Dundee includes three paintings by Thomas Musgrave Joy that celebrate Grace Darling&#x27;s deeds with the &quot;Forfarshire&quot;.

At Bamburgh, a museum is dedicated to her achievements and the seafaring life of the area. From 1990 to 2020 an RNLI &quot;Mersey&quot;-class lifeboat at Seahouses bore the name &quot;Grace Darling&quot;. Singer/songwriter Dave Cousins of Strawbs wrote &quot;Grace Darling&quot; (on the album &quot;Ghosts&quot;) in tribute and as a love song. The children&#x27;s singing group The Limeliters sang a different &quot;Grace Darling&quot; (featuring the refrain &quot;Help, help, came a desperate yelp!&quot;) in their 1962 album, recorded live in concert, &quot;Through Children&#x27;s Eyes&quot;. In 2017, Duke Special set Michael Longley&#x27;s poem &quot;Grace Darling&quot; to music and recorded it on the album &quot;Hallow&quot;. The Grace Darling Hotel, one of the oldest extant hotels in Melbourne, Victoria, opened in 1854.

==Gallery==
==See also==

* Monument to Grace Darling in St Aidan&#x27;s Churchyard
* Ida Walley Lewis, an American lighthouse keeper noted for rescuing numerous people in the latter half of the 19th century
* Grace Bussell, a 16-year-old Australian girl who along with Sam Isaacs rescued 50 people from the SS &quot;Georgette&quot; when it foundered off the West Australian coast in 1876, is regarded as Australia&#x27;s national heroine. At the time of the rescue, Bussell was referred to as the &quot;Grace Darling of the West&quot; by journalists.
* Ann Harvey, a Newfoundland 17-year-old who in 1828, with her father, brother, and dog, rescued 163 shipwrecked people
* Roberta Boyd, a New Brunswick girl who was hailed as the &quot;Grace Darling of the St. Croix&quot; after a rescue in 1882

==References==
==Further reading==
* Algernon Charles Swinburne&#x27;s poem &quot;Grace Darling&quot;. A poem of the same name and subject was published in 1910 by Scottish Border poet and Australian bush balladeer Will H. Ogilvie (1869–1963)
* Richard Armstrong: &quot;Grace Darling: Maid and Myth&quot; (1965)
* Hugh Cunningham: &quot;Grace Darling – Victorian Heroine&quot; Hambledon: Continuum (2008) 
* Thomasin Darling: &quot;Grace Darling, her True Story: from Unpublished Papers in Possession of her Family&quot; (1880)
* Thomasin Darling: &quot;The Journal of William Darling, Grace Darling&#x27;s Father&quot; (1887)
* Eva Hope: &quot;Grace Darling – Heroine of the Farne Islands&quot; Walter Scott Publishing (1875)
* Jessica Mitford: &quot;Grace Had an English Heart. The Story of Grace Darling, Heroine and Victorian Superstar&quot; (1998) 
* Constance Smedley: &quot;Grace Darling and Her Times&quot; Hurst and Blackett (1932)
*H. C. G. Matthew, &quot;Darling, Grace Horsley (1815–1842)&quot;, &quot;Oxford Dictionary of National Biography&quot;, Oxford University Press, 2004
*@RNLI: tweets as the voice of Grace Darling narrating her famous rescue in &#x27;real time&#x27; on its 175th anniversary (2013)

==External links==
*Grace Darling Museum from the RNLI
*Grace Darling website
*Information on Grace and the area in which she lived, including Seahouses, Bamburgh, Beadnell and the Farne Islands (most recently saved Web Archive snapshot of lost website)
*Description of the sinking of the Forfarshire and Grace Darling’s part in the rescue, from &quot;The Tragedy of the Seas&quot;, 1841, from Google Book Search
* “Grace Darling: Victorian heroine” BBC
* “Grace Darling - Heroine of the sea” BBC
*Grace Darling genealogy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q461882" start="0" end="21" title="Grace Darling" label="Grace Horsley Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766113" start="74" end="91" title="lighthouse keeper" label="lighthouse keeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469528" start="175" end="198" title="Forfarshire (ship)" label="&amp;quot;Forfarshire&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121471" start="238" end="251" title="paddlesteamer" label="paddlesteamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q666887" start="271" end="284" title="Farne Islands" label="Farne Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q23079" start="302" end="316" title="Northumberland" label="Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q666887" start="714" end="727" title="Farne Islands" label="Farne Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570725" start="826" end="839" title="Trinity House" label="Trinity House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2752899" start="1122" end="1142" title="Longstone Lighthouse" label="Longstone Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361551" start="2034" end="2042" title="lifeboat (rescue)" label="lifeboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q681908" start="2059" end="2068" title="Seahouses" label="Seahouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q583753" start="2075" end="2091" title="North Sunderland" label="North Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q21368803" start="2109" end="2120" title="rowing boat" label="rowing boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138921" start="2150" end="2155" title="coble" label="coble"/>
<link wikidata="Q420303" start="3813" end="3821" title="Montrose, Angus" label="Montrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q210223" start="3822" end="3827" title="sloop" label="sloop"/>
<link wikidata="Q279000" start="3846" end="3859" title="South Shields" label="South Shields"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4097" end="4121" title="Awards of the Royal National Lifeboat Institution#Medal of the RNLI" label="Silver Medal for Bravery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166873" start="4217" end="4252" title="Royal National Lifeboat Institution" label="Royal National Lifeboat Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q151352" start="4612" end="4634" title="Hugh Percy, 3rd Duke of Northumberland" label="Duke of Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="4874" end="4886" title="Tuberculosis" label="Tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23463467" start="4940" end="4963" title="Northumberland Archives" label="Northumberland Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663783" start="5005" end="5011" title="Wooler" label="Wooler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002826" start="5260" end="5267" title="Alnwick" label="Alnwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754479" start="5278" end="5303" title="Charlotte Percy, Duchess of Northumberland" label="Duchess of Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320427" start="5398" end="5412" title="Alnwick Castle" label="Alnwick Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="5658" end="5669" title="Tuberculosis" label="consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q15979293" start="5722" end="5754" title="St Aidan&amp;#x27;s Church, Bamburgh" label="St Aidan&amp;#x27;s Church, Bamburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q17546734" start="5760" end="5785" title="Monument to Grace Darling" label="Monument to Grace Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q112993207" start="6025" end="6046" title="Charles Raymond Smith" label="Charles Raymond Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q21075643" start="6054" end="6065" title="James Smith (sculptor)" label="James Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q45546" start="6657" end="6675" title="William Wordsworth" label="William Wordsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q83065" start="6845" end="6854" title="Leicester" label="Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027127" start="6929" end="6939" title="Shoreditch" label="Shoreditch"/>
<link wikidata="Q213804" start="7079" end="7090" title="Lindisfarne" label="Holy Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075556" start="7134" end="7152" title="William Bell Scott" label="William Bell Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963113" start="7156" end="7171" title="Wallington Hall" label="Wallington Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303706" start="7222" end="7239" title="McManus Galleries" label="McManus Galleries"/>
<link wikidata="Q15429337" start="7278" end="7297" title="Thomas Musgrave Joy" label="Thomas Musgrave Joy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11672337" start="7492" end="7525" title="Mersey class lifeboat" label="&amp;quot;Mersey&amp;quot;-class lifeboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173158" start="7598" end="7610" title="Dave Cousins" label="Dave Cousins"/>
<link wikidata="Q926799" start="7614" end="7621" title="Strawbs" label="Strawbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591078" start="7634" end="7647" title="Grace Darling (song)" label="Grace Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755099" start="7674" end="7680" title="Ghosts (Strawbs album)" label="Ghosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q290028" start="7980" end="7992" title="Duke Special" label="Duke Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q962873" start="7997" end="8012" title="Michael Longley" label="Michael Longley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="8169" end="8178" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q17546734" start="8235" end="8260" title="Monument to Grace Darling" label="Monument to Grace Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5987082" start="8293" end="8309" title="Ida Lewis" label="Ida Walley Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591022" start="8417" end="8430" title="Grace Bussell" label="Grace Bussell"/>
<link wikidata="Q18418692" start="8477" end="8487" title="Sam Isaacs" label="Sam Isaacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7393741" start="8515" end="8539" title="SS Georgette" label="SS &amp;quot;Georgette&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="8566" end="8581" title="Western Australia" label="West Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766443" start="8761" end="8771" title="Ann Harvey" label="Ann Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351487" start="8881" end="8893" title="Roberta Boyd" label="Roberta Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="8897" end="8910" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q534181" start="8965" end="8974" title="St. Croix River (Maine – New Brunswick)" label="St. Croix"/>
<link wikidata="Q315511" start="9042" end="9068" title="Algernon Charles Swinburne" label="Algernon Charles Swinburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329577" start="9220" end="9235" title="William Henry Ogilvie" label="Will H. Ogilvie"/>
<link wikidata="Q457856" start="9734" end="9749" title="Jessica Mitford" label="Jessica Mitford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210343" start="10019" end="10058" title="Oxford Dictionary of National Biography" label="Oxford Dictionary of National Biography"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="60556" wikidata="Q335115" url="?curid=60556" title="William Armstrong, 1st Baron Armstrong">
<text>William Armstrong, 1st Baron Armstrong, (26 November 1810 – 27 December 1900) was an English engineer and industrialist who founded the Armstrong Whitworth manufacturing concern on Tyneside. He was also an eminent scientist, inventor and philanthropist. In collaboration with the architect Richard Norman Shaw, he built Cragside in Northumberland, the first house in the world to be lit by hydroelectricity. He is regarded as the inventor of modern artillery.

Armstrong was knighted in 1859 after giving his gun patents to the government. In 1887, in Queen Victoria&#x27;s golden jubilee year, he was raised to the peerage as Baron Armstrong of Cragside.

==Early life==
Armstrong was born in Newcastle upon Tyne at 9 Pleasant Row, Shieldfield, Although the house in which he was born no longer exists, an inscribed granite tablet marks the site where it stood. At that time the area, next to the Pandon Dene, was rural. His father, also called William, was a corn merchant on the Newcastle quayside, who rose through the ranks of Newcastle society to become mayor of the town in 1850. An elder sister, Anne, born in 1802, was named after his mother, the daughter of Addison Potter.

Armstrong was educated at the Royal Grammar School, Newcastle upon Tyne, until he was sixteen, when he was sent to Bishop Auckland Grammar School. While there, he often visited the nearby engineering works of William Ramshaw. During his visits he met his future wife, Ramshaw&#x27;s daughter Margaret, six years his senior.

Armstrong&#x27;s father was set on his following a career in the law, and so he was articled to Armorer Donkin, a solicitor friend of his father&#x27;s. He spent five years in London studying law and returned to Newcastle in 1833. In 1835 he became a partner in Donkin&#x27;s business and the firm became Donkin, Stable and Armstrong. Armstrong married Margaret Ramshaw in 1835, and they built a house in Jesmond Dene, on the eastern edge of Newcastle. Armstrong worked for eleven years as a solicitor, but during his spare time he showed great interest in engineering, developing the &quot;Armstrong Hydroelectric Machine&quot; between 1840 and 1842. In 1837, he laid the foundations for the engineering and environmental consultancy which is today known as Wardell Armstrong.

==Change of career==
Armstrong was a very keen angler, and while fishing on the River Dee at Dentdale in the Pennines, he saw a waterwheel in action, supplying power to a marble quarry. It struck Armstrong that much of the available power was being wasted. When he returned to Newcastle, he designed a rotary engine powered by water, and this was built in the High Bridge works of his friend Henry Watson. Little interest was shown in the engine. Armstrong subsequently developed a piston engine instead of a rotary one and decided that it might be suitable for driving a hydraulic crane. In 1846 his work as an amateur scientist was recognized when he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society.

In 1845 a scheme was set in motion to provide piped water from distant reservoirs to the households of Newcastle. Armstrong was involved in this scheme and he proposed to Newcastle Corporation that the excess water pressure in the lower part of town could be used to power a quayside crane specially adapted by himself. He claimed that his hydraulic crane could unload ships faster and more cheaply than conventional cranes. The Corporation agreed to his suggestion, and the experiment proved so successful that three more hydraulic cranes were installed on the Quayside.

The success of his hydraulic crane led Armstrong to consider setting up a business to manufacture cranes and other hydraulic equipment. He therefore resigned from his legal practice. Donkin, his legal colleague, supported him in his career move, providing financial backing for the new venture. In 1847 the firm of W. G. Armstrong &amp; Company bought of land alongside the river at Elswick, near Newcastle, and began to build a factory there. The new company received orders for hydraulic cranes from Edinburgh and Northern Railways and from Liverpool Docks, as well as for hydraulic machinery for dock gates in Grimsby. The company soon began to expand. In 1850 the company produced 45 cranes and two years later, 75. It averaged 100 cranes per year for the rest of the century. In 1850 over 300 men were employed at the works, but by 1863 this had risen to 3,800. The company soon branched out into bridge building, one of the first orders being for the Inverness Bridge, completed in 1855.

==Hydraulic accumulator==

Armstrong was responsible for developing the hydraulic accumulator. Where water pressure was not available on site for the use of hydraulic cranes, Armstrong often built high water towers to provide a supply of water at pressure – for instance, the Grimsby Dock Tower. However, when supplying cranes for use at New Holland on the Humber Estuary, he was unable to do this because the foundations consisted of sand. After much careful thought he produced the weighted accumulator, a cast-iron cylinder fitted with a plunger supporting a very heavy weight. The plunger would slowly be raised, drawing in water, until the downward force of the weight was sufficient to force the water below it into pipes at great pressure. The accumulator was a very significant, if unspectacular, invention, which found many applications in the following years.

==Armaments==

In 1854, during the Crimean War, Armstrong read about the difficulties the British Army experienced in manoeuvring its heavy field guns. He decided to design a lighter, more mobile field gun, with greater range and accuracy. He built a breech-loading gun with a strong, rifled barrel made from wrought iron wrapped around a steel inner lining, designed to fire a shell rather than a ball. In 1855 he had a five-pounder ready for inspection by a government committee. The gun proved successful in trials, but the committee thought a higher calibre gun was needed, so Armstrong built an 18-pounder on the same design.

After trials, this gun was declared to be superior to all its rivals. Armstrong surrendered the patent for the gun to the British government, rather than profit from its design. As a result he was created a Knight Bachelor and in 1859 was presented to Queen Victoria. Armstrong became employed as Engineer of Rifled Ordnance to the War Department. In order to avoid a conflict of interests if his own company were to manufacture armaments, Armstrong created a separate company, called Elswick Ordnance Company, in which he had no financial involvement. The new company agreed to manufacture armaments for the British government and no other. Under his new position, Armstrong worked to bring the old Woolwich Arsenal up to date so that it could build guns designed at Elswick.

However, just when it looked as if the new gun was about to become a great success, a great deal of opposition to the gun arose, both inside the army and from rival arms manufacturers, particularly Joseph Whitworth of Manchester. Stories were publicised that the new gun was too difficult to use, that it was too expensive, that it was dangerous to use, that it frequently needed repair and so on. All of this smacked of a concerted campaign against Armstrong. Armstrong was able to refute all of these claims in front of various government committees, but he found the constant criticism very wearying and depressing. In 1862 the government decided to stop ordering the new gun and return to muzzle loaders. Also, because of a drop in demand, future orders for guns would be supplied from Woolwich, leaving Elswick without new business. Compensation was eventually agreed with the government for the loss of business to the company, which went on legitimately to sell its products to foreign powers. Speculation that guns were sold to both sides in the American Civil War was unfounded.

== Warships ==

In 1864 the two companies, W. G. Armstrong &amp; Company and Elswick Ordnance Company merged to form Sir W. G. Armstrong &amp; Company. Armstrong had resigned from his employment with the War Office, so there was no longer a conflict of interest. The company turned its attention to naval guns. In 1867 Armstrong reached an agreement with Charles Mitchell, a shipbuilder in Low Walker, whereby Mitchells would build warships and Elswick would provide the guns. The first ship, in 1868 was HMS &quot;Staunch&quot;, a gunboat.

In 1876, because the 18th-century bridge at Newcastle restricted access by ships to the Elswick works, Armstrong&#x27;s company paid for a new Swing Bridge to be built, so that warships could have their guns fitted at Elswick. In 1882 Armstrong&#x27;s company merged with Mitchell&#x27;s to form Sir William Armstrong, Mitchell and Co. Ltd. and in 1884 a shipyard opened at Elswick to specialise in warship production. The first vessels produced were the torpedo cruisers &quot;Panther&quot; and &quot;Leopard&quot; for the Austro-Hungarian Navy. The first battleship produced at Elswick was HMS &quot;Victoria&quot;, launched in 1887. The ship was originally to be named &quot;Renown&quot;, but the name was changed in honour of the Queen&#x27;s Golden Jubilee. Armstrong drove the first and last rivets. The ship was ill-fated, as she was involved in a collision with HMS &quot;Camperdown&quot; just six years later in 1893 and sank with the loss of 358 men, including Vice-Admiral Sir George Tryon. An important customer of the Elswick yard was Japan, which took several cruisers, some of which defeated the Russian fleet at the Battle of Tsushima in 1905. It was claimed that every Japanese gun used in the battle had been provided by Elswick. Elswick was the only factory in the world that could build a battleship and arm it completely.


The Elswick works continued to prosper, and by 1870 stretched for three-quarters of a mile along the riverside. The population of Elswick, which had been 3,539 in 1851, had increased to 27,800 by 1871. In 1894, Elswick built and installed the steam-driven pumping engines, hydraulic accumulators and hydraulic pumping engines to operate London&#x27;s Tower Bridge. In 1897 the company merged with the company of Armstrong&#x27;s old rival, Joseph Whitworth, and became Sir W. G. Armstrong, Whitworth &amp; Co Ltd. Whitworth was by this time dead.

Armstrong gathered many excellent engineers at Elswick. Notable among them were Andrew Noble and George Wightwick Rendel, whose design of gun-mountings and hydraulic control of gun-turrets were adopted worldwide. Rendel introduced the cruiser as a naval vessel. There was great rivalry and dislike between Noble and Rendel, which became open after Armstrong&#x27;s death.

==Cragside==
From 1863 onwards, although Armstrong remained the head of his company, he became less involved in its day-to-day running. He appointed several very able men to senior positions and they continued his work. When he married, he acquired a house called Jesmond Dean (sic), which is now demolished, and not to be confused with the nearby Jesmond Dene House. Armstrong&#x27;s house was to the west of Jesmond Dene, Newcastle, and thus not far from his birthplace, and he began to landscape and improve land that he bought within the Dene. In 1860 he paid local architect John Dobson to design a Banqueting Hall overlooking the Dene, which still survives, though it is now roofless. His house close to Newcastle was convenient for his practice as a solicitor and his work as an industrialist, but when he had more spare time he longed for a house in the country.

He had often visited Rothbury as a child, when he was afflicted by a severe cough, and he had fond memories of the area. In 1863 he bought some land in a steep-sided, narrow valley where the Debdon Burn flows towards the River Coquet near Rothbury. He had the land cleared and supervised the building of a house perched on a ledge of rock, overlooking the burn. He also supervised a programme of planting trees and mosses so as to cover the rocky hillside with vegetation.

His new house was called Cragside, and over the years Armstrong added to the Cragside estate. Eventually the estate was and had seven million trees planted, together with five artificial lakes and of carriage drives, and his demonstration centre at Cragend Farm Hydraulic Silo. The lakes were used to generate hydro-electricity, and the house was the first in the world to be lit by hydro-electricity, using incandescent lamps provided by the inventor Joseph Swan.

As Armstrong spent less and less time at the Elswick works, he spent more and more time at Cragside, and it became his main home. In 1869 he commissioned the celebrated architect Richard Norman Shaw to enlarge and improve the house, and this was done over a period of 15 years. In 1883 Armstrong gave Jesmond Dene, together with its banqueting hall to the city of Newcastle. He retained his house next to the Dene. Armstrong entertained several eminent guests at Cragside, including the Shah of Persia, the King of Siam, the prime minister of China and the Prince and Princess of Wales.

==Later life==

In 1873 he served as High Sheriff of Northumberland. He was President of the North of England Institute of Mining and Mechanical Engineers from 1872 to 1875. He was elected as the president of the Institution of Civil Engineers in December 1881 and served in that capacity for the next year. He was conferred with Honorary Membership of the Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders in Scotland in 1884. In 1886, he was persuaded to stand as a Unionist Liberal candidate for Newcastle, but was unsuccessful, coming third in the election. That same year he was presented with the Freedom of the City of Newcastle. In 1887 he was raised to the peerage as Baron Armstrong, of Cragside in the County of Northumberland. His last great project, begun in 1894, was the purchase and restoration of the huge Bamburgh Castle on the Northumberland coast, which remains in the hands of the Armstrong family. His wife, Margaret, died in September 1893, at their house in Jesmond. Armstrong died at Cragside on 27 December 1900, aged ninety. He was buried in Rothbury churchyard, alongside his wife. The couple had no children, and Armstrong&#x27;s heir was his great-nephew William Watson-Armstrong. He was succeeded as chairman of the company by his one-time protégé, Andrew Noble.

Such was Armstrong&#x27;s fame as a gun-maker that he is thought to be a possible model for George Bernard Shaw&#x27;s arms magnate in &quot;Major Barbara&quot;. The title character in Iain Pears&#x27; historical-mystery novel &quot;Stone&#x27;s Fall&quot; also has similarities to Armstrong.

==His attitude to armaments==
There is no evidence that Armstrong agonised over his decision to go into armament production. He once said: &quot;If I thought that war would be fomented, or the interests of humanity suffer, by what I have done, I would greatly regret it. I have no such apprehension.&quot; He also said: &quot;It is our province, as engineers to make the forces of matter obedient to the will of man; those who use the means we supply must be responsible for their legitimate application.&quot;

==Views on renewable energy==

Armstrong advocated the use of renewable energy. Stating that coal &quot;was used wastefully and extravagantly in all its applications&quot;, he predicted in 1863 that Britain would cease to produce coal within two centuries. As well as advocating the use of hydroelectricity, he also supported solar power, stating that the amount of solar energy received by an area of in the tropics would &quot;exert the amazing power of 4,000 horses acting for nearly nine hours every day&quot;.

==The benefactor==
Armstrong donated the long wooded gorge of Jesmond Dene to the people of the city of Newcastle upon Tyne in 1883, as well as Armstrong Bridge and Armstrong Park nearby. He was involved in the foundation in 1871 of the College of Physical Science – a forerunner of the University of Newcastle, renamed Armstrong College in 1906. He was President of the Literary and Philosophical Society of Newcastle upon Tyne from 1860 until his death, as well as twice president of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers. Armstrong gave £11,500 towards the building of Newcastle&#x27;s Hancock Natural History Museum, which was completed in 1882. This sum is equivalent to over £555,000 in 2010. Lord Armstrong&#x27;s generosity extended beyond his death. In 1901 his heir, William Watson-Armstrong gave £100,000 (equivalent to £ in ), for the building of the new Royal Victoria Infirmary in Newcastle upon Tyne. Its original 1753 building at Forth Banks near the River Tyne was inadequate and impossible to expand. In 1903 the barony of Armstrong was revived in favour of William Watson-Armstrong.

==Honours==
* In 1846 he was made a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS).
* In 1850 he received the Telford Medal from the Institution of Civil Engineers. 
* In 1859 William Armstrong was knighted as a Knight Bachelor (Kt).
* He was made a Companion of the Order of the Bath in the Civil Division
* In 1874 he was elected an International Member of the American Philosophical Society.
* In 1878 he received the Albert Medal from the Royal Society of Arts.
* In 1886 he was awarded the Freedom of the City of Newcastle.
* In 1887 he was raised to the peerage as a Hereditary peer, allowing him to sit in the House of Lords. He took the title Baron Armstrong, of Cragside in the County of Northumberland. 
* In 1891 he received the Bessemer Gold Medal from the Iron and Steel Institute.

;Honorary Degrees

==Arms==
===Publications===
*
*, Plates: 17–24

==References==
==Further reading==
* Heald, Henrietta (2012), &quot;William Armstrong: Magician of the North&quot;. Alnwick, Northumberland: McNidder &amp; Grace. .
* Smith, Ken (2005), &quot;Emperor of Industry: Lord Armstrong of Cragside&quot;. Newcastle: Tyne Bridge Publishing, 48 pp. .
* Bastable, Marshall J. (2004), &quot;Arms and the State, Sir William Armstrong and the Remaking of British Naval Power&quot;. UK: Ashgate, 300 pp. .
* Renwick, Lou (2024), Transformation: Lord Armstrong&#x27;s Cragend Farm. UK. Feedaread. Amazon. 134 pp. ISBN: 978-1835-97207-6.

==External links==
* William Armstrong website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q335115" start="0" end="38" title="William Armstrong, 1st Baron Armstrong" label="William Armstrong, 1st Baron Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q689159" start="136" end="155" title="Armstrong Whitworth" label="Armstrong Whitworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578988" start="181" end="189" title="Tyneside" label="Tyneside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374863" start="290" end="309" title="Richard Norman Shaw" label="Richard Norman Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180627" start="320" end="328" title="Cragside" label="Cragside"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="475" end="483" title="Knight Bachelor" label="knighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="552" end="566" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="694" end="713" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7496168" start="733" end="744" title="Shieldfield" label="Shieldfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q18531005" start="946" end="953" title="William Armstrong (corn merchant)" label="William"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374234" start="1215" end="1256" title="Royal Grammar School, Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Royal Grammar School, Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411754" start="1300" end="1330" title="King James I Academy" label="Bishop Auckland Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1606" end="1620" title="Armorer Donkin" label="Armorer Donkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185770" start="1915" end="1927" title="Jesmond Dene" label="Jesmond Dene"/>
<link wikidata="Q55604217" start="2101" end="2132" title="Armstrong Hydroelectric Machine" label="Armstrong Hydroelectric Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q155400" start="2369" end="2378" title="River Dee, Cumbria" label="River Dee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704300" start="2382" end="2390" title="Dent (Lonsdale)" label="Dentdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q35647" start="2398" end="2406" title="Pennines" label="Pennines"/>
<link wikidata="Q146728" start="2417" end="2427" title="waterwheel" label="waterwheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q108085192" start="2460" end="2466" title="Dent Marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q25313277" start="2861" end="2876" title="hydraulic crane" label="hydraulic crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="2970" end="2983" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269625" start="3261" end="3269" title="quayside" label="quayside"/>
<link wikidata="Q98972704" start="3942" end="3949" title="Elswick, Tyne and Wear" label="Elswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398514" start="4102" end="4117" title="Port of Liverpool" label="Liverpool Docks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972552" start="4134" end="4153" title="hydraulic machinery" label="hydraulic machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q179406" start="4172" end="4179" title="Grimsby" label="Grimsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q160493" start="4516" end="4525" title="Inverness" label="Inverness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668679" start="4626" end="4647" title="hydraulic accumulator" label="hydraulic accumulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668679" start="4756" end="4767" title="Accumulator tower" label="water tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609325" start="4830" end="4848" title="Grimsby Dock Tower" label="Grimsby Dock Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314637" start="4892" end="4903" title="New Holland, North Lincolnshire" label="New Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q550995" start="4911" end="4925" title="Humber Estuary" label="Humber Estuary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5038" end="5058" title="hydraulic accumulator#Raised weight" label="weighted accumulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="5460" end="5471" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="5515" end="5527" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933955" start="5676" end="5694" title="Breech-loading weapon" label="breech-loading gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q318028" start="5803" end="5808" title="shell (projectile)" label="shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723884" start="5823" end="5827" title="cannonball" label="ball"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5846" end="5858" title="Glossary of British ordnance terms#Pounder" label="five-pounder"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="6264" end="6279" title="Knight Bachelor" label="Knight Bachelor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="6309" end="6323" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548932" start="6389" end="6403" title="War Department (UK)" label="War Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333973" start="6542" end="6566" title="Elswick Ordnance Company" label="Elswick Ordnance Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170996" start="6757" end="6773" title="Royal Arsenal" label="Woolwich Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q712307" start="7033" end="7049" title="Joseph Whitworth" label="Joseph Whitworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="7053" end="7063" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="7889" end="7907" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080992" start="8279" end="8295" title="Charles Mitchell (shipbuilder)" label="Charles Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q214196" start="8456" end="8463" title="gunboat" label="gunboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7658542" start="8609" end="8621" title="Swing Bridge, River Tyne" label="Swing Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q19013671" start="8938" end="8957" title="SMS Panther (1885)" label="&amp;quot;Panther&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q560330" start="8962" end="8981" title="SMS Leopard (1885)" label="&amp;quot;Leopard&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q159211" start="8990" end="9011" title="Austro-Hungarian Navy" label="Austro-Hungarian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502183" start="9058" end="9082" title="HMS Victoria (1887)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Victoria&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5631770" start="9336" end="9362" title="HMS Camperdown (1885)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Camperdown&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508380" start="9454" end="9466" title="George Tryon" label="George Tryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q208127" start="9598" end="9616" title="Battle of Tsushima" label="Battle of Tsushima"/>
<link wikidata="Q83125" start="10162" end="10174" title="Tower Bridge" label="Tower Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106331" start="10439" end="10451" title="Sir Andrew Noble, 1st Baronet" label="Andrew Noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q4393229" start="10456" end="10479" title="George Wightwick Rendel" label="George Wightwick Rendel"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843" start="10594" end="10601" title="cruiser" label="cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185772" start="11080" end="11098" title="Jesmond Dene House" label="Jesmond Dene House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185770" start="11142" end="11154" title="Jesmond Dene" label="Jesmond Dene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229555" start="11312" end="11323" title="John Dobson (architect)" label="John Dobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q26275714" start="11336" end="11351" title="Jesmond Dene Banqueting Hall" label="Banqueting Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q578750" start="11625" end="11633" title="Rothbury" label="Rothbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337301" start="11825" end="11837" title="River Coquet" label="River Coquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180627" start="12103" end="12111" title="Cragside" label="Cragside"/>
<link wikidata="Q315422" start="12530" end="12541" title="Joseph Swan" label="Joseph Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374863" start="12723" end="12742" title="Richard Norman Shaw" label="Richard Norman Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185770" start="12845" end="12857" title="Jesmond Dene" label="Jesmond Dene"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="13039" end="13045" title="Persian Empire" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="13059" end="13063" title="Thailand" label="Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="13101" end="13107" title="Edward VII of the United Kingdom" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q152260" start="13112" end="13129" title="Alexandra of Denmark" label="Princess of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756885" start="13169" end="13199" title="High Sheriff of Northumberland" label="High Sheriff of Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057517" start="13225" end="13286" title="North of England Institute of Mining and Mechanical Engineers" label="North of England Institute of Mining and Mechanical Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665181" start="13345" end="13375" title="Institution of Civil Engineers" label="Institution of Civil Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995187" start="13489" end="13542" title="Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders in Scotland" label="Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754707" start="13592" end="13608" title="Liberal Unionist Party" label="Unionist Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017352" start="13623" end="13632" title="Newcastle-upon-Tyne (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="13727" end="13746" title="Freedom of the City" label="Freedom of the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="13750" end="13759" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026185" start="13947" end="13962" title="Bamburgh Castle" label="Bamburgh Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020067" start="14309" end="14333" title="William Watson-Armstrong, 1st Baron Armstrong" label="William Watson-Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106331" start="14404" end="14416" title="Sir Andrew Noble, 1st Baronet" label="Andrew Noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="14511" end="14530" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="George Bernard Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738028" start="14560" end="14573" title="Major Barbara" label="Major Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q983568" start="14604" end="14614" title="Iain Pears" label="Iain Pears"/>
<link wikidata="Q783288" start="14652" end="14669" title="Stone&amp;#x27;s Fall" label="Stone&amp;#x27;s Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="15287" end="15303" title="renewable energy" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="15515" end="15531" title="hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483757" start="15551" end="15562" title="solar power" label="solar power"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="15634" end="15641" title="tropics" label="tropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185770" start="15803" end="15815" title="Jesmond Dene" label="Jesmond Dene"/>
<link wikidata="Q837164" start="16028" end="16051" title="Newcastle University" label="University of Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647654" start="16112" end="16169" title="Literary and Philosophical Society of Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Literary and Philosophical Society of Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q15051986" start="16231" end="16266" title="Institution of Mechanical Engineers" label="Institution of Mechanical Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647057" start="16332" end="16362" title="Hancock Natural History Museum" label="Hancock Natural History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020067" start="16520" end="16544" title="William Watson-Armstrong, 1st Baron Armstrong" label="William Watson-Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374975" start="16610" end="16634" title="Royal Victoria Infirmary" label="Royal Victoria Infirmary"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="16882" end="16909" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="Fellow of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697212" start="16943" end="16956" title="Telford Medal" label="Telford Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665181" start="16966" end="16996" title="Institution of Civil Engineers" label="Institution of Civil Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="17031" end="17039" title="Knighthood" label="knighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="17045" end="17060" title="Knight Bachelor" label="Knight Bachelor"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="17100" end="17117" title="Order of the Bath" label="Order of the Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="17196" end="17226" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710826" start="17254" end="17266" title="Albert Medal (Royal Society of Arts)" label="Albert Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460885" start="17276" end="17297" title="Royal Society of Arts" label="Royal Society of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="17328" end="17347" title="Freedom of the City" label="Freedom of the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="17351" end="17360" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q808719" start="17406" end="17421" title="Hereditary peer" label="Hereditary peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="17450" end="17464" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180627" start="17504" end="17512" title="Cragside" label="Cragside"/>
<link wikidata="Q23079" start="17530" end="17544" title="Northumberland" label="Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34072152" start="17602" end="17626" title="Iron and Steel Institute" label="Iron and Steel Institute"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="60557" wikidata="Q211519" url="?curid=60557" title="Emmeline Pankhurst">
<text>Emmeline Pankhurst (; Goulden; 15 July 1858 – 14 June 1928) was a British political activist who organised the British suffragette movement and helped women to win in 1918 the right to vote in Great Britain and Ireland. In 1999, &quot;Time&quot; named her as one of the 100 Most Important People of the 20th Century, stating that &quot;she shaped an idea of objects for our time&quot; and &quot;shook society into a new pattern from which there could be no going back&quot;. She was widely criticised for her militant tactics, and historians disagree about their effectiveness, but her work is recognised as a crucial element in achieving women&#x27;s suffrage in the United Kingdom.

Born in the Moss Side district of Manchester to politically active parents, Pankhurst was introduced at the age of 16 to the women&#x27;s suffrage movement. She founded and became involved with the Women&#x27;s Franchise League, which advocated suffrage for both married and unmarried women. When that organisation broke apart, she tried to join the left-leaning Independent Labour Party through her friendship with socialist Keir Hardie but was initially refused membership by the local branch on account of her sex. While working as a Poor Law Guardian, she was shocked at the harsh conditions she encountered in Manchester&#x27;s workhouses.

In 1903, Pankhurst founded the Women&#x27;s Social and Political Union (WSPU), an all-women suffrage advocacy organisation dedicated to &quot;deeds, not words&quot;. The group identified as independent from – and often in opposition to – political parties. It became known for physical confrontations: its members smashed windows and assaulted police officers. Pankhurst, her daughters, and other WSPU activists received repeated prison sentences, where they staged hunger strikes to secure better conditions, and were often force-fed. As Pankhurst&#x27;s eldest daughter Christabel took leadership of the WSPU, antagonism between the group and the government grew. Eventually, the group adopted bombings and arson as a tactic, and more moderate organisations spoke out against the Pankhurst family. In 1913, several prominent individuals left the WSPU, among them Pankhurst&#x27;s younger daughters, Adela and Sylvia. Emmeline was so furious that she &quot;gave [Adela] a ticket, £20, and a letter of introduction to a suffragette in Australia, and firmly insisted that she emigrate&quot;. Adela complied and the family rift was never healed. Sylvia became a socialist.

With the advent of the First World War, Emmeline and Christabel called an immediate halt to the militant terrorism in support of the British government&#x27;s stand against the &quot;German Peril&quot;. Emmeline organised and led a massive procession called the &quot;Women&#x27;s Right to Serve demonstration&quot; to illustrate women&#x27;s contribution to the war effort. Emmeline and Christabel urged women to aid industrial production and encouraged young men to fight. Some have suggested there is an ideological link between the feminist movement and the white feather movement.

In 1918, the Representation of the People Act granted votes to all men over the age of 21 and women over the age of 30. This discrepancy was intended to ensure that men did not become minority voters as a consequence of the huge number of deaths suffered during the First World War.

She transformed the WSPU machinery into the Women&#x27;s Party, which was dedicated to promoting women&#x27;s equality in public life. In her later years, she became concerned with what she perceived as the menace posed by Bolshevism and joined the Conservative Party. She was selected as the Conservative candidate for Whitechapel and St Georges in 1927. She died on 14 June 1928, only weeks before the Conservative government&#x27;s Representation of the People (Equal Franchise) Act 1928 extended the vote to all women over 21 years of age on 2 July 1928. She was commemorated two years later with a statue in Victoria Tower Gardens, next to the Houses of Parliament.

==Early life==

Emmeline Goulden was born on Sloan Street in the Moss Side district of Manchester on 15 July 1858. Although her birth certificate says otherwise, she believed and later claimed her birthday was a day earlier, on Bastille Day (14 July). Most biographies, including those written by her daughters, repeat this claim. Feeling a kinship with the female revolutionaries who stormed the Bastille, she said in 1908: &quot;I have always thought that the fact that I was born on that day had some kind of influence over my life.&quot; The family into which she was born had been steeped in political agitation for generations; her mother, Sophia, was a Manx woman from the Isle of Man who was descended from men who were charged with social unrest and slander.

In 1881, the Isle of Man became the first place in the British Isles to grant women the right to vote in Manx national elections (the Isle does not return members to the UK Parliament). Her father, Robert Goulden, was a self-made manworking his way from errand boy to manufacturerfrom a humble Manchester family with its own background of political activity. Robert&#x27;s mother, a fustian cutter, worked with the Anti-Corn Law League, and his father was press-ganged into the Royal Navy and present at the Peterloo massacre, when cavalry charged and broke up a crowd demanding parliamentary reform.

The Gouldens&#x27; first son died at the age of three, but they had 10 other children; Emmeline was the eldest of five daughters. Soon after her birth, the family moved to Seedley, where her father had co-founded a small business. He was also active in local politics, serving for several years on the Salford town council. He was an enthusiastic supporter of dramatic organisations including the Manchester Athenaeum and the Dramatic Reading Society. He owned a theatre in Salford for several years, where he played the leads in several Shakespeare plays. Goulden absorbed an appreciation of drama and theatrics from her father, which she used later in social activism. The Gouldens included their children in social activism. As part of the movement to end U.S. slavery, Robert welcomed American abolitionist Henry Ward Beecher when he visited Manchester. Sophia used the novel &quot;Uncle Tom&#x27;s Cabin&quot;, written by Beecher&#x27;s sister Harriet Beecher Stowe, as a regular source of bedtime stories for her sons and daughters. In her 1914 autobiography &quot;My Own Story&quot;, Goulden recalls visiting a bazaar at a young age to collect money for newly freed slaves in the U.S.

Emmeline began to read books when she was very young, with one source claiming that she was reading as early as the age of three. She read the &quot;Odyssey&quot; at the age of nine and enjoyed the works of John Bunyan, especially his 1678 story &quot;The Pilgrim&#x27;s Progress&quot;. Another of her favourite books was Thomas Carlyle&#x27;s three-volume treatise &quot;The French Revolution: A History&quot;, and she later said the work &quot;remained all [her] life a source of inspiration&quot;. Despite her avid consumption of books, however, she was not given the educational advantages enjoyed by her brothers. Their parents believed that the girls needed most to learn the art of &quot;making home attractive&quot; and other skills desired by potential husbands. The Gouldens deliberated carefully about future plans for their sons&#x27; education, but they expected their daughters to marry young and avoid paid work. Although they supported women&#x27;s suffrage and the general advancement of women in society, the Gouldens believed their daughters incapable of the goals of their male peers. Feigning sleep one evening as her father came into her bedroom, Goulden heard him pause and say to himself, &quot;What a pity she wasn&#x27;t born a lad.&quot;

It was through her parents&#x27; interest in women&#x27;s suffrage that Goulden was first introduced to the subject. Her mother received and read the &quot;Women&#x27;s Suffrage Journal&quot;, and Goulden grew fond of its editor Lydia Becker. At the age of 14, she returned home from school one day to find her mother on her way to a public meeting about women&#x27;s voting rights. After learning that Becker would be speaking, she insisted on attending. Goulden was enthralled by Becker&#x27;s address and later wrote, &quot;I left the meeting a conscious and confirmed suffragist.&quot; A year later, she arrived in Paris to attend the &quot;École Normale de Neuilly&quot;. The school provided its female pupils with classes in chemistry and bookkeeping, in addition to traditionally feminine arts such as embroidery. Her roommate was Noémie, the daughter of Victor Henri Rochefort, who had been imprisoned in New Caledonia for his support of the Paris Commune. The girls shared tales of their parents&#x27; political exploits and remained good friends for years. Goulden was so fond of Noémie and the school that she returned with her sister Mary Jane as a parlour boarder after graduating. Noémie had married a Swiss painter and quickly found a suitable French husband for her English friend. When Robert refused to provide a dowry for his daughter, the man withdrew his offer of marriage and Goulden returned, miserable, to Manchester.

== Marriage and family ==
In the autumn of 1878, at the age of 20, Goulden met and began a relationship with Richard Pankhurst, a barrister who had advocated women&#x27;s suffrage – and other causes, including freedom of speech and education reform – for years. Richard, 44 years old when they met, had earlier resolved to remain a bachelor to better serve the public. Their mutual affection was powerful, but the couple&#x27;s happiness was diminished by the death of his mother the following year. Sophia Jane Goulden chastised her daughter for &quot;throwing herself&quot; at Richard and advised her without success to exhibit more aloofness. Emmeline suggested to Richard that they avoid the legal formalities of marriage by entering into a free union; he objected on the grounds that she would be excluded from political life as an unmarried woman. He noted that his colleague Elizabeth Wolstenholme Elmy had faced social condemnation before she formalised her marriage to Ben Elmy. Emmeline Goulden agreed, and they had their wedding in St Luke&#x27;s Church, Pendleton on 18 December 1879.

During the 1880s, living at the Goulden cottage with her parents in Seedley, then at 1 Drayton Terrace Chester Rd Old Trafford (1881 census Stretford) opposite Richard&#x27;s parents home, Emmeline Pankhurst tended to her husband and children, but still devoted time to political activities. Although she gave birth to five children in ten years, both she and Richard believed that she should not be &quot;a household machine&quot;. Thus a butler was hired to help with the children as Pankhurst involved herself with the Women&#x27;s Suffrage Society. Their daughter Christabel was born on 22 September 1880, less than a year after the wedding. Pankhurst gave birth to another daughter, Estelle Sylvia, in 1882, and their son Henry Francis Robert, nicknamed Frank, in 1884. Soon afterwards Richard Pankhurst left the Liberal Party. He began expressing more radical socialist views and argued a case in court against several wealthy businessmen. These actions roused Robert Goulden&#x27;s ire and the mood in the house became tense. In 1885, the Pankhursts moved to Chorlton-on-Medlock, and their daughter Adela was born. They moved to London the following year, where Richard ran unsuccessfully for election as a Member of Parliament and Pankhurst opened a small fabric shop called Emerson and Company, together with her sister Mary Jane.

In 1888, Pankhurst&#x27;s son Frank developed diphtheria. He died on 11 September. Overwhelmed with grief, Pankhurst commissioned two portraits of the dead boy but was unable to look at them and hid them in a bedroom cupboard. The family concluded that a faulty drainage system at the back of their house had caused their son&#x27;s illness. Pankhurst blamed the poor conditions of the neighbourhood, and the family moved to a more affluent middle class district at Russell Square. She was soon pregnant once more and declared that the child was &quot;Frank coming again&quot;. She gave birth to a son on 7 July 1889 and named him Henry Francis in honour of his deceased brother.

Pankhurst made their Russell Square home into a centre for political intellectuals and activists, including, &quot;Socialists, Protesters, Anarchists, Suffragists, Free Thinkers, Radicals and Humanitarians of all schools.&quot; She took pleasure in decorating the house – especially with furnishings from Asia – and clothing the family in tasteful apparel. Her daughter Sylvia later wrote: &quot;Beauty and appropriateness in her dress and household appointments seemed to her at all times an indispensable setting to public work.&quot;

The Pankhursts hosted a variety of guests including Indian MP Dadabhai Naoroji, socialist activists Herbert Burrows and Annie Besant, and French anarchist Louise Michel.

== Women&#x27;s Franchise League ==

In 1888, Britain&#x27;s first nationwide coalition of groups advocating women&#x27;s right to vote, the National Society for Women&#x27;s Suffrage (NSWS), split after a majority of members decided to accept organisations affiliated with political parties. Angry at this decision, some of the group&#x27;s leaders, including Lydia Becker and Millicent Fawcett, stormed out of the meeting and created an alternative organisation committed to the &quot;old rules,&quot; called the Great College Street Society after the location of its headquarters. Pankhurst aligned herself with the &quot;new rules&quot; group, which became known as the Parliament Street Society (PSS). Some members of the PSS favoured a piecemeal approach to gaining the vote. Because it was often assumed that married women did not need the vote since their husbands &quot;voted for them,&quot; some PSS members felt that the vote for single women and widows was a practical step along the path to full suffrage. When the reluctance within the PSS to advocate on behalf of married women became clear, Pankhurst and her husband helped organise another new group dedicated to voting rights for all women – married and unmarried.

The inaugural meeting of the Women&#x27;s Franchise League (WFL) was held on 25 July 1889, at the Pankhurst home in Russell Square. Early members of the WFL included Josephine Butler, leader of the Ladies National Association for the Repeal of the Contagious Diseases Acts; the Pankhursts&#x27; friend Elizabeth Clarke Wolstenholme-Elmy; and Harriot Eaton Stanton Blatch, daughter of US suffragist Elizabeth Cady Stanton.

The WFL was considered a radical organisation, since in addition to women&#x27;s suffrage it supported equal rights for women in the areas of divorce and inheritance. It also advocated trade unionism and sought alliances with socialist organisations. The more conservative group that emerged from the NSWS split spoke out against what they called the &quot;extreme left&quot; wing of the movement. The WFL reacted by ridiculing the &quot;Spinster Suffrage party&quot; and insisting that a wider assault on social inequity was required. The group&#x27;s radicalism caused some members to leave; both Blatch and Elmy resigned from the WFL. The group fell apart one year later.

== Independent Labour Party ==
Pankhurst&#x27;s shop never succeeded and he had trouble attracting business in London. With the family&#x27;s finances in jeopardy, Richard travelled regularly to northwest England, where most of his clients were. In 1893 the Pankhursts closed the store and returned to Manchester. They stayed for several months in the seaside town of Southport, then moved briefly to the village of Disley and finally settled into a house in Manchester&#x27;s Victoria Park. The girls were enrolled in Manchester Girls&#x27; High School, where they felt confined by the large student population and strictly regimented schedule.

Pankhurst began to work with several political organisations, distinguishing herself for the first time as an activist in her own right and gaining respect in the community. One biographer describes this period as her &quot;emergence from Richard&#x27;s shadow.&quot; In addition to her work on behalf of women&#x27;s suffrage, she became active with the Women&#x27;s Liberal Federation (WLF), an auxiliary of the Liberal Party. She quickly grew disenchanted with the group&#x27;s moderate positions, however, especially its unwillingness to support Irish Home Rule and the aristocratic leadership of Archibald Primrose.

In 1888 Pankhurst had met and befriended Keir Hardie, a socialist from Scotland. He was elected to parliament in 1891 and two years later helped to create the Independent Labour Party (ILP). Excited about the range of issues which the ILP pledged to confront, Pankhurst resigned from the WFL and applied to join the ILP. The local branch refused her admission on the grounds of her sex, but she eventually joined the ILP nationally. Christabel later wrote of her mother&#x27;s enthusiasm for the party and its organising efforts: &quot;In this movement she hoped there might be the means of righting every political and social wrong.&quot;

One of her first activities with the ILP found Pankhurst distributing food to poor men and women through the Committee for the Relief of the Unemployed. In December 1894 she was elected to the position of Poor Law Guardian in Chorlton-on-Medlock. She was appalled by the conditions she witnessed first-hand in the Manchester workhouse:Pankhurst immediately began to change these conditions, and established herself as a successful voice of reform on the Board of Guardians. Her chief opponent was a passionate man named Mainwaring, known for his rudeness. Recognising that his loud anger was hurting his chances of persuading those aligned with Pankhurst, he kept a note nearby during meetings: &quot;Keep your temper!&quot;

After helping her husband with another unsuccessful parliamentary campaign, Pankhurst faced legal troubles in 1896 when she and two men violated a court order against ILP meetings at Boggart Hole Clough. With Richard&#x27;s volunteering his time as legal counsel, they refused to pay fines, and the two men spent a month in prison. The punishment was never ordered for Pankhurst, however, possibly because the magistrate feared public backlash against the imprisonment of a woman so respected in the community. Asked by an ILP reporter if she were prepared to spend time in prison, Pankhurst replied: &quot;Oh, yes, quite. It wouldn&#x27;t be so very dreadful, you know, and it would be a valuable experience.&quot; Although ILP meetings were eventually permitted, the episode was a strain on Pankhurst&#x27;s health and caused loss of income for their family.

=== Richard&#x27;s death ===
During the struggle at Boggart Hole Clough, Richard Pankhurst began to experience severe stomach pains. He had developed a gastric ulcer, and his health deteriorated in 1897. The family moved briefly to Mobberley, with the hope that country air would help his condition. He soon felt well again, and the family returned to Manchester in the autumn. In the summer of 1898, he suffered a sudden relapse. Emmeline Pankhurst had taken their oldest daughter Christabel to Corsier, Switzerland, to visit her old friend Noémie. A telegram arrived from Richard, reading: &quot;I am not well. Please come home, my love.&quot; Leaving Christabel with Noémie, Pankhurst returned immediately to England. On 5 July, while on a train from London to Manchester, she noticed a newspaper announcing the death of Richard Pankhurst.

The loss of her husband left Pankhurst with new responsibilities and a significant amount of debt. She moved the family to a smaller house at 62 Nelson Street, resigned from the Board of Guardians, and was given a paid position as Registrar of Births and Deaths in Chorlton. This work gave her more insight into the conditions of women in the region. She wrote in her autobiography: &quot;They used to tell me their stories, dreadful stories some of them, and all of them pathetic with that patient and uncomplaining pathos of poverty.&quot; Her observations of the differences between the lives of men and women, for example in relation to illegitimacy, reinforced her conviction that women needed the right to vote before their conditions could improve. In 1900 she was elected to the Manchester School Board and saw new examples of women suffering unequal treatment and limited opportunities. During this time she also re-opened her store, with the hope that it would provide additional income for the family.

The individual identities of the Pankhurst children began to emerge around the time of their father&#x27;s death. Before long they were all involved in the struggle for women&#x27;s suffrage. Christabel enjoyed a privileged status among the daughters, as Sylvia noted in 1931: &quot;She was our mother&#x27;s favourite; we all knew it, and I, for one, never resented the fact.&quot; Christabel did not share her mother&#x27;s fervour for political work, however, until she befriended the suffrage activists Esther Roper and Eva Gore-Booth. She soon became involved with the suffrage movement and joined her mother at speaking events. Sylvia took lessons from a respected local artist and soon received a scholarship to the Manchester School of Art. She went on to study art in Florence and Venice. The younger children, Adela and Harry, had difficulty finding a path for their studies. Adela was sent to a local boarding school, where she was cut off from her friends and contracted head lice. Harry also had difficulty at school; he suffered from measles and vision problems.

==Women&#x27;s Social and Political Union/WSPU==

By 1903, Pankhurst believed that years of moderate speeches and promises about women&#x27;s suffrage from members of parliament (MPs) had yielded no progress. Although suffrage bills in 1870, 1886, and 1897 had shown promise, each was defeated. She doubted that political parties, with their many agenda items, would ever make women&#x27;s suffrage a priority. She even broke with the ILP when it refused to focus on Votes for Women. It was necessary to abandon the patient tactics of existing advocacy groups, she believed, in favour of more militant actions. Thus on 10 October 1903 Pankhurst and several colleagues founded the Women&#x27;s Social and Political Union (WSPU), an organisation open only to women and focused on direct action to win the vote. &quot;Deeds,&quot; she wrote later, &quot;not words, was to be our permanent motto.&quot; The WSPU confined its membership to women – men could not become members.

The group&#x27;s early militancy took non-violent forms. In addition to making speeches and gathering petition signatures, the WSPU organised rallies and published a newsletter called &quot;Votes for Women.&quot; The group also convened a series of &quot;Women&#x27;s Parliaments&quot; for example, in Caxton Hall, to coincide with official government sessions. When a bill for women&#x27;s suffrage was filibustered on 12 May 1905, Pankhurst and other WSPU members began a loud protest outside the Parliament building. Police immediately forced them away from the building, where they regrouped and demanded passage of the bill. Although the bill was never resurrected, Pankhurst considered it a successful demonstration of militancy&#x27;s power to capture attention. Pankhurst declared in 1906: &quot;We are at last recognized as a political party; we are now in the swim of politics, and are a political force.&quot;

Before long, all three of her daughters became active with the WSPU. Christabel was arrested after spitting at a policeman during a meeting of the Liberal Party in October 1905; Adela and Sylvia were arrested a year later during a protest outside Parliament. Pankhurst was arrested for the first time in February 1908, when she tried to enter Parliament to deliver a protest resolution to Prime Minister H. H. Asquith. She was charged with obstruction and sentenced to six weeks in prison. She spoke out against the conditions of her confinement, including vermin, meagre food, and the &quot;civilised torture of solitary confinement and absolute silence&quot; to which she and others were ordered. Pankhurst saw imprisonment as a means to publicise the urgency of women&#x27;s suffrage; in June 1909 she struck a police officer twice in the face to ensure she would be arrested. Pankhurst was arrested seven times before women&#x27;s suffrage was approved. During her trial on 21 October 1908 she told the court: &quot;We are here not because we are law-breakers; we are here in our efforts to become law-makers.&quot;

The exclusive focus of the WSPU on votes for women was another hallmark of its militancy. While other organisations agreed to work with individual political parties, the WSPU insisted on separating itself from – and in many cases opposing – parties which did not make women&#x27;s suffrage a priority. The group protested against all candidates belonging to the party of the ruling government since it refused to pass women&#x27;s suffrage legislation. This brought them into immediate conflict with Liberal Party organisers, particularly since many Liberal candidates supported women&#x27;s suffrage. (One early target of WSPU opposition was future Prime Minister Winston Churchill; his opponent attributed Churchill&#x27;s defeat in part to &quot;those ladies who are sometimes laughed at.&quot;)

Members of the WSPU were sometimes heckled and derided for spoiling elections for Liberal candidates. On 18 January 1908, Pankhurst and her associate Nellie Martel were attacked by an all-male crowd of Liberal supporters who blamed the WSPU for costing them a recent by-election to the Conservative candidate. The men threw clay, rotten eggs, and stones packed in snow; the women were beaten and Pankhurst&#x27;s ankle was severely bruised. Similar tensions later formed with Labour. Until party leaders made the vote for women a priority, however, the WSPU vowed to continue its militant activism. Pankhurst and others in the union saw party politics as distracting to the goal of women&#x27;s suffrage and criticised other organisations for putting party loyalty ahead of women&#x27;s votes.

As the WSPU gained recognition and notoriety for its actions, Pankhurst resisted efforts to democratise the organisation itself. In 1907 a small group of members led by Teresa Billington-Greig called for more involvement from the rank-and-file suffragettes at the union&#x27;s annual meetings. In response, Pankhurst announced at a WSPU meeting that elements of the organisation&#x27;s constitution relating to decision-making were void and cancelled the annual meetings. She also insisted that a small committee chosen by the members in attendance be allowed to co-ordinate WSPU activities. Pankhurst and her daughter Christabel were chosen (along with Mabel Tuke and Emmeline Pethick Lawrence) as members of the new committee. Frustrated, several members including Billington-Greig and Charlotte Despard quit to form their own organisation, the Women&#x27;s Freedom League. In her 1914 autobiography Pankhurst dismissed criticism of the WSPU&#x27;s leadership structure:if at any time a member, or a group of members, loses faith in our policy; if any one begins to suggest that some other policy ought to be substituted, or if she tries to confuse the issue by adding other policies, she ceases at once to be a member. Autocratic? Quite so. But, you may object, a suffrage organisation ought to be democratic. Well the members of the W.S.P.U. do not agree with you. We do not believe in the effectiveness of the ordinary suffrage organisation. The W.S.P.U. is not hampered by a complexity of rules. We have no constitution and by-laws; nothing to be amended or tinkered with or quarrelled over at an annual meeting ... The W.S.P.U. is simply a suffrage army in the field.

=== Tactical intensification ===
On 21 June 1908, 500,000 activists rallied in Hyde Park to demand votes for women. This day is the beginning of &quot;Women&#x27; s Sunday&quot;. It was organised by the WSPN, the massive demonstration for women&#x27;s suffrage saw thousands march in seven processions all over London, gathering for a day of peaceful protest.

Asquith and leading MPs responded with indifference. Angered by this intransigence and abusive police activity, some WSPU members increased the severity of their actions. Soon after the rally, twelve women gathered in Parliament Square and tried to deliver speeches for women&#x27;s suffrage. Police officers seized several of the speakers and pushed them into a crowd of opponents who had gathered nearby. Frustrated, two WSPU members – Edith New and Mary Leigh – went to 10 Downing Street and hurled rocks at the windows of the Prime Minister&#x27;s home. They insisted their act was independent of the WSPU command, but Pankhurst expressed her approval of the action. When a magistrate sentenced New and Leigh to two months&#x27; imprisonment, Pankhurst reminded the court of how various male political agitators had broken windows to win legal and civil rights throughout Britain&#x27;s history.

In 1909 the hunger strike was added to the WSPU&#x27;s repertoire of resistance. On 24 June Marion Wallace Dunlop was arrested for writing an excerpt from the Bill of Rights (1688 or 1689) on a wall in the House of Commons. Angered by the conditions of the jail, Dunlop went on a hunger strike. When it proved effective, fourteen women imprisoned for smashing windows began to fast. WSPU members soon became known around the country for holding prolonged hunger strikes to protest their incarceration. Prison authorities frequently force-fed the women, using tubes inserted through the nose or mouth. The painful techniques (which, in the case of mouth-feeding, required the use of steel gags to force the mouth open) brought condemnation from suffragists and medical professionals.

These tactics caused some tension between the WSPU and more moderate organisations, which had coalesced into the National Union of Women&#x27;s Suffrage Societies (NUWSS). That group&#x27;s leader, Millicent Fawcett, originally hailed WSPU members for their courage and dedication to the cause. By 1912, however, she declared that hunger strikes were mere publicity stunts and that militant activists were &quot;the chief obstacles in the way of the success of the suffrage movement in the House of Commons.&quot; The NUWSS refused to join a march of women&#x27;s suffrage groups after demanding without success that the WSPU end its support of property destruction. Fawcett&#x27;s sister Elizabeth Garrett Anderson later resigned from the WSPU for similar reasons.

Press coverage was mixed; many journalists noted that crowds of women responded positively to speeches by Pankhurst, while others condemned her radical approach to the issue. &quot;The Daily News&quot; urged her to endorse a more moderate approach, and other press outlets condemned the breaking of windows by WSPU members. In 1906 &quot;Daily Mail&quot; journalist Charles Hands referred to militant women using the diminutive term &quot;suffragette&quot; (rather than the standard &quot;suffragist&quot;). Pankhurst and her allies seized the term as their own and used it to differentiate themselves from moderate groups.

The last half of the century&#x27;s first decade was a time of sorrow, loneliness, and constant work for Pankhurst. In 1907 she sold her home in Manchester and began an itinerant lifestyle, moving from place to place as she spoke and marched for women&#x27;s suffrage. She stayed with friends and in hotels, carrying her few possessions in suitcases. Although she was energized by the struggle–and found joy in giving energy to others– her constant travelling meant separation from her children, especially Christabel, who had become the national coordinator of the WSPU. In 1909, as Pankhurst planned a speaking tour of the United States, Henry was paralyzed after his spinal cord became inflamed. She hesitated to leave the country while he was ill, but she needed money to pay for his treatment and the tour promised to be lucrative. On her return from a successful tour, she sat by Henry&#x27;s bedside as he died on 5 January 1910. Five days later she buried him beside his brother Frank in Highgate Cemetery, then spoke before 5,000 people in Manchester. Liberal Party supporters who had come to heckle her remained quiet as she addressed the crowd.
=== Conciliation, force-feeding attempt, and arson ===

After the Liberal losses in the 1910 elections, ILP member and journalist Henry Brailsford helped organise a Conciliation Committee for Women&#x27;s Suffrage, which gathered 54 MPs from various parties. The group&#x27;s Conciliation Bill looked to be a narrowly defined but still significant possibility to achieve the vote for some women. Thus the WSPU agreed to suspend its support for window-breaking and hunger strikes while it was being negotiated. When it became clear that the bill would not pass, Pankhurst declared: &quot;If the Bill, in spite of our efforts, is killed by the Government, then ... I have to say there is an end to the truce.&quot; When it was defeated, Pankhurst led a protest march of 300 women to Parliament Square on 18 November. They were met with aggressive police response, directed by Home Secretary Winston Churchill: officers punched the marchers, twisted arms, and pulled on women&#x27;s breasts. Although Pankhurst was allowed to enter Parliament, Prime Minister Asquith refused to meet her. The incident became known as Black Friday. Her sister Mary Jane, who had attended the protest, too, was arrested for the third time, a few days later. She was sentenced to a month of imprisonment. On Christmas Day she died at the home of their brother Herbert Goulden, two days after her release.


As subsequent Conciliation Bills were introduced, WSPU leaders advocated a halt to militant tactics. Aileen Preston was appointed as Pankhurst&#x27;s driver in April 1911, to drive her around the country to help spread the suffrage message.

In March 1912, the second bill was in jeopardy and Pankhurst joined a fresh outbreak of window-smashing. Extensive property damage led police to raid the WSPU offices. Pankhurst and Emmeline Pethick-Lawrence were tried at the Old Bailey and convicted of conspiracy to commit property damage. Christabel, who by 1912 was the chief coordinator for the organisation, was also wanted by police. She fled to Paris, where she directed WSPU strategy in exile. Inside Holloway Prison, Emmeline Pankhurst staged her first hunger strike to improve conditions for other suffragettes in nearby cells; she was quickly joined by Pethick-Lawrence and other WSPU members. She described in her autobiography the trauma caused by force-feeding during the strike: &quot;Holloway became a place of horror and torment. Sickening scenes of violence took place almost every hour of the day, as the doctors went from cell to cell performing their hideous office.&quot; When prison officials tried to enter her cell, Pankhurst raised a clay jug over her head and announced: &quot;If any of you dares so much as to take one step inside this cell I shall defend myself.&quot;

Pankhurst was spared further force-feeding attempts after this incident, but she continued to violate the law and – when imprisoned – starve herself in protest. During the following two years she was arrested numerous times but was frequently released after several days because of her ill health. Later, the Asquith government enacted the Cat and Mouse Act, which allowed similar releases for other suffragettes facing ill-health due to hunger strikes. Prison officials recognised the potential public relations disaster that would erupt if the popular WSPU leader were force-fed or allowed to suffer extensively in jail. Still, police officers arrested her during talks and as she marched. She tried to evade police harassment by wearing disguises and eventually the WSPU established a jujutsu-trained female bodyguard squad to physically protect her against the police. She and other escorts were targeted by police, resulting in violent scuffles as officers tried to detain Pankhurst.

In 1912, WSPU members adopted arson as another tactic to win the vote. After Prime Minister Asquith had visited the Theatre Royal in Dublin, suffragette activists Gladys Evans, Lizzie Baker, Mary Leigh, and Mabel Capper attempted to cause an explosion using gunpowder and benzine, which resulted in minimal damage. During the same evening, Mary Leigh threw an axe at the carriage containing John Redmond (leader of the Irish Parliamentary Party), the Lord Mayor, and Asquith.

Over the next two years women set fire to a refreshments building in Regent&#x27;s Park, an orchid house at Kew Gardens, pillar boxes, and a railway carriage. Emily Davison threw herself under the King&#x27;s horse Anmer at the Epsom Derby in 1913. Her funeral drew 55,000 attendees along the streets and at the funeral. This gave significant publicity to the movement.
Although Pankhurst confirmed that these women had not been commanded by her or Christabel, they both assured the public that they supported the arsonist suffragettes. There were similar incidents around the country. One WSPU member, for example, put a small hatchet into the Prime Minister&#x27;s carriage inscribed with the words: &quot;Votes for Women,&quot; and other suffragettes used acid to burn the same slogan into golf courses used by MPs. In 1914, Mary Richardson slashed the Velasquez painting &quot;Rokeby Venus&quot; to protest against Pankhurst&#x27;s imprisonment.

=== Defection and dismissal ===

The WSPU&#x27;s approval of property destruction led to the departure of several important members. The first were Emmeline Pethick-Lawrence and her husband Frederick. They had long been integral members of the group&#x27;s leadership but found themselves in conflict with Christabel about the wisdom of such volatile tactics. After returning from a vacation in Canada they found that Pankhurst had expelled them from the WSPU. The pair found the decision appalling, but to avoid a schism in the movement they continued to praise Pankhurst and the organisation in public. Around the same time, Emmeline&#x27;s daughter Adela left the group. She disapproved of WSPU endorsement of property destruction and felt that a heavier emphasis on socialism was necessary. Adela&#x27;s relationship with her family – especially Christabel – was also strained as a result.

The deepest rift in the Pankhurst family came in November 1913 when Sylvia spoke at a meeting of socialists and trade unionists in support of trade union organiser Jim Larkin. She had been working with the East London Federation of Suffragettes (ELFS), a local branch of the WSPU which had a close relationship with socialists and organised labour. The close connection to labour groups and Sylvia&#x27;s appearance on stage with Frederick Pethick-Lawrence – who also addressed the crowd – convinced Christabel that her sister was organising a group that might challenge the WSPU in the suffrage movement. The dispute became public, and members of groups including the WSPU, ILP, and ELFS braced themselves for a showdown. After being dismissed from the WSPU, Sylvia felt &quot;bruised, as one does, when fighting the foe without, one is struck by the friend within.&quot;

In January Sylvia was summoned to Paris, where Emmeline and Christabel were waiting. Their mother had just returned from another tour of the US, and Sylvia had just been released from prison. All three women were exhausted and stressed, which added considerably to the tension. In her 1931 book &quot;The Suffrage Movement&quot; Sylvia describes Christabel as an unreasonable figure, haranguing her for refusing to toe the WSPU line:She turned to me. &quot;You have your own ideas. We do not want that; we want all our women to take their instructions and walk in step like an army!&quot; Too tired, too ill to argue, I made no reply. I was oppressed by a sense of tragedy, grieved by her ruthlessness. Her glorification of autocracy seemed to me remote indeed from the struggle we were waging, the grim fight even now proceeding in the cells. I thought of many others who had been thrust aside for some minor difference.With their mother&#x27;s blessing, Christabel ordered Sylvia&#x27;s group to dissociate from the WSPU. Pankhurst tried to persuade the ELFS to remove the word &quot;suffragettes&quot; from its name, since it was inextricably linked to the WSPU. When Sylvia refused, her mother switched to fierce anger in a letter:You are unreasonable, always have been &amp; I fear always will be. I suppose you were made so! ... Had you chosen a name which we could approve we could have done much to launch you &amp; advertise your society by name. Now you must take your own way of doing so. I am sorry but you make your own difficulties by an incapacity to look at situations from other people&#x27;s point of view as well as your own. Perhaps in time you will learn the lessons that we all have to learn in life.Adela, unemployed and unsure of her future, had become a worry for Pankhurst as well. She decided that Adela should move to Australia, and paid for her relocation. They never saw one another again.

===The Women&#x27;s Party===

In November 1917 the WSPU&#x27;s weekly newspaper announced that the WSPU was to become the Women&#x27;s Party. Twelve months later on Tuesday 19 November at the Queen&#x27;s Hall in London Emmeline Pankhurst said that her daughter Christabel would be their candidate at the forthcoming General Election, the first at which women could stand as candidates. They didn&#x27;t say which constituency they would fight but a few days later Westbury in Wiltshire was identified. Emmeline lobbied Prime Minister David Lloyd George to ensure Christabel would have coalition backing. However, as these discussions were taking place the Pankhurst&#x27;s switched their attention to Smethwick in Staffordshire. The Coalition had already settled on a local candidate, Major Samuel Nock Thompson, but Bonar Law, the Conservative leader, was persuaded to ask Thompson to withdraw. Significantly, Christabel was not issued with a formal letter of support from the two leaders, the Coalition Coupon. Christabel then had a straight fight with the Labour candidate John Davison and lost by 775 votes. The Women&#x27;s Party fought no other elections and closed soon after.

== First World War ==

When the First World War began in August 1914, Emmeline and Christabel considered that the threat posed by Germany was a danger to all humanity, and that the British government needed the support of all men. They persuaded the WSPU to halt all militant suffrage activities until fighting on the European mainland ended. It was no time for dissent or agitation; Christabel wrote later: &quot;This was national militancy. As Suffragists we could not be pacifists at any price.&quot; A truce with the government was established, all WSPU prisoners were released, and Christabel returned to London. Emmeline and Christabel set the WSPU into motion on behalf of the war effort. In her first speech after returning to Britain, Christabel warned of the &quot;German Peril&quot;. She urged the gathered women to follow the example of their French sisters, who – while the men fought – &quot;are able to keep the country going, to get in the harvest, to carry on the industries&quot;. Emmeline tried to shame men in to volunteering for the front lines.

Sylvia and Adela, meanwhile, did not share their mother&#x27;s enthusiasm for the war. As committed pacifists, they rejected the WSPU&#x27;s support for the government. Sylvia&#x27;s socialist perspective convinced her that the war was another example of capitalist oligarchs exploiting poor soldiers and workers. Adela, meanwhile, spoke against the war in Australia and made public her opposition to conscription. In a short letter, Emmeline told Sylvia: &quot;I am ashamed to know where you and Adela stand.&quot; She had a similar impatience for dissent within the WSPU; when long-time member Mary Leigh asked a question during a meeting in October 1915, Pankhurst replied: &quot;That woman is a pro German and should leave the hall. ... I denounce you as a pro German and wish to forget that such a person ever existed.&quot; Some WSPU members were outraged by this sudden rigid devotion to the government, the leadership&#x27;s perceived abandonment of efforts to win the vote for women, and questions about how funds collected on behalf of suffrage were being managed with regard to the organisation&#x27;s new focus. Two groups split from the WSPU: The Suffragettes of the Women&#x27;s Social and Political Union (SWSPU) and the Independent Women&#x27;s Social and Political Union (IWSPU), each dedicated to maintaining pressure toward women&#x27;s suffrage.

Pankhurst put the same energy and determination she had previously applied to women&#x27;s suffrage into patriotic advocacy of the war effort. She organised rallies, toured constantly delivering speeches, and lobbied the government to help women enter the work force while men were overseas fighting. Another issue which concerned her greatly at the time was the plight of so-called war babies, children born to single mothers whose fathers were on the front lines. Pankhurst established an adoption home at Campden Hill designed to employ the Montessori method of childhood education. Some women criticised Pankhurst for offering relief to parents of children born out of wedlock, but she declared indignantly that the welfare of children–whose suffering she had seen firsthand as a Poor Law Guardian–was her only concern. Due to lack of funds, however, the home was soon turned over to Princess Alice. Pankhurst herself adopted four children, whom she renamed Kathleen King, Flora Mary Gordon (later Mary Hodgson), Joan Pembridge and Elizabeth Tudor. They lived in London, where–for the first time in many years–she had a permanent home, at Holland Park. Asked how, at the age of 57 and with no steady income, she could take on the burden of bringing up four more children, Pankhurst replied: &quot;My dear, I wonder I didn&#x27;t take forty.&quot; The historian, Brian Harrison, interviewed Mary Hodgson, about Pankhurst, in July 1976 as part of the Suffrage Interviews project, titled &quot;Oral evidence on the suffragette and suffragist movements: the Brian Harrison interviews.&quot; She talks about Pankhurst&#x27;s approach to motherhood and education, their time in Bermuda and Canada, and Pankhurst&#x27;s death and funeral.

=== Russian delegation ===
Pankhurst visited North America in 1916 together with the former Secretary of State for Serbia, Čedomilj Mijatović, whose nation had been at the centre of fighting at the start of the war. They toured the United States and Canada, raising money and urging the US government to support Britain and its Canadian and other allies. Two years later, after the US entered the war, Pankhurst returned to the United States, encouraging suffragettes there – who had not suspended their militancy – to support the war effort by sidelining activities related to the vote. She also spoke about her fears of communist insurgency, which she considered a grave threat to Russian democracy.

By June 1917 the Russian Revolution had strengthened the Bolsheviks, who urged an end to the war. Pankhurst&#x27;s translated autobiography had been read widely in Russia, and she saw an opportunity to put pressure on the Russian people. She hoped to convince them not to accept Germany&#x27;s conditions for peace, which she saw as a potential defeat for Britain and Russia. UK Prime Minister David Lloyd George agreed to sponsor her trip to Russia, which she took in June. She told one crowd: &quot;I came to Petrograd with a prayer from the English nation to the Russian nation, that you may continue the war on which depends the face of civilisation and freedom.&quot; Press response was divided between left and right wings; the former depicted her as a tool of capitalism, while the latter praised her devout patriotism.

In August she met with Alexander Kerensky, the Russian Prime Minister. Although she had been active with the socialist-leaning ILP in years past, Pankhurst had begun to see leftist politics as disagreeable, an attitude which intensified while she was in Russia. The meeting was uncomfortable for both parties; he felt that she was unable to appreciate the class-based conflict driving Russian policy at the time. He concluded by telling her that English women had nothing to teach women in Russia. She later told the &quot;New York Times&quot; that Kerensky was the &quot;biggest fraud of modern times&quot; and that his government could &quot;destroy civilisation.&quot;

== Accomplishment of suffrage (1918) ==

When she returned from Russia, Pankhurst was delighted to find that women&#x27;s right to vote was finally on its way to becoming a reality. The 1918 Representation of the People Act removed property restrictions on men&#x27;s suffrage and granted the vote to women over the age of 30 (with several restrictions). As suffragists and suffragettes celebrated and prepared for its imminent passage, a new schism erupted: should women&#x27;s political organisations join forces with those established by men? Many socialists and moderates supported unity of the sexes in politics, but Emmeline and Christabel Pankhurst saw the best hope in remaining separate. They reinvented the WSPU as the Women&#x27;s Party, still open only to women. Women, they said, &quot;can best serve the nation by keeping clear of men&#x27;s party political machinery and traditions, which, by universal consent, leave so much to be desired.&quot; The party favoured equal marriage laws, equal pay for equal work, and equal job opportunities for women. These were matters for the post-war era, however. While the fighting continued the Women&#x27;s Party demanded no compromise in the defeat of Germany; the removal from government of anyone with family ties to Germany or pacifist attitudes; and shorter work hours to forestall labour strikes. This last plank in the party&#x27;s platform was meant to discourage potential interest in Bolshevism, about which Pankhurst was increasingly anxious.

== Post-war activities ==
In the years after the 1918 Armistice, Pankhurst continued to promote her nationalist vision of British unity. She maintained a focus on women&#x27;s empowerment, but her days of fighting with government officialdom were over. She defended the presence and reach of the British Empire: &quot;Some talk about the Empire and Imperialism as if it were something to decry and something to be ashamed of. [I]t is a great thing to be the inheritors of an Empire like ours ... great in territory, great in potential wealth. ... If we can only realise and use that potential wealth we can destroy thereby poverty, we can remove and destroy ignorance.&quot; For years she travelled around England and North America, rallying support for the British Empire and warning audiences about the dangers of Bolshevism. After the war she lived in Bermuda and America for a couple of years.

Emmeline Pankhurst also became active in political campaigning again when a bill was passed allowing women to run for the House of Commons. Many Women&#x27;s Party members urged Pankhurst to stand for election, but she insisted that Christabel was a better choice. She campaigned tirelessly for her daughter, lobbying Prime Minister Lloyd George for his support and at one point delivering a passionate speech in the rain. Christabel lost by a very slim margin to the Labour Party candidate, and the recount showed a difference of 775 votes. One biographer called it &quot;the bitterest disappointment of Emmeline&#x27;s life.&quot; The Women&#x27;s Party withered from existence soon afterward.

As a result of her many trips to North America, Pankhurst became fond of Canada, stating in an interview that &quot;there seems to be more equality between men and women [there] than in any other country I know.&quot; In 1922 she applied for Canadian &quot;permission to land&quot; (a prerequisite to status as a &quot;British Subject with Canadian Domicile&quot;) and rented a house in Toronto, where she moved with her four adopted children. She became active with the Canadian National Council for Combating Venereal Diseases (CNCCVD), which worked against the sexual double standard which Pankhurst considered particularly harmful to women. In many of her public lectures across Canada, she also promoted eugenic feminist notions of &quot;race betterment&quot; and often gave speeches together with Emily Murphy, a prominent proponent compulsory sterilization for the &quot;feeble-minded.&quot; During a tour of Bathurst, the mayor showed her a new building which would become the Home for Fallen Women. Pankhurst replied: &quot;Ah! Where is your Home for Fallen Men?&quot; Before long, however, she grew tired of long Canadian winters, and she ran out of money. She returned to England in late 1925.

Back in London Emmeline was visited by Sylvia, who had not seen her mother in years. Their politics were by now very different, and Sylvia was living, unmarried, with an Italian anarchist. Sylvia described a moment of familial affection when they met, followed by a sad distance between them. Emmeline&#x27;s adopted daughter Mary, however, remembered the meeting differently. According to her version, Emmeline set her teacup down and walked silently out of the room, leaving Sylvia in tears. Christabel, meanwhile, had become a convert to Adventism and devoted much of her time to the church. The British press sometimes made light of the varied paths followed by the once indivisible family.

In 1926 Pankhurst joined the Conservative Party and two years later ran as a candidate for Parliament in Whitechapel and St George&#x27;s. Her transformation from a fiery supporter of the ILP and window-smashing radical to an official Conservative Party member surprised many people. She replied succinctly: &quot;My war experience and my experience on the other side of the Atlantic have changed my views considerably.&quot; Her biographers insist that the move was more complex; she was devoted to a programme of women&#x27;s empowerment and anti-communism. Both the Liberal and Labour parties bore grudges for her work against them in the WSPU, and the Conservative Party had a victorious record after the war and a significant majority. Pankhurst may have joined the Conservative Party as much to secure the vote for women as from ideological affinity.

== Illness and death ==

Pankhurst&#x27;s campaign for Parliament was preempted by her ill health and a final scandal involving Sylvia. The years of touring, lectures, imprisonment and hunger strikes had taken their toll; fatigue and illness became a regular part of Pankhurst&#x27;s life. Even more painful, however, was the news in April 1928 that Sylvia had given birth out of wedlock. She had named the child Richard Keir Pethick Pankhurst, in memory of her father, her ILP comrade, and her colleagues from the WSPU respectively. Emmeline was further shocked to see a report from a newspaper in the US that declared that &quot;Miss Pankhurst&quot; – a title usually reserved for Christabel – boasted of her child being a triumph of &quot;eugenics&quot;, since both parents were healthy and intelligent. In the article, Sylvia also spoke of her belief that &quot;marriage without legal union&quot; was the most sensible option for liberated women. These offences against the social dignity which Pankhurst had always valued devastated the elderly woman; to make matters worse, many people believed the &quot;Miss Pankhurst&quot; in newspaper headlines referred to Christabel. After hearing the news, Emmeline spent an entire day crying; her campaign for Parliament ended with the scandal.

As her health deteriorated, Pankhurst moved into a nursing home in Hampstead. She requested that she be treated by the doctor who attended to her during her hunger strikes. His use of the stomach pump had helped her feel better while in prison; her nurses were sure that the shock of such treatment would severely wound her, but Christabel felt obliged to carry out her mother&#x27;s request. Before the procedure could be carried out, however, she fell into a critical condition from which none expected her to recover. On Thursday, 14 June 1928, Pankhurst died at the age of 69.

She was interred in Brompton Cemetery in London. Her pallbearers were the former WSPU suffragettes Georgiana Brackenbury, Marie Brackenbury, Marion Wallace Dunlop, Harriet Kerr, Mildred Mansel, Kitty Marshall, Marie Naylor, Ada Wright and Barbara Wylie.

== Legacy ==

News of Emmeline Pankhurst&#x27;s death was announced around the country, and extensively in North America. Her funeral service on 18 June 1928 was filled with her former WSPU colleagues and those who had worked beside her in various capacities. The &quot;Daily Mail&quot; described the procession as &quot;like a dead general in the midst of a mourning army&quot;. Women wore WSPU sashes and ribbons, and the organisation&#x27;s flag was carried alongside the Union Flag. Christabel and Sylvia appeared together at the service, the latter with her child. Adela did not attend. Press coverage around the world recognised her tireless work on behalf of women&#x27;s right to vote – even if they did not agree on the value of her contributions. The &quot;New York Herald Tribune&quot; called her &quot;the most remarkable political and social agitator of the early part of the twentieth century and the supreme protagonist of the campaign for the electoral enfranchisement of women.&quot;

Shortly after the funeral, one of Pankhurst&#x27;s bodyguards from her WSPU days, Catherine Marshall, began raising funds for a memorial statue. In spring 1930 her efforts bore fruit, and on 6 March her statue in Victoria Tower Gardens, next to and gesturing towards the Houses of Parliament, was unveiled. A crowd of radicals, former suffragettes, and national dignitaries gathered as former Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin presented the memorial to the public. In his address, Baldwin declared: &quot;I say with no fear of contradiction, that whatever view posterity may take, Mrs. Pankhurst has won for herself a niche in the Temple of Fame which will last for all time.&quot; Sylvia was the only Pankhurst daughter in attendance; Christabel, touring North America, sent a telegram which was read aloud. While planning the agenda for the day, Marshall had intentionally excluded Sylvia, who in her opinion had hastened Pankhurst&#x27;s death. Historic England listed the statue as Grade II on 5 February 1970.

A proposal to move the statue of Pankhurst away from the Houses of Parliament to the private Regent&#x27;s University London in Regent&#x27;s Park was submitted to Westminster City Council planning department in July 2018 by former Conservative MP Sir Neil Thorne. This proposal was withdrawn in September 2018 after widespread anger and a public campaign against it. The planning application received 896 comments, 887 of them objections. A 38 Degrees petition against the removal of the statue attracted 180,839 signatures. The Curator&#x27;s Office at the Palace of Westminster commissioned a report into the plan to remove the statue. Published on 22 August 2018, it concluded &#x27;The Memorial to Emmeline and Christabel Pankhurst is of high significance, which is not fully recognised through its listing at Grade II. An application has been made to Historic England to upgrade the memorial to Grade II*. This is based on it having &#x27;more than special interest&#x27;, in terms of its unique history, its artistic quality and the importance of its setting next to the Houses of Parliament. This proposal to move the memorial from Victoria Tower Gardens to Regent&#x27;s Park would cause substantial harm to the significance of the memorial, as well has harm to the Westminster Abbey and Parliament Square Conservation Area...The proposal to move the memorial, therefore, should not be granted planning permission or listed building consent.

During the twentieth century Emmeline Pankhurst&#x27;s value to the movement for women&#x27;s suffrage was debated passionately, and no consensus was achieved. Her daughters Sylvia and Christabel weighed in with books, scornful and laudatory respectively, about their time in the struggle. Sylvia&#x27;s 1931 book &quot;The Suffrage Movement&quot; describes her mother&#x27;s political shift at the start of the First World War as the beginning of a betrayal of her family (especially her father) and the movement. It set the tone for much of the socialist and activist history written about the WSPU and particularly solidified Emmeline Pankhurst&#x27;s reputation as an unreasonable autocrat. Christabel&#x27;s &quot;Unshackled: The Story of How We Won the Vote,&quot; released in 1959, paints her mother as generous and selfless to a fault, offering herself completely to the most noble causes. It provided a sympathetic counterpart to Sylvia&#x27;s attacks and continued the polarised discussion; detached and objective assessment has rarely been a part of Pankhurst scholarship.

Recent biographies show that historians differ about whether Emmeline Pankhurst&#x27;s militancy helped or hurt the movement; however, there is general agreement that the WSPU raised public awareness of the movement in ways that proved essential. Baldwin compared her to Martin Luther and Jean-Jacques Rousseau: individuals who were not the sum total of the movements in which they took part, but who nevertheless played crucial roles in struggles of social and political reform. In the case of Pankhurst, this reform took place in both intentional and unintentional ways. By defying the roles of wife and mother as the docile companion, Pankhurst helped to pave the way for many future feminists, though some would later decry her support for empire and endorsement of the idea of &quot;race betterment.&quot;

In 1987 one of her homes in Manchester was opened as the Pankhurst Centre, an all-women gathering space and museum. In 2002, Pankhurst was placed at number 27 in the BBC&#x27;s poll of the 100 Greatest Britons. In 2006, a blue plaque for Pankhurst and her daughter, Christabel was placed by English Heritage at 50 Clarendon Road, Notting Hill, London W11 3AD, Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea, where they had lived.

In January 2016, following a public vote, it was announced that &quot;Rise up, Women&quot;, a statue of Emmeline Pankhurst by Hazel Reeves, would be unveiled in Manchester in 2019, making her the first woman to be honoured with a statue in the city since Queen Victoria more than 100 years ago. The statue was unveiled on 14 December 2018, one hundred years after British women were first able to vote in the 1918 United Kingdom general election. Her name and image and those of 58 other women&#x27;s suffrage supporters including her daughters are etched on the plinth of the statue of Millicent Fawcett in Parliament Square, London that was unveiled in 2018. One of the &#x27;houses&#x27; at Wellacre Academy in Manchester is named after her.

Helen Pankhurst, the great-granddaughter of Emmeline Pankhurst and the granddaughter of Sylvia Pankhurst, works for women&#x27;s rights. Along with her daughter, she founded Olympic Suffragettes, which campaigns on a number of women&#x27;s rights issues.

Pankhurst has appeared in several works of popular culture. In the 1974 BBC television miniseries &quot;Shoulder to Shoulder&quot;, Pankhurst is played by Siân Phillips. In the 2015 film &quot;Suffragette&quot;, Pankhurst is played by Meryl Streep.

==Works==

== See also ==
* History of feminism
* List of civil rights leaders
* Suffragette bombing and arson campaign
* List of suffragists and suffragettes
* List of women&#x27;s rights activists
* Timeline of women&#x27;s suffrage
* Women&#x27;s suffrage organisations

== Notes ==
== References ==
* Bartley, Paula. &quot;Emmeline Pankhurst.&quot; London: Routledge, 2002. .
* Brendon, Piers. &quot;Eminent Edwardians&quot; (Secker &amp; Warburg, 1979) 
* Carter, Sarah. &quot;&#x27;Develop a Great Imperial Race&#x27;: Emmeline Pankhurst, Emily Murphy, and Their Promotion of &#x27;Race Betterment&#x27; in Western Canada in the 1920s.&quot; In &quot;Finding Directions West: Readings that Locate and Dislocate Western Canada&#x27;s Past,&quot; eds. George Colpitts and Heather Devine, 133–50. Calgary: University of Calgary Press, 2017. ISBN 978-1-55238-881-5.
* Fulford, Roger. &quot;Votes for Women: The Story of a Struggle.&quot; London: Faber and Faber Ltd, 1957. 
* Hallam, David J.A., Taking on the Men: the first women parliamentary candidates 1918, Studley, 2018. (Chapter 2 &quot;Christabel Pankhurst in Smethwick)
* Holton, Sandra Stanley. &quot;Suffrage Days: Stories from the Women&#x27;s Suffrage Movement.&quot; London: Routledge, 1996. .
* Kamm, Josephine. &quot;The Story of Mrs Pankhurst.&quot; London: Methuen, 1961. .
* Liddington, Jill and Jill Norris. &quot;One Hand Tied Behind Us: The Rise of the Women&#x27;s Suffrage Movement.&quot; London: Virago Limited, 1978. .
* Marcus, Jane, ed. &quot;Suffrage and the Pankhursts.&quot; London: Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul, 1987. .
* Oakley, Robin. &quot;The Forgotten Pankhurst Boys&quot;, Highgate Cemetery Newsletter, August 2021 
* Pankhurst, Christabel. &quot;Unshackled: The Story of How We Won the Vote.&quot; London: Hutchinson &amp; Co., 1959. .
* Pankhurst, Emmeline. &quot;My Own Story.&quot; 1914. London: Virago Limited, 1979. .
* Pankhurst, E. Sylvia. &quot;The Suffragette Movement.&quot; 1931. New York: Kraus Reprint Co., 1971. .
* Phillips, Melanie. &quot;The Ascent of Woman: A History of the Suffragette Movement and the Ideas Behind It.&quot; London: Abacus, 2004. .
* Pugh, Martin. &quot;The Pankhursts.&quot; London: Penguin Books, 2001. .
* Purvis, June. &quot;Emmeline Pankhurst: A Biography.&quot; London: Routledge, 2002. .
* Purvis, June and Sandra Stanley Holton, eds. &quot;Votes for Women.&quot; London: Routledge, 2000. .
* West, Rebecca. &quot;A Reed of Steel.&quot; &quot;The Young Rebecca: Writings of Rebecca West 1911–17.&quot; Ed. Jane Marcus. New York: The Viking Press, 1982. .

== External links ==

* 
* Emmeline Pankhurst at Flickr Commons
* Emmeline Pankhurst at &quot;Time&quot; 100: The Most Important People of the Century
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q211519" start="0" end="18" title="Emmeline Pankhurst" label="Emmeline Pankhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q211519" start="22" end="29" title="Emmeline Pankhurst" label="Goulden"/>
<link wikidata="Q322170" start="119" end="130" title="suffragette" label="suffragette"/>
<link wikidata="Q205204" start="176" end="189" title="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage" label="right to vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="193" end="218" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="235" end="239" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="" start="270" end="315" title="Time 100: The Most Important People of the Century" label="100 Most Important People of the 20th Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435868" start="639" end="682" title="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage in the United Kingdom" label="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2240567" start="697" end="706" title="Moss Side" label="Moss Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="719" end="729" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030901" start="883" end="912" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Franchise League" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Franchise League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507913" start="1048" end="1072" title="Independent Labour Party" label="Independent Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q332460" start="1111" end="1122" title="Keir Hardie" label="Keir Hardie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931394" start="1222" end="1239" title="Poor Law Guardian" label="Poor Law Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q628155" start="1318" end="1327" title="workhouse" label="workhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967499" start="1362" end="1401" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Social and Political Union" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Social and Political Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q191355" start="1797" end="1810" title="hunger strike" label="hunger strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296926" start="1856" end="1865" title="force feeding" label="force-fed"/>
<link wikidata="Q269863" start="1903" end="1913" title="Christabel Pankhurst" label="Christabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q105320780" start="2019" end="2057" title="Suffragette bombing and arson campaign" label="adopted bombings and arson as a tactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q353769" start="2232" end="2237" title="Adela Pankhurst" label="Adela"/>
<link wikidata="Q298213" start="2242" end="2248" title="Sylvia Pankhurst" label="Sylvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2526" end="2541" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="2636" end="2654" title="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Government" label="British government"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2771" end="2812" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Right to Serve demonstration" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Right to Serve demonstration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527220" start="3065" end="3078" title="white feather" label="white feather"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427309" start="3103" end="3135" title="Representation of the People Act 1918" label="Representation of the People Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031021" start="3418" end="3436" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Party (UK)" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q472940" start="3597" end="3607" title="Bolshevism" label="Bolshevism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="3623" end="3641" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995781" start="3694" end="3720" title="Whitechapel and St Georges (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Whitechapel and St Georges"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314203" start="3809" end="3864" title="Representation of the People (Equal Franchise) Act 1928" label="Representation of the People (Equal Franchise) Act 1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485117" start="3987" end="4009" title="Victoria Tower Gardens" label="Victoria Tower Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="4023" end="4043" title="Houses of Parliament" label="Houses of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2240567" start="4111" end="4120" title="Moss Side" label="Moss Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="4133" end="4143" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q83900" start="4174" end="4191" title="birth certificate" label="birth certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q326724" start="4274" end="4286" title="Bastille Day" label="Bastille Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q6539" start="4431" end="4451" title="Storming of the Bastille" label="stormed the Bastille"/>
<link wikidata="Q50387964" start="4692" end="4698" title="Sophia Goulden" label="Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="4726" end="4737" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q603100" start="5198" end="5205" title="fustian" label="fustian"/>
<link wikidata="Q574598" start="5230" end="5250" title="Anti-Corn Law League" label="Anti-Corn Law League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566803" start="5271" end="5283" title="impressment" label="press-ganged"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="5293" end="5303" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q876357" start="5323" end="5340" title="Peterloo massacre" label="Peterloo massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445674" start="5589" end="5596" title="Seedley" label="Seedley"/>
<link wikidata="Q47952" start="5719" end="5726" title="Salford" label="Salford"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="5955" end="5966" title="William Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607404" start="6228" end="6246" title="Henry Ward Beecher" label="Henry Ward Beecher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222" start="6303" end="6325" title="Uncle Tom&amp;#x27;s Cabin" label="Uncle Tom&amp;#x27;s Cabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q102513" start="6366" end="6387" title="Harriet Beecher Stowe" label="Harriet Beecher Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q219760" start="6535" end="6541" title="bazaar" label="bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="6759" end="6766" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q108206" start="6817" end="6828" title="John Bunyan" label="John Bunyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q268211" start="6862" end="6889" title="The Pilgrim&amp;#x27;s Progress" label="The Pilgrim&amp;#x27;s Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q151403" start="6932" end="6946" title="Thomas Carlyle" label="Thomas Carlyle"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6982" end="7014" title="The French Revolution: A History" label="The French Revolution: A History"/>
<link wikidata="Q205204" start="7562" end="7583" title="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage" label="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031079" start="8032" end="8061" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Suffrage Journal" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Suffrage Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q276466" start="8105" end="8117" title="Lydia Becker" label="Lydia Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="8495" end="8500" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q18281" start="8685" end="8695" title="embroidery" label="embroidery"/>
<link wikidata="Q642060" start="8738" end="8760" title="Victor Henri Rochefort, Marquis de Rochefort-Luçay" label="Victor Henri Rochefort"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="8789" end="8802" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133132" start="8826" end="8839" title="Paris Commune" label="Paris Commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q16043531" start="9022" end="9031" title="Mary Jane Clarke" label="Mary Jane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139127" start="9037" end="9052" title="parlour boarder" label="parlour boarder"/>
<link wikidata="Q45803" start="9207" end="9212" title="dowry" label="dowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431098" start="9428" end="9445" title="Richard Pankhurst (politician)" label="Richard Pankhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="9529" end="9546" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q516445" start="9651" end="9659" title="bachelor" label="bachelor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550316" start="10064" end="10074" title="free union" label="free union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051285" start="10201" end="10228" title="Elizabeth Clarke Wolstenholme Elmy" label="Elizabeth Wolstenholme Elmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17361871" start="10362" end="10394" title="St Luke&amp;#x27;s Church, Pendleton" label="St Luke&amp;#x27;s Church, Pendleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q269863" start="10985" end="10995" title="Christabel Pankhurst" label="Christabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q298213" start="11105" end="11119" title="Sylvia Pankhurst" label="Estelle Sylvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="11235" end="11248" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012082" start="11483" end="11502" title="Chorlton-on-Medlock" label="Chorlton-on-Medlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q353769" start="11523" end="11528" title="Adela Pankhurst" label="Adela"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="11641" end="11651" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q134649" start="11804" end="11814" title="diphtheria" label="diphtheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7481320" start="12020" end="12028" title="drainage" label="drainage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346906" start="12224" end="12238" title="Russell Square" label="Russell Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q10240" start="13039" end="13055" title="Dadabhai Naoroji" label="Dadabhai Naoroji"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133442" start="13077" end="13092" title="Herbert Burrows" label="Herbert Burrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q464318" start="13097" end="13109" title="Annie Besant" label="Annie Besant"/>
<link wikidata="Q216092" start="13132" end="13145" title="Louise Michel" label="Louise Michel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978526" start="13289" end="13331" title="National Society for Women&amp;#x27;s Suffrage" label="National Society for Women&amp;#x27;s Suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q276466" start="13509" end="13521" title="Lydia Becker" label="Lydia Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q442818" start="13526" end="13543" title="Millicent Fawcett" label="Millicent Fawcett"/>
<link wikidata="Q214820" start="13822" end="13839" title="Whitehall" label="Parliament Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030901" start="14411" end="14440" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Franchise League" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Franchise League"/>
<link wikidata="Q225863" start="14548" end="14564" title="Josephine Butler" label="Josephine Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6469516" start="14580" end="14654" title="Ladies National Association for the Repeal of the Contagious Diseases Acts" label="Ladies National Association for the Repeal of the Contagious Diseases Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051285" start="14684" end="14718" title="Elizabeth Clarke Wolstenholme-Elmy" label="Elizabeth Clarke Wolstenholme-Elmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664672" start="14724" end="14752" title="Harriot Eaton Stanton Blatch" label="Harriot Eaton Stanton Blatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q465335" start="14780" end="14802" title="Elizabeth Cady Stanton" label="Elizabeth Cady Stanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416790" start="14908" end="14920" title="Social equality" label="equal rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q200303" start="14959" end="14970" title="inheritance" label="inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="14990" end="15004" title="trade unionism" label="trade unionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q466439" start="15358" end="15368" title="Extremism" label="radicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q47967" start="15676" end="15693" title="northwest England" label="northwest England"/>
<link wikidata="Q868647" start="15849" end="15858" title="Southport" label="Southport"/>
<link wikidata="Q23063" start="15897" end="15903" title="Disley" label="Disley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926917" start="15958" end="15971" title="Victoria Park, Manchester" label="Victoria Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030966" start="16483" end="16514" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Liberal Federation" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Liberal Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7467819" start="16678" end="16693" title="Irish Home Rule bills" label="Irish Home Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q244620" start="16729" end="16747" title="Archibald Primrose, 5th Earl of Rosebery" label="Archibald Primrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q332460" start="16791" end="16802" title="Keir Hardie" label="Keir Hardie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507913" start="16909" end="16933" title="Independent Labour Party" label="Independent Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931394" start="17596" end="17613" title="Board of Guardians" label="Poor Law Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012082" start="17617" end="17636" title="Chorlton-on-Medlock" label="Chorlton-on-Medlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q628155" start="17716" end="17725" title="workhouse" label="workhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q696617" start="18264" end="18275" title="court order" label="court order"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937578" start="18300" end="18319" title="Boggart Hole Clough" label="Boggart Hole Clough"/>
<link wikidata="Q40348" start="18366" end="18379" title="Lawyer" label="legal counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q183425" start="19097" end="19110" title="Abdominal pain" label="stomach pains"/>
<link wikidata="Q172941" start="19131" end="19144" title="gastric ulcer" label="gastric ulcer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886651" start="19211" end="19220" title="Mobberley" label="Mobberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q65643" start="19475" end="19482" title="Corsier" label="Corsier"/>
<link wikidata="Q378505" start="20464" end="20476" title="illegitimacy" label="illegitimacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401286" start="21344" end="21356" title="Esther Roper" label="Esther Roper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415056" start="21361" end="21375" title="Eva Gore-Booth" label="Eva Gore-Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888771" start="21560" end="21584" title="Manchester Metropolitan University" label="Manchester School of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q269770" start="21749" end="21764" title="boarding school" label="boarding school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343674" start="21820" end="21829" title="Pediculosis" label="head lice"/>
<link wikidata="Q79793" start="21885" end="21892" title="measles" label="measles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507913" start="22350" end="22353" title="Independent Labour Party" label="ILP"/>
<link wikidata="Q205204" start="22382" end="22397" title="Votes for Women" label="Votes for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967499" start="22595" end="22634" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Social and Political Union" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Social and Political Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q506259" start="22693" end="22706" title="direct action" label="direct action"/>
<link wikidata="Q76611" start="22927" end="22938" title="Nonviolence" label="non-violent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055269" start="23191" end="23202" title="Caxton Hall" label="Caxton Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q166714" start="24215" end="24228" title="H. H. Asquith" label="H. H. Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q132627" start="24424" end="24444" title="solitary confinement" label="solitary confinement"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="25597" end="25614" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6990119" start="25882" end="25895" title="Nellie Martel" label="Nellie Martel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="26369" end="26383" title="Political party" label="party politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702100" start="26696" end="26719" title="Teresa Billington-Greig" label="Teresa Billington-Greig"/>
<link wikidata="Q18576665" start="27181" end="27191" title="Mabel Tuke" label="Mabel Tuke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373431" start="27196" end="27221" title="Emmeline Pethick Lawrence" label="Emmeline Pethick Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q432717" start="27315" end="27332" title="Charlotte Despard" label="Charlotte Despard"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030912" start="27374" end="27401" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Freedom League" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Freedom League"/>
<link wikidata="Q679847" start="28057" end="28064" title="Bylaw" label="by-laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q123738" start="28282" end="28291" title="Hyde Park, London" label="Hyde Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368556" start="28782" end="28799" title="Parliament Square" label="Parliament Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q20684968" start="29002" end="29011" title="Edith New" label="Edith New"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780077" start="29016" end="29026" title="Mary Leigh" label="Mary Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q169101" start="29037" end="29054" title="10 Downing Street" label="10 Downing Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="29416" end="29428" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q191355" start="29477" end="29490" title="hunger strike" label="hunger strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q3849278" start="29557" end="29578" title="Marion Wallace Dunlop" label="Marion Wallace Dunlop"/>
<link wikidata="Q219447" start="29624" end="29653" title="Bill of Rights 1689" label="Bill of Rights (1688 or 1689)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="29671" end="29687" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748532" start="30362" end="30411" title="National Union of Women&amp;#x27;s Suffrage Societies" label="National Union of Women&amp;#x27;s Suffrage Societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q442818" start="30447" end="30464" title="Millicent Fawcett" label="Millicent Fawcett"/>
<link wikidata="Q235464" start="30938" end="30964" title="Elizabeth Garrett Anderson" label="Elizabeth Garrett Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605160" start="31197" end="31211" title="The Daily News (UK)" label="The Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q210534" start="31354" end="31364" title="Daily Mail" label="Daily Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q322170" start="31455" end="31466" title="suffragette" label="suffragette"/>
<link wikidata="Q185387" start="31505" end="31515" title="suffragist" label="suffragist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="32311" end="32322" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512157" start="32927" end="32943" title="Henry Brailsford" label="Henry Brailsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158701" start="33073" end="33090" title="Conciliation Bills" label="Conciliation Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q175331" start="33548" end="33561" title="Demonstration (people)" label="protest march"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484309" start="33671" end="33685" title="Home Secretary" label="Home Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920802" start="33911" end="33923" title="Black Friday (1910)" label="Black Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q105977389" start="34282" end="34296" title="Aileen Preston" label="Aileen Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194829" start="34649" end="34659" title="Old Bailey" label="Old Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q554774" start="34698" end="34713" title="property damage" label="property damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q381356" start="34883" end="34898" title="Holloway (HM Prison)" label="Holloway Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296926" start="35135" end="35148" title="force-feeding" label="force-feeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="35859" end="35869" title="Disease" label="ill health"/>
<link wikidata="Q2941577" start="35913" end="35930" title="Cat and Mouse Act" label="Cat and Mouse Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q133080" start="36069" end="36085" title="public relations" label="public relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q163770" start="36361" end="36368" title="jujutsu" label="jujutsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q105320780" start="36585" end="36632" title="Suffragette bombing and arson campaign" label="adopted arson as another tactic to win the vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777424" start="36679" end="36692" title="Theatre Royal, Dublin" label="Theatre Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780077" start="36754" end="36764" title="Mary Leigh" label="Mary Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721422" start="36770" end="36782" title="Mabel Capper" label="Mabel Capper"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36783" end="36842" title="Suffragette bombing and arson campaign#The campaign" label="attempted to cause an explosion using gunpowder and benzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q225392" start="36954" end="36966" title="John Redmond" label="John Redmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311653" start="36982" end="37007" title="Irish Parliamentary Party" label="Irish Parliamentary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q739341" start="37109" end="37127" title="Regent&amp;#x27;s Park" label="Regent&amp;#x27;s Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q188617" start="37148" end="37159" title="Kew Gardens" label="Kew Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q58663" start="37161" end="37171" title="pillar box" label="pillar box"/>
<link wikidata="Q208502" start="37181" end="37197" title="Railroad car" label="railway carriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q254858" start="37199" end="37212" title="Emily Davison" label="Emily Davison"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="37233" end="37241" title="George V" label="the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779389" start="37255" end="37260" title="Anmer" label="Anmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q55629" start="37268" end="37279" title="Epsom Derby" label="Epsom Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q672890" start="37668" end="37675" title="hatchet" label="hatchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="37833" end="37845" title="Golf" label="golf courses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482677" start="37868" end="37883" title="Mary Richardson" label="Mary Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q297" start="37896" end="37905" title="Diego Velázquez" label="Velasquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q275349" start="37921" end="37933" title="Rokeby Venus" label="Rokeby Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498549" start="38181" end="38190" title="Frederick Pethick-Lawrence, 1st Baron Pethick-Lawrence" label="Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q126287984" start="38506" end="38512" title="Schism (organizational)" label="schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583571" start="39050" end="39060" title="Jim Larkin" label="Jim Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034744" start="39092" end="39130" title="Workers Socialist Federation" label="East London Federation of Suffragettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q208701" start="39217" end="39233" title="Labour movement" label="organised labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031021" start="41803" end="41821" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Party (UK)" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779710" start="41873" end="41890" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Hall" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042701" start="41998" end="42014" title="1918 United Kingdom general election" label="General Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119959" start="42146" end="42154" title="Westbury (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Westbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="42216" end="42234" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q126884553" start="42383" end="42392" title="Smethwick (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Smethwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q166663" start="42499" end="42508" title="Bonar Law" label="Bonar Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137907" start="42677" end="42693" title="Coalition Coupon" label="Coalition Coupon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6228855" start="42758" end="42770" title="John Davison (politician)" label="John Davison"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="42899" end="42914" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049087" start="43551" end="43561" title="war effort" label="war effort"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="44035" end="44044" title="pacifism" label="pacifists"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="44336" end="44348" title="conscription" label="conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780077" start="44531" end="44541" title="Mary Leigh" label="Mary Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q48801248" start="45171" end="45222" title="Independent Women&amp;#x27;s Social and Political Union" label="Independent Women&amp;#x27;s Social and Political Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q829465" start="45685" end="45695" title="war children" label="war babies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204559" start="45714" end="45728" title="Single parent" label="single mothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028240" start="45810" end="45822" title="Campden Hill" label="Campden Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q190218" start="45846" end="45863" title="Montessori method" label="Montessori method"/>
<link wikidata="Q378505" start="45968" end="45982" title="Illegitimacy" label="out of wedlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q235521" start="46190" end="46204" title="Princess Alice, Countess of Athlone" label="Princess Alice"/>
<link wikidata="Q251630" start="46445" end="46457" title="Holland Park" label="Holland Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963963" start="46668" end="46682" title="Brian Harrison (historian)" label="Brian Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079697" start="47162" end="47180" title="Čedomilj Mijatović" label="Čedomilj Mijatović"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="47326" end="47339" title="Federal government of the United States" label="US government"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="47759" end="47777" title="Russian Revolution (1917)" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="47799" end="47808" title="Bolshevik" label="Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="47964" end="47978" title="Russians" label="Russian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="48136" end="48154" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q48211" start="48593" end="48611" title="Alexander Kerensky" label="Alexander Kerensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744607" start="48926" end="48946" title="class struggle" label="class-based conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427309" start="49434" end="49466" title="Representation of the People Act 1918" label="Representation of the People Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031021" start="49972" end="49990" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Party (UK)" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11414572" start="50245" end="50269" title="Equal pay for women" label="equal pay for equal work"/>
<link wikidata="Q253224" start="50803" end="50817" title="Armistice with Germany (Compiègne)" label="1918 Armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="51103" end="51114" title="Imperialism" label="Imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="51508" end="51526" title="British Empire" label="the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q847301" start="51694" end="51712" title="political campaign" label="political campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="52117" end="52133" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="the Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005289" start="52592" end="52631" title="Canadian nationality law" label="Canadian &amp;quot;permission to land&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="52861" end="52878" title="Sexually transmitted disease" label="Venereal Diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q60464302" start="53059" end="53075" title="Eugenic feminism" label="eugenic feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q439355" start="53153" end="53165" title="Emily Murphy" label="Emily Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q706716" start="53189" end="53213" title="compulsory sterilization" label="compulsory sterilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q810807" start="53266" end="53274" title="Bathurst, New Brunswick" label="Bathurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q215168" start="54097" end="54106" title="Adventism" label="Adventism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="54281" end="54299" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995781" start="54357" end="54389" title="Whitechapel and St Georges (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Whitechapel and St George&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="54796" end="54810" title="anti-communism" label="anti-communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632991" start="54971" end="54991" title="1924 United Kingdom general election" label="significant majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q585460" start="55523" end="55553" title="Richard Pankhurst (Ethiopianist)" label="Richard Keir Pethick Pankhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="55852" end="55860" title="eugenics" label="eugenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q837142" start="56454" end="56466" title="nursing home" label="nursing home"/>
<link wikidata="Q25610" start="56470" end="56479" title="Hampstead" label="Hampstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755116" start="56591" end="56603" title="gastric lavage" label="stomach pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q926913" start="57005" end="57022" title="Brompton Cemetery" label="Brompton Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q21464042" start="57084" end="57105" title="Georgina Brackenbury" label="Georgiana Brackenbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q42412185" start="57107" end="57124" title="Marie Brackenbury" label="Marie Brackenbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3849278" start="57126" end="57147" title="Marion Wallace Dunlop" label="Marion Wallace Dunlop"/>
<link wikidata="Q121788141" start="57149" end="57161" title="Harriet Kerr" label="Harriet Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q75353301" start="57163" end="57177" title="Mildred Mansel" label="Mildred Mansel"/>
<link wikidata="Q65962980" start="57179" end="57193" title="Katherine &amp;quot;Kitty&amp;quot; Marshall" label="Kitty Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q52291586" start="57195" end="57207" title="Marie Naylor" label="Marie Naylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q47471941" start="57209" end="57219" title="Ada Wright" label="Ada Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q110064483" start="57224" end="57237" title="Barbara Wylie" label="Barbara Wylie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173323" start="57715" end="57725" title="Union Flag" label="Union Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q532494" start="58007" end="58030" title="New York Herald Tribune" label="New York Herald Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q18564709" start="58324" end="58342" title="Catherine Marshall (suffragist)" label="Catherine Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q19364406" start="58441" end="58451" title="Emmeline and Christabel Pankhurst Memorial" label="her statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485117" start="58455" end="58477" title="Victoria Tower Gardens" label="Victoria Tower Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="58513" end="58533" title="Houses of Parliament" label="Houses of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q166635" start="58650" end="58665" title="Stanley Baldwin" label="Stanley Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6989409" start="59507" end="59518" title="Neil Thorne" label="Neil Thorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="62063" end="62076" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="62081" end="62102" title="Jean-Jacques Rousseau" label="Jean-Jacques Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131318" start="62661" end="62677" title="Pankhurst Centre" label="Pankhurst Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031625" start="62682" end="62707" title="women-only space" label="all-women gathering space"/>
<link wikidata="Q165177" start="62793" end="62813" title="100 Greatest Britons" label="100 Greatest Britons"/>
<link wikidata="Q885849" start="62826" end="62837" title="blue plaque" label="blue plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q116029176" start="62918" end="62932" title="Clarendon Road" label="Clarendon Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q59773345" start="63098" end="63112" title="Rise up, Women (Emmeline Pankhurst statue)" label="Rise up, Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q59779567" start="63154" end="63166" title="Hazel Reeves" label="Hazel Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="63283" end="63297" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042701" start="63437" end="63473" title="1918 United Kingdom general election" label="1918 United Kingdom general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014132" start="63591" end="63597" title="plinth" label="plinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q52157841" start="63605" end="63632" title="statue of Millicent Fawcett" label="statue of Millicent Fawcett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368556" start="63636" end="63653" title="Parliament Square" label="Parliament Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915726" start="63706" end="63712" title="House system" label="houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981139" start="63722" end="63738" title="Wellacre Academy" label="Wellacre Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27981199" start="63774" end="63789" title="Helen Pankhurst" label="Helen Pankhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q298213" start="63862" end="63878" title="Sylvia Pankhurst" label="Sylvia Pankhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502730" start="64134" end="64154" title="Shoulder to Shoulder" label="Shoulder to Shoulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q237778" start="64185" end="64198" title="Siân Phillips" label="Siân Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021589" start="64223" end="64234" title="Suffragette (film)" label="Suffragette"/>
<link wikidata="Q873" start="64265" end="64277" title="Meryl Streep" label="Meryl Streep"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297554" start="64308" end="64327" title="History of feminism" label="History of feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722345" start="64330" end="64358" title="List of civil rights leaders" label="List of civil rights leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q105320780" start="64361" end="64399" title="Suffragette bombing and arson campaign" label="Suffragette bombing and arson campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641747" start="64402" end="64438" title="List of suffragists and suffragettes" label="List of suffragists and suffragettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722889" start="64441" end="64478" title="List of women&amp;#x27;s rights activists" label="List of women&amp;#x27;s rights activists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647212" start="64481" end="64514" title="Timeline of women&amp;#x27;s suffrage" label="Timeline of women&amp;#x27;s suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64517" end="64552" title="List of suffragists and suffragettes#Major suffrage organizations" label="Women&amp;#x27;s suffrage organisations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508259" start="64641" end="64650" title="Routledge" label="Routledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q898097" start="65228" end="65243" title="Faber and Faber" label="Faber and Faber"/>
<link wikidata="Q269863" start="65986" end="66007" title="Christabel Pankhurst" label="Pankhurst, Christabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q298213" start="66194" end="66214" title="Sylvia Pankhurst" label="Pankhurst, E. Sylvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39078678" start="66440" end="66452" title="Martin Pugh (author)" label="Pugh, Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336200" start="66490" end="66503" title="Penguin Books" label="Penguin Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q236669" start="66706" end="66719" title="Rebecca West" label="West, Rebecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q921536" start="66842" end="66858" title="Viking Press" label="The Viking Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q103204" start="66918" end="66932" title="Flickr Commons" label="Flickr Commons"/>
<link wikidata="" start="66957" end="67019" title="Time 100: The Most Important People of the Century" label="&amp;quot;Time&amp;quot; 100: The Most Important People of the Century"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="60558" wikidata="Q16980" url="?curid=60558" title="ARM architecture family">
<text>ARM (stylised in lowercase as arm, formerly an acronym for Advanced RISC Machines and originally Acorn RISC Machine) is a family of RISC instruction set architectures (ISAs) for computer processors. Arm Holdings develops the ISAs and licenses them to other companies, who build the physical devices that use the instruction set. It also designs and licenses cores that implement these ISAs.

Due to their low costs, low power consumption, and low heat generation, ARM processors are useful for light, portable, battery-powered devices, including smartphones, laptops, and tablet computers, as well as embedded systems. However, ARM processors are also used for desktops and servers, including Fugaku, the world&#x27;s fastest supercomputer from 2020 to 2022. With over 230 billion ARM chips produced, , ARM is the most widely used family of instruction set architectures.

There have been several generations of the ARM design. The original ARM1 used a 32-bit internal structure but had a 26-bit address space that limited it to 64 MB of main memory. This limitation was removed in the ARMv3 series, which has a 32-bit address space, and several additional generations up to ARMv7 remained 32-bit. Released in 2011, the ARMv8-A architecture added support for a 64-bit address space and 64-bit arithmetic with its new 32-bit fixed-length instruction set. Arm Holdings has also released a series of additional instruction sets for different rules; the &quot;Thumb&quot; extension adds both 32- and 16-bit instructions for improved code density, while Jazelle added instructions for directly handling Java bytecode. More recent changes include the addition of simultaneous multithreading (SMT) for improved performance or fault tolerance.

==History==

===BBC Micro===

Acorn Computers&#x27; first widely successful design was the BBC Micro, introduced in December 1981. This was a relatively conventional machine based on the MOS Technology 6502 CPU but ran at roughly double the performance of competing designs like the Apple II due to its use of faster dynamic random-access memory (DRAM). Typical DRAM of the era ran at about 2 MHz; Acorn arranged a deal with Hitachi for a supply of faster 4 MHz parts.

Machines of the era generally shared memory between the processor and the framebuffer, which allowed the processor to quickly update the contents of the screen without having to perform separate input/output (I/O). As the timing of the video display is exacting, the video hardware had to have priority access to that memory. Due to a quirk of the 6502&#x27;s design, the CPU left the memory untouched for half of the time. Thus by running the CPU at 1 MHz, the video system could read data during those down times, taking up the total 2 MHz bandwidth of the RAM. In the BBC Micro, the use of 4 MHz RAM allowed the same technique to be used, but running at twice the speed. This allowed it to outperform any similar machine on the market.

===Acorn Business Computer===

1981 was also the year that the IBM Personal Computer was introduced. Using the recently introduced Intel 8088, a 16-bit CPU compared to the 6502&#x27;s 8-bit design, it offered higher overall performance. Its introduction changed the desktop computer market radically: what had been largely a hobby and gaming market emerging over the prior five years began to change to a must-have business tool where the earlier 8-bit designs simply could not compete. Even newer 32-bit designs were also coming to market, such as the Motorola 68000 and National Semiconductor NS32016.

Acorn began considering how to compete in this market and produced a new paper design named the Acorn Business Computer. They set themselves the goal of producing a machine with ten times the performance of the BBC Micro, but at the same price. This would outperform and underprice the PC. At the same time, the recent introduction of the Apple Lisa brought the graphical user interface (GUI) concept to a wider audience and suggested the future belonged to machines with a GUI. The Lisa, however, cost $9,995, as it was packed with support chips, large amounts of memory, and a hard disk drive, all very expensive then.

The engineers then began studying all of the CPU designs available. Their conclusion about the existing 16-bit designs was that they were a lot more expensive and were still &quot;a bit crap&quot;, offering only slightly higher performance than their BBC Micro design. They also almost always demanded a large number of support chips to operate even at that level, which drove up the cost of the computer as a whole. These systems would simply not hit the design goal. They also considered the new 32-bit designs, but these cost even more and had the same issues with support chips. According to Sophie Wilson, all the processors tested at that time performed about the same, with about a 4 Mbit/s bandwidth.

Two key events led Acorn down the path to ARM. One was the publication of a series of reports from the University of California, Berkeley, which suggested that a simple chip design could nevertheless have extremely high performance, much higher than the latest 32-bit designs on the market. The second was a visit by Steve Furber and Sophie Wilson to the Western Design Center, a company run by Bill Mensch and his sister, which had become the logical successor to the MOS team and was offering new versions like the WDC 65C02. The Acorn team saw high school students producing chip layouts on Apple II machines, which suggested that anyone could do it. In contrast, a visit to another design firm working on modern 32-bit CPU revealed a team with over a dozen members who were already on revision H of their design and yet it still contained bugs. This cemented their late 1983 decision to begin their own CPU design, the Acorn RISC Machine.

===Design concepts===
The original Berkeley RISC designs were in some sense teaching systems, not designed specifically for outright performance. To the RISC&#x27;s basic register-heavy and load/store concepts, ARM added a number of the well-received design notes of the 6502. Primary among them was the ability to quickly serve interrupts, which allowed the machines to offer reasonable input/output performance with no added external hardware. To offer interrupts with similar performance as the 6502, the ARM design limited its physical address space to 64 MB of total addressable space, requiring 26 bits of address. As instructions were 4 bytes (32 bits) long, and required to be aligned on 4-byte boundaries, the lower 2 bits of an instruction address were always zero. This meant the program counter (PC) only needed to be 24 bits, allowing it to be stored along with the eight bit processor flags in a single 32-bit register. That meant that upon receiving an interrupt, the entire machine state could be saved in a single operation, whereas had the PC been a full 32-bit value, it would require separate operations to store the PC and the status flags. This decision halved the interrupt overhead.

Another change, and among the most important in terms of practical real-world performance, was the modification of the instruction set to take advantage of page mode DRAM. Recently introduced, page mode allowed subsequent accesses of memory to run twice as fast if they were roughly in the same location, or &quot;page&quot;, in the DRAM chip. Berkeley&#x27;s design did not consider page mode and treated all memory equally. The ARM design added special vector-like memory access instructions, the &quot;S-cycles&quot;, that could be used to fill or save multiple registers in a single page using page mode. This doubled memory performance when they could be used, and was especially important for graphics performance.

The Berkeley RISC designs used register windows to reduce the number of register saves and restores performed in procedure calls; the ARM design did not adopt this.

Wilson developed the instruction set, writing a simulation of the processor in BBC BASIC that ran on a BBC Micro with a second 6502 processor. This convinced Acorn engineers they were on the right track. Wilson approached Acorn&#x27;s CEO, Hermann Hauser, and requested more resources. Hauser gave his approval and assembled a small team to design the actual processor based on Wilson&#x27;s ISA. The official Acorn RISC Machine project started in October 1983.

===ARM1===

Acorn chose VLSI Technology as the &quot;silicon partner&quot;, as they were a source of ROMs and custom chips for Acorn. Acorn provided the design and VLSI provided the layout and production. The first samples of ARM silicon worked properly when first received and tested on 26 April 1985. Known as ARM1, these versions ran at 6 MHz.

The first ARM application was as a second processor for the BBC Micro, where it helped in developing simulation software to finish development of the support chips (VIDC, IOC, MEMC), and sped up the CAD software used in ARM2 development. Wilson subsequently rewrote BBC BASIC in ARM assembly language. The in-depth knowledge gained from designing the instruction set enabled the code to be very dense, making ARM BBC BASIC an extremely good test for any ARM emulator.

===ARM2===
The result of the simulations on the ARM1 boards led to the late 1986 introduction of the ARM2 design running at 8 MHz, and the early 1987 speed-bumped version at 10 to 12 MHz. A significant change in the underlying architecture was the addition of a Booth multiplier, whereas formerly multiplication had to be carried out in software. Further, a new Fast Interrupt reQuest mode, FIQ for short, allowed registers 8 through 14 to be replaced as part of the interrupt itself. This meant FIQ requests did not have to save out their registers, further speeding interrupts.

The first use of the ARM2 was the Acorn Archimedes personal computer models A305, A310, and A440 launched in 1987.

According to the Dhrystone benchmark, the ARM2 was roughly seven times the performance of a typical 7 MHz 68000-based system like the Amiga or Macintosh SE. It was twice as fast as an Intel 80386 running at 16 MHz, and about the same speed as a multi-processor VAX-11/784 superminicomputer. The only systems that beat it were the Sun SPARC and MIPS R2000 RISC-based workstations. Further, as the CPU was designed for high-speed I/O, it dispensed with many of the support chips seen in these machines; notably, it lacked any dedicated direct memory access (DMA) controller which was often found on workstations. The graphics system was also simplified based on the same set of underlying assumptions about memory and timing. The result was a dramatically simplified design, offering performance on par with expensive workstations but at a price point similar to contemporary desktops.

The ARM2 featured a 32-bit data bus, 26-bit address space and 27 32-bit registers, of which 16 are accessible at any one time (including the PC). The ARM2 had a transistor count of just 30,000, compared to Motorola&#x27;s six-year-older 68000 model with around 68,000. Much of this simplicity came from the lack of microcode, which represents about one-quarter to one-third of the 68000&#x27;s transistors, and the lack of (like most CPUs of the day) a cache. This simplicity enabled the ARM2 to have a low power consumption and simpler thermal packaging by having fewer powered transistors. Nevertheless, ARM2 offered better performance than the contemporary 1987 IBM PS/2 Model 50, which initially utilised an Intel 80286, offering 1.8 MIPS @ 10 MHz, and later in 1987, the 2 MIPS of the PS/2 70, with its Intel 386 DX @ 16 MHz.

A successor, ARM3, was produced with a 4 KB cache, which further improved performance. The address bus was extended to 32 bits in the ARM6, but program code still had to lie within the first 64 MB of memory in 26-bit compatibility mode, due to the reserved bits for the status flags.

===Advanced RISC Machines Ltd. – ARM6===

In the late 1980s, Apple Computer and VLSI Technology started working with Acorn on newer versions of the ARM core. In 1990, Acorn spun off the design team into a new company named Advanced RISC Machines Ltd., which became ARM Ltd. when its parent company, Arm Holdings plc, floated on the London Stock Exchange and Nasdaq in 1998. The new Apple–ARM work would eventually evolve into the ARM6, first released in early 1992. Apple used the ARM6-based ARM610 as the basis for their Apple Newton PDA.

===Early licensees===
In 1994, Acorn used the ARM610 as the main central processing unit (CPU) in their RiscPC computers. DEC licensed the ARMv4 architecture and produced the StrongARM. At 233 MHz, this CPU drew only one watt (newer versions draw far less). This work was later passed to Intel as part of a lawsuit settlement, and Intel took the opportunity to supplement their i960 line with the StrongARM. Intel later developed its own high performance implementation named XScale, which it has since sold to Marvell. Transistor count of the ARM core remained essentially the same throughout these changes; ARM2 had 30,000 transistors, while ARM6 grew only to 35,000.

===Market share===
In 2005, about 98% of all mobile phones sold used at least one ARM processor. In 2010, producers of chips based on ARM architectures reported shipments of 6.1 billion ARM-based processors, representing 95% of smartphones, 35% of digital televisions and set-top boxes, and 10% of mobile computers. In 2011, the 32-bit ARM architecture was the most widely used architecture in mobile devices and the most popular 32-bit one in embedded systems. In 2013, 10 billion were produced and &quot;ARM-based chips are found in nearly 60 percent of the world&#x27;s mobile devices&quot;.

==Licensing==

===Core licence===
Arm Holdings&#x27;s primary business is selling IP cores, which licensees use to create microcontrollers (MCUs), CPUs, and systems-on-chips based on those cores. The original design manufacturer combines the ARM core with other parts to produce a complete device, typically one that can be built in existing semiconductor fabrication plants (fabs) at low cost and still deliver substantial performance. The most successful implementation has been the ARM7TDMI with hundreds of millions sold. Atmel has been a precursor design center in the ARM7TDMI-based embedded system.

The ARM architectures used in smartphones, PDAs and other mobile devices range from ARMv5 to .

In 2009, some manufacturers introduced netbooks based on ARM architecture CPUs, in direct competition with netbooks based on Intel Atom.

Arm Holdings offers a variety of licensing terms, varying in cost and deliverables. Arm Holdings provides to all licensees an integratable hardware description of the ARM core as well as complete software development toolset (compiler, debugger, software development kit), and the right to sell manufactured silicon containing the ARM CPU.

SoC packages integrating ARM&#x27;s core designs include Nvidia Tegra&#x27;s first three generations, CSR plc&#x27;s Quatro family, ST-Ericsson&#x27;s Nova and NovaThor, Silicon Labs&#x27;s Precision32 MCU, Texas Instruments&#x27;s OMAP products, Samsung&#x27;s Hummingbird and Exynos products, Apple&#x27;s A4, A5, and A5X, and NXP&#x27;s i.MX.

Fabless licensees, who wish to integrate an ARM core into their own chip design, are usually only interested in acquiring a ready-to-manufacture verified semiconductor intellectual property core. For these customers, Arm Holdings delivers a gate netlist description of the chosen ARM core, along with an abstracted simulation model and test programs to aid design integration and verification. More ambitious customers, including integrated device manufacturers (IDM) and foundry operators, choose to acquire the processor IP in synthesizable RTL (Verilog) form. With the synthesizable RTL, the customer has the ability to perform architectural level optimisations and extensions. This allows the designer to achieve exotic design goals not otherwise possible with an unmodified netlist (high clock speed, very low power consumption, instruction set extensions, etc.). While Arm Holdings does not grant the licensee the right to resell the ARM architecture itself, licensees may freely sell manufactured products such as chip devices, evaluation boards and complete systems. Merchant foundries can be a special case; not only are they allowed to sell finished silicon containing ARM cores, they generally hold the right to re-manufacture ARM cores for other customers.

Arm Holdings prices its IP based on perceived value. Lower performing ARM cores typically have lower licence costs than higher performing cores. In implementation terms, a synthesisable core costs more than a hard macro (blackbox) core. Complicating price matters, a merchant foundry that holds an ARM licence, such as Samsung or Fujitsu, can offer fab customers reduced licensing costs. In exchange for acquiring the ARM core through the foundry&#x27;s in-house design services, the customer can reduce or eliminate payment of ARM&#x27;s upfront licence fee.

Compared to dedicated semiconductor foundries (such as TSMC and UMC) without in-house design services, Fujitsu/Samsung charge two- to three-times more per manufactured wafer. For low to mid volume applications, a design service foundry offers lower overall pricing (through subsidisation of the licence fee). For high volume mass-produced parts, the long term cost reduction achievable through lower wafer pricing reduces the impact of ARM&#x27;s NRE (non-recurring engineering) costs, making the dedicated foundry a better choice.

Companies that have developed chips with cores designed by Arm include Amazon.com&#x27;s Annapurna Labs subsidiary, Analog Devices, Apple, AppliedMicro (now: MACOM Technology Solutions), Atmel, Broadcom, Cavium, Cypress Semiconductor, Freescale Semiconductor (now NXP Semiconductors), Huawei, Intel, Maxim Integrated, Nvidia, NXP, Qualcomm, Renesas, Samsung Electronics, ST Microelectronics, Texas Instruments, and Xilinx.

===Built on ARM Cortex Technology licence===
In February 2016, ARM announced the Built on ARM Cortex Technology licence, often shortened to Built on Cortex (BoC) licence. This licence allows companies to partner with ARM and make modifications to ARM Cortex designs. These design modifications will not be shared with other companies. These semi-custom core designs also have brand freedom, for example Kryo 280.

Companies that are current licensees of Built on ARM Cortex Technology include Qualcomm.

===Architectural licence===
Companies can also obtain an ARM &quot;architectural licence&quot; for designing their own CPU cores using the ARM instruction sets. These cores must comply fully with the ARM architecture. Companies that have designed cores that implement an ARM architecture include Apple, AppliedMicro (now: Ampere Computing), Broadcom, Cavium (now: Marvell), Digital Equipment Corporation, Intel, Nvidia, Qualcomm, Samsung Electronics, Fujitsu, and NUVIA Inc. (acquired by Qualcomm in 2021).

===ARM Flexible Access===
On 16 July 2019, ARM announced ARM Flexible Access. ARM Flexible Access provides unlimited access to included ARM intellectual property (IP) for development. Per product licence fees are required once a customer reaches foundry tapeout or prototyping.

75% of ARM&#x27;s most recent IP over the last two years are included in ARM Flexible Access. As of October 2019:
* CPUs: Cortex-A5, Cortex-A7, Cortex-A32, Cortex-A34, Cortex-A35, Cortex-A53, Cortex-R5, Cortex-R8, Cortex-R52, Cortex-M0, Cortex-M0+, Cortex-M3, Cortex-M4, Cortex-M7, Cortex-M23, Cortex-M33
* GPUs: Mali-G52, Mali-G31. Includes Mali Driver Development Kits (DDK).
* Interconnect: CoreLink NIC-400, CoreLink NIC-450, CoreLink CCI-400, CoreLink CCI-500, CoreLink CCI-550, ADB-400 AMBA, XHB-400 AXI-AHB
* System Controllers: CoreLink GIC-400, CoreLink GIC-500, PL192 VIC, BP141 TrustZone Memory Wrapper, CoreLink TZC-400, CoreLink L2C-310, CoreLink MMU-500, BP140 Memory Interface
* Security IP: CryptoCell-312, CryptoCell-712, TrustZone True Random Number Generator
* Peripheral Controllers: PL011 UART, PL022 SPI, PL031 RTC
* Debug &amp; Trace: CoreSight SoC-400, CoreSight SDC-600, CoreSight STM-500, CoreSight System Trace Macrocell, CoreSight Trace Memory Controller
* Design Kits: Corstone-101, Corstone-201
* Physical IP: Artisan PIK for Cortex-M33 TSMC 22ULL including memory compilers, logic libraries, GPIOs and documentation
* Tools &amp; Materials: Socrates IP ToolingARM Design Studio, Virtual System Models
* Support: Standard ARM Technical support, ARM online training, maintenance updates, credits toward onsite training and design reviews

==Cores==


Arm provides a list of vendors who implement ARM cores in their design (application specific standard products (ASSP), microprocessor and microcontrollers).

===Example applications of ARM cores===

ARM cores are used in a number of products, particularly PDAs and smartphones. Some computing examples are Microsoft&#x27;s first generation Surface, Surface 2 and Pocket PC devices (following 2002), Apple&#x27;s iPads, and Asus&#x27;s Eee Pad Transformer tablet computers, and several Chromebook laptops. Others include Apple&#x27;s iPhone smartphones and iPod portable media players, Canon PowerShot digital cameras, Nintendo Switch hybrid, the Wii security processor and 3DS handheld game consoles, and TomTom turn-by-turn navigation systems.

In 2005, Arm took part in the development of Manchester University&#x27;s computer SpiNNaker, which used ARM cores to simulate the human brain.

ARM chips are also used in Raspberry Pi, BeagleBoard, BeagleBone, PandaBoard, and other single-board computers, because they are very small, inexpensive, and consume very little power.

==32-bit architecture==


The 32-bit ARM architecture (ARM32), such as ARMv7-A (implementing AArch32; see section on Armv8-A for more on it), was the most widely used architecture in mobile devices .

Since 1995, various versions of the &quot;ARM Architecture Reference Manual&quot; (see ) have been the primary source of documentation on the ARM processor architecture and instruction set, distinguishing interfaces that all ARM processors are required to support (such as instruction semantics) from implementation details that may vary. The architecture has evolved over time, and version seven of the architecture, ARMv7, defines three architecture &quot;profiles&quot;:
* A-profile, the &quot;Application&quot; profile, implemented by 32-bit cores in the Cortex-A series and by some non-ARM cores
* R-profile, the &quot;Real-time&quot; profile, implemented by cores in the Cortex-R series
* M-profile, the &quot;Microcontroller&quot; profile, implemented by most cores in the Cortex-M series

Although the architecture profiles were first defined for ARMv7, ARM subsequently defined the ARMv6-M architecture (used by the Cortex M0/M0+/M1) as a subset of the ARMv7-M profile with fewer instructions.

===CPU modes===
Except in the M-profile, the 32-bit ARM architecture specifies several CPU modes, depending on the implemented architecture features. At any moment in time, the CPU can be in only one mode, but it can switch modes due to external events (interrupts) or programmatically.
* &quot;User mode:&quot; The only non-privileged mode.
* &quot;FIQ mode:&quot; A privileged mode that is entered whenever the processor accepts a fast interrupt request.
* &quot;IRQ mode:&quot; A privileged mode that is entered whenever the processor accepts an interrupt.
* &quot;Supervisor (svc) mode:&quot; A privileged mode entered whenever the CPU is reset or when an SVC instruction is executed.
* &quot;Abort mode:&quot; A privileged mode that is entered whenever a prefetch abort or data abort exception occurs.
* &quot;Undefined mode:&quot; A privileged mode that is entered whenever an undefined instruction exception occurs.
* &quot;System mode (ARMv4 and above):&quot; The only privileged mode that is not entered by an exception. It can only be entered by executing an instruction that explicitly writes to the mode bits of the Current Program Status Register (CPSR) from another privileged mode (not from user mode).
* &quot;Monitor mode (ARMv6 and ARMv7 Security Extensions, ARMv8 EL3):&quot; A monitor mode is introduced to support TrustZone extension in ARM cores.
* &quot;Hyp mode (ARMv7 Virtualization Extensions, ARMv8 EL2):&quot; A hypervisor mode that supports Popek and Goldberg virtualization requirements for the non-secure operation of the CPU.
* &quot;Thread mode (ARMv6-M, ARMv7-M, ARMv8-M):&quot; A mode which can be specified as either privileged or unprivileged. Whether the Main Stack Pointer (MSP) or Process Stack Pointer (PSP) is used can also be specified in CONTROL register with privileged access. This mode is designed for user tasks in RTOS environment but it is typically used in bare-metal for super-loop.
* &quot;Handler mode (ARMv6-M, ARMv7-M, ARMv8-M):&quot; A mode dedicated for exception handling (except the RESET which are handled in Thread mode). Handler mode always uses MSP and works in privileged level.

===Instruction set===
The original (and subsequent) ARM implementation was hardwired without microcode, like the much simpler 8-bit 6502 processor used in prior Acorn microcomputers.

The 32-bit ARM architecture (and the 64-bit architecture for the most part) includes the following RISC features:
* Load–store architecture.
* No support for unaligned memory accesses in the original version of the architecture. ARMv6 and later, except some microcontroller versions, support unaligned accesses for half-word and single-word load/store instructions with some limitations, such as no guaranteed atomicity.
* Uniform 16 × 32-bit register file (including the program counter, stack pointer and the link register).
* Fixed instruction width of 32 bits to ease decoding and pipelining, at the cost of decreased code density. Later, the Thumb instruction set added 16-bit instructions and increased code density.
* Mostly single clock-cycle execution.

To compensate for the simpler design, compared with processors like the Intel 80286 and Motorola 68020, some additional design features were used:
* Conditional execution of most instructions reduces branch overhead and compensates for the lack of a branch predictor in early chips.
* Arithmetic instructions alter condition codes only when desired.
* 32-bit barrel shifter can be used without performance penalty with most arithmetic instructions and address calculations.
* Has powerful indexed addressing modes.
* A link register supports fast leaf function calls.
* A simple, but fast, 2-priority-level interrupt subsystem has switched register banks.

====Arithmetic instructions====
ARM includes integer arithmetic operations for add, subtract, and multiply; some versions of the architecture also support divide operations.

ARM supports 32-bit × 32-bit multiplies with either a 32-bit result or 64-bit result, though Cortex-M0 / M0+ / M1 cores do not support 64-bit results. Some ARM cores also support 16-bit × 16-bit and 32-bit × 16-bit multiplies.

The divide instructions are only included in the following ARM architectures:
* Armv7-M and Armv7E-M architectures always include divide instructions.
* Armv7-R architecture always includes divide instructions in the Thumb instruction set, but optionally in its 32-bit instruction set.
* Armv7-A architecture optionally includes the divide instructions. The instructions might not be implemented, or implemented only in the Thumb instruction set, or implemented in both the Thumb and ARM instruction sets, or implemented if the Virtualization Extensions are included.

====Registers====
Registers R0 through R7 are the same across all CPU modes; they are never banked.

Registers R8 through R12 are the same across all CPU modes except FIQ mode. FIQ mode has its own distinct R8 through R12 registers.

R13 and R14 are banked across all privileged CPU modes except system mode. That is, each mode that can be entered because of an exception has its own R13 and R14. These registers generally contain the stack pointer and the return address from function calls, respectively.

Aliases:
* R13 is also referred to as SP, the stack pointer.
* R14 is also referred to as LR, the link register.
* R15 is also referred to as PC, the program counter.

The Current Program Status Register (CPSR) has the following 32 bits.
* M (bits 0–4) is the processor mode bits.
* T (bit 5) is the Thumb state bit.
* F (bit 6) is the FIQ disable bit.
* I (bit 7) is the IRQ disable bit.
* A (bit 8) is the imprecise data abort disable bit.
* E (bit 9) is the data endianness bit.
* IT (bits 10–15 and 25–26) is the if-then state bits.
* GE (bits 16–19) is the greater-than-or-equal-to bits.
* DNM (bits 20–23) is the do not modify bits.
* J (bit 24) is the Java state bit.
* Q (bit 27) is the sticky overflow bit.
* V (bit 28) is the overflow bit.
* C (bit 29) is the carry/borrow/extend bit.
* Z (bit 30) is the zero bit.
* N (bit 31) is the negative/less than bit.

====Conditional execution====
Almost every ARM instruction has a conditional execution feature called predication, which is implemented with a 4-bit condition code selector (the predicate). To allow for unconditional execution, one of the four-bit codes causes the instruction to be always executed. Most other CPU architectures only have condition codes on branch instructions.

Though the predicate takes up four of the 32 bits in an instruction code, and thus cuts down significantly on the encoding bits available for displacements in memory access instructions, it avoids branch instructions when generating code for small codice_1 statements. Apart from eliminating the branch instructions themselves, this preserves the fetch/decode/execute pipeline at the cost of only one cycle per skipped instruction.

An algorithm that provides a good example of conditional execution is the subtraction-based Euclidean algorithm for computing the greatest common divisor. In the C programming language, the algorithm can be written as:
int gcd(int a, int b) {
 while (a != b) // We enter the loop when a &lt; b or a &gt; b, but not when a == b
 if (a &gt; b) // When a &gt; b we do this
 a -= b;
 else // When a &lt; b we do that (no &quot;if (a &lt; b)&quot; needed since a != b is checked in while condition)
 b -= a;
 return a;


The same algorithm can be rewritten in a way closer to target ARM instructions as:
loop:
 // Compare a and b
 GT = a &gt; b;
 LT = a &lt; b;
 NE = a != b;

 // Perform operations based on flag results
 if (GT) a -= b; // Subtract *only* if greater-than
 if (LT) b -= a; // Subtract *only* if less-than
 if (NE) goto loop; // Loop *only* if compared values were not equal
 return a;

and coded in assembly language as:

; assign a to register r0, b to r1
loop: CMP r0, r1 ; set condition &quot;NE&quot; if (a ≠ b),
 ; &quot;GT&quot; if (a &gt; b),
 ; or &quot;LT&quot; if (a &lt; b)
 SUBGT r0, r0, r1 ; if &quot;GT&quot; (Greater Than), then a = a − b
 SUBLT r1, r1, r0 ; if &quot;LT&quot; (Less Than), then b = b − a
 BNE loop ; if &quot;NE&quot; (Not Equal), then loop
 B lr ; return

which avoids the branches around the codice_2 and codice_3 clauses. If codice_4 and codice_5 are equal then neither of the codice_6 instructions will be executed, eliminating the need for a conditional branch to implement the codice_7 check at the top of the loop, for example had codice_8 (less than or equal) been used.

One of the ways that Thumb code provides a more dense encoding is to remove the four-bit selector from non-branch instructions.

====Other features====
Another feature of the instruction set is the ability to fold shifts and rotates into the &quot;data processing&quot; (arithmetic, logical, and register-register move) instructions, so that, for example, the statement in C language:

a += (j « 2);

could be rendered as a one-word, one-cycle instruction:

ADD Ra, Ra, Rj, LSL #2

This results in the typical ARM program being denser than expected with fewer memory accesses; thus the pipeline is used more efficiently.

The ARM processor also has features rarely seen in other RISC architectures, such as PC-relative addressing (indeed, on the 32-bit ARM the PC is one of its 16 registers) and pre- and post-increment addressing modes.

The ARM instruction set has increased over time. Some early ARM processors (before ARM7TDMI), for example, have no instruction to store a two-byte quantity.

====Pipelines and other implementation issues====
The ARM7 and earlier implementations have a three-stage pipeline; the stages being fetch, decode, and execute. Higher-performance designs, such as the ARM9, have deeper pipelines: Cortex-A8 has thirteen stages. Additional implementation changes for higher performance include a faster adder and more extensive branch prediction logic. The difference between the ARM7DI and ARM7DMI cores, for example, was an improved multiplier; hence the added &quot;M&quot;.

====Coprocessors====
The ARM architecture (pre-Armv8) provides a non-intrusive way of extending the instruction set using &quot;coprocessors&quot; that can be addressed using MCR, MRC, MRRC, MCRR, and similar instructions. The coprocessor space is divided logically into 16 coprocessors with numbers from 0 to 15, coprocessor 15 (cp15) being reserved for some typical control functions like managing the caches and MMU operation on processors that have one.

In ARM-based machines, peripheral devices are usually attached to the processor by mapping their physical registers into ARM memory space, into the coprocessor space, or by connecting to another device (a bus) that in turn attaches to the processor. Coprocessor accesses have lower latency, so some peripherals—for example, an XScale interrupt controller—are accessible in both ways: through memory and through coprocessors.

In other cases, chip designers only integrate hardware using the coprocessor mechanism. For example, an image processing engine might be a small ARM7TDMI core combined with a coprocessor that has specialised operations to support a specific set of HDTV transcoding primitives.

===Debugging===

All modern ARM processors include hardware debugging facilities, allowing software debuggers to perform operations such as halting, stepping, and breakpointing of code starting from reset. These facilities are built using JTAG support, though some newer cores optionally support ARM&#x27;s own two-wire &quot;SWD&quot; protocol. In ARM7TDMI cores, the &quot;D&quot; represented JTAG debug support, and the &quot;I&quot; represented presence of an &quot;EmbeddedICE&quot; debug module. For ARM7 and ARM9 core generations, EmbeddedICE over JTAG was a de facto debug standard, though not architecturally guaranteed.

The ARMv7 architecture defines basic debug facilities at an architectural level. These include breakpoints, watchpoints and instruction execution in a &quot;Debug Mode&quot;; similar facilities were also available with EmbeddedICE. Both &quot;halt mode&quot; and &quot;monitor&quot; mode debugging are supported. The actual transport mechanism used to access the debug facilities is not architecturally specified, but implementations generally include JTAG support.

There is a separate ARM &quot;CoreSight&quot; debug architecture, which is not architecturally required by ARMv7 processors.

====Debug Access Port====
The Debug Access Port (DAP) is an implementation of an ARM Debug Interface.
There are two different supported implementations, the Serial Wire JTAG Debug Port (SWJ-DP) and the Serial Wire Debug Port (SW-DP).
CMSIS-DAP is a standard interface that describes how various debugging software on a host PC can communicate over USB to firmware running on a hardware debugger, which in turn talks over SWD or JTAG to a CoreSight-enabled ARM Cortex CPU.

===DSP enhancement instructions===
To improve the ARM architecture for digital signal processing and multimedia applications, DSP instructions were added to the instruction set. These are signified by an &quot;E&quot; in the name of the ARMv5TE and ARMv5TEJ architectures. E-variants also imply T, D, M, and I.

The new instructions are common in digital signal processor (DSP) architectures. They include variations on signed multiply–accumulate, saturated add and subtract, and count leading zeros.

First introduced in 1999, this extension of the core instruction set contrasted with ARM&#x27;s earlier DSP coprocessor known as Piccolo, which employed a distinct, incompatible instruction set whose execution involved a separate program counter. Piccolo instructions employed a distinct register file of sixteen 32-bit registers, with some instructions combining registers for use as 48-bit accumulators and other instructions addressing 16-bit half-registers. Some instructions were able to operate on two such 16-bit values in parallel. Communication with the Piccolo register file involved &quot;load to Piccolo&quot; and &quot;store from Piccolo&quot; coprocessor instructions via two buffers of eight 32-bit entries. Described as reminiscent of other approaches, notably Hitachi&#x27;s SH-DSP and Motorola&#x27;s 68356, Piccolo did not employ dedicated local memory and relied on the bandwidth of the ARM core for DSP operand retrieval, impacting concurrent performance. Piccolo&#x27;s distinct instruction set also proved not to be a &quot;good compiler target&quot;.

===SIMD extensions for multimedia===
Introduced in the ARMv6 architecture, this was a precursor to Advanced SIMD, also named Neon.

===Jazelle===
Jazelle DBX (Direct Bytecode eXecution) is a technique that allows Java bytecode to be executed directly in the ARM architecture as a third execution state (and instruction set) alongside the existing ARM and Thumb-mode. Support for this state is signified by the &quot;J&quot; in the ARMv5TEJ architecture, and in ARM9EJ-S and ARM7EJ-S core names. Support for this state is required starting in ARMv6 (except for the ARMv7-M profile), though newer cores only include a trivial implementation that provides no hardware acceleration.

===Thumb===
To improve compiled code density, processors since the ARM7TDMI (released in 1994) have featured the &quot;Thumb&quot; compressed instruction set, which have their own state. (The &quot;T&quot; in &quot;TDMI&quot; indicates the Thumb feature.) When in this state, the processor executes the Thumb instruction set, a compact 16-bit encoding for a subset of the ARM instruction set. Most of the Thumb instructions are directly mapped to normal ARM instructions. The space saving comes from making some of the instruction operands implicit and limiting the number of possibilities compared to the ARM instructions executed in the ARM instruction set state.

In Thumb, the 16-bit opcodes have less functionality. For example, only branches can be conditional, and many opcodes are restricted to accessing only half of all of the CPU&#x27;s general-purpose registers. The shorter opcodes give improved code density overall, even though some operations require extra instructions. In situations where the memory port or bus width is constrained to less than 32 bits, the shorter Thumb opcodes allow increased performance compared with 32-bit ARM code, as less program code may need to be loaded into the processor over the constrained memory bandwidth.

Unlike processor architectures with variable length (16- or 32-bit) instructions, such as the Cray-1 and Hitachi SuperH, the ARM and Thumb instruction sets exist independently of each other. Embedded hardware, such as the Game Boy Advance, typically have a small amount of RAM accessible with a full 32-bit datapath; the majority is accessed via a 16-bit or narrower secondary datapath. In this situation, it usually makes sense to compile Thumb code and hand-optimise a few of the most CPU-intensive sections using full 32-bit ARM instructions, placing these wider instructions into the 32-bit bus accessible memory.

The first processor with a Thumb instruction decoder was the ARM7TDMI. All processors supporting 32-bit instruction sets, starting with ARM9, and including XScale, have included a Thumb instruction decoder. It includes instructions adopted from the Hitachi SuperH (1992), which was licensed by ARM. ARM&#x27;s smallest processor families (Cortex M0 and M1) implement only the 16-bit Thumb instruction set for maximum performance in lowest cost applications. ARM processors that don&#x27;t support 32-bit addressing also omit Thumb.

===Thumb-2===

&quot;Thumb-2&quot; technology was introduced in the &quot;ARM1156 core&quot;, announced in 2003. Thumb-2 extends the limited 16-bit instruction set of Thumb with additional 32-bit instructions to give the instruction set more breadth, thus producing a variable-length instruction set. A stated aim for Thumb-2 was to achieve code density similar to Thumb with performance similar to the ARM instruction set on 32-bit memory.

Thumb-2 extends the Thumb instruction set with bit-field manipulation, table branches and conditional execution. At the same time, the ARM instruction set was extended to maintain equivalent functionality in both instruction sets. A new &quot;Unified Assembly Language&quot; (UAL) supports generation of either Thumb or ARM instructions from the same source code; versions of Thumb seen on ARMv7 processors are essentially as capable as ARM code (including the ability to write interrupt handlers). This requires a bit of care, and use of a new &quot;IT&quot; (if-then) instruction, which permits up to four successive instructions to execute based on a tested condition, or on its inverse. When compiling into ARM code, this is ignored, but when compiling into Thumb it generates an actual instruction. For example:
; if (r0 == r1)
CMP r0, r1
ITE EQ ; ARM: no code ... Thumb: IT instruction
; then r0 = r2;
MOVEQ r0, r2 ; ARM: conditional; Thumb: condition via ITE &#x27;T&#x27; (then)
; else r0 = r3;
MOVNE r0, r3 ; ARM: conditional; Thumb: condition via ITE &#x27;E&#x27; (else)
; recall that the Thumb MOV instruction has no bits to encode &quot;EQ&quot; or &quot;NE&quot;.
All ARMv7 chips support the Thumb instruction set. All chips in the Cortex-A series that support ARMv7, all Cortex-R series, and all ARM11 series support both &quot;ARM instruction set state&quot; and &quot;Thumb instruction set state&quot;, while chips in the Cortex-M series support only the Thumb instruction set.

===Thumb Execution Environment (ThumbEE)===
&quot;ThumbEE&quot; (erroneously called &quot;Thumb-2EE&quot; in some ARM documentation), which was marketed as Jazelle RCT (Runtime Compilation Target), was announced in 2005 and deprecated in 2011. It first appeared in the &quot;Cortex-A8&quot; processor. ThumbEE is a fourth instruction set state, making small changes to the Thumb-2 extended instruction set. These changes make the instruction set particularly suited to code generated at runtime (e.g. by JIT compilation) in managed &quot;Execution Environments&quot;. ThumbEE is a target for languages such as Java, C#, Perl, and Python, and allows JIT compilers to output smaller compiled code without reducing performance.

New features provided by ThumbEE include automatic null pointer checks on every load and store instruction, an instruction to perform an array bounds check, and special instructions that call a handler. In addition, because it utilises Thumb-2 technology, ThumbEE provides access to registers r8–r15 (where the Jazelle/DBX Java VM state is held). Handlers are small sections of frequently called code, commonly used to implement high level languages, such as allocating memory for a new object. These changes come from repurposing a handful of opcodes, and knowing the core is in the new ThumbEE state.

On 23 November 2011, Arm deprecated any use of the ThumbEE instruction set, and Armv8 removes support for ThumbEE.

===Floating-point (VFP)===
&quot;VFP&quot; (Vector Floating Point) technology is a floating-point unit (FPU) coprocessor extension to the ARM architecture (implemented differently in Armv8 – coprocessors not defined there). It provides low-cost single-precision and double-precision floating-point computation fully compliant with the &quot;ANSI/IEEE Std 754-1985 Standard for Binary Floating-Point Arithmetic&quot;. VFP provides floating-point computation suitable for a wide spectrum of applications such as PDAs, smartphones, voice compression and decompression, three-dimensional graphics and digital audio, printers, set-top boxes, and automotive applications. The VFP architecture was intended to support execution of short &quot;vector mode&quot; instructions but these operated on each vector element sequentially and thus did not offer the performance of true single instruction, multiple data (SIMD) vector parallelism. This vector mode was therefore removed shortly after its introduction, to be replaced with the much more powerful Advanced SIMD, also named Neon.

Some devices such as the ARM Cortex-A8 have a cut-down &quot;VFPLite&quot; module instead of a full VFP module, and require roughly ten times more clock cycles per float operation. Pre-Armv8 architecture implemented floating-point/SIMD with the coprocessor interface. Other floating-point and/or SIMD units found in ARM-based processors using the coprocessor interface include FPA, FPE, iwMMXt, some of which were implemented in software by trapping but could have been implemented in hardware. They provide some of the same functionality as VFP but are not opcode-compatible with it. FPA10 also provides extended precision, but implements correct rounding (required by IEEE 754) only in single precision.

; VFPv1: Obsolete
; VFPv2: An optional extension to the ARM instruction set in the ARMv5TE, ARMv5TEJ and ARMv6 architectures. VFPv2 has 16 64-bit FPU registers.
; VFPv3 or VFPv3-D32: Implemented on most Cortex-A8 and A9 ARMv7 processors. It is backward-compatible with VFPv2, except that it cannot trap floating-point exceptions. VFPv3 has 32 64-bit FPU registers as standard, adds VCVT instructions to convert between scalar, float and double, adds immediate mode to VMOV such that constants can be loaded into FPU registers.
; VFPv3-D16: As above, but with only 16 64-bit FPU registers. Implemented on Cortex-R4 and R5 processors and the Tegra 2 (Cortex-A9).
; VFPv3-F16: Uncommon; it supports IEEE754-2008 half-precision (16-bit) floating point as a storage format.
; VFPv4 or VFPv4-D32:Implemented on Cortex-A12 and A15 ARMv7 processors, Cortex-A7 optionally has VFPv4-D32 in the case of an FPU with Neon. VFPv4 has 32 64-bit FPU registers as standard, adds both half-precision support as a storage format and fused multiply-accumulate instructions to the features of VFPv3.
; VFPv4-D16: As above, but it has only 16 64-bit FPU registers. Implemented on Cortex-A5 and A7 processors in the case of an FPU without Neon.
; VFPv5-D16-M: Implemented on Cortex-M7 when single and double-precision floating-point core option exists.

In Debian Linux and derivatives such as Ubuntu and Linux Mint, armhf (ARM hard float) refers to the ARMv7 architecture including the additional VFP3-D16 floating-point hardware extension (and Thumb-2) above. Software packages and cross-compiler tools use the armhf vs. arm/armel suffixes to differentiate.

===Advanced SIMD (Neon)===
The &quot;Advanced SIMD&quot; extension (also known as &quot;Neon&quot; or &quot;MPE&quot; Media Processing Engine) is a combined 64- and 128-bit SIMD instruction set that provides standardised acceleration for media and signal processing applications. Neon is included in all Cortex-A8 devices, but is optional in Cortex-A9 devices. Neon can execute MP3 audio decoding on CPUs running at 10 MHz, and can run the GSM adaptive multi-rate (AMR) speech codec at 13 MHz. It features a comprehensive instruction set, separate register files, and independent execution hardware. Neon supports 8-, 16-, 32-, and 64-bit integer and single-precision (32-bit) floating-point data and SIMD operations for handling audio and video processing as well as graphics and gaming processing. In Neon, the SIMD supports up to 16 operations at the same time. The Neon hardware shares the same floating-point registers as used in VFP. Devices such as the ARM Cortex-A8 and Cortex-A9 support 128-bit vectors, but will execute with 64 bits at a time, whereas newer Cortex-A15 devices can execute 128 bits at a time.

A quirk of Neon in Armv7 devices is that it flushes all subnormal numbers to zero, and as a result the GCC compiler will not use it unless , which allows losing denormals, is turned on. &quot;Enhanced&quot; Neon defined since Armv8 does not have this quirk, but as of the same flag is still required to enable Neon instructions. On the other hand, GCC does consider Neon safe on AArch64 for Armv8.

ProjectNe10 is ARM&#x27;s first open-source project (from its inception; while they acquired an older project, now named Mbed TLS). The Ne10 library is a set of common, useful functions written in both Neon and C (for compatibility). The library was created to allow developers to use Neon optimisations without learning Neon, but it also serves as a set of highly optimised Neon intrinsic and assembly code examples for common DSP, arithmetic, and image processing routines. The source code is available on GitHub.

===ARM Helium technology===
Helium is the M-Profile Vector Extension (MVE). It adds more than 150 scalar and vector instructions.

===Security extensions===

====TrustZone (for Cortex-A profile)====
The Security Extensions, marketed as TrustZone Technology, is in ARMv6KZ and later application profile architectures. It provides a low-cost alternative to adding another dedicated security core to an SoC, by providing two virtual processors backed by hardware based access control. This lets the application core switch between two states, referred to as &quot;worlds&quot; (to reduce confusion with other names for capability domains), to prevent information leaking from the more trusted world to the less trusted world. This world switch is generally orthogonal to all other capabilities of the processor, thus each world can operate independently of the other while using the same core. Memory and peripherals are then made aware of the operating world of the core and may use this to provide access control to secrets and code on the device.

Typically, a rich operating system is run in the less trusted world, with smaller security-specialised code in the more trusted world, aiming to reduce the attack surface. Typical applications include DRM functionality for controlling the use of media on ARM-based devices, and preventing any unapproved use of the device.

In practice, since the specific implementation details of proprietary TrustZone implementations have not been publicly disclosed for review, it is unclear what level of assurance is provided for a given threat model, but they are not immune from attack.

Open Virtualization is an open source implementation of the trusted world architecture for TrustZone.

AMD has licensed and incorporated TrustZone technology into its Secure Processor Technology. AMD&#x27;s APUs include a Cortex-A5 processor for handling secure processing, which is enabled in some, but not all products. In fact, the Cortex-A5 TrustZone core had been included in earlier AMD products, but was not enabled due to time constraints.

Samsung Knox uses TrustZone for purposes such as detecting modifications to the kernel, storing certificates and attestating keys.

====TrustZone for Armv8-M (for Cortex-M profile)====
The Security Extension, marketed as TrustZone for Armv8-M Technology, was introduced in the Armv8-M architecture. While containing similar concepts to TrustZone for Armv8-A, it has a different architectural design, as world switching is performed using branch instructions instead of using exceptions. It also supports safe interleaved interrupt handling from either world regardless of the current security state. Together these features provide low latency calls to the secure world and responsive interrupt handling. ARM provides a reference stack of secure world code in the form of Trusted Firmware for M and PSA Certified.

===No-execute page protection===
As of ARMv6, the ARM architecture supports no-execute page protection, which is referred to as &quot;XN&quot;, for &quot;eXecute Never&quot;.

===Large Physical Address Extension (LPAE)===
The Large Physical Address Extension (LPAE), which extends the physical address size from 32 bits to 40 bits, was added to the Armv7-A architecture in 2011.

The physical address size may be even larger in processors based on the 64-bit (Armv8-A) architecture. For example, it is 44 bits in Cortex-A75 and Cortex-A65AE.

===Armv8-R and Armv8-M===
The Armv8-R and Armv8-M architectures, announced after the Armv8-A architecture, share some features with Armv8-A. However, Armv8-M does not include any 64-bit AArch64 instructions, and Armv8-R originally did not include any AArch64 instructions; those instructions were added to Armv8-R later.

====Armv8.1-M====
The Armv8.1-M architecture, announced in February 2019, is an enhancement of the Armv8-M architecture. It brings new features including:
* A new vector instruction set extension. The M-Profile Vector Extension (MVE), or Helium, is for signal processing and machine learning applications.
* Additional instruction set enhancements for loops and branches (Low Overhead Branch Extension).
* Instructions for half-precision floating-point support.
* Instruction set enhancement for TrustZone management for Floating Point Unit (FPU).
* New memory attribute in the Memory Protection Unit (MPU).
* Enhancements in debug including Performance Monitoring Unit (PMU), Unprivileged Debug Extension, and additional debug support focus on signal processing application developments.
* Reliability, Availability and Serviceability (RAS) extension.

==64/32-bit architecture==

===Armv8===

====Armv8-A====

Announced in October 2011, Armv8-A (often called ARMv8 while the Armv8-R is also available) represents a fundamental change to the ARM architecture. It supports two &quot;Execution states&quot;: a 64-bit state named &quot;AArch64&quot; and a 32-bit state named &quot;AArch32&quot;. In the AArch64 state, a new 64-bit &quot;A64&quot; instruction set is supported; in the AArch32 state, two instruction sets are supported: the original 32-bit instruction set, named &quot;A32&quot;, and the 32-bit Thumb-2 instruction set, named &quot;T32&quot;. AArch32 provides user-space compatibility with Armv7-A. The processor state can change on an Exception level change; this allows 32-bit applications to be executed in AArch32 state under a 64-bit OS whose kernel executes in AArch64 state, and allows a 32-bit OS to run in AArch32 state under the control of a 64-bit hypervisor running in AArch64 state. ARM announced their Cortex-A53 and Cortex-A57 cores on 30 October 2012. Apple was the first to release an Armv8-A compatible core in a consumer product (Apple A7 in iPhone 5S). AppliedMicro, using an FPGA, was the first to demo Armv8-A. The first Armv8-A SoC from Samsung is the Exynos 5433 used in the Galaxy Note 4, which features two clusters of four Cortex-A57 and Cortex-A53 cores in a big.LITTLE configuration; but it will run only in AArch32 mode.

To both AArch32 and AArch64, Armv8-A makes VFPv3/v4 and advanced SIMD (Neon) standard. It also adds cryptography instructions supporting AES, SHA-1/SHA-256 and finite field arithmetic. AArch64 was introduced in Armv8-A and its subsequent revision. AArch64 is not included in the 32-bit Armv8-R and Armv8-M architectures.

An ARMv8-A processor can support one or both of AArch32 and AArch64; it may support AArch32 and AArch64 at lower Exception levels and only AArch64 at higher Exception levels. For example, the ARM Cortex-A32 supports only AArch32, the ARM Cortex-A34 supports only AArch64, and the ARM Cortex-A72 supports both AArch64 and AArch32. An ARMv9-A processor must support AArch64 at all Exception levels, and may support AArch32 at EL0.

====Armv8-R====
Optional AArch64 support was added to the Armv8-R profile, with the first ARM core implementing it being the Cortex-R82. It adds the A64 instruction set.

===Armv9===

====Armv9-A====
Announced in March 2021, the updated architecture places a focus on secure execution and compartmentalisation.

==Arm SystemReady==
Arm SystemReady is a compliance program that helps ensure the interoperability of an operating system on Arm-based hardware from datacenter servers to industrial edge and IoT devices. The key building blocks of the program are the specifications for minimum hardware and firmware requirements that the operating systems and hypervisors can rely upon. These specifications are:

* Base System Architecture (BSA) and the market segment specific supplements (e.g., Server BSA supplement)
* Base Boot Requirements (BBR) and Base Boot Security Requirements (BBSR)

These specifications are co-developed by Arm and its partners in the System Architecture Advisory Committee (SystemArchAC).

Architecture Compliance Suite (ACS) is the test tools that help to check the compliance of these specifications. The Arm SystemReady Requirements Specification documents the requirements of the certifications.

This program was introduced by Arm in 2020 at the first DevSummit event. Its predecessor Arm ServerReady was introduced in 2018 at the Arm TechCon event. This program currently includes two bands:

* SystemReady Band: this band focuses on operating system interoperability for Advanced Configuration and Power Interface ACPI environments, where generic operating systems can be installed on either new or old hardware without modification. This band is relevant for systems using Windows, Linux, VMware, and BSD environments.
* SystemReady Devicetree Band: this band optimizes install and boot for embedded systems where devicetree is the preferred method of describing hardware, with a focus on forward compatibility. This applies to Linux distributions and BSD environments specifically.

==PSA Certified==
PSA Certified, formerly named Platform Security Architecture, is an architecture-agnostic security framework and evaluation scheme. It is intended to help secure Internet of things (IoT) devices built on system-on-a-chip (SoC) processors. It was introduced to increase security where a full trusted execution environment is too large or complex.

The architecture was introduced by Arm in 2017 at the annual TechCon event. Although the scheme is architecture agnostic, it was first implemented on Arm Cortex-M processor cores intended for microcontroller use. PSA Certified includes freely available threat models and security analyses that demonstrate the process for deciding on security features in common IoT products. It also provides freely downloadable application programming interface (API) packages, architectural specifications, open-source firmware implementations, and related test suites.

Following the development of the architecture security framework in 2017, the PSA Certified assurance scheme launched two years later at Embedded World in 2019. PSA Certified offers a multi-level security evaluation scheme for chip vendors, OS providers and IoT device makers. The Embedded World presentation introduced chip vendors to Level 1 Certification. A draft of Level 2 protection was presented at the same time. Level 2 certification became a usable standard in February 2020.

The certification was created by PSA Joint Stakeholders to enable a security-by-design approach for a diverse set of IoT products. PSA Certified specifications are implementation and architecture agnostic, as a result they can be applied to any chip, software or device. The certification also removes industry fragmentation for IoT product manufacturers and developers.

==Operating system support==

===32-bit operating systems===

====Historical operating systems====
The first 32-bit ARM-based personal computer, the Acorn Archimedes, was originally intended to run an ambitious operating system called ARX. The machines shipped with RISC OS, which was also used on later ARM-based systems from Acorn and other vendors. Some early Acorn machines were also able to run a Unix port called RISC iX. (Neither is to be confused with RISC/os, a contemporary Unix variant for the MIPS architecture.)

====Embedded operating systems====
The 32-bit ARM architecture is supported by a large number of embedded and real-time operating systems, including:
* A2
* Android
* ChibiOS/RT
* Deos
* DRYOS
* eCos
* embOS
* FreeBSD
* FreeRTOS
* INTEGRITY
* Linux
* Micro-Controller Operating Systems
* Mbed
* MINIX 3
* MQX
* Nucleus PLUS
* NuttX
* OKL4
* Operating System Embedded (OSE)
* OS-9
* Pharos
* Plan 9
* PikeOS
* QNX
* RIOT
* RTEMS
* RTXC Quadros
* SCIOPTA
* ThreadX
* TizenRT
* T-Kernel
* VxWorks
* Windows Embedded Compact
* Windows 10 IoT Core
* Zephyr
====Mobile device operating systems====
As of March 2024, the 32-bit ARM architecture used to be the primary hardware environment for most mobile device operating systems such as the following but many of these platforms such as Android and Apple iOS have evolved to the 64-bit ARM architecture:
* Android
* ChromeOS
* Mobian
* Sailfish
* postmarketOS
* Tizen
* Ubuntu Touch
* webOS
Formerly, but now discontinued:

* Bada
* BlackBerry OS/BlackBerry 10
* Firefox OS
* MeeGo
* Newton OS
* iOS 10 and earlier
* Symbian
* Windows 10 Mobile
* Windows RT
* Windows Phone
* Windows Mobile
====Desktop and server operating systems====
The 32-bit ARM architecture is supported by RISC OS and by multiple Unix-like operating systems including:
* FreeBSD
* NetBSD
* OpenBSD
* OpenSolaris
* several Linux distributions, such as:
** Debian
** Armbian
** Gentoo
** Ubuntu
** Raspberry Pi OS (formerly Raspbian)
** Slackware

===64-bit operating systems===

====Embedded operating systems====
* INTEGRITY
* OSE
* SCIOPTA
* seL4
* Pharos
* FreeRTOS
* QNX
* VxWorks
* Zephyr

====Mobile device operating systems====
* Android supports Armv8-A in Android Lollipop (5.0) and later.
* iOS supports Armv8-A in iOS 7 and later on 64-bit Apple SoCs. iOS 11 and later, and iPadOS, only support 64-bit ARM processors and applications.
* HarmonyOS NEXT was developed specifically for ARM processors, starting from its launch in 2024.
* Mobian
* PostmarketOS
* Arch Linux ARM
* Manjaro

====Desktop and server operating systems====
* Support for Armv8-A was merged into the Linux kernel version 3.7 in late 2012. Armv8-A is supported by a number of Linux distributions, such as:
** Debian
** Armbian
** Alpine Linux
** Ubuntu
** Fedora
** openSUSE
** SUSE Linux Enterprise
** RHEL
** Raspberry Pi OS (formerly Raspbian)
* Support for Armv8-A was merged into FreeBSD in late 2014.
* OpenBSD has Armv8 support .
* NetBSD has Armv8 support since early 2018.
* Windows - Windows 10 runs 32-bit &quot;x86 and 32-bit ARM applications&quot;, as well as native ARM64 desktop apps; Windows 11 runs native ARM64 apps and can also run x86 and x86-64 apps via emulation. Support for 64-bit ARM apps in the Microsoft Store has been available since November 2018.
* macOS has ARM support since late 2020; the first release to support ARM is macOS Big Sur. Rosetta 2 adds support for x86-64 applications but not virtualization of x86-64 computer platforms.

===Porting to 32- or 64-bit ARM operating systems===
Windows applications recompiled for ARM and linked with Winelib, from the Wine project, can run on 32-bit or 64-bit ARM in Linux, FreeBSD, or other compatible operating systems. x86 binaries, e.g. when not specially compiled for ARM, have been demonstrated on ARM using QEMU with Wine (on Linux and more), but do not work at full speed or same capability as with Winelib.

==Notes==
==See also==

* Amber – an open-source ARM-compatible processor core
* AMULET – an asynchronous implementation of the ARM architecture
* Apple silicon
* ARM Accredited Engineer – certification program
* ARM big.LITTLE – ARM&#x27;s heterogeneous computing architecture
** DynamIQ
* ARMulator – an instruction set simulator
* Comparison of ARM processors
* Meltdown (security vulnerability)
* Reduced instruction set computer (RISC)
* RISC-V
* Spectre (security vulnerability)
* Unicore – a 32-register architecture based heavily on a 32-bit ARM

==References==

===Citations===
===Bibliography===

==Further reading==
==External links==

* , ARM Ltd.

===Architecture manuals===
* - covers ARMv4, ARMv4T, ARMv5T, (ARMv5TExP), ARMv5TE, ARMv5TEJ, and ARMv6
* 
* 
* 
* 

===Quick-reference cards===

====Instructions====
* Thumb 
* ARM and Thumb-2 
* Vector Floating Point 

====Opcodes====

* Thumb 
* ARM 
* GNU Assembler Directives </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="0" end="3" title="ARM architecture family" label="ARM"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="30" end="33" title="ARM architecture family" label="arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="59" end="81" title="ARM architecture family" label="Advanced RISC Machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="97" end="115" title="ARM architecture family" label="Acorn RISC Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q189376" start="132" end="136" title="reduced instruction set computer" label="RISC"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="137" end="165" title="instruction set architecture" label="instruction set architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="178" end="197" title="central processing unit" label="computer processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q296782" start="199" end="211" title="Arm Holdings" label="Arm Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654284" start="358" end="363" title="semiconductor intellectual property core" label="cores"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="546" end="556" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962" start="559" end="565" title="laptop" label="laptop"/>
<link wikidata="Q155972" start="572" end="587" title="tablet computer" label="tablet computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="601" end="616" title="embedded system" label="embedded system"/>
<link wikidata="Q56155" start="661" end="669" title="desktop computer" label="desktops"/>
<link wikidata="Q44127" start="674" end="680" title="server (computing)" label="server"/>
<link wikidata="Q64008087" start="693" end="699" title="Fugaku (supercomputer)" label="Fugaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q121117" start="726" end="739" title="supercomputer" label="supercomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="953" end="959" title="32-bit computing" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q367204" start="996" end="1009" title="address space" label="address space"/>
<link wikidata="Q66221" start="1038" end="1049" title="main memory" label="main memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q252132" start="1261" end="1267" title="64-bit computing" label="64-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="1529" end="1541" title="code density" label="code density"/>
<link wikidata="Q4041810" start="1549" end="1556" title="Jazelle" label="Jazelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q137496" start="1598" end="1611" title="Java bytecode" label="Java bytecode"/>
<link wikidata="Q82178" start="1657" end="1684" title="simultaneous multithreading" label="simultaneous multithreading"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140932" start="1719" end="1734" title="fault tolerance" label="fault tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q342149" start="1767" end="1782" title="Acorn Computers" label="Acorn Computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q749976" start="1828" end="1837" title="BBC Micro" label="BBC Micro"/>
<link wikidata="Q255528" start="1924" end="1943" title="MOS Technology 6502" label="MOS Technology 6502"/>
<link wikidata="Q201652" start="2020" end="2028" title="Apple II" label="Apple II"/>
<link wikidata="Q189396" start="2054" end="2082" title="dynamic random-access memory" label="dynamic random-access memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q53238" start="2162" end="2169" title="Hitachi" label="Hitachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163900" start="2281" end="2292" title="framebuffer" label="framebuffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q219320" start="2402" end="2414" title="input/output" label="input/output"/>
<link wikidata="Q202712" start="3010" end="3031" title="IBM Personal Computer" label="IBM Personal Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q657808" start="3078" end="3088" title="Intel 8088" label="Intel 8088"/>
<link wikidata="Q194368" start="3092" end="3098" title="16-bit computing" label="16-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="3131" end="3136" title="8-bit computing" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="3445" end="3451" title="32-bit computing" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q667808" start="3500" end="3514" title="Motorola 68000" label="Motorola 68000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789318" start="3519" end="3549" title="National Semiconductor NS32016" label="National Semiconductor NS32016"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674545" start="3648" end="3671" title="Acorn Business Computer" label="Acorn Business Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q371482" start="3891" end="3901" title="Apple Lisa" label="Apple Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="3914" end="3938" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="4131" end="4146" title="hard disk drive" label="hard disk drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q16489" start="4770" end="4783" title="Sophie Wilson" label="Sophie Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="4987" end="5021" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q92776" start="5201" end="5213" title="Steve Furber" label="Steve Furber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505987" start="5239" end="5260" title="Western Design Center" label="Western Design Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q163370" start="5279" end="5290" title="Bill Mensch" label="Bill Mensch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323895" start="5401" end="5410" title="WDC 65C02" label="WDC 65C02"/>
<link wikidata="Q3638583" start="5863" end="5876" title="Berkeley RISC" label="Berkeley RISC"/>
<link wikidata="Q220764" start="6157" end="6166" title="interrupt" label="interrupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q219320" start="6216" end="6228" title="input/output" label="input/output"/>
<link wikidata="Q367204" start="6368" end="6381" title="address space" label="address space"/>
<link wikidata="Q814194" start="6619" end="6634" title="program counter" label="program counter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322850" start="6717" end="6731" title="processor flag" label="processor flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="7155" end="7170" title="instruction set" label="instruction set"/>
<link wikidata="Q189396" start="7192" end="7206" title="page mode DRAM" label="page mode DRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q401517" start="7789" end="7804" title="register window" label="register window"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="7871" end="7885" title="procedure call" label="procedure call"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8003" end="8012" title="BBC BASIC" label="BBC BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8044" end="8065" title="BBC Micro expansion unit#6502 Second Processor" label="second 6502 processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803761" start="8164" end="8178" title="Hermann Hauser" label="Hermann Hauser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362061" start="8411" end="8426" title="VLSI Technology" label="VLSI Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q184793" start="8934" end="8946" title="CAD software" label="CAD software"/>
<link wikidata="Q429801" start="9001" end="9010" title="BBC BASIC" label="BBC BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="9018" end="9035" title="assembly language" label="assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q477049" start="9466" end="9482" title="Booth&amp;#x27;s multiplication algorithm" label="Booth multiplier"/>
<link wikidata="Q41357" start="9819" end="9835" title="Acorn Archimedes" label="Acorn Archimedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207761" start="9918" end="9927" title="Dhrystone" label="Dhrystone"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="10035" end="10040" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882848" start="10044" end="10056" title="Macintosh SE" label="Macintosh SE"/>
<link wikidata="Q237794" start="10085" end="10096" title="i386" label="Intel 80386"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10162" end="10172" title="VAX-11#VAX-11/784" label="VAX-11/784"/>
<link wikidata="Q205450" start="10173" end="10190" title="superminicomputer" label="superminicomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q273190" start="10231" end="10240" title="Sun SPARC" label="Sun SPARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q248998" start="10245" end="10255" title="R2000 microprocessor" label="MIPS R2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q192525" start="10267" end="10278" title="workstation" label="workstation"/>
<link wikidata="Q210813" start="10435" end="10455" title="direct memory access" label="direct memory access"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="10806" end="10812" title="32-bit computing" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q178048" start="10813" end="10821" title="Bus (computing)" label="data bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632344" start="10823" end="10829" title="26-bit computing" label="26-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q187466" start="10858" end="10867" title="processor register" label="registers"/>
<link wikidata="Q814194" start="10927" end="10929" title="program counter" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623746" start="10947" end="10963" title="transistor count" label="transistor count"/>
<link wikidata="Q175869" start="11101" end="11110" title="microcode" label="microcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q352090" start="11239" end="11244" title="CPU cache" label="cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q127687940" start="11451" end="11468" title="IBM PS/2 Model 50" label="IBM PS/2 Model 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q622888" start="11498" end="11509" title="Intel 80286" label="Intel 80286"/>
<link wikidata="Q237794" start="11594" end="11603" title="i386" label="Intel 386"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="11964" end="11978" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362061" start="11983" end="11998" title="VLSI Technology" label="VLSI Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q296782" start="12202" end="12214" title="Arm Holdings" label="Arm Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q171240" start="12235" end="12256" title="London Stock Exchange" label="London Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q82059" start="12261" end="12267" title="Nasdaq" label="Nasdaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q420772" start="12425" end="12437" title="Apple Newton" label="Apple Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="12509" end="12532" title="central processing unit" label="central processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353312" start="12548" end="12554" title="RiscPC" label="RiscPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="12566" end="12569" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="DEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q296778" start="12619" end="12628" title="StrongARM" label="StrongARM"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="12637" end="12640" title="Hertz" label="MHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q277482" start="12822" end="12826" title="Intel i960" label="i960"/>
<link wikidata="Q133493" start="12920" end="12926" title="XScale" label="XScale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347782" start="12955" end="12962" title="Marvell Technology Group" label="Marvell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606045" start="13301" end="13321" title="list of products using ARM processors" label="ARM-based processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="13343" end="13353" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q497317" start="13363" end="13381" title="integrated digital television" label="digital television"/>
<link wikidata="Q842729" start="13387" end="13398" title="set-top box" label="set-top box"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738570" start="13413" end="13428" title="mobile computer" label="mobile computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654284" start="13793" end="13800" title="IP core" label="IP core"/>
<link wikidata="Q165678" start="13833" end="13848" title="microcontroller" label="microcontroller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="13858" end="13861" title="CPU" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q610398" start="13868" end="13884" title="system on a chip" label="systems-on-chips"/>
<link wikidata="Q761977" start="13911" end="13939" title="original design manufacturer" label="original design manufacturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168959" start="14053" end="14084" title="semiconductor fabrication plant" label="semiconductor fabrication plant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14196" end="14204" title="ARM7#ARM7TDMI" label="ARM7TDMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q757489" start="14237" end="14242" title="Atmel" label="Atmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082128" start="14376" end="14389" title="mobile device" label="mobile device"/>
<link wikidata="Q324536" start="14539" end="14549" title="Intel Atom" label="Intel Atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="14778" end="14786" title="compiler" label="compiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q193231" start="14788" end="14796" title="debugger" label="debugger"/>
<link wikidata="Q467707" start="14798" end="14822" title="software development kit" label="software development kit"/>
<link wikidata="Q175805" start="14860" end="14867" title="semiconductor device" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151413" start="15125" end="15129" title="OMAP" label="OMAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q483488" start="15171" end="15177" title="Exynos" label="Exynos"/>
<link wikidata="Q420767" start="15201" end="15203" title="Apple A4" label="A4"/>
<link wikidata="Q420764" start="15205" end="15207" title="Apple A5" label="A5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858729" start="15213" end="15216" title="Apple A5X" label="A5X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155668" start="15222" end="15225" title="NXP Semiconductors" label="NXP"/>
<link wikidata="Q82516" start="15233" end="15237" title="i.MX" label="i.MX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191383" start="15240" end="15247" title="Fabless manufacturing" label="Fabless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654284" start="15394" end="15434" title="semiconductor intellectual property core" label="semiconductor intellectual property core"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760303" start="15481" end="15493" title="netlist" label="gate netlist"/>
<link wikidata="Q173198" start="15769" end="15782" title="logic synthesis" label="synthesizable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484552" start="15783" end="15786" title="register-transfer level" label="RTL"/>
<link wikidata="Q827773" start="15788" end="15795" title="Verilog" label="Verilog"/>
<link wikidata="Q911691" start="16028" end="16044" title="clock rate" label="high clock speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439882" start="16315" end="16333" title="Foundry model" label="Merchant foundries"/>
<link wikidata="Q713418" start="17126" end="17130" title="TSMC" label="TSMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q143616" start="17135" end="17138" title="United Microelectronics Corporation" label="UMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q267131" start="17239" end="17244" title="wafer (electronics)" label="wafer"/>
<link wikidata="Q845173" start="17523" end="17548" title="non-recurring engineering" label="non-recurring engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="17675" end="17685" title="Amazon.com" label="Amazon.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q19599375" start="17693" end="17707" title="Annapurna Labs" label="Annapurna Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q484930" start="17720" end="17734" title="Analog Devices" label="Analog Devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="17736" end="17741" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781558" start="17743" end="17755" title="AppliedMicro" label="AppliedMicro"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109447" start="17762" end="17788" title="MACOM Technology Solutions" label="MACOM Technology Solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q757489" start="17791" end="17796" title="Atmel" label="Atmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q790060" start="17798" end="17806" title="Broadcom" label="Broadcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055187" start="17808" end="17814" title="Cavium" label="Cavium"/>
<link wikidata="Q478354" start="17816" end="17837" title="Cypress Semiconductor" label="Cypress Semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q863675" start="17839" end="17862" title="Freescale Semiconductor" label="Freescale Semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155668" start="17868" end="17886" title="NXP Semiconductors" label="NXP Semiconductors"/>
<link wikidata="Q160120" start="17889" end="17895" title="Huawei" label="Huawei"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="17897" end="17902" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784671" start="17904" end="17920" title="Maxim Integrated" label="Maxim Integrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q182477" start="17922" end="17928" title="Nvidia" label="Nvidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155668" start="17930" end="17933" title="NXP" label="NXP"/>
<link wikidata="Q544847" start="17935" end="17943" title="Qualcomm" label="Qualcomm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196269" start="17945" end="17952" title="Renesas Electronics" label="Renesas"/>
<link wikidata="Q20718" start="17954" end="17973" title="Samsung Electronics" label="Samsung Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q661845" start="17975" end="17994" title="ST Microelectronics" label="ST Microelectronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q193412" start="17996" end="18013" title="Texas Instruments" label="Texas Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046482" start="18019" end="18025" title="Xilinx" label="Xilinx"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18431" end="18439" title="Kryo#Kryo 280" label="Kryo 280"/>
<link wikidata="Q544847" start="18521" end="18529" title="Qualcomm" label="Qualcomm"/>
<link wikidata="Q59491380" start="18854" end="18870" title="Ampere Computing" label="Ampere Computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055187" start="18883" end="18889" title="Cavium" label="Cavium"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="18906" end="18935" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="Digital Equipment Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q186394" start="18983" end="18990" title="Fujitsu" label="Fujitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q131257" start="19180" end="19201" title="intellectual property" label="intellectual property"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101415" start="19441" end="19450" title="ARM Cortex-A5" label="Cortex-A5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819372" start="19452" end="19461" title="ARM Cortex-A7" label="Cortex-A7"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="19463" end="19473" title="ARM Cortex-A32" label="Cortex-A32"/>
<link wikidata="Q105393815" start="19475" end="19485" title="ARM Cortex-A34" label="Cortex-A34"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="19487" end="19497" title="ARM Cortex-A35" label="Cortex-A35"/>
<link wikidata="Q23045352" start="19499" end="19509" title="ARM Cortex-A53" label="Cortex-A53"/>
<link wikidata="Q15122690" start="19511" end="19520" title="ARM Cortex-R5" label="Cortex-R5"/>
<link wikidata="Q15122690" start="19522" end="19531" title="ARM Cortex-R8" label="Cortex-R8"/>
<link wikidata="Q15122690" start="19533" end="19543" title="ARM Cortex-R52" label="Cortex-R52"/>
<link wikidata="Q296760" start="19545" end="19554" title="ARM Cortex-M0" label="Cortex-M0"/>
<link wikidata="Q296760" start="19556" end="19566" title="ARM Cortex-M0+" label="Cortex-M0+"/>
<link wikidata="Q296760" start="19568" end="19577" title="ARM Cortex-M3" label="Cortex-M3"/>
<link wikidata="Q296760" start="19579" end="19588" title="ARM Cortex-M4" label="Cortex-M4"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19590" end="19599" title="ARM Cortex-M#Cortex-M7" label="Cortex-M7"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19601" end="19611" title="ARM Cortex-M#Cortex-M23" label="Cortex-M23"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19613" end="19623" title="ARM Cortex-M#Cortex-M33" label="Cortex-M33"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620412" start="19632" end="19640" title="Mali (GPU)" label="Mali-G52"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620412" start="19642" end="19650" title="Mali (GPU)" label="Mali-G31"/>
<link wikidata="Q162768" start="20955" end="20958" title="personal digital assistant" label="PDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="20964" end="20974" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q179310" start="20982" end="20991" title="computing" label="computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="21005" end="21014" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q17511542" start="21022" end="21046" title="Surface (2012 tablet)" label="first generation Surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q15102813" start="21048" end="21057" title="Surface 2" label="Surface 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q29758" start="21062" end="21071" title="Pocket PC" label="Pocket PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7206413" start="21091" end="21095" title="Pocket PC 2002" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="21098" end="21103" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796" start="21111" end="21115" title="iPad" label="iPad"/>
<link wikidata="Q152864" start="21122" end="21126" title="Asus" label="Asus"/>
<link wikidata="Q701261" start="21134" end="21153" title="Asus Eee Pad Transformer" label="Eee Pad Transformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q155972" start="21154" end="21169" title="tablet computer" label="tablet computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q861508" start="21184" end="21194" title="Chromebook" label="Chromebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766" start="21232" end="21238" title="iPhone" label="iPhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="21239" end="21249" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q9479" start="21255" end="21259" title="iPod" label="iPod"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872571" start="21260" end="21281" title="portable media player" label="portable media player"/>
<link wikidata="Q62609" start="21284" end="21299" title="Canon PowerShot" label="Canon PowerShot"/>
<link wikidata="Q62927" start="21300" end="21314" title="digital camera" label="digital camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q19610114" start="21317" end="21332" title="Nintendo Switch" label="Nintendo Switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079" start="21345" end="21348" title="Wii" label="Wii"/>
<link wikidata="Q203597" start="21372" end="21375" title="Nintendo 3DS" label="3DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q941818" start="21376" end="21397" title="handheld game console" label="handheld game console"/>
<link wikidata="Q682144" start="21404" end="21410" title="TomTom" label="TomTom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486497" start="21424" end="21442" title="GPS navigation device" label="navigation systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q230899" start="21490" end="21511" title="Manchester University" label="Manchester University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576855" start="21528" end="21537" title="SpiNNaker" label="SpiNNaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q492038" start="21576" end="21587" title="human brain" label="human brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q245" start="21617" end="21629" title="Raspberry Pi" label="Raspberry Pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q812912" start="21631" end="21642" title="BeagleBoard" label="BeagleBoard"/>
<link wikidata="Q812912" start="21644" end="21654" title="BeagleBone" label="BeagleBone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350360" start="21656" end="21666" title="PandaBoard" label="PandaBoard"/>
<link wikidata="Q944780" start="21678" end="21699" title="single-board computer" label="single-board computer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21882" end="21900" title="#Armv8-A" label="section on Armv8-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819366" start="22536" end="22544" title="ARM Cortex-A" label="Cortex-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q15122690" start="22654" end="22662" title="ARM Cortex-R" label="Cortex-R"/>
<link wikidata="Q296760" start="22757" end="22765" title="ARM Cortex-M" label="Cortex-M"/>
<link wikidata="Q296760" start="22909" end="22911" title="ARM Cortex-M0" label="M0"/>
<link wikidata="Q296760" start="22912" end="22915" title="ARM Cortex-M0+" label="M0+"/>
<link wikidata="Q296760" start="22916" end="22918" title="ARM Cortex-M1" label="M1"/>
<link wikidata="Q16920669" start="23414" end="23436" title="fast interrupt request" label="fast interrupt request"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017100" start="24451" end="24497" title="Popek and Goldberg virtualization requirements" label="Popek and Goldberg virtualization requirements"/>
<link wikidata="Q175869" start="25219" end="25228" title="microcode" label="microcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="25252" end="25257" title="8-bit computing" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q255528" start="25258" end="25262" title="MOS Technology 6502" label="6502"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663274" start="25426" end="25449" title="Load–store architecture" label="Load–store architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413745" start="25468" end="25493" title="data structure alignment" label="unaligned memory accesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q513932" start="25720" end="25729" title="linearizability" label="atomicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q180944" start="25753" end="25766" title="register file" label="register file"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490641" start="25895" end="25905" title="instruction pipelining" label="pipelining"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="25932" end="25944" title="code density" label="code density"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25957" end="25978" title="#Thumb" label="Thumb instruction set"/>
<link wikidata="Q916240" start="26161" end="26175" title="Motorola 68020" label="Motorola 68020"/>
<link wikidata="Q679552" start="26323" end="26339" title="branch predictor" label="branch predictor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322850" start="26388" end="26402" title="Condition Code Register" label="condition code"/>
<link wikidata="Q808850" start="26432" end="26446" title="barrel shifter" label="barrel shifter"/>
<link wikidata="Q367183" start="26570" end="26585" title="addressing mode" label="addressing mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554324" start="26592" end="26605" title="link register" label="link register"/>
<link wikidata="Q220764" start="26680" end="26689" title="interrupt" label="interrupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595963" start="28256" end="28269" title="stack pointer" label="stack pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554324" start="28308" end="28321" title="link register" label="link register"/>
<link wikidata="Q814194" start="28360" end="28375" title="program counter" label="program counter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956394" start="29182" end="29193" title="predication (computer architecture)" label="predication"/>
<link wikidata="Q817862" start="29708" end="29727" title="conditional (programming)" label="codice_1 statements"/>
<link wikidata="Q230848" start="29985" end="30004" title="Euclidean algorithm" label="Euclidean algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q131752" start="30023" end="30046" title="greatest common divisor" label="greatest common divisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="30055" end="30077" title="C (programming language)" label="C programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="30475" end="30487" title="instruction set architecture" label="instructions"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="30805" end="30822" title="assembly language" label="assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="31693" end="31708" title="instruction set" label="instruction set"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="31891" end="31892" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q814194" start="32225" end="32227" title="program counter" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q814194" start="32279" end="32281" title="program counter" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490641" start="32621" end="32629" title="instruction pipelining" label="pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q376953" start="32850" end="32855" title="adder (electronics)" label="adder"/>
<link wikidata="Q679552" start="32875" end="32892" title="branch prediction" label="branch prediction"/>
<link wikidata="Q518020" start="33441" end="33444" title="memory management unit" label="MMU"/>
<link wikidata="Q545306" start="34428" end="34432" title="JTAG" label="JTAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q545306" start="35582" end="35586" title="JTAG" label="JTAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q173142" start="35957" end="35982" title="digital signal processing" label="digital signal processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q106370" start="36233" end="36257" title="digital signal processor" label="digital signal processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327576" start="36313" end="36332" title="multiply–accumulate operation" label="multiply–accumulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q913725" start="36334" end="36360" title="saturation arithmetic" label="saturated add and subtract"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449888" start="36366" end="36385" title="count leading zeros" label="count leading zeros"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37589" end="37593" title="#Advanced SIMD (Neon)" label="Neon"/>
<link wikidata="Q137496" start="37677" end="37690" title="Java bytecode" label="Java bytecode"/>
<link wikidata="Q106610690" start="38275" end="38301" title="compressed instruction set" label="compressed instruction set"/>
<link wikidata="Q53238" start="39509" end="39516" title="Hitachi" label="Hitachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205020" start="39517" end="39523" title="SuperH" label="SuperH"/>
<link wikidata="Q188642" start="39626" end="39642" title="Game Boy Advance" label="Game Boy Advance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="40056" end="40075" title="instruction decoder" label="instruction decoder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205020" start="40280" end="40286" title="SuperH" label="SuperH"/>
<link wikidata="Q296760" start="42437" end="42445" title="ARM Cortex-M" label="Cortex-M"/>
<link wikidata="Q110546" start="42998" end="43013" title="just-in-time compilation" label="JIT compilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="43104" end="43108" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370" start="43110" end="43112" title="C Sharp (programming language)" label="C#"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="43114" end="43118" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="43124" end="43130" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q110546" start="43143" end="43156" title="Just-in-time compilation" label="JIT compilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q733507" start="44023" end="44042" title="floating-point unit" label="floating-point unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307173" start="44185" end="44201" title="single-precision floating-point format" label="single-precision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243369" start="44206" end="44237" title="double-precision floating-point format" label="double-precision floating-point"/>
<link wikidata="Q828287" start="44281" end="44349" title="IEEE 754" label="ANSI/IEEE Std 754-1985 Standard for Binary Floating-Point Arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q339387" start="44809" end="44842" title="single instruction, multiple data" label="single instruction, multiple data"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45010" end="45014" title="#Advanced SIMD (Neon)" label="Neon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45394" end="45397" title="Floating Point Accelerator" label="FPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q904336" start="45404" end="45410" title="MMX (instruction set)" label="iwMMXt"/>
<link wikidata="Q766483" start="45575" end="45581" title="opcode" label="opcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421900" start="45622" end="45640" title="extended precision" label="extended precision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061159" start="46364" end="46371" title="Tegra" label="Tegra 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994657" start="46420" end="46471" title="half-precision floating-point format" label="IEEE754-2008 half-precision (16-bit) floating point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327576" start="46738" end="46763" title="fused multiply–add" label="fused multiply-accumulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715973" start="47058" end="47064" title="Debian" label="Debian"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="47065" end="47070" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q381" start="47095" end="47101" title="Ubuntu" label="Ubuntu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027" start="47106" end="47116" title="Linux Mint" label="Linux Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296355" start="47527" end="47534" title="128-bit computing" label="128-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="47802" end="47805" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676210" start="47806" end="47825" title="adaptive Multi-Rate audio codec" label="adaptive multi-rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070094" start="48538" end="48554" title="subnormal number" label="subnormal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q178940" start="48585" end="48588" title="GNU Compiler Collection" label="GCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208994" start="49002" end="49010" title="Mbed TLS" label="Mbed TLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q303569" start="50602" end="50616" title="attack surface" label="attack surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q192532" start="50647" end="50650" title="digital rights management" label="DRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797194" start="50973" end="50985" title="threat model" label="threat model"/>
<link wikidata="Q128896" start="51128" end="51131" title="AMD" label="AMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q48743222" start="51192" end="51219" title="AMD Platform Security Processor" label="Secure Processor Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q294956" start="51232" end="51235" title="AMD Accelerated Processing Unit" label="APU"/>
<link wikidata="Q14628801" start="51474" end="51486" title="Samsung Knox" label="Samsung Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q96398020" start="52273" end="52286" title="PSA Certified" label="PSA Certified"/>
<link wikidata="Q911952" start="52365" end="52391" title="NX bit" label="no-execute page protection"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53138" end="53145" title="#Armv8-R" label="Armv8-R"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994657" start="53577" end="53606" title="half-precision floating-point format" label="half-precision floating-point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142183" start="54627" end="54637" title="user space" label="user-space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077480" start="54926" end="54936" title="hypervisor" label="hypervisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q14887104" start="55116" end="55124" title="Apple A7" label="Apple A7"/>
<link wikidata="Q14850354" start="55128" end="55137" title="iPhone 5S" label="iPhone 5S"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781558" start="55140" end="55152" title="AppliedMicro" label="AppliedMicro"/>
<link wikidata="Q190411" start="55163" end="55167" title="FPGA" label="FPGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q610398" start="55218" end="55221" title="system on a chip" label="SoC"/>
<link wikidata="Q20718" start="55227" end="55234" title="Samsung Electronics" label="Samsung"/>
<link wikidata="Q17859761" start="55266" end="55279" title="Samsung Galaxy Note 4" label="Galaxy Note 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902093" start="55354" end="55364" title="ARM big.LITTLE" label="big.LITTLE"/>
<link wikidata="Q190746" start="55556" end="55559" title="Advanced Encryption Standard" label="AES"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414952" start="55561" end="55566" title="SHA-1" label="SHA-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968605" start="55567" end="55574" title="SHA-256" label="SHA-256"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450398" start="55579" end="55602" title="finite field arithmetic" label="finite field arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q105393815" start="55975" end="55989" title="ARM Cortex-A34" label="ARM Cortex-A34"/>
<link wikidata="Q19606482" start="56021" end="56035" title="ARM Cortex-A72" label="ARM Cortex-A72"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156050" start="56460" end="56480" title="Compartmentalization (engineering)" label="compartmentalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q296782" start="57104" end="57107" title="Arm Holdings" label="Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q296782" start="57430" end="57433" title="Arm Holdings" label="Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q114197457" start="57455" end="57464" title="ARM DevSummit" label="DevSummit"/>
<link wikidata="Q379523" start="57719" end="57723" title="ACPI" label="ACPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="57879" end="57886" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="57888" end="57893" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q11407" start="57895" end="57901" title="VMware" label="VMware"/>
<link wikidata="Q34264" start="57907" end="57910" title="Berkeley Software Distribution" label="BSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q16960371" start="58020" end="58030" title="device tree" label="devicetree"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="58134" end="58139" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q34264" start="58158" end="58161" title="Berkeley Software Distribution" label="BSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q96398020" start="58208" end="58221" title="PSA Certified" label="PSA Certified"/>
<link wikidata="Q251212" start="58370" end="58388" title="Internet of things" label="Internet of things"/>
<link wikidata="Q15526028" start="58499" end="58528" title="trusted execution environment" label="trusted execution environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q296782" start="58590" end="58593" title="Arm Holdings" label="Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q114197457" start="58616" end="58623" title="ARM DevSummit" label="TechCon"/>
<link wikidata="Q96398020" start="59190" end="59203" title="PSA Certified" label="PSA Certified"/>
<link wikidata="Q251212" start="59928" end="59939" title="Internet of Things" label="IoT product"/>
<link wikidata="Q41357" start="60120" end="60136" title="Acorn Archimedes" label="Acorn Archimedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q281222" start="60206" end="60209" title="ARX (operating system)" label="ARX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202514" start="60237" end="60244" title="RISC OS" label="RISC OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="60373" end="60377" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q4047860" start="60390" end="60397" title="RISC iX" label="RISC iX"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433109" start="60431" end="60438" title="MIPS RISC/os" label="RISC/os"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139923" start="60594" end="60602" title="embedded operating system" label="embedded"/>
<link wikidata="Q213666" start="60607" end="60633" title="real-time operating system" label="real-time operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q885978" start="60649" end="60651" title="A2 (operating system)" label="A2"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="60654" end="60661" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603924" start="60664" end="60674" title="ChibiOS/RT" label="ChibiOS/RT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204670" start="60677" end="60681" title="Deos" label="Deos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155485" start="60684" end="60689" title="DRYOS" label="DRYOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q285237" start="60692" end="60696" title="eCos" label="eCos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446242" start="60699" end="60704" title="embOS" label="embOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q34236" start="60707" end="60714" title="FreeBSD" label="FreeBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186761" start="60717" end="60725" title="FreeRTOS" label="FreeRTOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152988" start="60728" end="60737" title="Integrity (operating system)" label="INTEGRITY"/>
<link wikidata="Q14579" start="60740" end="60745" title="Linux kernel" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839097" start="60748" end="60782" title="Micro-Controller Operating Systems" label="Micro-Controller Operating Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144173" start="60785" end="60789" title="Mbed" label="Mbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q770573" start="60792" end="60799" title="MINIX 3" label="MINIX 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q6717408" start="60802" end="60805" title="MQX" label="MQX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144225" start="60808" end="60820" title="Nucleus RTOS" label="Nucleus PLUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070560" start="60823" end="60828" title="NuttX" label="NuttX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797819" start="60831" end="60835" title="L4 microkernel family" label="OKL4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341066" start="60838" end="60863" title="Operating System Embedded" label="Operating System Embedded"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008085" start="60872" end="60876" title="OS-9" label="OS-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q725779" start="60888" end="60894" title="Plan 9 from Bell Labs" label="Plan 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570329" start="60897" end="60903" title="PikeOS" label="PikeOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q676052" start="60906" end="60909" title="QNX" label="QNX"/>
<link wikidata="Q16292393" start="60912" end="60916" title="RIOT (operating system)" label="RIOT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1600588" start="60919" end="60924" title="RTEMS" label="RTEMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277909" start="60927" end="60939" title="RTXC Quadros" label="RTXC Quadros"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797161" start="60952" end="60959" title="ThreadX" label="ThreadX"/>
<link wikidata="Q609306" start="60962" end="60969" title="TizenRT" label="TizenRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7667807" start="60972" end="60980" title="T-Kernel" label="T-Kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q757165" start="60983" end="60990" title="VxWorks" label="VxWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q488244" start="60993" end="61017" title="Windows CE" label="Windows Embedded Compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314632" start="61020" end="61039" title="Windows 10 IoT Core" label="Windows 10 IoT Core"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909895" start="61042" end="61048" title="Zephyr (operating system)" label="Zephyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="61347" end="61354" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q79531" start="61357" end="61365" title="ChromeOS" label="ChromeOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q99615161" start="61368" end="61374" title="Mobian" label="Mobian"/>
<link wikidata="Q81229" start="61377" end="61385" title="Sailfish OS" label="Sailfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q42851482" start="61388" end="61400" title="postmarketOS" label="postmarketOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q609306" start="61403" end="61408" title="Tizen" label="Tizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595413" start="61411" end="61423" title="Ubuntu Touch" label="Ubuntu Touch"/>
<link wikidata="Q305873" start="61426" end="61431" title="webOS" label="webOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q242157" start="61467" end="61471" title="Bada (operating system)" label="Bada"/>
<link wikidata="Q880016" start="61474" end="61487" title="BlackBerry OS" label="BlackBerry OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q879989" start="61488" end="61501" title="BlackBerry 10" label="BlackBerry 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q550303" start="61504" end="61514" title="Firefox OS" label="Firefox OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q241874" start="61517" end="61522" title="MeeGo" label="MeeGo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185591" start="61525" end="61534" title="Newton OS" label="Newton OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="61537" end="61540" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q483318" start="61558" end="61565" title="Symbian" label="Symbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q18845397" start="61568" end="61585" title="Windows 10 Mobile" label="Windows 10 Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q17424" start="61588" end="61598" title="Windows RT" label="Windows RT"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885200" start="61601" end="61614" title="Windows Phone" label="Windows Phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q21207" start="61617" end="61631" title="Windows Mobile" label="Windows Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q14656" start="61745" end="61754" title="Unix-like" label="Unix-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q34236" start="61786" end="61793" title="FreeBSD" label="FreeBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q34225" start="61796" end="61802" title="NetBSD" label="NetBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q34215" start="61805" end="61812" title="OpenBSD" label="OpenBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q237580" start="61815" end="61826" title="OpenSolaris" label="OpenSolaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="61837" end="61842" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715973" start="61870" end="61876" title="Debian" label="Debian"/>
<link wikidata="Q25025335" start="61880" end="61887" title="Armbian" label="Armbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q170378" start="61891" end="61897" title="Gentoo Linux" label="Gentoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q381" start="61901" end="61907" title="Ubuntu" label="Ubuntu"/>
<link wikidata="Q890474" start="61911" end="61926" title="Raspberry Pi OS" label="Raspberry Pi OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q58436" start="61950" end="61959" title="Slackware ARM" label="Slackware"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152988" start="62030" end="62039" title="Integrity (operating system)" label="INTEGRITY"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341066" start="62042" end="62045" title="Operating System Embedded" label="OSE"/>
<link wikidata="" start="62058" end="62062" title="L4 microkernel family#High assurance: seL4" label="seL4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186761" start="62074" end="62082" title="FreeRTOS" label="FreeRTOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q676052" start="62085" end="62088" title="QNX" label="QNX"/>
<link wikidata="Q757165" start="62091" end="62098" title="VxWorks" label="VxWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909895" start="62101" end="62107" title="Zephyr (operating system)" label="Zephyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="62151" end="62158" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q17305518" start="62179" end="62195" title="Android Lollipop" label="Android Lollipop"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="62215" end="62218" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426339" start="62239" end="62244" title="iOS 7" label="iOS 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q406283" start="62265" end="62274" title="Apple silicon" label="Apple SoC"/>
<link wikidata="Q30136207" start="62277" end="62283" title="iOS 11" label="iOS 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q64350339" start="62299" end="62305" title="iPadOS" label="iPadOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q123469520" start="62362" end="62376" title="HarmonyOS NEXT" label="HarmonyOS NEXT"/>
<link wikidata="Q99615161" start="62460" end="62466" title="Mobian" label="Mobian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42851482" start="62469" end="62481" title="PostmarketOS" label="PostmarketOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785310" start="62484" end="62498" title="Arch Linux ARM" label="Arch Linux ARM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285992" start="62501" end="62508" title="Manjaro" label="Manjaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q14579" start="62597" end="62609" title="Linux kernel" label="Linux kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q131669" start="62672" end="62690" title="Linux distribution" label="Linux distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715973" start="62705" end="62711" title="Debian" label="Debian"/>
<link wikidata="Q25025335" start="62715" end="62722" title="Armbian" label="Armbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033826" start="62726" end="62738" title="Alpine Linux" label="Alpine Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q381" start="62742" end="62748" title="Ubuntu" label="Ubuntu"/>
<link wikidata="Q48267" start="62752" end="62758" title="Fedora Linux" label="Fedora"/>
<link wikidata="Q16691" start="62762" end="62770" title="openSUSE" label="openSUSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759786" start="62774" end="62795" title="SUSE Linux Enterprise" label="SUSE Linux Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q215273" start="62799" end="62803" title="Red Hat Enterprise Linux" label="RHEL"/>
<link wikidata="Q890474" start="62807" end="62822" title="Raspberry Pi OS" label="Raspberry Pi OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q34236" start="62881" end="62888" title="FreeBSD" label="FreeBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q34215" start="62905" end="62912" title="OpenBSD" label="OpenBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q34225" start="62935" end="62941" title="NetBSD" label="NetBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="62980" end="62987" title="Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q18168774" start="62990" end="63000" title="Windows 10" label="Windows 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q182933" start="63019" end="63022" title="x86" label="x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q107269746" start="63096" end="63106" title="Windows 11" label="Windows 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q135288" start="63217" end="63232" title="Microsoft Store" label="Microsoft Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="63275" end="63280" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q96583789" start="63350" end="63363" title="macOS Big Sur" label="macOS Big Sur"/>
<link wikidata="Q272629" start="63392" end="63398" title="x86-64" label="x86-64"/>
<link wikidata="Q188558" start="63593" end="63597" title="Wine (software)" label="Wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q624699" start="63789" end="63793" title="QEMU" label="QEMU"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741217" start="63918" end="63923" title="Amber (processor)" label="Amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q295348" start="63973" end="63979" title="AMULET (processor)" label="AMULET"/>
<link wikidata="Q406283" start="64039" end="64052" title="Apple silicon" label="Apple silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653845" start="64055" end="64078" title="ARM Accredited Engineer" label="ARM Accredited Engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902093" start="64105" end="64119" title="ARM big.LITTLE" label="ARM big.LITTLE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902093" start="64173" end="64180" title="DynamIQ" label="DynamIQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653875" start="64183" end="64192" title="ARMulator" label="ARMulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348555" start="64226" end="64254" title="Comparison of ARM processors" label="Comparison of ARM processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q47036859" start="64257" end="64290" title="Meltdown (security vulnerability)" label="Meltdown (security vulnerability)"/>
<link wikidata="Q189376" start="64293" end="64325" title="Reduced instruction set computer" label="Reduced instruction set computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17637401" start="64335" end="64341" title="RISC-V" label="RISC-V"/>
<link wikidata="Q47037422" start="64344" end="64376" title="Spectre (security vulnerability)" label="Spectre (security vulnerability)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884761" start="64379" end="64386" title="Unicore" label="Unicore"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="60559" wikidata="Q254858" url="?curid=60559" title="Emily Davison">
<text>Emily Wilding Davison (11 October 1872 – 8 June 1913) was an English suffragette who fought for votes for women in Britain in the early twentieth century. A member of the Women&#x27;s Social and Political Union (WSPU) and a militant fighter for her cause, she was arrested on nine occasions, went on hunger strike seven times and was force-fed on forty-nine occasions. She died after being hit by King George V&#x27;s horse Anmer at the 1913 Derby when she walked onto the track during the race.
Davison grew up in a middle-class family, and studied at Royal Holloway College, London, and St Hugh&#x27;s College, Oxford, before taking jobs as a teacher and governess. She joined the WSPU in November 1906 and became an officer of the organisation and a chief steward during marches. She soon became known in the organisation for her militant action; her tactics included breaking windows, throwing stones, setting fire to postboxes, planting bombs and, on three occasions, hiding overnight in the Palace of Westminster—including on the night of the 1911 census. Her funeral on 14 June 1913 was organised by the WSPU. A procession of 5,000 suffragettes and their supporters accompanied her coffin and 50,000 people lined the route through London; her coffin was then taken by train to the family plot in Morpeth, Northumberland.

Davison was a staunch feminist and passionate Christian, and considered that socialism was a moral and political force for good. Much of her life has been interpreted through the manner of her death. She gave no prior explanation for what she planned to do at the Derby and the uncertainty of her motives and intentions has affected how she has been judged by history. Several theories have been put forward, including accident, suicide or an attempt to pin a suffragette flag to the king&#x27;s horse.

==Biography==
===Early life and education===

Emily Wilding Davison was born at Roxburgh House, Greenwich, in south-east London on 11 October 1872. Her parents were Charles Davison, a retired merchant, and Margaret &quot;&quot; Caisley, both of Morpeth, Northumberland. At the time of his marriage to Margaret in 1868, Charles was 45 and Margaret was 19. Emily was the third of four children born to the couple; her younger sister died of diphtheria in 1880 at the age of six. The marriage to Margaret was Charles&#x27;s second; his first marriage produced nine children before the death of his wife in 1866.
The family moved to Sawbridgeworth, Hertfordshire, while Davison was still a baby; until the age of 11 she was educated at home. When her parents moved the family back to London she went to a day school, then spent a year studying in Dunkirk, France. When she was 13 she attended Kensington High School and later won a bursary to Royal Holloway College in 1891 to study literature. Her father died in early 1893 and she was forced to end her studies because her mother could not afford the fees of £20 a term.
On leaving Holloway, Davison became a live-in governess, and continued studying in the evenings. She saved enough money to enrol at St Hugh&#x27;s College, Oxford, for one term to sit her finals; she achieved first-class honours in English, but could not graduate because degrees from Oxford were closed to women. She worked briefly at a church school in Edgbaston between 1895 and 1896, but found it difficult and moved to Seabury, a private school in Worthing, where she was more settled; she left the town in 1898 and became a private tutor and governess to a family in Northamptonshire. In 1902 she began reading for a degree at the University of London; she graduated with third-class honours in 1908.

===Activism===

Davison joined the Women&#x27;s Social and Political Union (WSPU) in November 1906. Formed in 1903 by Emmeline Pankhurst, the WSPU brought together those who thought that militant, confrontational tactics were needed to achieve their ultimate goal of women&#x27;s suffrage. Davison joined in the WSPU&#x27;s campaigning and became an officer of the organisation and a chief steward during marches. In 1908 or 1909 she left her job teaching and dedicated herself full-time to the union. She began taking increasingly confrontational actions, which prompted Sylvia Pankhurst—the daughter of Emmeline and a full-time member of the WSPU—to describe her as &quot;one of the most daring and reckless of the militants&quot;. In March 1909 she was arrested for the first time; she had been part of a deputation of 21 women who marched from Caxton Hall to see the prime minister, H. H. Asquith, the march ended in a fracas with police and she was arrested for &quot;assaulting the police in the execution of their duty&quot;. She was sentenced to a month in prison. After her release she wrote to &quot;Votes for Women&quot;, the WSPU&#x27;s newspaper, saying that &quot;Through my humble work in this noblest of all causes I have come into a fullness of joy and an interest in living which I never before experienced&quot;.

In July 1909 Davison was arrested with fellow suffragettes Mary Leigh and Alice Paul for interrupting a public meeting from which women were barred, held by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, David Lloyd George; she was sentenced to two months for obstruction. She went on hunger strike and was released after five and a half days, during which time she lost ; she stated that she &quot;felt very weak&quot; as a result. She was arrested again in September the same year for throwing stones to break windows at a political meeting; the assembly, which was to protest at the 1909 budget, was only open to men. She was sent to Strangeways prison for two months. She again went on hunger strike and was released after two and a half days. She subsequently wrote to &quot;The Manchester Guardian&quot; to justify her action of throwing stones as one &quot;which was meant as a warning to the general public of the personal risk they run in future if they go to Cabinet Ministers&#x27; meetings anywhere&quot;. She went on to write that this was justified because of the &quot;unconstitutional action of Cabinet Ministers in addressing &#x27;public meetings&#x27; from which a large section of the public is excluded&quot;.
Davison was arrested again in early October 1909, while preparing to throw a stone at the cabinet minister Sir Walter Runciman; she acted in the mistaken belief the car in which he travelled contained Lloyd George. A suffragette colleague—Constance Lytton—threw hers first, before the police managed to intervene. Davison was charged with attempted assault, but released; Lytton was imprisoned for a month. Davison used her court appearances to give speeches; excerpts and quotes from these were published in the newspapers. Two weeks later she threw stones at Runciman at a political meeting in Radcliffe, Greater Manchester; she was arrested and sentenced to a week&#x27;s hard labour. She again went on hunger strike, but the government had authorised the use of force-feeding on prisoners. The historian Gay Gullickson describes the tactic as &quot;extremely painful, psychologically harrowing, and raised the possibility of dying in jail from medical error or official misjudgment&quot;. Davison said that the experience &quot;will haunt me with its horror all my life, and is almost indescribable. ... The torture was barbaric&quot;. Following the first episode of forced feeding, and to prevent a repeat of the experience, Davison barricaded herself in her cell using her bed and a stool and refused to allow the prison authorities to enter. They broke one of the window panes to the cell and turned a fire hose on her for 15 minutes, while attempting to force the door open. By the time the door was opened, the cell was six inches deep in water. She was taken to the prison hospital where she was warmed with hot water bottles. She was force-fed shortly afterwards and released after eight days. Davison&#x27;s treatment prompted the Labour Party MP Keir Hardie to ask a question in the House of Commons about the &quot;assault committed on a woman prisoner in Strangeways&quot;; Davison sued the prison authorities for the use of the hose and, in January 1910, she was awarded 40 shillings in damages.
In April 1910 Davison decided to gain entry to the floor of the House of Commons to ask Asquith about the vote for women. She entered the Palace of Westminster with other members of the public and made her way into the heating system, where she hid overnight. On a trip from her hiding place to find water, she was arrested by a policeman, but not prosecuted. The same month she became an employee of the WSPU and began to write for &quot;Votes for Women&quot;.
A bipartisan group of MPs formed a Conciliation Committee in early 1910 and proposed a Conciliation Bill that would have brought the vote to a million women, so long as they owned property. While the bill was being discussed, the WSPU put in a temporary truce on activity. The bill failed that November when Asquith&#x27;s Liberal government reneged on a promise to allow parliamentary time to debate the bill. A WSPU delegation of around 300 women tried to present him with a petition, but were prevented from doing so by an aggressive police response; the suffragettes, who called the day Black Friday, complained of assault, much of which was sexual in nature. Davison was not one of the 122 people arrested, but was incensed by the treatment of the delegation; the following day she broke several windows in the Crown Office in parliament. She was arrested and sentenced to a month in prison. She went on hunger strike again and was force-fed for eight days before being released.
On the night of the 1911 census, 2 April, Davison hid in a cupboard in St Mary Undercroft, the chapel of the Palace of Westminster. She remained hidden overnight to avoid being entered onto the census; the attempt was part of a wider suffragette action to avoid being listed by the state. She was found by a cleaner, who reported her presence; Davison was arrested but not charged. The Clerk of Works at the House of Commons completed a census form to include Davison in the returns. She was included in the census twice, as her landlady also included her as being present at her lodgings. Davison had continually written letters to the press to put forward the WSPU position in a non-violent manner—she had 12 published in &quot;The Manchester Guardian&quot; between 1909 and 1911—and she undertook a campaign between 1911 and 1913 during which she wrote nearly 200 letters to over 50 newspapers. Several of her letters were published, including about 26 in &quot;The Sunday Times&quot; between September 1910 and 1912.

Davison developed the new tactic of setting fire to postboxes in December 1911. She was arrested for arson on the postbox outside parliament and admitted to setting fire to two others. Sentenced to six months in Holloway Prison, she did not go on hunger strike at first, but the authorities required that she be force-fed between 29 February and 7 March 1912 because they considered her health and appetite to be in decline. In June she and other suffragette inmates barricaded themselves in their cells and went on hunger strike; the authorities broke down the cell doors and force-fed the strikers. Following the force-feeding, Davison decided on what she described as a &quot;desperate protest ... made to put a stop to the hideous torture, which was now our lot&quot; and jumped from one of the interior balconies of the prison. She later wrote:
... as soon as I got out I climbed on to the railing and threw myself out to the wire-netting, a distance of between 20 and 30 feet. The idea in my mind was &quot;one big tragedy may save many others&quot;. I realised that my best means of carrying out my purpose was the iron staircase. When a good moment came, quite deliberately I walked upstairs and threw myself from the top, as I meant, on to the iron staircase. If I had been successful I should undoubtedly have been killed, as it was a clear drop of 30 to 40 feet. But I caught on the edge of the netting. I then threw myself forward on my head with all my might.
She cracked two vertebrae and badly injured her head. Shortly afterwards, and despite her injuries, she was again force-fed before being released ten days early. She wrote to &quot;The Pall Mall Gazette&quot; to explain why she &quot;attempted to commit suicide&quot;:
I did it deliberately and with all my power, because I felt that by nothing but the sacrifice of human life would the nation be brought to realise the horrible torture our women face! If I had succeeded I am sure that forcible feeding could not in all conscience have been resorted to again.
As a result of her action Davison suffered discomfort for the rest of her life. Her arson of postboxes was not authorised by the WSPU leadership and this, together with her other actions, led to her falling out of favour with the organisation; Sylvia Pankhurst later wrote that the WSPU leadership wanted &quot;to discourage ... [Davison] in such tendencies ... She was condemned and ostracized as a self-willed person who persisted in acting upon her own initiative without waiting for official instructions.&quot; A statement Davison wrote on her release from prison for &quot;The Suffragette&quot;—the second official newspaper of the WSPU—was published by the union after her death.
In November 1912 Davison was arrested for a final time, for attacking a Baptist minister with a horsewhip or dogwhip, while on a stationary train in Aberdeen railway station; she had mistaken the man for Lloyd George. She was sentenced to ten days&#x27; imprisonment and released early following a four-day hunger strike. It was the seventh time she had been on hunger strike, and the forty-ninth time she had been force-fed.

===Fatal injury at the Derby===

On 4 June 1913 Davison obtained two flags bearing the suffragette colours of purple, white and green from the WSPU offices; she then travelled by train to Epsom, Surrey, to attend the Derby. She positioned herself in the infield at Tattenham Corner, the final bend before the home straight. At this point in the race, with some of the horses having passed her, she ducked under the guard rail and ran onto the course; she may have held in her hands one of the suffragette flags. She reached up to the reins of Anmer—King George V&#x27;s horse, ridden by Herbert Jones—and was hit by the animal, which would have been travelling at around per hour, four seconds after stepping onto the course. Anmer fell in the collision and partly rolled over his jockey, who had his foot momentarily caught in the stirrup. Davison was knocked to the ground unconscious; some reports say she was kicked in the head by Anmer, but the surgeon who operated on Davison stated that &quot;I could find no trace of her having been kicked by a horse&quot;. The event was captured by three newsreel cameras. The result of the race was not deemed to be void.

Bystanders rushed onto the track and attempted to aid Davison and Jones until both were taken to the nearby Epsom Cottage Hospital. Davison was operated on two days later, but she never regained consciousness; while in hospital she was sent hate mail. She died on 8 June, aged 40, from a fracture at the base of her skull. Found in Davison&#x27;s effects were the two suffragette flags, the return stub of her railway ticket to London, her race card, a ticket to a suffragette dance later that day and a diary with appointments for the following week. The King and Queen Mary were present at the race and made enquiries about the health of both Jones and Davison. The King later recorded in his diary that it was &quot;a most regrettable and scandalous proceeding&quot;; in her journal the Queen described Davison as a &quot;horrid woman&quot;. Jones suffered a concussion and other injuries; he spent the evening of 4 June in London, before returning home the following day. He could recall little of the event: &quot;She seemed to clutch at my horse, and I felt it strike her.&quot; He recovered sufficiently to race Anmer at Ascot Racecourse two weeks later.
The inquest into Davison&#x27;s death took place at Epsom on 10 June; Jones was not well enough to attend. Davison&#x27;s half-brother, Captain Henry Davison, gave evidence about his sister, saying that she was &quot;a woman of very strong reasoning faculties, and passionately devoted to the women&#x27;s movement&quot;. The coroner decided that, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, Davison had not committed suicide. The coroner also decided that, although she had waited until she could see the horses, &quot;from the evidence it was clear that the woman did not make for His Majesty&#x27;s horse in particular&quot;. The verdict of the court was:
that Miss Emily Wilding Davison died of fracture of the base of the skull, caused by being accidentally knocked down by a horse through wilfully rushing on to the racecourse on Epsom Downs during the progress of the race for the Derby; death was due to misadventure.

Davison&#x27;s purpose in attending the Derby and walking onto the course is unclear. She did not discuss her plans with anyone or leave a note. Several theories have been suggested, including that she intended to cross the track, believing that all horses had passed; that she wanted to pull down the King&#x27;s horse; that she was trying to attach one of the WSPU flags to a horse; or that she intended to throw herself in front of one of the horses. The historian Elizabeth Crawford considers that &quot;subsequent explanations of ... [Davison&#x27;s] action have created a tangle of fictions, false deductions, hearsay, conjecture, misrepresentation and theory&quot;.
In 2013 a Channel 4 documentary used forensic examiners who digitised the original nitrate film from the three cameras present. The film was digitally cleaned and examined. Their examination suggests that Davison intended to throw a suffragette flag around the neck of a horse or attach it to the horse&#x27;s bridle. A flag was gathered from the course; this was put up for auction and, as at 2021, it hangs in the Houses of Parliament. Michael Tanner, the horse-racing historian and author of a history of the 1913 Derby, doubts the authenticity of the item. Sotheby&#x27;s, the auction house that sold it, describe it as a sash that was &quot;reputed&quot; to have been worn by Davison. The seller stated that her father, Richard Pittway Burton, was the Clerk of the Course at Epsom; Tanner&#x27;s search of records shows Burton was listed as a dock labourer two weeks prior to the Derby. The official Clerk of the Course on the day of the Derby was Henry Mayson Dorling. When the police listed Davison&#x27;s possessions, they itemised the two flags provided by the WSPU, both folded up and pinned to the inside of her jacket. They measured 44.5 by 27 inches (113 × 69 cm); the sash displayed at the Houses of Parliament measures 82 by 12 inches (210 × 30 cm).
Tanner considers that Davison&#x27;s choice of the King&#x27;s horse was &quot;pure happenstance&quot;, as her position on the corner would have left her with a limited view. Examination of the newsreels by the forensic team employed by the Channel 4 documentary determined that Davison was closer to the start of the bend than had been previously assumed, and would have had a better view of the oncoming horses.
The contemporary news media were largely unsympathetic to Davison, and many publications &quot;questioned her sanity and characterised her actions as suicidal&quot;. &quot;The Pall Mall Gazette&quot; said it had &quot;pity for the dementia which led an unfortunate woman to seek a grotesque and meaningless kind of &#x27;martyrdom, while &quot;The Daily Express&quot; described Davison as &quot;A well-known malignant suffragette,  ... [who] has a long record of convictions for complicity in suffragette outrages.&quot; The journalist for &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; observed that &quot;Deep in the hearts of every onlooker was a feeling of fierce resentment with the miserable woman&quot;; the unnamed writer in &quot;The Daily Mirror&quot; opined that &quot;It was quite evident that her condition was serious; otherwise many of the crowd would have fulfilled their evident desire to lynch her.&quot;
The WSPU were quick to describe her as a martyr, part of a campaign to identify her as such. &quot;The Suffragette&quot; newspaper marked Davison&#x27;s death by issuing a copy showing a female angel with raised arms standing in front of the guard rail of a racecourse. The paper&#x27;s editorial stated that &quot;Davison has proved that there are in the twentieth-century people who are willing to lay down their lives for an ideal&quot;. Religious phraseology was used in the issue to describe her act, including &quot;Greater love hath no man than this, that he lay down his life for his friends&quot;, which Gullickson reports as being repeated several times in subsequent discussions of the events. A year after the Derby, &quot;The Suffragette&quot; included &quot;The Price of Liberty&quot;, an essay by Davison. In it, she had written &quot;To lay down life for friends, that is glorious, selfless, inspiring! But to re-enact the tragedy of Calvary for generations yet unborn, that is the last consummate sacrifice of the Militant&quot;.

===Funeral===

On 14 June 1913 Davison&#x27;s body was transported from Epsom to London; her coffin was inscribed &quot;Fight on. God will give the victory.&quot; Five thousand women formed a procession, followed by hundreds of male supporters, that took the body between Victoria and Kings Cross stations; the procession stopped at St George&#x27;s, Bloomsbury for a brief service led by its vicar, Charles Baumgarten, and Claude Hinscliff, who were members of the Church League for Women&#x27;s Suffrage. The women marched in ranks wearing the suffragette colours of white and purple, which &quot;The Manchester Guardian&quot; described as having &quot;something of the deliberate brilliance of a military funeral&quot;; 50,000 people lined the route. The event, which was organised by Grace Roe, is described by June Purvis, Davison&#x27;s biographer, as &quot;the last of the great suffragette spectacles&quot;. Emmeline Pankhurst planned to be part of the procession, but she was arrested on the morning, ostensibly to be returned to prison under the &quot;Cat and Mouse&quot; Act (1913).
The coffin was taken by train to Newcastle upon Tyne with a suffragette guard of honour for the journey; crowds met the train at its scheduled stops. The coffin remained overnight at the city&#x27;s central station before being taken to Morpeth. A procession of about a hundred suffragettes accompanied the coffin from the station to the St. Mary the Virgin church; it was watched by thousands. Only a few of the suffragettes entered the churchyard, as the service and interment were private. Her gravestone bears the WSPU slogan &quot;Deeds not words&quot;.

==Approach and analysis==

Davison&#x27;s death marked a culmination and a turning point of the militant suffragette campaign. The First World War broke out the following year and, on 10 August 1914, the government released all women hunger strikers and declared an amnesty. Emmeline Pankhurst suspended WSPU operations on 13 August. Pankhurst subsequently assisted the government in the recruitment of women for war work. In 1918 Parliament passed the Representation of the People Act 1918. Among the changes was the granting of the vote to women over the age of 30 who could pass property qualifications. The legislation added 8.5 million women to the electoral roll; they constituted 43% of the electorate. In 1928 the Representation of the People (Equal Franchise) Act lowered the voting age for women to 21 to put them on equal terms with male voters.
Crawford sees the events at the 1913 Derby as a lens &quot;through which ... [Davison&#x27;s] whole life has been interpreted&quot;, and the uncertainty of her motives and intentions that day has affected how she has been judged by history. Carolyn Collette, a literary critic who has studied Davison&#x27;s writing, identifies the different motives ascribed to Davison, including &quot;uncontrolled impulses&quot; or a search for martyrdom for women&#x27;s suffrage. Collette also sees a more current trend among historians &quot;to accept what some of her close contemporaries believed: that Davison&#x27;s actions that day were deliberate&quot; and that she attempted to attach the suffragette colours to the King&#x27;s horse. Cicely Hale, a suffragette who worked at the WSPU and who knew Davison, described her as &quot;a fanatic&quot; who was prepared to die but did not mean to. Other observers, such as Purvis, and Ann Morley and Liz Stanley—Davison&#x27;s biographers—agree that Davison did not mean to die.
Davison was a staunch feminist and a passionate Christian whose outlook &quot;invoked both medieval history and faith in God as part of the armour of her militancy&quot;. Her love of English literature, which she had studied at Oxford, was shown in her identification with Geoffrey Chaucer&#x27;s &quot;The Knight&#x27;s Tale&quot;, including being nicknamed &quot;Faire Emelye&quot;. Much of Davison&#x27;s writing reflected the doctrine of the Christian faith and referred to martyrs, martyrdom and triumphant suffering; according to Collette, the use of Christian and medieval language and imagery &quot;directly reflects the politics and rhetoric of the militant suffrage movement&quot;. Purvis writes that Davison&#x27;s committed Anglicanism would have stopped her from committing suicide because it would have meant that she could not be buried in consecrated ground. Davison wrote in &quot;The Price of Liberty&quot; about the high cost of devotion to the cause:
In the New Testament, the Master reminded His followers that when the merchant had found the Pearl of Great Price, he sold all that he had in order to buy it. That is the parable of Militancy! It is that which the women warriors are doing to-day.&lt;br&gt;
Some are truer warriors than others, but the perfect Amazon is she who will sacrifice all even unto the last, to win the Pearl of Freedom for her sex.
Davison held a firm moral conviction that socialism was a moral and political force for good. She attended the annual May Day rallies in Hyde Park and, according to the historian Krista Cowman, &quot;directly linked her militant suffrage activities with socialism&quot;. Her London and Morpeth funeral processions contained a heavy socialist presence in appreciation of her support for the cause.

==Legacy==

In 1968 a one-act play written by Joice Worters, &quot;Emily&quot;, was staged in Northumberland, focusing on the use of violence against the women&#x27;s campaign. Davison is the subject of an opera, &quot;Emily&quot; (2013), by the British composer Tim Benjamin, and of &quot;Emily Davison&quot;, a song by the American rock singer Greg Kihn. Davison also appears as a supporting character in the 2015 film &quot;Suffragette&quot;, in which she is portrayed by Natalie Press. Her death and funeral form the climax of the film. In January 2018 the cantata &quot;Pearl of Freedom&quot;, telling the story of Davison&#x27;s suffragette struggles, was premiered. The music was by the composer Joanna Marsh; the librettist was David Pountney.

In 1990 the Labour MPs Tony Benn and Jeremy Corbyn placed a commemorative plaque inside the cupboard in which Davison had hidden eighty years earlier. In April 2013 a plaque was unveiled at Epsom racecourse to mark the centenary of her death. In January 2017 Royal Holloway announced that its new library would be named after her. The statue of Millicent Fawcett in Parliament Square, London, unveiled in April 2018, features Davison&#x27;s name and picture, along with those of 58 other women&#x27;s suffrage supporters, on the plinth of the statue. The Women&#x27;s Library, at the London School of Economics, holds several collections related to Davison. They include her personal papers and objects connected to her death. In June 2023 English Heritage unveiled a blue plaque at 43 Fairholme Road, Kensington, London where she lived when at Kensington High School in 1880s. A statue of Davison, by the artist Christine Charlesworth, was installed in the marketplace at Epsom in 2021, following a campaign by volunteers from the Emily Davison Memorial Project.

==See also==
* List of suffragists and suffragettes
* Timeline of women&#x27;s suffrage
* Women&#x27;s suffrage organisations

==Notes and references==
===Notes===
===References===
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Cited page numbers from the pdf version.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

* An exhibit on Emily Davison, London School of Economics.
* The original Pathé footage of Emily Davison running out of the crowds at the Derby
* BBC profile
* Archives of Emily Davison at the Women&#x27;s Library at the Library of the London School of Economics
* &quot;The Price of Liberty&quot; manuscript (1913) at Google Arts &amp; Culture</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q254858" start="0" end="21" title="Emily Davison" label="Emily Wilding Davison"/>
<link wikidata="Q322170" start="69" end="80" title="suffragette" label="suffragette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435868" start="96" end="111" title="Women&amp;#x27;s suffrage in the United Kingdom" label="votes for women"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967499" start="171" end="210" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Social and Political Union" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Social and Political Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q191355" start="300" end="313" title="hunger strike" label="hunger strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296926" start="334" end="343" title="force-fed" label="force-fed"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="397" end="410" title="King George V" label="King George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q55098900" start="437" end="447" title="1913 Epsom Derby" label="1913 Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202039" start="553" end="575" title="Royal Holloway College" label="Royal Holloway College"/>
<link wikidata="Q128497" start="589" end="619" title="St Hugh&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford" label="St Hugh&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q105320780" start="933" end="947" title="Suffragette bombing and arson campaign" label="planting bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="997" end="1018" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Palace of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q736785" start="1303" end="1326" title="Morpeth, Northumberland" label="Morpeth, Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q582677" start="1343" end="1384" title="Christian feminism" label="staunch feminist and passionate Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="1406" end="1415" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q736785" start="2078" end="2101" title="Morpeth, Northumberland" label="Morpeth, Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q134649" start="2272" end="2282" title="diphtheria" label="diphtheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q591900" start="2462" end="2476" title="Sawbridgeworth" label="Sawbridgeworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="2478" end="2491" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q45797" start="2676" end="2683" title="Dunkirk" label="Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391475" start="2722" end="2744" title="Kensington Preparatory School" label="Kensington High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000589" start="2761" end="2768" title="bursary" label="bursary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202039" start="2772" end="2794" title="Royal Holloway, University of London" label="Royal Holloway College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540278" start="2998" end="3007" title="governess" label="governess"/>
<link wikidata="Q128497" start="3084" end="3114" title="St Hugh&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford" label="St Hugh&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355298" start="3140" end="3146" title="Final examination" label="finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971470" start="3161" end="3180" title="first-class honours" label="first-class honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q867738" start="3290" end="3303" title="church school" label="church school"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047556" start="3307" end="3316" title="Edgbaston" label="Edgbaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q423208" start="3387" end="3401" title="private school" label="private school"/>
<link wikidata="Q671348" start="3405" end="3413" title="Worthing" label="Worthing"/>
<link wikidata="Q23115" start="3525" end="3541" title="Northamptonshire" label="Northamptonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q170027" start="3589" end="3609" title="University of London" label="University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971470" start="3630" end="3649" title="third-class honours" label="third-class honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967499" start="3695" end="3734" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Social and Political Union" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Social and Political Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q211519" start="3778" end="3796" title="Emmeline Pankhurst" label="Emmeline Pankhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q298213" start="4232" end="4248" title="Sylvia Pankhurst" label="Sylvia Pankhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055269" start="4508" end="4519" title="Caxton Hall" label="Caxton Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q166714" start="4547" end="4560" title="H. H. Asquith" label="H. H. Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780077" start="5052" end="5062" title="Mary Leigh" label="Mary Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q127328" start="5067" end="5077" title="Alice Paul" label="Alice Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="5154" end="5181" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="5183" end="5201" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5264" end="5277" title="Hunger strike#British and American suffragettes" label="hunger strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374979" start="5565" end="5576" title="People&amp;#x27;s Budget" label="1909 budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635233" start="5616" end="5634" title="Strangeways prison" label="Strangeways prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="5759" end="5782" title="The Manchester Guardian" label="The Manchester Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q112014" start="6300" end="6316" title="Cabinet of the United Kingdom" label="cabinet minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q333376" start="6317" end="6336" title="Walter Runciman, 1st Viscount Runciman of Doxford" label="Sir Walter Runciman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470046" start="6449" end="6465" title="Lady Constance Bulwer-Lytton" label="Constance Lytton"/>
<link wikidata="Q968937" start="6806" end="6835" title="Radcliffe, Greater Manchester" label="Radcliffe, Greater Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373376" start="6885" end="6896" title="hard labour" label="hard labour"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6976" end="6989" title="Force-feeding#United Kingdom" label="force-feeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="7953" end="7965" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q332460" start="7969" end="7980" title="Keir Hardie" label="Keir Hardie"/>
<link wikidata="Q736526" start="8200" end="8209" title="Shilling (British coin)" label="shillings"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="8360" end="8381" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Palace of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158701" start="8771" end="8788" title="Conciliation Bill" label="Conciliation Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="9007" end="9014" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920802" start="9275" end="9287" title="Black Friday (1910)" label="Black Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131866" start="9500" end="9512" title="Clerk of the Crown in Chancery" label="Crown Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q16900474" start="9740" end="9758" title="St Mary Undercroft" label="St Mary Undercroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q221986" start="10634" end="10650" title="The Sunday Times" label="The Sunday Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q381356" start="10903" end="10918" title="Holloway Prison" label="Holloway Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q180323" start="12180" end="12189" title="vertebrae" label="vertebrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628706" start="12345" end="12366" title="The Pall Mall Gazette" label="The Pall Mall Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q131996049" start="13304" end="13319" title="The Suffragette (newspaper)" label="The Suffragette"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="13484" end="13491" title="Baptist" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665551" start="13561" end="13585" title="Aberdeen railway station" label="Aberdeen railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q993164" start="14027" end="14032" title="Epsom" label="Epsom"/>
<link wikidata="Q55629" start="14056" end="14061" title="Epsom Derby" label="Derby"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14093" end="14100" title="Infield#Tracks" label="infield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620984" start="14148" end="14161" title="home straight" label="home straight"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14388" end="14401" title="King George V" label="King George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q5734740" start="14426" end="14439" title="Herbert Jones (jockey)" label="Herbert Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383989" start="15114" end="15136" title="Epsom Cottage Hospital" label="Epsom Cottage Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937676" start="15294" end="15327" title="basilar skull fracture" label="fracture at the base of her skull"/>
<link wikidata="Q76927" start="15571" end="15581" title="Mary of Teck" label="Queen Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q723336" start="16134" end="16150" title="Ascot Racecourse" label="Ascot Racecourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q25047808" start="17063" end="17092" title="Death by misadventure" label="death was due to misadventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="17778" end="17787" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q143874" start="17851" end="17863" title="nitrate film" label="nitrate film"/>
<link wikidata="Q148558" start="18078" end="18084" title="bridle" label="bridle"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="18184" end="18204" title="Houses of Parliament" label="Houses of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q654762" start="18329" end="18343" title="Sotheby&amp;#x27;s" label="Sotheby&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q610190" start="19791" end="19808" title="The Daily Express" label="The Daily Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="19993" end="20012" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q217623" start="20171" end="20187" title="The Daily Mirror" label="The Daily Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q985210" start="21675" end="21683" title="London Victoria station" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q219867" start="21688" end="21699" title="London King&amp;#x27;s Cross railway station" label="Kings Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588083" start="21736" end="21764" title="St George&amp;#x27;s, Bloomsbury" label="St George&amp;#x27;s, Bloomsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q55136982" start="21827" end="21843" title="Claude Hinscliff" label="Claude Hinscliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958269" start="21869" end="21908" title="Church League for Women&amp;#x27;s Suffrage" label="Church League for Women&amp;#x27;s Suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q66023593" start="22191" end="22200" title="Grace Roe" label="Grace Roe"/>
<link wikidata="Q20712316" start="22218" end="22229" title="June Purvis" label="June Purvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2941577" start="22459" end="22495" title="Prisoners (Temporary Discharge for Ill Health) Act 1913" label="&amp;quot;Cat and Mouse&amp;quot; Act (1913)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="22530" end="22549" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047417" start="22696" end="22711" title="Newcastle railway station" label="central station"/>
<link wikidata="Q17527477" start="22835" end="22854" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s, Highchurch" label="St. Mary the Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="23188" end="23203" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427309" start="23510" end="23547" title="Representation of the People Act 1918" label="Representation of the People Act 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314203" start="23779" end="23829" title="Representation of the People (Equal Franchise) Act 1928" label="Representation of the People (Equal Franchise) Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045326" start="24155" end="24171" title="Carolyn Collette" label="Carolyn Collette"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575997" start="24645" end="24656" title="Cicely Hale" label="Cicely Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q582677" start="24946" end="24989" title="Christian feminism" label="staunch feminist and a passionate Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683" start="25205" end="25221" title="Geoffrey Chaucer" label="Geoffrey Chaucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260441" start="25235" end="25257" title="The Knight&amp;#x27;s Tale" label="The Knight&amp;#x27;s Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749813" start="25787" end="25805" title="consecrated ground" label="consecrated ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="26353" end="26362" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26429" end="26444" title="International Workers&amp;#x27; Day#Origin" label="May Day rallies"/>
<link wikidata="Q23079" start="26803" end="26817" title="Northumberland" label="Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803165" start="26972" end="26984" title="Tim Benjamin (composer)" label="Tim Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605833" start="27055" end="27064" title="Greg Kihn" label="Greg Kihn"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021589" start="27136" end="27147" title="Suffragette (film)" label="Suffragette"/>
<link wikidata="Q273904" start="27184" end="27197" title="Natalie Press" label="Natalie Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q174873" start="27270" end="27277" title="cantata" label="cantata"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="27430" end="27440" title="librettist" label="librettist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176161" start="27445" end="27459" title="David Pountney" label="David Pountney"/>
<link wikidata="Q332412" start="27485" end="27494" title="Tony Benn" label="Tony Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q291169" start="27499" end="27512" title="Jeremy Corbyn" label="Jeremy Corbyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383997" start="27652" end="27668" title="Epsom Downs Racecourse" label="Epsom racecourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q52157841" start="27797" end="27824" title="statue of Millicent Fawcett" label="statue of Millicent Fawcett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368556" start="27828" end="27845" title="Parliament Square" label="Parliament Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014132" start="27991" end="27997" title="plinth" label="plinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030967" start="28017" end="28037" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Library" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q174570" start="28046" end="28072" title="London School of Economics" label="London School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q936287" start="28202" end="28218" title="English Heritage" label="English Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q885849" start="28230" end="28241" title="blue plaque" label="blue plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q288781" start="28264" end="28274" title="Kensington" label="Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q124476428" start="28375" end="28397" title="Christine Charlesworth" label="Christine Charlesworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641747" start="28542" end="28578" title="List of suffragists and suffragettes" label="List of suffragists and suffragettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647212" start="28581" end="28614" title="Timeline of women&amp;#x27;s suffrage" label="Timeline of women&amp;#x27;s suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28617" end="28652" title="List of suffragists and suffragettes#Major suffrage organizations" label="Women&amp;#x27;s suffrage organisations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030967" start="29082" end="29102" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Library" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q369089" start="29208" end="29233" title="Google Arts &amp;amp; Culture" label="Google Arts &amp;amp; Culture"/>
</links>
</doc>
