<doc id="59687" wikidata="Q234132" url="?curid=59687" title="Hillsborough disaster">
<text>The Hillsborough disaster was a fatal crowd crush at a football match at Hillsborough Stadium in Sheffield, South Yorkshire, England, on 15 April 1989. It occurred during an FA Cup semi-final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest in the two standing-only central pens within the Leppings Lane stand allocated to Liverpool supporters. Shortly before kick-off, police match commander David Duckenfield ordered exit gate C to be opened in an attempt to ease crowding, which led to an influx of supporters entering the pens. This resulted in overcrowding of those pens and the fatal crush; with a total of 97 fatalities and 766 injuries, the disaster is the deadliest in British sporting history. Ninety-four people died on the day; one more died in hospital days later, Tony Bland died in 1993, and in 2021, a 97th person died. Both Bland and the 97th victim had suffered irreversible brain damage on the day. The match was abandoned and restaged at Old Trafford in Manchester on 7 May 1989; Liverpool won and went on to win that season&#x27;s FA Cup.

In the following days and weeks, South Yorkshire Police (SYP) fed the press false stories suggesting that football hooliganism and drunkenness by Liverpool supporters had caused the disaster. Blaming Liverpool fans persisted even after the Taylor Report of 1990, which found that the main cause was a failure of crowd control by SYP. Following the Taylor Report, the Director of Public Prosecutions ruled there was no evidence to justify prosecution of any individuals or institutions. The disaster led to a number of safety improvements in the largest English football grounds, notably the elimination of fenced standing terraces in favour of all-seater stadiums in the top two tiers of English football.

The first coroner&#x27;s inquests into the Hillsborough disaster, completed in 1991, concluded with verdicts of &quot;accidental death&quot; in respect of all the deceased. Families disputed the findings, and fought to have the case re-opened. In 1997 Lord Justice Stuart-Smith concluded that there was no justification for a new inquiry. Private prosecutions brought by the Hillsborough Family Support Group against Duckenfield and his deputy Bernard Murray failed in 2000. In 2009 a Hillsborough Independent Panel was formed to review the evidence. Reporting in 2012, it confirmed Taylor&#x27;s 1990 criticisms and revealed details about the extent of police efforts to shift blame onto fans, the role of other emergency services and the error of the first coroner&#x27;s inquests. The panel&#x27;s report resulted in the previous findings of accidental death being quashed, and the creation of new coroner&#x27;s inquests. It also produced two criminal investigations led by police in 2012: Operation Resolve to look into the causes of the disaster, and by the Independent Police Complaints Commission (IPCC) to examine actions by police in the aftermath.

The second coroner&#x27;s inquests were held from 1 April 2014 to 26 April 2016. They ruled that the supporters were unlawfully killed owing to grossly negligent failures by police and ambulance services to fulfil their duty of care. The inquests also found that the design of the stadium contributed to the crush, and that supporters were not to blame for the dangerous conditions. Public anger over the actions of their force during the second inquests led to the suspension of the SYP chief constable, David Crompton, following the verdict. In June 2017, six people were charged with offences including manslaughter by gross negligence, misconduct in public office and perverting the course of justice for their actions during and after the disaster. The Crown Prosecution Service subsequently dropped all charges against one of the defendants.
==Before the disaster==
===Venue===
Hillsborough Stadium had been constructed in 1899 to house Sheffield Wednesday. It was selected by the Football Association (FA) as a neutral venue to host the FA Cup semi-final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest Football Clubs. Kick-off was scheduled for 3:00 pm on 15 April 1989, and fans were advised to take up positions 15 minutes beforehand.

At the time of the disaster most English football stadiums had high steel fencing between the spectators and the playing field in response to pitch invasions. Hooliganism had affected the sport for some years and was particularly virulent in England. From 1974, when these security standards were put in place, crushes occurred in several English stadiums.

A report by Eastwood &amp; Partners for a safety certificate for the stadium in 1978 concluded that although it failed to meet the recommendations of the &quot;Green Guide&quot;, a guide to safety at sports grounds, the consequences were minor. It emphasised the general situation at Hillsborough was satisfactory compared with most grounds. Sheffield Wednesday were later criticised for neglecting safety in the stadium, especially after an incident in the semi-final of the 1981 FA Cup. The Leppings Lane end of the ground did not hold a valid safety certificate at the time of the disaster; it had not been updated since 1979.

Risks associated with confining fans in pens were highlighted by the &quot;Committee of Inquiry into Crowd Safety at Sports Grounds&quot; (the Popplewell inquiry) after the Bradford City stadium fire in May 1985. It made recommendations on the safety of crowds penned within fences, including that &quot;all exit gates should be manned at all times ... and capable of being opened immediately from the inside by anyone in an emergency&quot;.

====Previous incidents====
Hillsborough hosted five FA Cup semi-finals in the 1980s. During the 1981 semi-final between Tottenham Hotspur and Wolverhampton Wanderers, a crush occurred at the Leppings Lane end of the ground after hundreds more spectators were permitted to enter the terrace than could safely be accommodated, resulting in 38 injuries, including broken arms, legs and ribs. Police believed there would have been a real chance of fatalities had swift action not been taken, and recommended that the club reduce its capacity. In a post-match briefing to discuss the incident, Sheffield Wednesday chairman Bert McGee remarked: &quot;Bollocks – no one would have been killed&quot;. The incident nonetheless prompted Sheffield Wednesday to alter the layout at the Leppings Lane end, dividing the terrace into three separate pens to restrict sideways movement. This particular change, and other later alterations to the stadium, invalidated the stadium&#x27;s safety certificate which was not renewed, and the stated capacity of the stadium was never changed. The terrace was divided into five pens when the club was promoted to the First Division in 1984, and a crush barrier near the access tunnel was removed in 1986 to improve the flow of fans entering and exiting the central enclosure.

After the crush in 1981, Hillsborough was not selected to host an FA Cup semi-final again until 1987. Significant overcrowding was observed at the ground during that year&#x27;s quarter-final between Sheffield Wednesday and Coventry City, and again during the semi-final between Coventry City and Leeds United. The Leeds fans were assigned the Leppings Lane end for the semi-final; one fan described disorganisation at the turnstiles and no steward or police direction inside the stadium, resulting in the crowd in one enclosure becoming so compressed that he was at times unable to raise and clap his hands. Other accounts told of fans having to be pulled to safety from above.

Liverpool and Nottingham Forest met in the semi-final at Hillsborough in 1988, and fans again reported crushing at the Leppings Lane end. Liverpool lodged a complaint before the match in 1989. One supporter wrote to the Football Association and the Minister for Sport: &quot;The whole area was packed solid to the point where it was impossible to move and where I, and others around me, felt considerable concern for personal safety.&quot;

=== South Yorkshire Police command changes ===
South Yorkshire Police (SYP) presence at the previous year&#x27;s FA Cup semi-final (also between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest and also at Hillsborough Stadium) had been overseen by Chief Superintendent Brian L. Mole. Mole had supervised numerous police deployments at the stadium in the past. In October 1988 a probationary PC in Mole&#x27;s F division, South Yorkshire was handcuffed, photographed, and stripped by fellow officers in a fake robbery, as a hazing prank. Four officers resigned and seven were disciplined over the incident. Chief Superintendent Mole himself was to be transferred to the Barnsley division for &quot;career development reasons&quot;. The transfer was to be done with immediate effect on 27 March 1989.

Meanwhile, Hillsborough was accepted as the FA Cup semi-final venue on 20 March 1989 by the Football Association. The first planning meeting for the semi-final took place on 22 March and was attended by newly promoted Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield, not by Mole. No known minutes exist of this meeting. Although Mole could have been assigned the semi-final match&#x27;s planning despite his transfer, that was not done. This left planning for the semi-final match to Duckenfield, who had never commanded a sell-out football match before, and who had &quot;very little, if any&quot; training or personal experience in how to do so.

==Disaster==
===Access to the stadium===
As is common practice at domestic football matches in England, opposing supporters were segregated in and around the stadium. Nottingham Forest were allocated the South Stand and Spion Kop, with a combined capacity of 29,800 spectators, reached by 60 turnstiles spaced along the south and east sides of the ground. Liverpool were allocated the North Stand and West Stand, with a combined capacity of 24,256 spectators, reached by 23 turnstiles from a narrow concourse off Leppings Lane. Ten turnstiles (numbered 1 to 10) provided access to 9,700 seats in the North Stand, six turnstiles (numbered 11 to 16) provided access to 4,456 seats in the upper tier of the West Stand, and a further seven turnstiles (lettered A to G) gave access to 10,100 standing places in the lower tier of the West Stand. Although a greater number of Liverpool supporters were expected to attend the match, Nottingham had been allocated the larger spectator area, to avoid the approach routes of rival fans crossing. As a result of the stadium layout and the segregation policy, the additional turnstiles that would normally have allowed access to the North Stand from the east were not being used, and the Liverpool fans were forced to converge on the single entrance at Leppings Lane. On the day of the match, radio and television broadcasters were advising anyone without a ticket not to attend. Rather than establishing crowd safety as their top priority, the clubs, local authorities and police viewed their roles and responsibilities through the &#x27;lens of hooliganism&#x27;.

===Build-up===
Three chartered trains had transported Liverpool supporters to Sheffield for the 1988 semi-final, but only one such train was provided in 1989. The 350 passengers arrived at the ground at about 2:20 pm. Many of the supporters wished to enjoy the day and were in no hurry to enter the stadium too early. Some were delayed by roadworks while crossing the Pennines on the M62 motorway which resulted in minor traffic congestion. Between 2:30 pm and 2:40 pm, there was a build-up of supporters outside the turnstiles facing Leppings Lane, eager to enter the stadium before the game started. At 2:46 pm, the BBC&#x27;s football commentator John Motson had already noticed the uneven distribution of people in the Leppings Lane pens, and while rehearsing for the match off-air he had suggested a nearby cameraman look as well. &quot;There&#x27;s gaps, you know, in parts of the ground. Well, if you look at the Liverpool end, to the right of the goal, there&#x27;s hardly anybody &quot;on&quot; those steps... that&#x27;s it. Look down there.&quot;

A bottleneck developed outside the stadium, with more fans arriving than could be safely filtered through the turnstiles before the 3:00 pm kick-off. People presenting tickets at the wrong turnstiles, and those who had been refused entry, were blocked from leaving because of the crowd behind them and remained as an obstruction. Fans outside the ground could hear cheering as the teams came onto the pitch ten minutes before the start of the match, and as the match kicked off, but could not gain entrance. A police constable radioed control requesting that the game be delayed, as had happened in 1987, to ensure the safe passage of supporters into the ground, but the request to delay the kick-off by 20 minutes was declined.

By this time, an estimated 5,000 fans were trying to enter through the turnstiles. Amid increasing safety concerns, and to avoid fatalities outside the ground, the police opened a large exit gate (Gate C) that ordinarily permitted the free flow of supporters departing the stadium after a match. Two more gates (A and B) were subsequently opened to further relieve the pressure. After an initial rush, thousands of supporters entered the stadium &quot;steadily at a fast walk&quot;.
===Crush===
When the gates were opened, thousands of fans entered a narrow tunnel leading from the rear of the terrace into two overcrowded central pens (pens 3 and 4), creating pressure at the front. Hundreds of people were pressed against one another and the fencing by the weight of the crowd behind them. People entering were unaware of the problems at the front of the pens; police or stewards would normally stand at the entrance to the tunnel and, if the central pens reached capacity, they would direct people to the side pens, but that did not happen on this occasion, for reasons not fully explained.

The match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest started at 3:00 pm, as scheduled. Fans were still streaming into pens 3 and 4 from the rear entrance tunnel as the match began. For some time, problems at the front of the Liverpool central goal pens went largely unnoticed except by those inside the pens and a few police at that end of the pitch. Liverpool&#x27;s goalkeeper Bruce Grobbelaar later reported that fans behind him were pleading to him for help as the situation worsened. At first, the police made attempts to stop people from spilling out of the pens, some believing this to be a pitch invasion. At approximately 3:04 pm, a shot from Liverpool&#x27;s Peter Beardsley hit the crossbar; possibly connected to the excitement, a surge in pen 3 caused one of its metal to give way.

Police superintendent Roger Greenwood (the most senior SYP officer in command inside the ground on the day) realised the situation, and ran onto the field to gain the attention of referee Ray Lewis, who stopped the match at 3:05:30. At this point, people were climbing the fence at the front of the pens in an effort to escape the crush and get to the pitchside. A small gate in the fence had been forced open and some fans managed to escape via this route, while others continued to climb over the fencing. Some were pulled to safety by people at the front of the upper tier of the West Stand above the Leppings Lane terrace. The intensity of the crush broke more crush barriers on the terrace. Holes were made in the perimeter fencing by fans desperately attempting to rescue others.

The crowd in the Leppings Lane terrace spilled onto the pitch, where the many injured and traumatised fans who had climbed to safety congregated. The football players were ushered to their dressing rooms and informed that there would be a 30-minute postponement. The people still trapped in the pens were packed so tightly that many victims died of compressive asphyxia while standing. Meanwhile, on the pitch, police, stewards and members of the St John Ambulance service were overwhelmed. Many uninjured fans were assisting the injured; several attempted CPR and others tore down advertising hoardings to use as makeshift stretchers. SYP chief superintendent John Nesbit later briefed Michael Shersby MP, at a Police Federation meeting in October 1989, that allowing the fans to help with the rescue effort was a deliberate strategy &quot;otherwise they might have turned their frustration on the police.&quot;

====SYMAS response====
The agreed protocol for the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service (SYMAS) was that ambulances were to queue at the entrance to the gymnasium under the North Stand, termed the &quot;casualty reception point&quot;, or CRP. Any individuals within the stadium that were seriously injured were to be delivered expeditiously by police and paramedics to the CRP to receive medical attention. The system of ferrying injured any location within the stadium the CRP required a formal declaration to be made by those in charge for it to take effect. As this declaration was not immediately performed, there was confusion among those attempting to administer aid on the pitch. This indecision migrated to the first responders waiting in ambulances at the CRP, which quickly deteriorated into an ambulance car park. Some crews were hesitant to leave their vehicles, unsure of whether patients were coming to them, or vice versa. Others who did leave their vehicles were then faced with the obstacles inherent in placing distance between themselves and their equipment. As the Panel explained in their report:
A total of 42 ambulances arrived at the stadium. Two ambulances managed to make their way onto the pitch of their own accord, and a third entered the field at the direction of deputy chief ambulance officer Alan Hopkins, who felt its visibility might allay crowd concerns. The remaining 39 ambulances were collectively able to transport approximately 149 people to either Northern General Hospital, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, or Barnsley Hospital for treatment.

The adverse comments of two doctors regarding the emergency response appeared in the media. Their views were not &quot;a maverick view from a disaffected minority but the considered opinion of the majority of professionals present from the outset.&quot;

===Reactions===
Condolences flooded in from across the world, led by the Queen. Other messages came from Pope John Paul II, US President George H. W. Bush, and the chief executive of Juventus (fans of Liverpool and Juventus had been involved in the Heysel Stadium disaster) amongst many others.

Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and Home Secretary Douglas Hurd visited Hillsborough the day after the disaster and met survivors. Anfield stadium was opened on the Sunday to allow fans to pay tribute to the dead. Thousands of fans visited and the stadium filled with flowers, scarves and other tributes. In the following days more than 200,000 people visited the &quot;shrine&quot; inside the stadium. The following Sunday, a link of football scarves spanning the distance across Stanley Park from Goodison Park to Anfield was created, with the final scarf in position at 3:06 pm. Elsewhere on the same day, a silence – opened with an air-raid siren at three o&#x27;clock – was held in central Nottingham with the colours of Forest, Liverpool and Wednesday adorning Nottingham Council House.

At Liverpool Metropolitan Cathedral, a requiem mass attended by 3,000 people was held by the Catholic Archbishop of Liverpool, Derek Worlock. The first reading was read by Liverpool goalkeeper Bruce Grobbelaar. Liverpool players Ronnie Whelan, Steve Nicol, and former manager Joe Fagan carried the communion bread and wine.

The FA chief executive Graham Kelly, who had attended the match, said the FA would conduct an inquiry into what had happened. Speaking after the disaster, Kelly backed all-seater stadiums, saying &quot;We must move fans away from the ritual of standing on terraces&quot;. Standing on terraces and the use of perimeter fencing around the pitch, the use of CCTV, the timing of football matches and policing of sporting events were factors for a subsequent inquiry to consider.

UEFA President Jacques Georges caused controversy by describing the Liverpool supporters as &quot;beasts&quot;, wrongly suggesting that hooliganism was the cause of the disaster, which had occurred less than four years after the Heysel Stadium disaster. His remarks led to Liverpool F.C. calling for his resignation, but he apologised on discovering hooliganism was not the cause.

At the 1989 FA Cup final between Liverpool and local rivals Everton, held just five weeks after the Hillsborough disaster, the players from both participating teams wore black armbands as a gesture of respect to the victims.

During the final match of the 1988–89 Football League season, contested on 26 May 1989 between Liverpool and second-place Arsenal, the Arsenal players presented flowers to fans in different parts of Anfield in memory of those who had died in the Hillsborough disaster.

===Disaster appeal fund===
A disaster appeal fund was set up with donations of £500,000 from the UK Government, £100,000 from Liverpool F.C. and £25,000 each from the cities of Liverpool, Sheffield, and Nottingham. The Liverpool F.C. donation was the amount the club would have received (as its share of the match income) had the semi-final gone ahead as planned. Within days, donations had passed £1 million, swelled by donations from individuals, schools and businesses. Other fundraising activities included a Factory Records benefit concert and several fundraising football matches. The two teams involved in the Bradford City stadium fire, Bradford City and Lincoln City, met for the first time since the 1985 disaster in a game that raised £25,000 for the Hillsborough fund. By the time the appeal closed in 1990, it had raised more than £12 million. Much of the money went to victims and relatives of those involved in the disaster and provided funds for a college course to improve the hospital phase of emergency care.

In May 1989, a charity version of the Gerry and the Pacemakers song &quot;Ferry Cross the Mersey&quot; was released in aid of those affected. The record was produced by Stock Aitken Waterman and featured Liverpool musicians Paul McCartney, Gerry Marsden (of the Pacemakers), Holly Johnson, and The Christians. It entered the UK Singles Chart at number 1 on 20 May, and remained at the top of the chart for three weeks. Despite having stronger ties to Liverpool F.C., Gerry and the Pacemakers&#x27; earlier hit &quot;You&#x27;ll Never Walk Alone&quot; was not used because it had recently been re-recorded for the Bradford City stadium fire appeal.

===Effect on survivors===
By the disaster&#x27;s 10th anniversary in 1999, at least three people who survived were known to have taken their own lives. Another survivor had spent eight years in psychiatric care. There were cases of alcoholism, drug abuse, and collapsed marriages involving people who had witnessed the events. The lingering effects of the disaster were seen as a cause, or contributory factor, in all of these.
==Victims==
In total, ninety-seven people died as a result of injuries incurred during the disaster. Ninety-four people, aged from 10 to 67 years old, died on the day, either at the stadium, in the ambulances, or shortly after arrival at hospital. A total of 766 people were reported to have suffered injuries, among whom 300 were hospitalised. The less seriously injured survivors who did not live in the Sheffield area were advised to seek treatment for their injuries at hospitals nearer to their homes. On 19 April, the death toll reached 95 when 14-year-old Lee Nicol died in hospital after being taken off life support. The death toll reached 96 in March 1993, when artificial feeding and hydration were withdrawn from 22-year-old Tony Bland after nearly four years, during which time he had remained in a persistent vegetative state showing no sign of improvement.
This followed a legal challenge in the High Court by his family to have his treatment withdrawn, a landmark challenge which succeeded in November 1992.

Andrew Devine, aged 22 at the time of the disaster, suffered similar injuries to Tony Bland and was also diagnosed as being in a persistent vegetative state. In March 1997 – just before the eighth anniversary of the disaster – it was reported he had emerged from the condition and was able to communicate using a touch-sensitive pad, and he had been showing signs of awareness of his surroundings for up to three years before. Devine died in 2021, as a consequence of the injuries sustained at Hillsborough, with his death being ruled by the coroner to have been an unlawful killing, raising the total death toll of the disaster to 97.

Two sisters, three pairs of brothers, and a father and son were among those who died, as were two men about to become fathers for the first time: 25-year-old Steven Brown of Wrexham and 30-year-old Peter Thompson of Widnes. Jon-Paul Gilhooley, aged 10, was the youngest person to die. His cousin, Steven Gerrard, then aged 8, went on to become Liverpool F.C.&#x27;s captain. Gerrard has said the disaster inspired him to lead the team he supported as a boy and become a top professional football player. The oldest person to die at Hillsborough was 67-year-old Gerard Baron, an older brother of former Liverpool player Kevin Baron.

Stephen Whittle is considered by some to be another victim of Hillsborough, as due to work commitments, he had sold his ticket to a friend (whom he and his family chose not to identify), who then died in the disaster; the resulting feeling of survivor guilt is believed to be the main reason he took his own life at age 50 in February 2011.

The majority of victims who died were from Liverpool (38) and Greater Merseyside (20). A further 20 were from counties adjacent to Merseyside. An additional three victims came from Sheffield with two more living in counties adjacent to South Yorkshire. The remaining 14 victims lived in other parts of England.

===Ages===
Of those who died, 79 were aged under 30, 38 of whom were under 20, and all but three of the victims were aged under 50.

==1989–1991 coroner&#x27;s hearing==
Inquests into the deaths were opened and adjourned immediately after the disaster.

Resumed on 19 November 1990, they proved to be controversial. South Yorkshire coroner Stefan Popper limited the main inquests to events up to 3:15 pm on the day of the disaster – nine minutes after the match was halted and the crowd spilt onto the pitch. Popper said this was because the victims were either dead, or brain dead, by 3:15 pm. The decision angered the families, many of whom felt the inquests were unable to consider the response of the police and other emergency services after that time. The inquests returned verdicts of accidental death on 26 March 1991, much to the dismay of the bereaved families, who had been hoping for a verdict of unlawful killing or an open verdict, and for manslaughter charges to be brought against the officers who had been present at the disaster. Trevor Hicks, whose two daughters had been killed, described the verdicts as &#x27;lawful&#x27; but &#x27;immoral&#x27;.

Popper&#x27;s decision regarding the cut-off time was subsequently endorsed by the Divisional Court who considered it to have been justified in the light of the medical evidence available to him. Relatives later failed to have the inquests reopened to allow more scrutiny of police actions and closer examination of the circumstances of individual cases.

Families believed that Popper was &#x27;too close&#x27; to the police. After the verdicts Barry Devonside, who had lost his son, witnessed Popper hosting a celebration party with police officers.

One of the individual cases where the circumstances of death were not fully resolved was that of Kevin Williams, the fifteen-year-old son of Anne Williams. Anne Williams, who died in 2013, rejected the coroner&#x27;s decision that the Hillsborough victims, including her son, had died before 3:15 pm, citing witness statements that described him showing signs of life at 4:00 pm. She unsuccessfully appealed to the European Court of Human Rights in 2009. The Hillsborough Independent Panel considered the available evidence and stated that &quot;the initial pathologist&#x27;s opinion appeared definitive, but further authoritative opinions raised significant doubts about the accuracy of that initial opinion.&quot;

Popper had excluded the witness evidence of two qualified Merseyside doctors (Drs Ashton and Phillips) who had been inside the stadium on the day and who had been critical of the chaotic emergency response. The views of both were dismissed by the Taylor report. They both gave evidence at the 2016 Warrington inquests. Phillips stated that the exclusion of their evidence was a &#x27;serious error of judgement&#x27; by Popper. He said that he &#x27;could not fathom why he didn&#x27;t call us, other than he specifically did not want to hear our evidence, in which case the first inquests were coloured and flawed before they even started&#x27;.

Ashton and Phillips were not the only doctors present at the disaster not to be called to give evidence to the Popper inquests. The only one called was the Sheffield Wednesday club doctor.

==Taylor Inquiry==

After the disaster, Lord Justice Taylor was appointed to conduct an inquiry into the events. The Taylor Inquiry sat for a total of 31 days (between 15 May and 29 June 1989) and published two reports: an interim report (1 August 1989) which laid out the events of the day and immediate conclusions; and a final report (19 January 1990) which outlined general recommendations on football ground safety. The two publications together became known as the Taylor Report.

Taylor concluded that policing on the day &quot;broke down&quot; and &quot;the main reason for the disaster was the failure of police control&quot;. Attention was focused on the decision to open the secondary gates; moreover, the kick-off should have been delayed, as had been done at other venues and matches.

Sheffield Wednesday was also criticised for the inadequate number of turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end and the poor quality of the crush barriers on the terraces, &quot;respects in which failure by the Club contributed to this disaster&quot;.

===Police control===
Taylor found there was &quot;no provision&quot; for controlling the entry of spectators into the turnstile area. He dismissed the claim by senior police officers that they had no reason to anticipate problems, since congestion had occurred at both the 1987 and 1988 semi-finals. He said that &quot;the Operational Order and police tactics on the day failed to provide for controlling a concentrated arrival of large numbers should that occur in a short period. That it might so occur was foreseeable&quot;. The failure by the police to give the order to direct fans to empty areas of the stadium, was described by Taylor as &quot;a blunder of the first magnitude&quot;.

There was no means for calculating when individual enclosures had reached capacity. A police officer ordinarily made a visual assessment before guiding fans to other pens. However, on the day of the disaster, &quot;by 2:52 pm when gate C was opened, pens 3 and 4 were over-full [...] to allow any more into those pens was likely to cause injuries; to allow in a large stream was courting disaster&quot;.

The report noted that the official capacity of the central pens was 2,200, that the Health and Safety Executive found this should have been reduced to 1,693 due to crush barriers and perimeter gates, but actually an estimated 3,000 people were in the pens around 3:00 pm. The report said &quot;When spectators first appeared on the track, the immediate assumption in the control room was that a pitch invasion was threatened. This was unlikely at the beginning of a match. It became still less likely when those on the track made no move towards the pitch. ... [T]here was no effective leadership either from control or on the pitch to harness and organise rescue efforts. No orders were given for officers to enter the tunnel and relieve pressure&quot;. Further that: &quot;The anxiety to protect the sanctity of the pitch has caused insufficient attention to be paid to the risk of a crush due to overcrowding&quot;.

Regarding the decision to allocate Liverpool spectators to the West and North Ends, Taylor stated &quot;I do not consider choice of ends was causative of the disaster. Had it been reversed, the disaster could well have occurred in a similar manner but to Nottingham supporters&quot;.

Lord Taylor noted with regard to the performance of the senior police officers in command that &quot;...neither their handling of the problems on the day nor their account of it in evidence showed the qualities of leadership to be expected of their rank&quot;.

===Behaviour of fans===
Lord Taylor concluded that the behaviour of Liverpool fans, including accusations of drunkenness, were secondary factors, and said that most fans were: &quot;not drunk, nor even the worse for drink&quot;. He concluded that this formed an exacerbating factor but that police, seeking to rationalise their loss of control, overestimated the element of drunkenness in the crowd.

The report dismissed the theory, put forward by South Yorkshire Police, that fans attempting to gain entry without tickets or with forged tickets were contributing factors.

===Emergency response===
Taylor concluded that in responding to the disaster there had been no fault on the part of the emergency services (St John Ambulance, South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service and fire brigade).

===Police evasion===
Taylor concluded his criticism of South Yorkshire Police by describing senior officers in command as &quot;defensive and evasive witnesses&quot; who refused to accept any responsibility for error: &quot;In all some 65 police officers gave oral evidence at the Inquiry. Sadly I must report that for the most part the quality of their evidence was in inverse proportion to their rank&quot;. Further stating: &quot;South Yorkshire Police were not prepared to concede they were in any respect at fault in what occurred. ... [T]he police case was to blame the fans for being late and drunk, and to blame the Club for failing to monitor the pens. ... Such an unrealistic approach gives cause for anxiety as to whether lessons have been learnt&quot;.

===Effect on stadiums in Britain===
The Taylor Report had a deep impact on safety standards for stadiums in the UK. Perimeter and lateral fencing was removed and many top stadiums were converted to all-seated. Purpose-built stadiums for Premier League and most Football League teams since the report are all-seater. Chester City F.C.&#x27;s Deva Stadium was the first English football stadium to fulfil the safety recommendations of the Taylor Report, with Millwall F.C.&#x27;s The Den being the first new stadium to be built that fulfilled the recommendations.

In July 1992, the government announced a relaxation of the regulation for the lower two English leagues (known now as League One and League Two). The Football Spectators Act does not cover Scotland, but the Scottish Premier League chose to make all-seater stadiums a requirement of league membership. In England and Wales all-seating is a requirement of the Premier League and of the Football League for clubs who have been present in the Championship for more than three seasons.
Several campaigns have attempted to get the government to relax the regulation and allow standing areas to return to Premiership and Championship grounds.

==Stuart-Smith scrutiny==
In May 1997, when the Labour Party came into office, Home Secretary Jack Straw ordered an investigation. It was performed by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. The appointment of Stuart-Smith was not without controversy. At a meeting in Liverpool with relatives of those involved in Hillsborough in October 1997, he flippantly remarked &quot;Have you got a few of your people or are they like the Liverpool fans, turn up at the last minute?&quot; He later apologised for his remark, saying it was not intended to offend. The terms of reference of his inquiry were limited to &quot;new evidence&quot;, that is &quot;...evidence which was not available or was not presented to the previous inquiries, courts or authorities.&quot; Therefore, evidence such as witness statements which had been altered were classed as inadmissible.
When he presented his report in February 1998, he concluded that there was insufficient evidence for a new inquiry into the disaster. In paragraph 5 of his summary, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith said:
Importantly, Stuart-Smith&#x27;s report supported the coroner&#x27;s assertion that evidence after 3:15 pm was inadmissible as &quot;that by 3:15 pm the principal cause of death, that is, the crushing, was over.&quot; This was controversial as the subsequent response of the police and emergency services would not be scrutinised. Announcing the report to the House of Commons, Home Secretary Jack Straw backed Stuart-Smith&#x27;s findings and said that &quot;I do not believe that a further inquiry could or would uncover significant new evidence or provide any relief for the distress of those who have been bereaved.&quot; However, the determination by Stuart-Smith was heavily criticised by the Justice Minister, Lord Falconer, who stated &quot;I am absolutely sure that Sir Murray Stuart-Smith came completely to the wrong conclusion&quot;. Falconer added: &quot;It made the families in the Hillsborough disaster feel after one establishment cover-up, here was another.&quot;

==Hillsborough Independent Panel==
The Hillsborough Independent Panel was instituted in 2009 by the British government to investigate the Hillsborough disaster, to oversee the disclosure of documents about the disaster and its aftermath and to produce a report. On 12 September 2012, it published its report and simultaneously launched a website containing 450,000 pages of material collated from 85 organisations and individuals over two years.

===History===
In the years after the disaster, the Hillsborough Family Support Group had campaigned for the release of all relevant documents into the public domain. After the disaster&#x27;s 20th anniversary in April 2009, supported by the Culture Secretary, Andy Burnham, and Minister of State for Justice, Maria Eagle, the government asked the Home Office and Department of Culture, Media and Sport to investigate the best way for this information to be made public. In April 2009, the Home Secretary Jacqui Smith announced she had requested secret files concerning the disaster be made public.

In December 2009, Home Secretary Alan Johnson said the Hillsborough Independent Panel&#x27;s remit would be to oversee &quot;full public disclosure of relevant government and local information within the limited constraints set out in the disclosure protocol&quot; and &quot;consult with the Hillsborough families to ensure that the views of those most affected by the disaster are taken into account&quot;. An archive of all relevant documentation would be created and a report produced within two years explaining the work of the panel and its conclusions.

The panel was chaired by James Jones, the Bishop of Liverpool. Other members were:
* Raju Bhatt, human rights lawyer
* Christine Gifford, expert in the field of access to information
* Katy Jones, investigative journalist
* Bill Kirkup, Associate chief medical officer in the Department of Health
* Paul Leighton, former deputy chief constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland
* Professor Phil Scraton, expert in criminology
* Peter Sissons, broadcaster (media)
* Sarah Tyacke, former chief executive of the National Archives

===Findings===
On 12 September 2012, the Hillsborough Independent Panel concluded that no Liverpool fans were responsible in any way for the disaster, and that its main cause was a &quot;lack of police control&quot;. Crowd safety was &quot;compromised at every level&quot; and overcrowding issues had been recorded two years earlier. The panel concluded that &quot;up to 41&quot; of the 96 who had died up to that date, might have survived had the emergency services&#x27; reactions and co-ordination been better. The number is based on post-mortem examinations which found some victims may have had heart, lung or blood circulation function for some time after being removed from the crush. The report stated that placing fans who were &quot;merely unconscious&quot; on their backs rather than in the recovery position, would have resulted in their deaths due to airway obstruction. Their report was in 395 pages and delivered 153 key findings.

The findings concluded that 164 witness statements had been altered. Of those statements, 116 were amended to remove or change negative comments about South Yorkshire Police. South Yorkshire Police had performed blood alcohol tests on the victims, some of them children, and ran computer checks on the national police database in an attempt to &quot;impugn their reputation&quot;. The report concluded that the then Conservative MP for Sheffield Hallam, Irvine Patnick, passed inaccurate and untrue information from the police to the press.

The panel noted that, despite being dismissed by the Taylor Report, the idea that alcohol contributed to the disaster proved remarkably durable. Documents disclosed confirm that repeated attempts were made to find supporting evidence for alcohol being a factor, and that available evidence was significantly misinterpreted. It noted &quot;The weight placed on alcohol in the face of objective evidence of a pattern of consumption modest for a leisure event was inappropriate. It has since fuelled persistent and unsustainable assertions about drunken fan behaviour&quot;.

The evidence it released online included altered police reports.

===Effects===
Subsequent apologies were released by Prime Minister David Cameron on behalf of the government, Ed Miliband on behalf of the opposition, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, South Yorkshire Police, and former editor of &quot;The Sun&quot;, Kelvin MacKenzie, who apologised for making false accusations under the headline &quot;The Truth&quot;. MacKenzie said he should have written a headline that read &quot;The Lies&quot;, although this apology was rejected by the Hillsborough Family Support Group and Liverpool fans, as it was seen to be &quot;shifting the blame once again.&quot;

After publication, the Hillsborough Family Support Group called for new inquests for the victims. They also called for prosecutions for unlawful killing, corporate manslaughter and perversion of the course of justice in respect of the actions of the police both in causing the disaster and covering up their actions; and in respect of Sheffield Wednesday F.C., Sheffield Council and the Football Association for their various responsibilities for providing, certifying and selecting the stadium for the fatal event.

Calls were made for the resignation of police officers involved in the cover-up, and for Sheffield Wednesday, the police and the Football Association to admit their blame. Calls were also made for Sir Dave Richards to resign as chairman of the Premier League and give up his knighthood as a result of his conduct at Sheffield Wednesday at the time of the disaster. The Home Secretary called for investigations into law-breaking and promised resources to investigate individual or systematic issues.

On 23 October 2012, Norman Bettison resigned with immediate effect as chief constable of West Yorkshire Police, after Maria Eagle MP on the floor of the House and protected by parliamentary privilege, accused him of boasting about concocting a story that all the Liverpool fans were drunk and police were afraid they were going to break down the gates and decided to open them. Bettison denied the claim, and other allegations about his conduct, saying:
Merseyside Police Authority confirmed that Bettison would receive an £83,000 pension, unless convicted of a criminal offence. Hillsborough families called for the payments to be frozen during the IPCC investigation. In the same 22 October House of Commons debate, Stephen Mosley MP alleged West Midlands police pressured witnesses – both police and civilians – to change their statements. Maria Eagle confirmed her understanding that WMP actions in this respect would be the subject of IPCC scrutiny.

==Second coroner&#x27;s hearing==
Following an application on 19 December 2012 by the Attorney General Dominic Grieve, the High Court quashed the verdicts in the original inquests and ordered fresh inquests to be held. Sir John Goldring was appointed as Assistant Coroner for South Yorkshire (East) and West Yorkshire (West) to conduct those inquests. The inquests hearings started on Monday 31 March 2014 at Warrington. Transcripts of the proceedings and evidence that was produced during the hearings were published at the Hillsborough Inquests official website. On 6 April 2016, the nine jurors were sent out to consider their verdicts. These were formally given to the inquests at 11:00 on 26 April 2016. The jury returned a verdict of unlawful killing in respect of all 96 victims (by majority verdict of 7–2). Upon receiving the April 2016 verdict, Hillsborough Family Support Group chair Margaret Aspinall, whose 18-year-old son James was killed in the disaster, said:
On the day after the verdicts were reached, the Home Secretary, Theresa May, made a statement to Parliament which included the verdicts of the jury to the fourteen questions they had been asked regarding the roles of South Yorkshire police, the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service, Sheffield Wednesday football club and Hillsborough stadium&#x27;s engineers and two specific questions specific relating to the time and cause of death for each of the dead. In addition to the &quot;unlawful killing&quot; verdict, the jury concluded that &quot;errors or omissions&quot; by police commanding officers, Sheffield Wednesday, the ambulance service and the design and certification of the stadium had all &quot;caused or contributed&quot; to the deaths, but that the behaviour of football supporters had not. In all but one case, the jury recorded the time of death as later than the 3:15 pm cut-off point adopted by the coroner at the original inquests.

Prime Minister David Cameron also responded to the April 2016 verdict by saying that it represented a &quot;long overdue&quot; but &quot;landmark moment in the quest for justice&quot;, adding &quot;All families and survivors now have official confirmation of what they always knew was the case, that the Liverpool fans were utterly blameless in the disaster that unfolded at Hillsborough.&quot; The Labour Party described the handling of the Hillsborough disaster as the &quot;greatest miscarriage of justice of our times&quot;, with Labour MPs Andy Burnham and Steve Rotheram calling for accountability and the prosecution of those responsible. Liberal Democrat MP John Pugh called for David Cameron to make a formal apology in the House of Commons to the families of those killed at Hillsborough and to the city of Liverpool as a whole.

Echoing his 2012 expression of regret former Home Secretary Jack Straw apologised to the families for the failures of his 1997 review of the disaster.

Kelvin MacKenzie, who wrote the now-infamous &quot;The Truth&quot; front page for the &quot;Sun&quot;, said that although he was &quot;duped&quot; into publishing his story, that his &quot;heart goes out&quot; to the families of those affected, saying that &quot;It&#x27;s quite clear today the fans had nothing to do with it&quot;. However, MacKenzie did not accept any personal responsibility for the story.

During the inquests, Maxwell Groome – a police constable at the time of the disaster – made allegations of a high-level &quot;conspiracy&quot; by Freemasons to shift blame for the disaster onto Superintendent Roger Marshall, also that junior officers were pressured into changing their statements after the disaster, and told not to write their accounts in their official police pocketbooks. Groome also claimed that match commander Duckenfield was a member of the &quot;highly influential&quot; Dole lodge in Sheffield (the same lodge as Brian Mole, his predecessor). Coroner Sir John Goldring warned the jury that there was &quot;not a shred of evidence&quot; that any Masonic meeting actually took place, or that those named were all Freemasons, advising the jury to cast aside &quot;gossip and hearsay&quot;. During the inquests, Duckenfield confirmed that he became a Freemason in 1975 and became Worshipful Master of his local lodge in 1990, a year after the disaster; following this revelation, Freemasons were forbidden to take part in the IPCC investigation and Operation Resolve as civilian investigators to prevent any perceived bias.

===Independent Police Complaints Commission investigation===
Following the inquests verdicts, South Yorkshire police announced it would refer the actions of its officers to the Independent Police Complaints Commission (IPCC). West Yorkshire Police announced it would refer its Chief Constable, Norman Bettison, to the IPCC in mid-September. Bettison had been one of a number of police officers who were accused by the Hillsborough Independent Panel of manipulating evidence. In early October, Bettison announced his retirement, becoming the first senior figure to step down since publication of the panel&#x27;s report.

The IPCC announced on 12 October 2012 that it would investigate the failure of the police to declare a major incident, failure to close the tunnel to the stands which led to overcrowded pens despite evidence it had been closed in such circumstances in the past; changes made to the statements of police officers; actions which misled Parliament and the media; shortcomings of previous investigations; and the role played by Norman Bettison.

By 22 October 2012, the names of at least 1,444 serving and former police officers had been referred to the IPCC investigation. In its announcement, the IPCC praised the tenacity of the Hillsborough families&#x27; campaign for truth and justice. On 16 October 2012, the Attorney General announced in Parliament he had applied to have the original inquests&#x27; verdicts quashed, arguing it proceeded on a false basis and evidence now to hand required this exceptional step.

On 12 July 2013, it was reported that the IPCC had found that in addition to the now 164 police statements known to have been altered, a further 55 police officers had changed their statements. Deborah Glass, deputy chair of the IPCC said, &quot;We know the people who have contacted us are the tip of the iceberg.&quot; That was after the IPCC&#x27;s Hillsborough Contact team had received 230 pieces of correspondence since October 2012.

The IPCC is also investigating the actions of West Midlands Police, who in 1989 had been tasked with investigating South Yorkshire Police&#x27;s conduct for both the original inquests and also the Taylor independent inquiry.

In April 2016, the Crown Prosecution Service announced that it would consider bringing charges against both individuals and corporate bodies once the criminal investigation by the Independent Police Complaints Commission – Operation Resolve – had been completed.

===&#x27;The patronising disposition of unaccountable power&#x27; report===

In April 2016, the then Home Secretary Theresa May commissioned the Right Reverend James Jones (Bishop of Liverpool from 1998 to 2013) to produce a report on the experiences of the Hillsborough families, in the hope that their pain and suffering would not be repeated and that their perspective would not be lost. After carrying out a thorough review, Jones published his report – titled &quot;The patronising disposition of unaccountable power: A report to ensure that the pain and suffering of the Hillsborough families is not repeated&quot; – on 1 November 2017. Having met the Hillsborough families in one-to-one meetings and group sessions whilst compiling his report, Jones was able to include numerous first-hand accounts of their encounters with private and public authorities.

The report identified 25 &#x27;points of learning&#x27;, of which the following drew particular attention:

*Charter for Families Bereaved through Public Tragedy – a series of commitments by public bodies to change, related to transparency and acting in the public interest
*Proper participation&#x27; of bereaved families at inquests – including publicly funded legal representation for bereaved families at inquests at which public bodies are legally represented, an end to public bodies spending limitless sums, and a change in the way that public bodies approach inquests
*A duty of candour for police officers – requiring them to cooperate fully with investigations into alleged criminal offences or misconduct, as undertaken by the Independent Police Complaints Commission or its successor body

In the report, James also called for the government to give &quot;full consideration&quot; to a proposed Public Authority Accountability Bill, known informally as &#x27;The Hillsborough Law&#x27;, which would include a legal duty of candour on public authorities and officials to be truthful and to proactively cooperate with official investigations and inquiries. The full text of the draft bill was provided as an appendix to his report.

Six years after the report was published, on 6 December 2023, the government issued its response and signed the Hillsborough Charter giving a commitment to transparency following a public tragedy. However, the proposal for a &#x27;Hillsborough Law&#x27; was rejected as it was considered by the government to be &quot;not necessary&quot;.

==Criminal and civil cases==

===Prosecutions===
In February 2000, a private prosecution was brought against Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield and another officer, Bernard Murray. The prosecution argued that the crush was &quot;foreseeable&quot; hence the defendants were &quot;grossly negligent&quot;. Prosecutor Alun Jones told the court that Duckenfield gave the order to open the gates so that hundreds of fans could be herded onto the already crowded terraces at the stadium. Jones stated that minutes after the disaster, Duckenfield &quot;deceitfully and dishonestly&quot; told senior FA officials that the supporters had forced the gate open. Duckenfield admitted that he had lied in certain statements regarding the causes of the disaster. The prosecution ended on 24 July 2000, when Murray was acquitted and the jury was unable to reach a verdict in the case of Duckenfield. On 26 July, the judge refused the prosecution&#x27;s application for a retrial of Duckenfield.

Police disciplinary charges were abandoned when Duckenfield retired on health grounds and, because Murray was unavailable, it was decided not to proceed with disciplinary charges against him. Duckenfield took medical retirement on a full police pension.

Home Secretary Theresa May announced on 18 December 2012 that a new police inquiry would be initiated to examine the possibility of charging agencies other than the police over the Hillsborough deaths. The inquiry was first headed by former Durham Chief Constable Jon Stoddart, and later by Assistant Commissioner Rob Beckley.

On 28 June 2017, it was announced that six people were to be charged with offences in relation to the disaster. Former Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, in charge of the match, faced 95 counts of manslaughter by gross negligence. He faced no charge in respect of the death of Tony Bland, who died four years after the disaster. Former Chief Inspector Sir Norman Bettinson faced four counts of misconduct in public office. Former Sheffield Wednesday F.C. Club Secretary Graham Mackrell faced a charge of breaching the Safety at Sports Ground Act 1975. Solicitor Peter Metcalf, former Chief Superintendent Donald Denton, and former Detective Chief Inspector Alan Foster were all charged with perverting the course of justice, for having altered 68 police officers&#x27; statements in order to &quot;mask the failings&quot; of the police force.

On 9 August 2017, all except Duckenfield appeared at Warrington Magistrates Court. Mackrell pleaded not guilty to the charge against him. No formal pleas were taken from the other four defendants. All five were bailed to appear at the Crown Court in September. Duckenfield was not required to appear as the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) needed to apply to the High Court to lift a court order before he could be prosecuted on the manslaughter charges. On 29 June 2018, a ruling was made that Duckenfield would be prosecuted on the manslaughter charges.

It was announced in December 2017 that a police officer and a farrier would not be prosecuted over allegations that they fabricated a story about a police horse being burned with cigarettes at Hillsborough. Although there was enough evidence to charge the farrier with perverting the course of justice, it was felt not to be in the public interest to charge him. There was insufficient evidence against the police officer to charge him with the offence.

On 21 August 2018, it was announced that all charges against Bettison were being dropped as the CPS felt that there was insufficient evidence to have a realistic chance of a conviction. The death of two witnesses and contradictions in the evidence of others were cited as part of the reason for the decision. Representatives of the 96 victims of the disaster stated that they would be asking for an independent review of the decision under the Right to Review Scheme.

At a trial preparation hearing at Preston Crown Court on 10 September 2018, Duckenfield pleaded not guilty to all 95 charges against him. Mackrell pleaded not guilty to the two charges against him. A provisional trial date was set for 14 January 2019, on which date the trial started at Preston Crown Court before Mr Justice Openshaw.

On 13 March 2019, it was reported that Duckenfield would not be called to give evidence in his defence. It was also reported that the jury would be directed to find Mackrell not guilty on the charge of contravening the stadium&#x27;s safety certificate due to a lack of evidence. On 3 April, the jury returned with a guilty verdict against Mackrell on a health and safety charge but was unable to reach a verdict on Duckenfield. It was announced on 25 June that Duckenfield would face a retrial, which was scheduled to start on 7 October at Preston Crown Court. On 28 November 2019, Duckenfield was found not guilty of gross negligence manslaughter.

On 26 May 2021, Denton, Foster and Metcalfe were all found not guilty of perverting the course of justice by altering 68 police officers&#x27; statements, when Mr Justice William Davis found that they had no case to answer. The reason given was that the public inquiry in 1990, to which the altered statements were submitted, was not a statutory inquiry, and therefore not a Court of Law. Consequently, a course of public justice could not have been perverted. The ruling also noted that the original statements had neither been destroyed, nor had they been ordered to be destroyed.

In response to the acquittals, Leader of the House of Commons Jacob Rees-Mogg called the lack of accountability over Hillsborough &quot;the greatest scandal of British policing of our lifetimes&quot;. Garston and Halewood MP Maria Eagle called for the law to be changed to &quot;prevent another catastrophic failure of justice&quot;.

===Psychiatric injury and other litigation===
Various negligence cases were brought against the police by spectators who had been at the ground but had not been in the pens, and by people who watched the incident unfolding on television (or heard about it on the radio). A case, &quot;Alcock v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police&quot; [1992] 1 A.C. 310, was eventually appealed to the Appellate Committee of the House of Lords and was an important milestone in the law of claims of secondary victims for negligently inflicted psychiatric injury. It was held that claimants who watched the disaster on television/listened on radio were not &#x27;&#x27; and their claims were rejected.

Another psychiatric injury claim was brought to the House of Lords, &quot;White v Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire Police&quot; [1999] 2 A.C. 455. It was brought by police officers on duty against the chief constable who was said to have been vicariously liable for the disaster. Their claims were dismissed and the Alcock decision was upheld. It affirmed the position of the courts once again towards claims of psychiatric injuries of secondary victims.

A third legal case which resulted from the Hillsborough disaster was &quot;Airedale N.H.S. Trust v Bland&quot; [1993] A.C. 789, a landmark House of Lords decision in English criminal law, that allowed the life-support machine of Tony Bland, a Hillsborough victim in a persistent vegetative state, to be switched off.

In April 2016, an action was launched in the High Court on behalf of victims&#x27; relatives against both SYP and the West Midlands Police force (who had investigated the actions of SYP) alleging misfeasance in public office, involving a concerted cover-up designed to shift blame away from the police. An agreement was reached to settle the case in April 2021, but reporting restrictions were put in place due to the pending trial of Denton, Foster and Metcalf. Following the finding that they did not have a case to answer, the restrictions were lifted.

===Proposed &quot;Hillsborough Law&quot;===
A &quot;Public Authority (Accountability) Bill&quot;, or a &quot;Hillsborough Law&quot;, has been proposed by bereaved families of various such disasters whereby public bodies and public servants (such as police) would have a &quot;duty of candour&quot;.

==Memorials==

===Permanent memorials===
Several memorials have been erected in memory of the victims of the Hillsborough disaster.
* Flames were added either side of the Liverpool F.C. crest in memory of the fans who lost their lives in the Hillsborough disaster.
* The Hillsborough memorial at Anfield (featuring the names of the 96 who lost their lives, and an eternal flame) was located next to the Shankly Gates before it was moved to the front of the redeveloped main stand in 2016. It was modified with a 97th name after Andrew Devine died in 2021.
* A memorial at Hillsborough stadium, unveiled on the tenth anniversary of the disaster on 15 April 1999, reads: &quot;In memory of the 96 men, women, and children who tragically died and the countless people whose lives were changed forever. FA Cup semi-final Liverpool v Nottingham Forest. 15 April 1989. &#x27;You&#x27;ll never walk alone.
* A memorial stone in the pavement on the south side of Liverpool&#x27;s Anglican cathedral.
* A memorial garden in Hillsborough Park with a &quot;You&#x27;ll never walk alone&quot; gateway.
* A headstone at the junction of Middlewood Road, Leppings Lane and Wadsley Lane, near the ground and by the Sheffield Supertram route.
* A Hillsborough Memorial Rose Garden in Port Sunlight, Wirral.

* A memorial rose garden on Sudley Estate in South Liverpool (also known as the APH). Each of the six rose beds has a centre piece of a white standard rosebush, surrounded by red rose bushes, named &#x27;Liverpool Remember&#x27;. There are brass memorial plaques on both sets of gates to the garden, and a sundial inscribed with the words: &quot;&quot;Time Marches On But We Will Always Remember&quot;.
* In the grounds of Crosby Library, to the memory of the 18 football fans from Sefton who lost their lives in the Hillsborough disaster. The memorial, sited in a raised rose bed containing the Liverpool Remembers red rose, is made of black granite. It is inscribed: &quot;In loving memory of the 96 football supporters who died at Hillsborough, Sheffield on 15 April 1989. Of those who lost their lives the following young men were from Sefton families.&quot;&quot; The memorial was unveiled on 4 October 1991 (two years before the death of Tony Bland) by the Mayor of Sefton, Councillor Syd Whitby. The project was carried out by the council after consultation with the Sefton Survivors Group.

* A seven-foot-high circular bronze memorial was unveiled in the Old Haymarket district of Liverpool in April 2013. This memorial is inscribed with the words: &quot;Hillsborough Disaster – we will remember them&quot;, and displays the names of the 96 victims who died.
* An eight-foot-high clock, dating from the 1780s, was installed at Liverpool Town Hall in April 2013, with the hands indicating 3:06 (the time at which the match was abandoned).

* A memorial plaque dedicated to the 96 at Goodison Park in Liverpool, home of local rivals Everton F.C.
*Hillsborough Oaks – 96 oak trees planted in Cross Hillocks Wood, next to the Knowsley Expressway, with a memorial unveiled on 20 September 2000.

===Memorial ceremonies===
The disaster has been acknowledged on 15 April every year by the community in Liverpool and football in general. An annual memorial ceremony is held at Anfield and at a church in Liverpool. The 10th and 20th anniversaries were marked by special services to remember the victims. Liverpool F.C. typically request that they are not scheduled to play on the anniversary of the disaster.

From 2007, an annual Hillsborough Memorial service was held at Spion Kop, KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. The ceremony was held on the Spion Kop Battlefield that gave its name to the Kop Stand at Anfield. There is a permanent memorial to the 96 fans who died, in the form of a bench in view of the battlefield at a nearby lodge. South African Liverpool supporters were responsible for the service and the bench was commissioned in 2008. Following on from the Hillsborough families&#x27; decision to conclude official memorials at Anfield with a final service in 2016, it was decided not to hold any further memorials at Spion Kop. The Memorial bench remains at Spion Kop Lodge. In April 2023, a single seat was added to commemorate the 97th victim, Andrew Devine.

In 2014, to mark the 25th anniversary of the disaster, the FA decided that all FA Cup, Premier League, Football League, and Football Conference matches played between 11 and 14 April would kick-off seven minutes later than originally scheduled with a six-minute delay and a one-minute silence tribute.

===10th anniversary===

In 1999, Anfield was packed with a crowd of around 10,000 people ten years after the disaster. A candle was lit for each of the 96 victims. The clock at the Kop End stood still at 3:06 pm, the time that the referee had blown his whistle in 1989 and a minute&#x27;s silence was held, the start signalled by match referee from that day, Ray Lewis. A service led by the Right Reverend James Jones, the Bishop of Liverpool, was attended by past and present Liverpool players, including Robbie Fowler, Steve McManaman and Alan Hansen. According to the BBC report: &quot;The names of the victims were read from the memorial book and floral tributes were laid at a plaque bearing their names.&quot; A gospel choir performed and the ceremony ended with a rendition of &quot;You&#x27;ll Never Walk Alone&quot;. The anniversary was also marked by a minute&#x27;s silence at the weekend&#x27;s league games and FA Cup semi-finals.

===20th anniversary===

In 2009, on the 20th anniversary of the disaster, Liverpool&#x27;s request that their Champions League quarter-finals return leg, scheduled for 15 April, be played the day before was granted.

The event was remembered with a ceremony at Anfield attended by over 28,000 people. The Kop, Centenary and Main Stands were opened to the public before part of the Anfield Road End was opened to supporters. The memorial service, led by the Bishop of Liverpool began at 14:45 BST and a two-minute silence (observed across Liverpool and in Sheffield and Nottingham, including public transport coming to a stand-still) was held at the time of the disaster twenty years earlier, 15:06 BST. Burnham, by then the Sports Minister, addressed the crowd but was heckled by supporters chanting &quot;Justice for the 96&quot;. The ceremony was attended by survivors of the disaster, families of victims and the Liverpool team, with goalkeeper Pepe Reina leading the team and management staff onto the pitch. Team captain Steven Gerrard and vice-captain Jamie Carragher handed the freedom of the city to the families of all the victims. Candles were lit for each of the 96 people who died. Kenny Dalglish, Liverpool&#x27;s manager at the time of the disaster, read a passage from the Bible, &quot;Lamentations of Jeremiah&quot;. The Liverpool manager, Rafael Benítez, set 96 balloons free. The ceremony ended with 96 rings of church bells across the city and a rendition of &quot;You&#x27;ll Never Walk Alone&quot;.

Other services took place at the same time, including at the Anglican Liverpool Cathedral and the Roman Catholic Liverpool Metropolitan Cathedral. After the two-minute silence, bells on civic buildings rang out throughout Merseyside.

A song was released to mark the 20th anniversary, entitled &quot;Fields of Anfield Road&quot;, which peaked at No. 14 in the UK charts.

Liverpool, Chelsea, Arsenal, and Manchester United players showed respect by wearing black armbands during their Champions League quarter-final matches on 14 and 15 April 2009.

On 14 May, more than 20,000 people packed Anfield for a match held in memory of the victims. The Liverpool Legends, comprising ex-Liverpool footballers beat the All Stars, captained by actor Ricky Tomlinson, 3–1. The event also raised cash for the Marina Dalglish Appeal which was contributed towards a radiotherapy centre at University Hospital in Aintree.

With the imminent release of police documents relating to events on 15 April 1989, the Hillsborough Family Support Group launched Project 96, a fundraising initiative on 1 August 2009. At least 96 current and former Liverpool footballers are being lined up to raise £96,000 by auctioning a limited edition (of 96) signed photographs.

On 11 April 2009, Liverpool fans sang &quot;You&#x27;ll Never Walk Alone&quot; as a tribute to the upcoming anniversary of the disaster before the home game against Blackburn Rovers (which ended in Liverpool winning 4–0) and was followed by former Liverpool player, Stephen Warnock presenting a memorial wreath to the Kop showing the figure &quot; 96 &quot; in red flowers.

===Other tributes===
The Hillsborough disaster touched not only Liverpool, but football clubs in England and around the world. Supporters of Everton, Liverpool&#x27;s traditional local rivals, were affected, many of them having lost friends and family. Supporters laid down flowers and blue and white scarves to show respect for the dead and unity with fellow Merseysiders.

On Wednesday 19 April 1989, four days after the disaster, the second leg of the European Cup semi-final tie between AC Milan and Real Madrid was played. The referee blew his whistle two minutes into the game to stop play and a minute&#x27;s silence was held for those who lost their lives at Hillsborough. Halfway through the minute&#x27;s silence, the Milan fans sang Liverpool&#x27;s &quot;You&#x27;ll Never Walk Alone&quot; as a sign of respect. In April 1989, Bradford City and Lincoln City held a friendly match to benefit the victims of Hillsborough. The occasion was the first in which the two teams had met since the 1985 Bradford City stadium fire that had claimed 56 lives at Valley Parade.

On 30 April 1989, a friendly match organised by Celtic F.C. was played at Celtic Park, Glasgow, between the home club and Liverpool. This game was Liverpool&#x27;s first appearance on the football field since the disaster two weeks earlier. The crowd numbered more than 60,000, including around 6,000 Liverpool fans, and all the match proceeds went to the Hillsborough appeal fund. Liverpool won the match by four goals to nil.

As a result of the disaster, Liverpool&#x27;s scheduled match against Arsenal was delayed from 23 April until the end of the season, and the game eventually decided the league title. At the rescheduled fixture, Arsenal players brought flowers onto the pitch and presented them to the Liverpool fans around the stadium before the game commenced.

During a 2011 debate in the House of Commons, the Labour MP for Liverpool Walton, Steve Rotheram, read out a list of the victims and, as a result, the names were recorded in the &quot;Hansard&quot; transcripts.

In December 2021, Liverpool City Council nominated Andrew Devine posthumously for the freedom of the city of Liverpool, a tribute given to the original 96 victims in 2016.

==Controversies==

=== Media portrayal ===
Initial media coverage – spurred by what Phil Scraton calls in &quot;Hillsborough: The Truth&quot; &quot;the Heysel factor&quot; and &quot;hooligan hysteria&quot; – began to shift the blame onto the behaviour of the Liverpool fans at the stadium, making it a public order issue. As well as &quot;The Sun&quot;″s 19 April 1989 &quot;The Truth&quot; article (see below) other newspapers published similar allegations; the &quot;Daily Star&quot; headline on the same day reported &quot;Dead fans robbed by drunk thugs&quot;; the &quot;Daily Mail&quot; accused the Liverpool fans of being &quot;drunk and violent and their actions were vile&quot;, and &quot;The Daily Express&quot; ran a story alleging that &quot;Police saw &#x27;sick spectacle of pilfering from the dying&#x27;.&quot; Peter McKay in the &quot;Evening Standard&quot; wrote that the &quot;catastrophe was caused first and foremost by violent enthusiasm for soccer and in this case the tribal passions of Liverpool supporters [who] literally killed themselves and others to be at the game&quot; and published a front-page headline &quot;Police attack &#x27;vile&#x27; fans&quot; on 18 April 1989, in which police sources blamed the behaviour of a section of Liverpool fans for the disaster.

In Liverpool local journalist John Williams of the &quot;Liverpool Daily Post&quot; wrote in an article titled &quot;I Blame the Yobs&quot; that &quot;The gatecrashers wreaked their fatal havoc ... Their uncontrolled fanaticism and mass hysteria ... literally squeezed the life out of men, women and children ... yobbism at its most base ... Scouse killed Scouse for no better reason than 22 men were kicking a ball&quot;.

In other regional newspapers, the &quot;Manchester Evening News&quot; wrote that the &quot;Anfield Army charged on to the terrace behind the goal – many without tickets&quot;, and the &quot;Yorkshire Post&quot; wrote that the &quot;trampling crush&quot; had been started by &quot;thousands of fans&quot; who were &quot;latecomers ... forc[ing] their way into the ground&quot;. The &quot;Sheffield Star&quot; published similar allegations to &quot;The Sun&quot;, running the headline &quot;Fans in Drunken Attacks on Police&quot;.

Many of the more serious allegations – such as stealing from the dead and assault of police officers and rescue workers – appeared on 18 April, although several evening newspapers published on 15 April 1989 also gave inaccurate reporting of the disaster, as these newspapers went to press before the full extent or circumstances of the disaster had been confirmed or even reported. This included the Wolverhampton-based &quot;Express &amp; Star&quot;, which reported that the match had been cancelled as a result of a &quot;pitch invasion in which many fans were injured&quot;. This article was presumably published before there were any reports that people had been killed. These media reports and others were examined during the 2012 Hillsborough Independent Panel report.

====&quot;The Sun&quot;====
On 19 April, four days after the disaster, Kelvin MacKenzie, editor of &quot;The Sun&quot;, ordered &quot;The Truth&quot; as the front-page headline, followed by three sub-headlines: &quot;Some fans picked pockets of victims&quot;, &quot;Some fans urinated on the brave cops&quot; and &quot;Some fans beat up PC giving kiss of life&quot;. Mackenzie reportedly spent two hours deciding on which headline to run; his original instinct being for &quot;You Scum&quot; before eventually deciding on &quot;The Truth&quot;.

The information was provided to the newspaper by Whites News Agency in Sheffield; the newspaper cited claims by police inspector Gordon Sykes, that Liverpool fans had pickpocketed the dead, as well as other claims by unnamed police officers and local Conservative MP Irvine Patnick. &quot;The Daily Express&quot; also carried Patnick&#x27;s version, under the headline &quot;Police Accuse Drunken Fans&quot; which gave Patnick&#x27;s views, saying he had told Margaret Thatcher, while escorting her on a tour of the ground after the disaster, of the &quot;mayhem caused by drunks&quot; and that policemen told him they were &quot;hampered, harassed, punched and kicked&quot;.

The story accompanying &quot;The Sun&quot; headlines claimed &quot;drunken Liverpool fans viciously attacked rescue workers as they tried to revive victims&quot; and &quot;police officers, firemen and ambulance crew were punched, kicked and urinated upon&quot;. A quotation, attributed to an unnamed policeman, claimed a partially unclothed dead girl had been verbally abused, and that Liverpool fans were &quot;openly urinating on us and the bodies of the dead&quot;. In fact many Liverpool fans helped security personnel stretcher away victims and gave first aid to the injured. &quot;The Guardian&quot; later wrote that &quot;The claim that supporters higher up the Leppings Lane terrace had urinated on police pulling bodies out of the crush appeared to have roots in the fact that those who were dying or sustaining serious injuries suffered compression asphyxia and many urinated, vomited and emptied their bowels as they were crushed.&quot;

In their history of &quot;The Sun&quot;, Peter Chippendale and Chris Horrie wrote:
MacKenzie maintained for years that his &quot;only mistake was to believe a Tory MP&quot;. In 1993, he told a House of Commons committee, &quot;I regret Hillsborough. It was a fundamental mistake. The mistake was I believed what an MP said&quot;, but privately said at a 2006 dinner that he had only apologised under the instruction of Rupert Murdoch, believing: &quot;all I did wrong was tell the truth ... I was not sorry then and I&#x27;m not sorry now&quot;. On &quot;Question Time&quot; the next year, MacKenzie publicly repeated the claims he said at the dinner; he said that he believed some of the material they published in &quot;The Sun&quot; but was not sure about all of it. He said in 2012, &quot;Twenty-three years ago I was handed a piece of copy from a reputable news agency in Sheffield in which a senior police officer and a senior local MP were making serious allegations against fans in the stadium... these allegations were wholly untrue and were part of a concerted plot by police officers to discredit the supporters... I published in good faith and I am sorry that it was so wrong&quot;. A member of the Hillsborough Family Support Group responded &quot;too little, too late&quot;.

Widespread boycotts of the newspaper throughout Merseyside followed immediately and continue to this day. Boycotts include both customers refusing to purchase it, and retailers refusing to stock it. The &quot;Financial Times&quot; reported in 2019 that Merseyside sales were estimated to drop from 55,000 per day to 12,000 per day, an 80% decrease. Chris Horrie estimated in 2014 that the tabloid&#x27;s owners had lost £15million per month since the disaster, in 1989 prices. The Hillsborough Justice Campaign organised a less successful national boycott that had some impact on the paper&#x27;s sales nationally.

In 2004, after Wayne Rooney gave exclusive interviews to &quot;The Sun&quot;, causing backlash in Liverpool, &quot;The Sun&quot; ran a front-page story apologising for &quot;the most terrible mistake in its history&quot;, saying &quot;We long ago apologised publicly... We gladly say sorry again today: fully, openly, honestly and without reservation&quot;. It said criticism of Rooney was wrong and co-ordinated by the &quot;Liverpool Echo&quot; and &quot;Liverpool Post&quot;. The &quot;Liverpool Echo&quot; condemned the apology as &quot;cynical and shameless&quot;. In 2012, under the headline &quot;The Real Truth&quot;, &quot;The Sun&quot; made a front-page apology, saying &quot;we are profoundly sorry for false reports&quot;. The editor at the time, Dominic Mohan, wrote: &quot;We published an inaccurate and offensive story about the events at Hillsborough. We said it was the truth – it wasn&#x27;t... for that we&#x27;re deeply ashamed and profoundly sorry&quot;. Following the second inquest in 2016, &quot;The Sun&quot;″s eighth and ninth pages carried images of the 96 victims and an editorial which apologised &quot;unreservedly&quot;, saying &quot;the police smeared [supporters] with a pack of lies which in 1989 the Sun and other media swallowed whole&quot;. A lengthier apology was published online.

James Murdoch made a full apology for &quot;The Sun&quot; coverage when he appeared at a hearing of the House of Commons Select committee dealing with the News International phone hacking scandal in 2012.

On 12 September 2012, after the publication of the report exonerating the Liverpool fans, MacKenzie issued the following statement:
In response, Trevor Hicks, chairman of the Hillsborough Family Support Group, rejected MacKenzie&#x27;s apology as &quot;too little, too late&quot;, calling him &quot;lowlife, clever lowlife, but lowlife&quot;. A press conference held by families of the victims also banned all &quot;Sun&quot; reporters from entering, with a sign on the door reading &quot;NO ENTRY TO SUN JOURNALISTS&quot;.

Following the April 2016 verdict of unlawful killing, &quot;The Sun&quot; and the first print edition of the &quot;Times&quot; (both owned by News International), did not cover the stories on their front pages, with &quot;The Sun&quot; relegating the story to pages 8 and 9. An apology appeared on page 10, reiterating previous statements that the 1989 headline had been an error of judgement.

The coverage was widely condemned on social media, with Twitter users saying that this reflected &quot;Murdoch&#x27;s view on Hillsborough&quot;, which was a &quot;smear&quot;, which &quot;now daren&#x27;t speak its name&quot;. On the night of the verdict coverage, more than 124,000 tweets used the term &quot;The Sun&quot;.

However, on Sky News, &quot;The Sun&quot; Political Editor Tom Newton Dunn defended this decision, saying: &quot;I don&#x27;t think it should all be about &quot;The Sun&quot; – it was not us who committed Hillsborough.&quot; Trevor Kavanagh, the political editor at the time of the Hillsborough disaster, said that he was &quot;not sorry at all&quot; about the reporting and supported his former boss Kelvin MacKenzie, stating that &quot;we were clearly misled about the events and the authorities, including the police, actively concealed the truth&quot;.

In February 2017, Liverpool F.C. issued a ban on &quot;The Sun&quot; journalists from entering their grounds in response to the coverage of Hillsborough by the newspaper. Everton F.C. followed in April 2017 on the eve of the 28th anniversary of the disaster after a column by Kelvin MacKenzie concerning Everton footballer Ross Barkley. MacKenzie was suspended as a contributor to the newspaper.

====&quot;The Times&quot;====
The journalist Edward Pearce was criticised for writing a controversial article in the aftermath of the disaster, at a time when a number of victims&#x27; funerals were taking place. His column in &quot;The Sunday Times&quot; on 23 April 1989, included the text:
Pearce went on to reflect that if South Yorkshire Police bore any responsibility, it was &quot;for not realising what brutes they had to handle.&quot;

Professor Phil Scraton described Pearce&#x27;s comments as amongst the &quot;most bigoted and factually inaccurate&quot; published in the wake of the disaster. A number of complaints were made to the Press Council concerning the article, but the Council ruled that it was unable to adjudicate on comment pieces, though the Council noted that tragedy or disaster is not an occasion for writers to exercise gratuitous provocation.

On 27 April 2016, &quot;Times&quot; staffers in the sports department expressed their outrage over the paper&#x27;s decision to cover 26 April inquest, which ruled that the 96 dead were unlawfully killed, only on an inside spread and the sports pages, with some in the newspaper claiming there was a &quot;mutiny&quot; in the sports department. The &quot;Times&quot; later tweeted that &quot;We made a mistake with the front page of our first edition, and we fixed it for our second edition.&quot;

The &quot;Times&quot; was the only major UK newspaper not to give the story front-page coverage other than fellow News UK-owned &quot;Sun&quot;. Gary Lineker described the incident as &quot;disgusting as it is unsurprising&quot;, and David Walsh, chief sports writer at the &quot;Sunday Times&quot;, said it was a &quot;shocking misjudgment&quot; to not include this story on the front page. However, insiders dismissed any suggestion that a visit by News UK owner Rupert Murdoch to the &quot;Times&quot; newsroom on the day of the verdict had anything to do with the editorial decision.

==== &quot;FHM&quot; ====
The November 2002 edition of the men&#x27;s lifestyle magazine &quot;FHM&quot; in Australia was swiftly withdrawn from sale soon after its publication, and a public apology made in the Australian and British editions, because it contained jokes mocking the disaster. As a result, Emap Australia, who owned &quot;FHM&quot; at the time, pledged to make a donation to the families of the victims. Although the original apology was not printed in the magazine as it was not considered &quot;serious enough&quot;, its Australian editor, Geoff Campbell, released a statement: &quot;We deeply regret the photograph captions published in the November issue of the Australian edition of &quot;FHM&quot;, accompanying an article about the Hillsborough disaster of 1989. The right course of action is to withdraw this edition from sale – which we will be doing. We have been in contact with the Hillsborough Family Support Group and the Hillsborough Justice Campaign to express our deep regret and sincere apologies.&quot; The British edition disassociated itself from the controversy, stating: &quot;&quot;FHM&quot; Australia has its own editorial team and these captions were written and published without consultation with the UK edition, or any other edition of &quot;FHM&quot;.&quot;

The vice-chairman of the Hillsborough Family Support Group, Philip Hammond, said he wanted all football fans to boycott the magazine, saying, &quot;I am going to write to every fanzine in the country – including Liverpool F.C.&#x27;s – telling them to ban &quot;FHM.&quot; People are very upset by it. I think there will be a real boycott.&quot; He added it would be like making jokes about the 2002 Bali bombings, in which 88 Australians were killed. The publication was finally discontinued in 2016, for unrelated reasons.

==== &quot;The Spectator&quot; ====
&quot;The Spectator&quot; was criticised for an editorial which appeared in the magazine on 16 October 2004 following the death of British hostage Kenneth John &quot;Ken&quot; Bigley in Iraq, in which it was claimed that the response to Bigley&#x27;s killing was fuelled by the fact he was from Liverpool, and went on to criticise the &quot;drunken&quot; fans at Hillsborough and call on them to accept responsibility for their &quot;role&quot; in the disaster:
Although the editor Boris Johnson did not write this piece, journalist Simon Heffer said he had written the first draft of the article at Johnson&#x27;s request. Johnson apologised at the time of the article, travelling to Liverpool to do so, and again following the publication of the report of the Hillsborough Independent Panel in 2012; Johnson&#x27;s apology was rejected by Margaret Aspinall, chair of the Hillsborough Family Support Group, whose son James, 18, died in the disaster:
The &quot;Spectator&quot; comments were widely circulated following the April 2016 verdict by the Hillsborough inquest&#x27;s second hearing proving unlawful killing of the 96 dead at Hillsborough.

===&quot;EastEnders&quot;===
In November 2007, the BBC soap opera &quot;EastEnders&quot; caused controversy when the character Minty Peterson (played by Cliff Parisi) made a reference to the disaster. During the episode car mechanic Minty said: &quot;Five years out of Europe because of Heysel, because they penned you lot in to stop you fighting on the pitch and then what did we end up with? Hillsborough.&quot; This prompted 380 complaints and the BBC apologised, saying that the character was simply reminding another character, former football hooligan Jase Dyer, that the actions of hooligans led to the fencing-in of football fans. Ofcom also received 177 complaints.

===Charles Itandje===
Liverpool goalkeeper Charles Itandje was accused of having shown disrespect towards the Hillsborough victims during the 2009 remembrance ceremony, as he was spotted on camera &quot;smiling and nudging&quot; teammate Damien Plessis. He was suspended from the club for a fortnight and many fans felt he should not play for the club again. He was omitted from the first team squad and never played for the club in any capacity again.

===Jeremy Hunt===
On 28 June 2010, following England&#x27;s departure from the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa, the UK&#x27;s Culture and Sport Secretary Jeremy Hunt praised the England fans for their behaviour during the competition, saying &quot;I mean, not a single arrest for a football-related offence, and the terrible problems that we had in Heysel and Hillsborough in the 1980s seem now to be behind us.&quot; He later apologised and said &quot;I know that fan unrest played no part in the terrible events of April 1989 and I apologise to Liverpool fans and the families of those killed and injured in the Hillsborough disaster if my comments caused any offence.&quot; Margaret Aspinall, chair of the Hillsborough Family Support Group, asked for a face to face meeting with Hunt before deciding if she would accept the apology.

===Fans&#x27; chants===
Fans of rival clubs have been known to chant about the Hillsborough disaster at football matches, in order to upset Liverpool fans. Following the findings of the Independent Panel in September 2012, Alex Ferguson and two Manchester United fan groups called for an end to the &quot;sick chants&quot;. Leeds United chairman Ken Bates endorsed this call in the club programme and stated, &quot;Leeds have suffered at times with reference to Galatasaray; some of our so-called fans have also been guilty as well, particularly in relation to Munich.&quot; &quot;Munich&quot; is a reference to the deaths of eight Manchester United players in the Munich air disaster of 1958.

===Oliver Popplewell===
In October 2011, Sir Oliver Popplewell, who had chaired the public inquiry into the 1985 Bradford City stadium fire at Valley Parade that killed 56 people, called on the families of the Hillsborough victims to look at the &quot;quiet dignity and great courage relatives in the West Yorkshire city had shown in the years following the tragedy&quot;. He said of the Bradford families: &quot;They did not harbour conspiracy theories. They did not seek endless further inquiries. They buried their dead, comforted the bereaved and succoured the injured. They organised a sensible compensation scheme and moved on. Is there, perhaps, a lesson there for the Hillsborough campaigners?&quot;

Popplewell was criticised for the comments, including a rebuke from a survivor of the Bradford fire. Labour MP Steve Rotheram, commented: &quot;How insensitive does somebody have to be to write that load of drivel?&quot;

===David Crompton===

In 2013, a formal complaint was made against David Crompton, South Yorkshire&#x27;s chief constable, over internal emails relating to the Hillsborough disaster. On 8 September 2012, just four days before the Hillsborough Independent Panel Report was published, Crompton had emailed the force&#x27;s assistant chief constable Andy Holt and head of media Mark Thompson. In the email, which came to light as the result of a Freedom of Information request, Crompton had said that the families&#x27; &quot;version of certain events has become &#x27;the truth&#x27; even though it isn&#x27;t&quot;. South Yorkshire&#x27;s police and crime commissioner Shaun Wright appointed chief constable Simon Parr of Cambridgeshire Constabulary to head an investigation into the matter. Wright said: &quot;The request has been submitted by a firm of solicitors in Liverpool acting on behalf of a number of individuals affected by the event.&quot;

In March 2016, Crompton announced that he would retire in November. On 26 April 2016, after the inquest jury delivered a verdict affirming all the charges against the police, Crompton &quot;unequivocally accepted&quot; the verdicts, including unlawful killing, said that the police operation at the stadium on the day of the disaster had been &quot;catastrophically wrong&quot;, and apologised unreservedly. Following continued criticism of Crompton in the wake of the unlawful killing verdict, South Yorkshire Police and Crime Commissioner Alan Billings suspended Crompton from duty on 27 April 2016.

===Civil servant===

In June 2014, an unnamed 24-year-old British civil servant was sacked for posting offensive comments about the disaster on Wikipedia.

===Steven Cohen===
In 2009, nearly twenty years to the day after the disaster, Steven Cohen, a presenter on Fox Soccer Channel and Sirius satellite radio in the United States (an Englishman and Chelsea fan), stated on his radio show that Liverpool fans &quot;without tickets&quot; were the &quot;root cause&quot; and &quot;perpetrators&quot; of the disaster. A boycott of advertisers by American Liverpool fans eventually brought about an apology from him. Despite this he was replaced as presenter of Fox Football Fone-in. His actions were disowned by Chelsea Football Club and he no longer works as a broadcaster.

===Bernard Ingham===

In 1996, Sir Bernard Ingham, former press secretary to former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, caused controversy with his comments about the disaster. In a letter addressed to a victim&#x27;s parent, Ingham wrote that the disaster was caused by &quot;tanked up yobs&quot;. In another letter written to a Liverpool supporter, also written in 1996, Ingham remarked that people should &quot;shut up about Hillsborough&quot;. On the day of the inquest verdict, Ingham refused to apologise or respond to the previous comments he made, telling a reporter, &quot;I have nothing to say.&quot; There have since been calls to have Ingham stripped of his knighthood.

===Topman===
In March 2018, British clothing retailer Topman marketed a T-shirt which was interpreted by members of the public, including relatives of Hillsborough victims, as mocking the disaster. The T-shirt was red with white details like a Liverpool shirt, and had the number 96 on the back like a football shirt, with the text &quot;Karma&quot; and &quot;What goes around comes back around&quot;, and a white rose, as associated with Yorkshire. Topman stated that the T-shirt was in reference to a Bob Marley song re-released in 1996 and apologised and withdrew the item.

==Radio, television and theatre==

===1989: &quot;After Dark&quot; (TV discussion programme)===
On 20 May 1989, five weeks after the disaster, Channel 4&#x27;s &quot;After Dark&quot; programme broadcast an extended live discussion called &quot;Football – The Final Whistle?&quot;. Among the guests were bereaved father James Delaney and his wife Eileen, who said &quot;they didn&#x27;t give the poor people who were killed any dignity ... I bent down to kiss and talk to [my son] and as we stood up there was a policeman who came from behind me ... trying to usher myself and my husband out ... I had to scream at the police officer to allow us privacy ... the total attitude was, you’ve identified number 33 so go!&quot;

Further extracts from what Eileen Delaney said on the programme can be found on the Hillsborough Justice Campaign website and in Phil Scraton&#x27;s book &quot;Hillsborough: The Truth&quot;.

===1994: &quot;The Cook Report&quot;===
In 1994 Roger Cook led an investigation into the Hillsborough disaster in Series 9, Episode 3 of The Cook Report entitled &quot;Kevin&#x27;s Mum&quot;.

===1996: &quot;Hillsborough&quot; (TV drama)===

A television drama, based on the disaster and subsequent events, titled simply &quot;Hillsborough&quot;, was produced by Granada Television in 1996. It won the BAFTA Award for Best Single Drama in 1997. The cast included Christopher Eccleston, Annabelle Apsion, Ricky Tomlinson and Mark Womack. The film was aired for the first time in 1996, and has been shown four times since then: in 1998, in 2009, in September 2012 (shortly after the release of the findings of the Hillsborough Independent Panel), and again on 1 May 2016 on ITV.

===2009: &quot;The Reunion&quot; (Radio discussion programme)===
On the 20th anniversary of the disaster, BBC Radio 4 produced an episode of their series &quot;The Reunion&quot; on the subject of Hillsborough. Sue MacGregor brought together a group of people who were involved in the disaster to talk about the events of that day at a time when they were still in the midst of their fight for justice. The programme was repeated on 1 May 2016, at the end of the week in which the Hillsborough inquest ruled that the 96 Liverpool football fans died unlawfully.

===2014: &quot;Hillsborough&quot; (TV documentary)===

The American sports network ESPN produced the documentary &quot;Hillsborough&quot; as part of its &quot;30 for 30&quot; series of sports films (under a new &quot;Soccer Stories&quot; subdivision). Directed by Daniel Gordon and co-produced with the BBC, the two-hour film chronicles the disaster, the investigations, and their lingering effects; it also includes interviews with survivors, victims&#x27; relatives, police officers and investigators. &quot;Hillsborough&quot; first aired in the US on 15 April 2014, the 25th anniversary of the disaster.

As the documentary included previously unreleased security camera footage from the stadium on the day of the disaster, it could not be shown in the UK upon initial release due to the 2012 High Court inquest still being in progress. After the inquest verdict, the BBC aired the documentary on 8 May 2016, with additional footage from the inquest, as well as its final verdict.

=== 2022: &quot;Anne&quot; (TV drama) ===
&quot;Anne&quot; is a four-part docudrama about Anne Williams&#x27; campaign to reveal the truth about her son&#x27;s death, which aired on ITV in January 2022. Williams was portrayed by Maxine Peake, whose performance was described in &quot;The Guardian&quot; as &quot;almost unwatchably intense&quot;.

===Stage plays===
Two British stage plays also dealt with the disaster with different view points:
* Jonathan Harvey&#x27;s &quot;Guiding Star&quot; showed a father coming to terms with what had happened some years later.
* Lance Nielsen wrote &quot;Waiting for Hillsborough&quot; about two Liverpool families waiting for news of their missing loved ones on the day, which leads to discussion of football safety and the culture of blame. Nielsen&#x27;s play won him an award at the 1999 Liverpool Arts and Entertainment awards and was highly praised by the Liverpool press.

==Notes==
==See also==
* List of disasters in Great Britain and Ireland by death toll
* Kanjuruhan Stadium disaster – a 2022 disaster in Indonesia involving tear gas being used against supporters

==References==
=== Cited works ===
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* 
* Home Office; &quot;Scrutiny of Evidence Relating to the Hillsborough Football Stadium Disaster&quot; (Command Paper); 
* Owen Luder (Ed.), Sports Stadia After Hillsborough: Seminar Papers; RIBA, Sports Council; 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Hillsborough Independent Panel (includes digital archives of material used for the panel&#x27;s inquiry)
* Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG)
* Hillsborough Justice Campaign (HJC) – contrast.org
* Liverpool Football Club Hillsborough Memorial
* Transcript of &quot;The Sun&quot; newspaper coverage of the Hillsborough disaster.
* List of archive and library material relating to the disaster held at Sheffield City Council&#x27;s Libraries and Archives.
* Bibliography of over 150 books, journal articles, TV programmes and websites relating to the Disaster and its aftermath produced by Sheffield City Council&#x27;s Archives Service.
* A 20-minute video of the disaster in Windows Media Player format.
* September 2012 Hillsborough disaster report (7.25 megabytes) (Archive)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q234132" start="4" end="25" title="Hillsborough disaster" label="Hillsborough disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q109905701" start="38" end="49" title="Crowd collapses and crushes" label="crowd crush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="55" end="63" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q642557" start="73" end="93" title="Hillsborough Stadium" label="Hillsborough Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q42448" start="97" end="106" title="Sheffield" label="Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q23095" start="108" end="123" title="South Yorkshire" label="South Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="174" end="180" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="200" end="209" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q19490" start="214" end="231" title="Nottingham Forest F.C." label="Nottingham Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q107428100" start="769" end="779" title="Tony Bland" label="Tony Bland"/>
<link wikidata="Q83457" start="949" end="961" title="Old Trafford" label="Old Trafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="965" end="975" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165212" start="1024" end="1049" title="1988–89 FA Cup" label="that season&amp;#x27;s FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569006" start="1085" end="1107" title="South Yorkshire Police" label="South Yorkshire Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001756" start="1158" end="1178" title="football hooliganism" label="football hooliganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348518" start="1292" end="1305" title="Taylor Report" label="Taylor Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872073" start="1364" end="1377" title="crowd control" label="crowd control"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280558" start="1419" end="1450" title="Director of Public Prosecutions (England and Wales)" label="Director of Public Prosecutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577534" start="1665" end="1682" title="Terrace (stadium)" label="standing terraces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728370" start="1696" end="1714" title="all-seater stadium" label="all-seater stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q21142718" start="1877" end="1893" title="accidental death" label="accidental death"/>
<link wikidata="Q24006641" start="2011" end="2036" title="Murray Stuart-Smith" label="Lord Justice Stuart-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q564163" start="2098" end="2117" title="Private prosecution" label="Private prosecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516678" start="2823" end="2863" title="Independent Police Complaints Commission" label="Independent Police Complaints Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897003" start="3036" end="3053" title="Unlawful killing" label="unlawfully killed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610511" start="3063" end="3080" title="Gross negligence" label="grossly negligent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144694" start="3139" end="3151" title="duty of care" label="duty of care"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242291" start="3407" end="3422" title="chief constable" label="chief constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882220" start="3525" end="3557" title="manslaughter" label="manslaughter by gross negligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q463516" start="3559" end="3586" title="misconduct in public office" label="misconduct in public office"/>
<link wikidata="Q10728581" start="3591" end="3623" title="perverting the course of justice" label="perverting the course of justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141790" start="3677" end="3702" title="Crown Prosecution Service" label="Crown Prosecution Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q642557" start="3803" end="3823" title="Hillsborough Stadium" label="Hillsborough Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q19498" start="3862" end="3881" title="Sheffield Wednesday F.C." label="Sheffield Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q9500" start="3902" end="3926" title="the Football Association" label="the Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="3989" end="3998" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q19490" start="4003" end="4034" title="Nottingham Forest F.C." label="Nottingham Forest Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198858" start="4299" end="4313" title="pitch invasion" label="pitch invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001756" start="4316" end="4327" title="Football hooliganism" label="Hooliganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602619" start="4675" end="4686" title="Green Guide" label="Green Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087775" start="5289" end="5299" title="Oliver Popplewell" label="Popplewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116681" start="5319" end="5345" title="Bradford City stadium fire" label="Bradford City stadium fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="5709" end="5726" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q19500" start="5731" end="5754" title="Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C." label="Wolverhampton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013479" start="6207" end="6217" title="Bert McGee" label="Bert McGee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252307" start="6761" end="6774" title="crush barrier" label="crush barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q19580" start="7115" end="7128" title="Coventry City F.C." label="Coventry City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128631" start="7188" end="7200" title="Leeds United F.C." label="Leeds United"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865965" start="7820" end="7838" title="Minister for Sport and the Olympics" label="Minister for Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569006" start="8059" end="8081" title="South Yorkshire Police" label="South Yorkshire Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q879295" start="8519" end="8525" title="hazing" label="hazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891050" start="9656" end="9665" title="Spion Kop (stadiums)" label="Spion Kop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465903" start="11061" end="11077" title="Football Specials" label="chartered trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q35647" start="11408" end="11416" title="Pennines" label="Pennines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881035" start="11424" end="11436" title="M62 motorway" label="M62 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="11658" end="11661" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4304944" start="11690" end="11701" title="John Motson" label="John Motson"/>
<link wikidata="Q570364" start="12239" end="12247" title="Kick-off (association football)" label="kick-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q444295" start="14300" end="14316" title="Bruce Grobbelaar" label="Bruce Grobbelaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q344989" start="14590" end="14605" title="Peter Beardsley" label="Peter Beardsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q18530" start="14614" end="14622" title="Goal (sport)" label="crossbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437271" start="14717" end="14738" title="Police superintendent" label="Police superintendent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297747" start="14905" end="14914" title="Ray Lewis (referee)" label="Ray Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193840" start="15853" end="15873" title="compressive asphyxia" label="compressive asphyxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q699370" start="15951" end="15968" title="St John Ambulance" label="St John Ambulance"/>
<link wikidata="Q185325" start="16061" end="16064" title="CPR" label="CPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q623149" start="16098" end="16107" title="billboard" label="hoardings"/>
<link wikidata="Q860252" start="16144" end="16164" title="chief superintendent" label="chief superintendent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6834367" start="16191" end="16206" title="Michael Shersby" label="Michael Shersby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568993" start="16469" end="16515" title="South Yorkshire Ambulance Service" label="South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q19693316" start="17147" end="17162" title="first responder" label="first responder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501349" start="17243" end="17251" title="car park" label="car park"/>
<link wikidata="Q234132" start="17513" end="17518" title="Hillsborough Independent Panel" label="Panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058368" start="17918" end="17943" title="Northern General Hospital" label="Northern General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374251" start="17945" end="17971" title="Royal Hallamshire Hospital" label="Royal Hallamshire Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q30280608" start="17976" end="17993" title="Barnsley Hospital" label="Barnsley Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="18334" end="18343" title="Elizabeth II" label="the Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="18370" end="18387" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="18402" end="18419" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422" start="18448" end="18456" title="Juventus FC" label="Juventus"/>
<link wikidata="Q323888" start="18514" end="18537" title="Heysel Stadium disaster" label="Heysel Stadium disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="18576" end="18593" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484309" start="18598" end="18612" title="Home Secretary" label="Home Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q337375" start="18613" end="18625" title="Douglas Hurd" label="Douglas Hurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q45671" start="18693" end="18708" title="Anfield" label="Anfield stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538801" start="19043" end="19055" title="Stanley Park, Liverpool" label="Stanley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q968420" start="19061" end="19074" title="Goodison Park" label="Goodison Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q695738" start="19198" end="19212" title="Civil defense siren" label="air-raid siren"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="19257" end="19267" title="Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063627" start="19329" end="19353" title="Nottingham Council House" label="Nottingham Council House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470975" start="19359" end="19391" title="Liverpool Metropolitan Cathedral" label="Liverpool Metropolitan Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q51616" start="19395" end="19407" title="requiem mass" label="requiem mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256136" start="19458" end="19481" title="Archbishop of Liverpool" label="Archbishop of Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023789" start="19483" end="19496" title="Derek Worlock" label="Derek Worlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q544085" start="19585" end="19598" title="Ronnie Whelan" label="Ronnie Whelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q287911" start="19600" end="19611" title="Steve Nicol" label="Steve Nicol"/>
<link wikidata="Q348271" start="19632" end="19641" title="Joe Fagan" label="Joe Fagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="19654" end="19663" title="Eucharist" label="communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592972" start="19704" end="19716" title="Graham Kelly (football administrator)" label="Graham Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q242256" start="20036" end="20040" title="Closed-circuit television" label="CCTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="20157" end="20161" title="UEFA" label="UEFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q575730" start="20172" end="20187" title="Jacques Georges" label="Jacques Georges"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151884" start="20546" end="20563" title="1989 FA Cup final" label="1989 FA Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="20599" end="20606" title="Everton F.C." label="Everton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20709" end="20723" title="Armband#Mourning" label="black armbands"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843952" start="20772" end="20787" title="Liverpool 0–2 Arsenal (26 May 1989)" label="the final match"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444815" start="20795" end="20818" title="1988–89 Football League" label="1988–89 Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="20887" end="20894" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="21132" end="21145" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="UK Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q578943" start="21548" end="21563" title="Factory Records" label="Factory Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q48879" start="21680" end="21693" title="Bradford City A.F.C." label="Bradford City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18519" start="21698" end="21710" title="Lincoln City F.C." label="Lincoln City"/>
<link wikidata="Q733400" start="22102" end="22126" title="Gerry and the Pacemakers" label="Gerry and the Pacemakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q335369" start="22138" end="22160" title="Ferry Cross the Mersey" label="Ferry Cross the Mersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q945153" start="22233" end="22254" title="Stock Aitken Waterman" label="Stock Aitken Waterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="22288" end="22302" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552874" start="22304" end="22317" title="Gerry Marsden" label="Gerry Marsden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350303" start="22339" end="22352" title="Holly Johnson" label="Holly Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q388573" start="22358" end="22372" title="The Christians (band)" label="The Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="22389" end="22405" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q728692" start="22580" end="22608" title="You&amp;#x27;ll Never Walk Alone" label="You&amp;#x27;ll Never Walk Alone"/>
<link wikidata="Q107428100" start="23878" end="23888" title="Tony Bland" label="Tony Bland"/>
<link wikidata="Q139720" start="23953" end="23980" title="persistent vegetative state" label="persistent vegetative state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128539" start="24052" end="24062" title="High Court" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q496368" start="24977" end="24984" title="Wrexham" label="Wrexham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022741" start="25019" end="25025" title="Widnes" label="Widnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q459830" start="25100" end="25114" title="Steven Gerrard" label="Steven Gerrard"/>
<link wikidata="Q10380346" start="25422" end="25433" title="Kevin Baron (footballer)" label="Kevin Baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q332768" start="25679" end="25693" title="survivor guilt" label="survivor guilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="25821" end="25830" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242530" start="25840" end="25858" title="Liverpool City Region" label="Greater Merseyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q6036832" start="26260" end="26267" title="Inquest" label="Inquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q21142718" start="26882" end="26898" title="accidental death" label="accidental death"/>
<link wikidata="Q15993657" start="27954" end="27967" title="Anne Williams (activist)" label="Anne Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="28228" end="28258" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="European Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6219589" start="28613" end="28619" title="John Ashton (public health director)" label="Ashton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28824" end="28848" title="#Second coroner&amp;#x27;s hearing" label="2016 Warrington inquests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077155" start="29409" end="29428" title="Peter Taylor, Baron Taylor of Gosforth" label="Lord Justice Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29592" end="29606" title="#Taylor1989" label="interim report"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29693" end="29705" title="#Taylor1990" label="final report"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478750" start="31595" end="31622" title="Health and Safety Executive" label="Health and Safety Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728370" start="34743" end="34753" title="All-seater stadium" label="all-seated"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="34782" end="34796" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="34806" end="34821" title="Football League" label="Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070732" start="34861" end="34878" title="Chester City F.C." label="Chester City F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q619259" start="34886" end="34898" title="Deva Stadium" label="Deva Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q19487" start="35002" end="35015" title="Millwall F.C." label="Millwall F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q908481" start="35023" end="35030" title="The Den" label="The Den"/>
<link wikidata="Q187304" start="35315" end="35338" title="Scottish Premier League" label="Scottish Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="35793" end="35805" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q311278" start="35839" end="35849" title="Jack Straw" label="Jack Straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q24006641" start="35896" end="35921" title="Murray Stuart-Smith" label="Lord Justice Stuart-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q852633" start="36577" end="36589" title="admissible evidence" label="inadmissible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134614" start="36842" end="36849" title="coroner" label="coroner"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="37148" end="37164" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q311278" start="37181" end="37191" title="Jack Straw" label="Jack Straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q337117" start="37505" end="37518" title="Charlie Falconer, Baron Falconer of Thoroton" label="Lord Falconer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="38368" end="38381" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297079" start="38458" end="38475" title="Secretary of State for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport" label="Culture Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q269909" start="38477" end="38489" title="Andy Burnham" label="Andy Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413677" start="38495" end="38524" title="Ministry of Justice" label="Minister of State for Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q302815" start="38526" end="38537" title="Maria Eagle" label="Maria Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q763388" start="38564" end="38575" title="Home Office" label="Home Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q910019" start="38580" end="38618" title="Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport" label="Department of Culture, Media and Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q237217" start="38721" end="38733" title="Jacqui Smith" label="Jacqui Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q332336" start="38849" end="38861" title="Alan Johnson" label="Alan Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681147" start="39401" end="39412" title="James Jones (bishop)" label="James Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917902" start="39418" end="39437" title="Bishop of Liverpool" label="Bishop of Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096841" start="39623" end="39644" title="Chief Medical Officer (United Kingdom)" label="chief medical officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044742" start="39652" end="39672" title="Department of Health (United Kingdom)" label="Department of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261092" start="39697" end="39719" title="deputy chief constable" label="deputy chief constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482170" start="39727" end="39761" title="Police Service of Northern Ireland" label="Police Service of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16143119" start="39774" end="39786" title="Phil Scraton" label="Phil Scraton"/>
<link wikidata="Q161733" start="39798" end="39809" title="criminology" label="criminology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176968" start="39812" end="39825" title="Peter Sissons" label="Peter Sissons"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994796" start="39849" end="39861" title="Sarah Tyacke" label="Sarah Tyacke"/>
<link wikidata="Q392703" start="39889" end="39910" title="The National Archives (United Kingdom)" label="the National Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074604" start="40714" end="40731" title="recovery position" label="recovery position"/>
<link wikidata="Q4330029" start="40776" end="40794" title="airway obstruction" label="airway obstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209483" start="41161" end="41185" title="Police National Computer" label="national police database"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031731" start="41295" end="41311" title="Sheffield Hallam (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Sheffield Hallam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6074365" start="41313" end="41327" title="Irvine Patnick" label="Irvine Patnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q192" start="42107" end="42120" title="David Cameron" label="David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q216594" start="42150" end="42161" title="Ed Miliband" label="Ed Miliband"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117085" start="42179" end="42189" title="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Most Loyal Opposition" label="opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386696" start="42292" end="42308" title="Kelvin MacKenzie" label="Kelvin MacKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273314" start="43352" end="43369" title="Dave Richards" label="Sir Dave Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q302815" start="43773" end="43784" title="Maria Eagle" label="Maria Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404273" start="43831" end="43854" title="parliamentary privilege" label="parliamentary privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501926" start="44697" end="44713" title="Attorney General" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q332994" start="44714" end="44728" title="Dominic Grieve" label="Dominic Grieve"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235640" start="44830" end="44847" title="John Goldring" label="Sir John Goldring"/>
<link wikidata="Q215733" start="45020" end="45030" title="Warrington" label="Warrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897003" start="45351" end="45367" title="unlawful killing" label="unlawful killing"/>
<link wikidata="Q264766" start="45651" end="45662" title="Theresa May" label="Theresa May"/>
<link wikidata="Q192" start="46563" end="46576" title="David Cameron" label="David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="46947" end="46959" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q269909" start="47093" end="47105" title="Andy Burnham" label="Andy Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q480068" start="47110" end="47124" title="Steve Rotheram" label="Steve Rotheram"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="47194" end="47210" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q272829" start="47214" end="47223" title="John Pugh" label="John Pugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="47281" end="47297" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q311278" start="47448" end="47458" title="Jack Straw" label="Jack Straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="48097" end="48107" title="Freemasons" label="Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090786" start="48853" end="48870" title="Worshipful Master" label="Worshipful Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516678" start="49275" end="49315" title="Independent Police Complaints Commission" label="Independent Police Complaints Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051968" start="49392" end="49407" title="Norman Bettison" label="Norman Bettison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985948" start="51124" end="51144" title="West Midlands Police" label="West Midlands Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141790" start="51323" end="51348" title="Crown Prosecution Service" label="Crown Prosecution Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516678" start="51484" end="51524" title="Independent Police Complaints Commission" label="Independent Police Complaints Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q264766" start="51684" end="51695" title="Theresa May" label="Theresa May"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681147" start="51728" end="51739" title="James Jones (bishop)" label="James Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917902" start="51741" end="51760" title="Bishop of Liverpool" label="Bishop of Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q564163" start="54084" end="54103" title="private prosecution" label="private prosecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q860252" start="54124" end="54144" title="Chief Superintendent" label="Chief Superintendent"/>
<link wikidata="Q15894241" start="55546" end="55568" title="Assistant Commissioner" label="Assistant Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q111423013" start="55569" end="55580" title="Rob Beckley (police officer)" label="Rob Beckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882220" start="55779" end="55811" title="manslaughter" label="manslaughter by gross negligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q463516" start="55976" end="56003" title="misconduct in public office" label="misconduct in public office"/>
<link wikidata="Q124619261" start="56100" end="56132" title="Safety at Sports Ground Act 1975" label="Safety at Sports Ground Act 1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q10728581" start="56273" end="56305" title="perverting the course of justice" label="perverting the course of justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q215733" start="56479" end="56489" title="Warrington" label="Warrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q203895" start="56661" end="56672" title="Crown Court" label="Crown Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141790" start="56733" end="56758" title="Crown Prosecution Service" label="Crown Prosecution Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q694579" start="57044" end="57051" title="farrier" label="farrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977391" start="57940" end="57959" title="Preston Crown Court" label="Preston Crown Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176225" start="58220" end="58239" title="Peter Openshaw (judge)" label="Mr Justice Openshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394901" start="59053" end="59077" title="William Davis (judge)" label="Mr Justice William Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12403813" start="59098" end="59115" title="no case to answer" label="no case to answer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636053" start="59508" end="59538" title="Leader of the House of Commons" label="Leader of the House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q574980" start="59539" end="59554" title="Jacob Rees-Mogg" label="Jacob Rees-Mogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301627" start="59678" end="59698" title="Garston and Halewood (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Garston and Halewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q302815" start="59702" end="59713" title="Maria Eagle" label="Maria Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713225" start="60097" end="60147" title="Alcock v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police" label="Alcock v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="60231" end="60245" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995709" start="60578" end="60631" title="White v Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire Police" label="White v Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="61105" end="61119" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352893" start="61132" end="61152" title="English criminal law" label="English criminal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q107428100" start="61195" end="61205" title="Tony Bland" label="Tony Bland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6875409" start="61480" end="61508" title="misfeasance in public office" label="misfeasance in public office"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907550" start="62327" end="62332" title="Crest (sports)" label="crest"/>
<link wikidata="Q63589" start="63340" end="63359" title="Sheffield Supertram" label="Sheffield Supertram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756002" start="63408" end="63421" title="Port Sunlight" label="Port Sunlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191558" start="63423" end="63429" title="Wirral Peninsula" label="Wirral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290927" start="63460" end="63473" title="Sudley House" label="Sudley Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141046" start="63855" end="63869" title="Crosby, Merseyside" label="Crosby Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546645" start="63914" end="63920" title="Metropolitan Borough of Sefton" label="Sefton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855296" start="64868" end="64887" title="Liverpool Town Hall" label="Liverpool Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="65072" end="65084" title="Everton Football Club" label="Everton F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="65109" end="65112" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649457" start="65163" end="65182" title="Knowsley Expressway" label="Knowsley Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577689" start="65706" end="65715" title="Spion Kop (mountain)" label="Spion Kop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577692" start="65775" end="65796" title="Spion Kop Battlefield" label="Spion Kop Battlefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891050" start="65823" end="65832" title="Spion Kop (stadiums)" label="Kop Stand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068056" start="66679" end="66697" title="one-minute silence" label="one-minute silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681147" start="67114" end="67125" title="James Jones (bishop)" label="James Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q206548" start="67214" end="67227" title="Robbie Fowler" label="Robbie Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q294501" start="67229" end="67244" title="Steve McManaman" label="Steve McManaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q374189" start="67249" end="67260" title="Alan Hansen" label="Alan Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q728692" start="67498" end="67526" title="You&amp;#x27;ll Never Walk Alone (song)" label="You&amp;#x27;ll Never Walk Alone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67763" end="67805" title="2008–09 UEFA Champions League#Quarter-finals" label="Champions League quarter-finals return leg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2244681" start="68145" end="68148" title="British Summer Time" label="BST"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152278" start="68155" end="68173" title="two-minute silence" label="two-minute silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q163666" start="68601" end="68611" title="Pepe Reina" label="Pepe Reina"/>
<link wikidata="Q172211" start="68711" end="68726" title="Jamie Carragher" label="Jamie Carragher"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="68738" end="68757" title="freedom of the city" label="freedom of the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q187198" start="68847" end="68861" title="Kenny Dalglish" label="Kenny Dalglish"/>
<link wikidata="Q144048" start="69009" end="69023" title="Rafael Benítez" label="Rafael Benítez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866506" start="69244" end="69263" title="Liverpool Cathedral" label="Liverpool Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q23100" start="69396" end="69406" title="Merseyside" label="Merseyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982395" start="69474" end="69496" title="Fields of Anfield Road" label="Fields of Anfield Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="69557" end="69564" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="69579" end="69596" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736441" start="69915" end="69930" title="Ricky Tomlinson" label="Ricky Tomlinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161355" start="70227" end="70238" title="fundraising" label="fundraising"/>
<link wikidata="Q19446" start="70583" end="70599" title="Blackburn Rovers F.C." label="Blackburn Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q241321" start="70684" end="70699" title="Stephen Warnock" label="Stephen Warnock"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="71248" end="71271" title="1988–89 European Cup#Semi-finals" label="European Cup semi-final"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="71284" end="71292" title="AC Milan" label="AC Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="71297" end="71308" title="Real Madrid CF" label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q969279" start="71854" end="71867" title="Valley Parade" label="Valley Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q19593" start="71918" end="71929" title="Celtic F.C." label="Celtic F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q216037" start="71944" end="71955" title="Celtic Park" label="Celtic Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444815" start="72468" end="72480" title="1988–89 Football League" label="league title"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077802" start="72709" end="72725" title="Liverpool Walton" label="Liverpool Walton"/>
<link wikidata="Q480068" start="72727" end="72741" title="Steve Rotheram" label="Steve Rotheram"/>
<link wikidata="Q524352" start="72829" end="72836" title="Hansard" label="Hansard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6658351" start="72875" end="72897" title="Liverpool City Council" label="Liverpool City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q16143119" start="73114" end="73126" title="Phil Scraton" label="Phil Scraton"/>
<link wikidata="Q323888" start="73182" end="73195" title="Heysel Stadium disaster" label="Heysel factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16820499" start="73206" end="73235" title="Football hooliganism in the United Kingdom" label="&amp;quot;hooligan hysteria&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923459" start="73332" end="73344" title="public order" label="public order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312950" start="73499" end="73509" title="Daily Star (British newspaper)" label="Daily Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q210534" start="73605" end="73615" title="Daily Mail" label="Daily Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q610190" start="73727" end="73744" title="The Daily Express" label="The Daily Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q666494" start="73881" end="73897" title="Evening Standard" label="Evening Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403102" start="74384" end="74404" title="Liverpool Daily Post" label="Liverpool Daily Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070672" start="74791" end="74814" title="Manchester Evening News" label="Manchester Evening News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571030" start="74941" end="74955" title="Yorkshire Post" label="Yorkshire Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492750" start="75138" end="75152" title="Sheffield Star" label="Sheffield Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q126269" start="75682" end="75695" title="Wolverhampton" label="Wolverhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421650" start="75708" end="75726" title="Express &amp;amp; Star" label="Express &amp;amp; Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q208875" start="76163" end="76170" title="The Sun (United Kingdom)" label="The Sun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76395" end="76397" title="Constable#United Kingdom" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q23807837" start="76405" end="76417" title="mouth-to-mouth resuscitation" label="kiss of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q6074365" start="76871" end="76885" title="Irvine Patnick" label="Irvine Patnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="77868" end="77880" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="78128" end="78148" title="Asphyxia#Compressive asphyxia" label="compression asphyxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106918" start="78293" end="78305" title="Chris Horrie" label="Chris Horrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="78423" end="78439" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q53944" start="78649" end="78663" title="Rupert Murdoch" label="Rupert Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286157" start="78785" end="78798" title="Question Time" label="Question Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q23100" start="79568" end="79578" title="Merseyside" label="Merseyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q183399" start="79729" end="79744" title="Financial Times" label="Financial Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106918" start="79869" end="79881" title="Chris Horrie" label="Chris Horrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q266613" start="80151" end="80163" title="Wayne Rooney" label="Wayne Rooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403102" start="80593" end="80607" title="Liverpool Post" label="Liverpool Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q471851" start="81457" end="81470" title="James Murdoch" label="James Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447672" start="81578" end="81594" title="Select committee (United Kingdom)" label="Select committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057189" start="81612" end="81652" title="News International phone hacking scandal" label="News International phone hacking scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692767" start="81962" end="81969" title="Low-life" label="lowlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105124" start="82330" end="82348" title="News UK" label="News International"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="82620" end="82632" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="82639" end="82646" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q217228" start="82922" end="82930" title="Sky News" label="Sky News"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217794" start="82969" end="82984" title="Tom Newton Dunn" label="Tom Newton Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839249" start="83135" end="83150" title="Trevor Kavanagh" label="Trevor Kavanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="83639" end="83651" title="Everton F.C." label="Everton F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q326240" start="83791" end="83803" title="Ross Barkley" label="Ross Barkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344798" start="83910" end="83923" title="Edward Pearce (journalist)" label="Edward Pearce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241610" start="84510" end="84523" title="Press Council (UK)" label="Press Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="84764" end="84769" title="The Times" label="Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q47778" start="85384" end="85396" title="Gary Lineker" label="Gary Lineker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177071" start="85473" end="85484" title="David Walsh (journalist)" label="David Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q221986" start="85519" end="85531" title="Sunday Times" label="Sunday Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q157015" start="85923" end="85926" title="FHM" label="FHM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310500" start="86134" end="86138" title="Emap" label="Emap"/>
<link wikidata="Q86584" start="87528" end="87546" title="2002 Bali bombings" label="2002 Bali bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790750" start="87701" end="87714" title="The Spectator" label="The Spectator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117105" start="87842" end="87877" title="Kenneth Bigley" label="Kenneth John &amp;quot;Ken&amp;quot; Bigley"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="88177" end="88190" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7518942" start="88228" end="88240" title="Simon Heffer" label="Simon Heffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897003" start="88795" end="88811" title="unlawful killing" label="unlawful killing"/>
<link wikidata="Q607514" start="88917" end="88927" title="EastEnders" label="EastEnders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869703" start="88972" end="88986" title="Minty Peterson" label="Minty Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132718" start="88998" end="89010" title="Cliff Parisi" label="Cliff Parisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6161391" start="89403" end="89412" title="Jase Dyer" label="Jase Dyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529532" start="89484" end="89489" title="Ofcom" label="Ofcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q299403" start="89564" end="89579" title="Charles Itandje" label="Charles Itandje"/>
<link wikidata="Q316726" start="89759" end="89773" title="Damien Plessis" label="Damien Plessis"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="90020" end="90027" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q176883" start="90054" end="90073" title="2010 FIFA World Cup" label="2010 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q333533" start="90133" end="90144" title="Jeremy Hunt" label="Jeremy Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q44980" start="91039" end="91052" title="Alex Ferguson" label="Alex Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q577831" start="91162" end="91171" title="Ken Bates" label="Ken Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581708" start="91260" end="91289" title="2000 UEFA Cup semi-final violence" label="with reference to Galatasaray"/>
<link wikidata="Q308923" start="91377" end="91383" title="Munich air disaster" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q308923" start="91481" end="91508" title="Munich air disaster" label="Munich air disaster of 1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087775" start="91552" end="91573" title="Oliver Popplewell" label="Sir Oliver Popplewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116681" start="91624" end="91650" title="Bradford City stadium fire" label="Bradford City stadium fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q969279" start="91654" end="91667" title="Valley Parade" label="Valley Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q480068" start="92331" end="92345" title="Steve Rotheram" label="Steve Rotheram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087334" start="92885" end="92907" title="Freedom of Information Act 2000" label="Freedom of Information"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025653" start="93163" end="93190" title="Cambridgeshire Constabulary" label="Cambridgeshire Constabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q18161855" start="93889" end="93934" title="South Yorkshire Police and Crime Commissioner" label="South Yorkshire Police and Crime Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706181" start="93935" end="93948" title="Alan Billings" label="Alan Billings"/>
<link wikidata="Q52" start="94141" end="94150" title="Wikipedia" label="Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792002" start="94261" end="94279" title="Fox Soccer Channel" label="Fox Soccer Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277465" start="94284" end="94290" title="Sirius XM" label="Sirius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893252" start="94801" end="94819" title="Bernard Ingham" label="Sir Bernard Ingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090880" start="95505" end="95511" title="Topman" label="Topman"/>
<link wikidata="Q409" start="95954" end="95964" title="Bob Marley" label="Bob Marley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="95970" end="95989" title="Bob Marley and the Wailers discography#1990s" label="re-released in 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="96172" end="96181" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690485" start="96195" end="96205" title="After Dark (TV programme)" label="After Dark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="96273" end="96302" title="After Dark (TV programme)#Hillsborough and &amp;quot;Football – The Final Whistle?&amp;quot;" label="Football – The Final Whistle?"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358011" start="96992" end="97002" title="Roger Cook (journalist)" label="Roger Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727540" start="97081" end="97096" title="The Cook Report" label="The Cook Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476957" start="97307" end="97325" title="Granada Television" label="Granada Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="97346" end="97351" title="British Academy of Film and Television Arts" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q312380" start="97407" end="97428" title="Christopher Eccleston" label="Christopher Eccleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767708" start="97430" end="97446" title="Annabelle Apsion" label="Annabelle Apsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736441" start="97448" end="97463" title="Ricky Tomlinson" label="Ricky Tomlinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770409" start="97468" end="97479" title="Mark Womack (British actor)" label="Mark Womack"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="97716" end="97719" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="97828" end="97839" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634186" start="97932" end="97945" title="Sue MacGregor" label="Sue MacGregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="98366" end="98370" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030809" start="98442" end="98451" title="30 for 30" label="30 for 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014110" start="98547" end="98560" title="Daniel Gordon (film director)" label="Daniel Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135310" start="98941" end="98956" title="security camera" label="security camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q110501166" start="99316" end="99320" title="Anne (British TV series)" label="Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q622370" start="99342" end="99351" title="docudrama" label="docudrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q15993657" start="99358" end="99377" title="Anne Williams (activist)" label="Anne Williams&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="99450" end="99453" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853137" start="99497" end="99509" title="Maxine Peake" label="Maxine Peake"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="99552" end="99564" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282769" start="99716" end="99731" title="Jonathan Harvey (playwright)" label="Jonathan Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483494" start="99839" end="99852" title="Lance Nielsen" label="Lance Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616818" start="100215" end="100275" title="List of disasters in Great Britain and Ireland by death toll" label="List of disasters in Great Britain and Ireland by death toll"/>
<link wikidata="Q114350394" start="100278" end="100305" title="Kanjuruhan Stadium disaster" label="Kanjuruhan Stadium disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q507926" start="100575" end="100585" title="Owen Luder" label="Owen Luder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067943" start="100643" end="100647" title="RIBA" label="RIBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q843265" start="100649" end="100663" title="Sports Council" label="Sports Council"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59692" wikidata="Q874492" url="?curid=59692" title="Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said">
<text>Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said is a 1974 science fiction novel by American writer Philip K. Dick. The novel is set in a futuristic dystopia where the United States has become a police state in the aftermath of a Second American Civil War. The story follows genetically enhanced pop singer and television star Jason Taverner who wakes up in a world where he has never existed.

The book was nominated for a Nebula Award in 1974 and a Hugo Award in 1975, and was awarded the John W. Campbell Memorial Award for Best Science Fiction Novel in 1975.

==Plot==
The novel is set in a dystopian version of 1988, following a Second Civil War which led to the collapse of the United States&#x27; democratic institutions. The National Guard (&quot;nats&quot;) and US police force (&quot;pols&quot;) reestablished social order through instituting a dictatorship, with a &quot;Director&quot; at the apex, and police marshals and generals as operational commanders in the field. Resistance to the regime is largely confined to university campuses, where radicalized former university students eke out a desperate existence in subterranean kibbutzim. Recreational drug use is widespread, and the age of consent has been lowered to 12. The black population has almost been rendered extinct. Most commuting is undertaken by personal aircraft, allowing great distances to be covered in little time.

The novel begins with the protagonist, Jason Taverner, a singer, hosting his weekly TV show which has an audience of 30 million viewers. His special guest is his girlfriend Heather Hart, also a singer. Both Hart and Taverner are &quot;Sixes&quot;, members of an elite class of genetically engineered humans. While leaving the studio, Taverner is telephoned by a former lover, who asks him to pay her a visit. When Taverner arrives at her apartment, the former lover attacks him by throwing a parasitic life-form at him. Although he manages to remove most of the life-form, parts of it are left inside him. After being rescued by Hart, he is taken to a medical facility.

Waking up the following day in a seedy hotel with no identification, Taverner becomes worried, as failure to produce identification at one of the numerous police checkpoints would lead to imprisonment in a forced labor camp. Through a succession of phone calls made from the hotel to colleagues and friends who now claim not to know him, Taverner establishes that he is no longer recognized by the outside world. He soon manages to bribe the hotel&#x27;s clerk into taking him to Kathy Nelson, a forger of government documents. However, Kathy reveals that both she and the clerk are police informants, and that the lobby clerk has placed a microscopic tracking device on him. She promises not to turn Taverner over to the police on the condition that he spend the night with her. Although he attempts to escape, Kathy confronts him again after he successfully passes a police checkpoint using the forged identity cards. Feeling in her debt, he accompanies Kathy to her apartment block, where Inspector McNulty, Kathy&#x27;s police handler, is waiting. McNulty has located Taverner via the tracking device the hotel lobby clerk placed on him, and instructs Taverner to come with him to the 469th Precinct police station so that further biometric identity checks can be performed.

At the station, McNulty erroneously reports the man&#x27;s name as Jason Tavern, revealing the identity of a Wyoming diesel engine mechanic. During questioning, Taverner goes along with McNulty&#x27;s mistake, explaining that he no longer resembles Tavern due to extensive plastic surgery. McNulty accepts this explanation and decides to release Taverner while lab checks are run on the rest of the documents. He issues Taverner a seven-day police pass to ensure he can pass police checkpoints in the interim period. Deciding to lie low, Taverner heads to a Las Vegas bar in the hopes of meeting a woman with whom he can stay. Instead, he encounters a former lover, Ruth Gomen; although she no longer recognizes him, he succeeds in his bid to seduce her and is taken back to her apartment. On the orders of Police General Felix Buckman, Gomen&#x27;s apartment is raided and Taverner is taken into custody, being transported immediately to the Police Academy in Los Angeles.

Buckman personally interrogates Taverner, soon reaching the conclusion that Taverner genuinely does not know why he no longer appears to exist. However, he suspects that Taverner may be part of a larger plot involving the Sixes. He orders Taverner released, although ensuring that tracking devices are again placed on him. Outside the police academy, Taverner is approached by Alys Buckman, Felix&#x27;s hypersexual sister and lover. Alys removes the tracking devices from Taverner and invites him to the home she shares with her brother. On the way there, she tells Taverner that she knows he is a TV star and reveals copies of his records.

At the Buckmans&#x27; home, Taverner takes Alys up on an offer of mescaline. When he has a bad reaction to the drug, Alys goes to find him a medicine to counteract it. When she does not return, Taverner goes to search for her, only to find her skeletal remains on the bathroom floor. Frightened and confused, he flees, unsuccessfully pursued by a private security guard. To aid in his escape, he asks for the help of Mary Anne Dominic, a potter. Heading to a cafe with her, they find that one of his records is on the jukebox. When his song plays, people begin to recognize him as a celebrity. After parting with Dominic, Taverner goes to the apartment of his celebrity girlfriend Heather Hart. She returns home, horrified, and shows Taverner a newspaper mentioning that he is wanted in connection with Alys Buckman&#x27;s death, the motive believed to have been his jealousy over Alys&#x27; purported relationship with Hart.

An autopsy reveals that Alys&#x27; death was caused by an experimental reality-warping drug called KR-3. The coroner explains to Felix that, as Alys was a fan of Taverner, her use of the drug caused Taverner to be transported to a parallel universe where he no longer existed. Her death then caused his return to his own universe. The Police General decides to implicate Taverner in Alys&#x27; death to distract attention from his incest. The press are informed that Taverner is a suspect in the case and, wishing to clear his name, Taverner surrenders himself to the police. Heartbroken over the death of his sister, Felix returns home, suffering a nervous breakdown on the way.

In an epilogue, the final fates of the main characters are disclosed. Buckman retires to Borneo where he is assassinated soon after writing an exposé of the global police apparatus. Taverner is cleared of all charges and dies of old age, while Heather Hart abandons her celebrity career and becomes a recluse. Dominic&#x27;s pottery wins an international award and her works become of great value while she lives into her eighties. KR-3 test trials are deemed too destructive and the project is abandoned. Ultimately, the revolutionary students give up and voluntarily enter forced-labor camps. The detention camps later dwindle away and close down, the government no longer posing a threat.

==Reception==
&quot;New York Times&quot; reviewer Gerald Jonas praised the novel, saying that &quot;Dick skillfully explores the psychological ramifications of this nightmare,&quot; but concludes that the story&#x27;s concluding rationalization of its events is &quot;an artistic miscalculation [and] a major flaw in an otherwise superb novel.&quot;

== Title ==
The title is a reference to &quot;Flow, my tears&quot;, an ayre by the 16th century composer John Dowland, setting to music a poem by an anonymous author (possibly Dowland himself). Quotations from the piece begin every major section of the novel, and Dowland&#x27;s work is referenced in several of Dick&#x27;s works. The poem begins:

The novel is parodied as &quot;The Android Cried Me a River&quot; in Dick&#x27;s later novel &quot;VALIS&quot;.

==Author&#x27;s interpretation==
In his undelivered speech &quot;How to Build a Universe That Doesn&#x27;t Fall Apart Two Days Later,&quot; Dick recounts how in describing an incident at the end of the book (end of chapter 27) to an Episcopalian priest, the priest noted its striking similarity to a scene in the Acts of the Apostles in the Bible. In Dick&#x27;s book, the police chief, Felix Buckman, meets a black stranger at an all-night gas station, and uncharacteristically makes an emotional connection with him. After handing the stranger a drawing of a heart pierced by an arrow, Buckman flies away, but he quickly returns and hugs the stranger, and they strike up a friendly conversation. In Acts Chapter 8, the disciple Philip meets an Ethiopian eunuch (a black man) sitting in a chariot, to whom he explains a passage from the Book of Isaiah, and then converts him to Christianity.

Dick further notes that eight years after writing the book, he himself uncharacteristically came to the aid of a black stranger who had run out of gas. After giving the man some money and then driving away, he returned to help the man reach a gas station. Dick was then struck by the similarity between this incident and that described in his book.

Dick also recounts an unusual dream he had when writing the book, and how he felt compelled to get it into the text of the novel. Years later, he came to interpret this dream as the key to understanding the real meaning of the story, stating:
==Adaptations==
===Stage===
Mabou Mines presented the world premiere of a theatrical adaptation of &quot;Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said&quot; at the Boston Shakespeare Theatre from June 18–30, 1985. The play received mixed reviews but was widely covered by the Boston media. Linda Hartinian, a personal friend of Dick, adapted the novel to the stage and designed the set, in addition to portraying Mary Ann Dominic and reading Dick&#x27;s 1981 &quot;Tagore Letter&quot; at the end of the play.

The &quot;Boston Phoenix&quot; quotes Hartinian on the subject in an interview before the play opened: &quot;[Dick] was someone I admired and looked up to, and I knew he had always wanted one of his works to be adapted. One day when I came to visit him he jumped up and grabbed this manuscript and said &#x27;I want to give you something, but I don&#x27;t have anything, so I&#x27;m going to give you this manuscript, and someday its gonna be worth a lot of money.&#x27;&quot; The &quot;Phoenix&quot; continues, &quot;It was a draft of &quot;Flow My Tears&quot;, and as Hartinian discovered when she sat down to adapt the book, it contained many passages that had been cut from the published text, including a discussion of ways to remember deceased writers that was to prove prescient. Naturally Hartinian based her script on her private edition.&quot;

The play was directed by Bill Raymond, Hartinian&#x27;s husband. &quot;It was in response to Linda&#x27;s loss that we chose &quot;Tears&quot;,&quot; he told the Phoenix, &quot;because &quot;Flow My Tears&quot; is in fact a novel about grief, and not necessarily just about loss of identity.&quot;

The play has been performed by Mabou Mines in Boston and New York City, and by the Prop Theatre in Chicago, and the Evidence Room in Los Angeles. The Evidence Room production received positive reviews including one from the Los Angeles Times which stated that &quot;the piece is vintage Dick, fluctuating between the inventive and the paranoiac.&quot;

===Film ===
On February 1, 2004, &quot;Variety&quot; announced that Utopia Pictures &amp; Television had acquired the rights to produce adaptations of three of Dick&#x27;s novels: &quot;Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said&quot;, &quot;VALIS&quot; and &quot;Radio Free Albemuth&quot;. In 2007, The Halcyon Company acquired the first-look rights to Dick&#x27;s works, and in May 2009 they announced that after &quot;Terminator Salvation&quot; (2009), they would next adapt &quot;Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said&quot;.

The book is referenced in the 2001 film &quot; Waking Life&quot; and in Richard Kelly&#x27;s 2006 film &quot;Southland Tales&quot;, in which an underground revolutionary dressed as a police officer (played by Jon Lovitz) says, &quot;Flow my tears&quot; as he shoots two rivals. Also, two of the main characters are Roland and Ronald Taverner.

===Music ===
Gary Numan referenced the novel in the 1978 song &quot;Listen to the Sirens&quot; from the debut Tubeway Army album. The song opens with the lyric, &quot;&quot;Flow My Tears&quot;, the new police song&quot;.&quot;

The Human League utilised a character named Jason Taverner as the host of their elusive 1979 demo tape, which has since become known by fans as the &quot;Taverner Tape&quot;. Taverner introduces each of the songs and mentions that he hosts his own network TV show.

American grindcore band Discordance Axis, released a song by the same name on their 1997 album &quot;Jouhou&quot;. Discordance Axis were influenced by cyberpunk and science fiction.

Avant-Pop collective MMC Ensemble, references the novel on their first release, &quot;Twin Lovers&quot; within the songs &quot;Montgomery L. Hopkins&quot;, &quot;Jason Taverner Does Not Exist&quot;, &quot;Sixes&quot;, &quot;Watts Proper&quot;, and &quot;Twin Lovers&quot;.

The American indie rock band Built to Spill released a song, &quot;Nowhere Nothin&#x27; Fuckup&quot; on their 1993 album &quot;Ultimate Alternative Wavers&quot;. The song on the album has the same name as protagonist Jason Taverner&#x27;s hit played repeatedly on the jukebox by character Anne Dominic in the coffee shop in the novel.

==References==
== External links ==
*Summary at official PKD website
*&quot;Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said&quot; cover art gallery
*&quot;Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said&quot; reviewed at The SF Site
*&quot;Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said&quot; at Worlds Without End</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="44" end="59" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q171091" start="85" end="99" title="Philip K. Dick" label="Philip K. Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="134" end="142" title="dystopia" label="dystopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q217405" start="180" end="192" title="police state" label="police state"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="296" end="306" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q194285" start="409" end="421" title="Nebula Award" label="Nebula Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q188914" start="436" end="446" title="Hugo Award" label="Hugo Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030402" start="476" end="538" title="John W. Campbell Memorial Award for Best Science Fiction Novel" label="John W. Campbell Memorial Award for Best Science Fiction Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="580" end="588" title="dystopia" label="dystopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q928670" start="718" end="732" title="National Guard of the United States" label="National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q35535" start="759" end="765" title="police" label="police"/>
<link wikidata="Q161387" start="1128" end="1135" title="kibbutz" label="kibbutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708739" start="1139" end="1160" title="Recreational drug use" label="Recreational drug use"/>
<link wikidata="Q327538" start="1184" end="1198" title="age of consent" label="age of consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="1227" end="1232" title="African Americans" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q159236" start="1662" end="1684" title="genetic engineering" label="genetically engineered"/>
<link wikidata="Q186517" start="1877" end="1886" title="parasite" label="parasitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q267907" start="4715" end="4726" title="Hypersexuality" label="hypersexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q193140" start="5020" end="5029" title="mescaline" label="mescaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="5392" end="5398" title="Pottery" label="potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q41482" start="5884" end="5891" title="autopsy" label="autopsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12221140" start="6112" end="6129" title="Parallel universe (fiction)" label="parallel universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="6531" end="6548" title="Mental breakdown" label="nervous breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771692" start="6568" end="6576" title="epilogue" label="epilogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="6651" end="6657" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127717" start="6705" end="6711" title="investigative journalism" label="exposé"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="7275" end="7289" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3952772" start="7652" end="7666" title="Flow, my tears" label="Flow, my tears"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7677" end="7681" title="Air (music)#English lute ayres" label="ayre"/>
<link wikidata="Q207355" start="7711" end="7723" title="John Dowland" label="John Dowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320318" start="8054" end="8059" title="VALIS" label="VALIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q40309" start="8381" end="8401" title="Acts of the Apostles" label="Acts of the Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="8409" end="8414" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374017" start="8814" end="8830" title="Ethiopian eunuch" label="Ethiopian eunuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q131458" start="8906" end="8920" title="Book of Isaiah" label="Book of Isaiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273812" start="9583" end="9594" title="Mabou Mines" label="Mabou Mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="9819" end="9825" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756161" start="10053" end="10083" title="The Boston Phoenix" label="The &amp;quot;Boston Phoenix&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390478" start="10933" end="10945" title="Bill Raymond" label="Bill Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273812" start="11238" end="11249" title="Mabou Mines" label="Mabou Mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="11264" end="11277" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11290" end="11302" title="Prop Theatre" label="Prop Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="11306" end="11313" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="11340" end="11351" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="11431" end="11448" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="11599" end="11606" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q16968923" start="11628" end="11660" title="Utopia Pictures &amp;amp; Television" label="Utopia Pictures &amp;amp; Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320318" start="11793" end="11798" title="VALIS" label="VALIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416949" start="11815" end="11834" title="Radio Free Albemuth" label="Radio Free Albemuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987455" start="11851" end="11870" title="The Halcyon Company" label="The Halcyon Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q191543" start="11972" end="11992" title="Terminator Salvation" label="Terminator Salvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q300042" start="12124" end="12135" title="Waking Life" label="Waking Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q711022" start="12149" end="12162" title="Richard Kelly (director)" label="Richard Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476272" start="12186" end="12201" title="Southland Tales" label="Southland Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q296524" start="12286" end="12296" title="Jon Lovitz" label="Jon Lovitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q331731" start="12434" end="12444" title="Gary Numan" label="Gary Numan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528766" start="12531" end="12543" title="Tubeway Army" label="Tubeway Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q730158" start="12649" end="12665" title="The Human League" label="The Human League"/>
<link wikidata="Q188534" start="12924" end="12933" title="grindcore" label="grindcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250099" start="12939" end="12955" title="Discordance Axis" label="Discordance Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294546" start="13016" end="13022" title="Jouhou" label="Jouhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q174526" start="13066" end="13075" title="cyberpunk" label="cyberpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827664" start="13098" end="13107" title="Avant-Pop" label="Avant-Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q183504" start="13385" end="13395" title="indie rock" label="indie rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003115" start="13401" end="13415" title="Built to Spill" label="Built to Spill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880121" start="13499" end="13526" title="Ultimate Alternative Wavers" label="Ultimate Alternative Wavers"/>
<link wikidata="Q815249" start="13640" end="13647" title="jukebox" label="jukebox"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59694" wikidata="Q8193763" url="?curid=59694" title="Fetish model">
<text>A fetish model is a model who models fetish clothing or accessories that augment their body in a fetish-like manner or in fetishistic situations. Fetish models do not necessarily work exclusively in that form of modeling.

Fetish models often wear fetish fashion, an extreme and provocative style of clothing designed to elicit a strong emotional reaction or sexual desire on the part of the observer. Such clothing ranges from exotic stylized bathing suits to body armor and sci-fi fantasy suits.

Bondage models appear in various forms of bondage. Other fetish modeling may involve body modification, appearing in fetish photography or exotic glamour photography, or wearing sexual fantasy costumes that fulfil a uniform fetish (e.g. French maid, nurse, etc.). As well as modelling for photography, fetish models also make public appearances at events such as BDSM fairs and parties.

Some pornographic actors and glamour models also work as fetish models.

==Types of fetish models==
Fetish modelling covers a wide range of fetishes, including those involving bondage and &#x27;, latex and PVC, corsets, tattoos, body piercings, shoe fetishism, food fetishism and &#x27;. Fetishes may also involve body parts, such as breast fetishism, navel fetishism and foot fetishism.

Fetish models are usually considered to work in a different category from Gothic fashion models or alternative models, whose work is generally far more niche-specific. Fetish modelling is usually considered to be a part of the sex industry due to the popular perception that it has a solely adult audience. However, in recent times, many aspects of the fetish fashion market have been incorporated and accepted into mainstream fashion, with fashion creators using exotic materials such as latex or sheer fabric instead of cotton or wool for their creations. Some fetish models only involve themselves in the aesthetic aspects of the work rather than involving themselves directly with sex and sexuality.

==Popular culture==

There have been several notable performers and producers of both the bondage and fetish area who have attained mainstream notability. The most recognized is the 1950s bondage model and pin-up girl, Bettie Page, who posed for photographer Irving Klaw for mail-order photographs and was subsequently featured in &quot;Playboy&quot;. She was the first famous bondage model.

In the 1960s, the popular British TV program &quot;The Avengers&quot; included several fetish costume elements worn by its female lead performers. This began with Honor Blackman and included Diana Rigg&#x27;s leather catsuits and leotards, as well as Tara King&#x27;s use of thigh-length boots and leather evening gloves.

The neo-burlesque performer Dita Von Teese started her career as a fetish model and stripper. Other notable fetish models include the Russian-American performer Mosh and the Canadian photographic model Bianca Beauchamp.

==Markets==
There are specialized fetish magazines that feature and promote fetish models, including &quot;Skin Two&quot;, &quot;Secret&quot;, Italian &quot;A Magazine&quot; (not to be confused with the now defunct &quot;A(sian) Magazine&quot;), and &quot;Marquis&quot;.

Fetish models may run personal adult pay websites and are featured on fetish adult pay sites.

There are also fetish fashion designers. Most of these designers employ fetish models for their clothing line. Fetish fashion shows are hosted several times a year, including Vex, The Baroness, Skintwo, and House of Harlot.

==Awards==
The SIGNY awards were awarded each year between 2000 and 2005 (except 2002) to the bondage models voted as the best of that year. The SIGNY award winners have been:

* 2000: Eve Ellis, runners-up Ashley Renee, Andrea Neal
* 2001: Ashley Renee, runners-up Andrea Neal, Eve Ellis
* 2003: Jasmine Sinclair, runners-up Amber Michaels, Ashley Renee.
* 2004: Jenni Lee, runners-up Jewell Marceau, Emily Marilyn (Molly Matthews)
* 2005: Jewell Marceau, runners-up Ashley Renee, Christina Carter

==See also==
*Bondage rigger
*Fetish art
*Japanese bondage
*Nyotaimori – serving sushi on the body of a naked woman
*Total enclosure fetishism
*Uniform fetishism

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8193763" start="2" end="14" title="Fetish model" label="fetish model"/>
<link wikidata="Q4610556" start="20" end="25" title="Model (person)" label="model"/>
<link wikidata="Q207791" start="97" end="103" title="Sexual fetishism" label="fetish"/>
<link wikidata="Q770546" start="248" end="262" title="fetish fashion" label="fetish fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q212989" start="444" end="457" title="bathing suits" label="bathing suits"/>
<link wikidata="Q485027" start="461" end="471" title="body armor" label="body armor"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="476" end="482" title="sci-fi" label="sci-fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8193763" start="499" end="513" title="Fetish model" label="Bondage models"/>
<link wikidata="Q273972" start="541" end="548" title="Bondage (BDSM)" label="bondage"/>
<link wikidata="Q890057" start="584" end="601" title="body modification" label="body modification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070891" start="616" end="634" title="fetish photography" label="fetish photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010947" start="645" end="664" title="glamour photography" label="glamour photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969374" start="677" end="691" title="sexual fantasy" label="sexual fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6149288" start="715" end="729" title="uniform fetish" label="uniform fetish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775843" start="736" end="747" title="French maid" label="French maid"/>
<link wikidata="Q190845" start="862" end="866" title="BDSM" label="BDSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q488111" start="892" end="910" title="pornographic actor" label="pornographic actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4610556" start="916" end="929" title="glamour model" label="glamour model"/>
<link wikidata="Q273972" start="1063" end="1070" title="bondage (BDSM)" label="bondage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417676" start="1083" end="1096" title="Latex and PVC fetishism" label="latex and PVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4941342" start="1098" end="1104" title="Bondage corset" label="corset"/>
<link wikidata="Q72941682" start="1107" end="1113" title="tattoo" label="tattoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q157943" start="1116" end="1129" title="body piercing" label="body piercing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651685" start="1132" end="1146" title="shoe fetishism" label="shoe fetishism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290888" start="1148" end="1162" title="Food play" label="food fetishism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651749" start="1221" end="1237" title="breast fetishism" label="breast fetishism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982257" start="1239" end="1254" title="navel fetishism" label="navel fetishism"/>
<link wikidata="Q463859" start="1259" end="1273" title="foot fetishism" label="foot fetishism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104919" start="1350" end="1364" title="Gothic fashion" label="Gothic fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736532" start="1375" end="1392" title="alternative model" label="alternative model"/>
<link wikidata="Q837322" start="1503" end="1515" title="sex industry" label="sex industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492502" start="1774" end="1786" title="sheer fabric" label="sheer fabric"/>
<link wikidata="Q35986" start="1884" end="1893" title="aesthetic" label="aesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q151092" start="2187" end="2198" title="pin-up girl" label="pin-up girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q61898" start="2200" end="2211" title="Bettie Page" label="Bettie Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q711617" start="2240" end="2251" title="Irving Klaw" label="Irving Klaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="2318" end="2325" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2400" end="2407" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q113700" start="2425" end="2437" title="The Avengers (TV series)" label="The Avengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q232840" start="2537" end="2551" title="Honor Blackman" label="Honor Blackman"/>
<link wikidata="Q232876" start="2565" end="2575" title="Diana Rigg" label="Diana Rigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051317" start="2591" end="2598" title="catsuit" label="catsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820061" start="2604" end="2611" title="leotard" label="leotard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515548" start="2625" end="2634" title="Tara King" label="Tara King"/>
<link wikidata="Q15647197" start="2649" end="2667" title="thigh-length boots" label="thigh-length boots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138314" start="2680" end="2693" title="evening glove" label="evening glove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982463" start="2701" end="2714" title="neo-burlesque" label="neo-burlesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q244214" start="2725" end="2739" title="Dita Von Teese" label="Dita Von Teese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141526" start="2781" end="2789" title="stripper" label="stripper"/>
<link wikidata="Q15743863" start="2858" end="2862" title="Mosh (model)" label="Mosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q258869" start="2899" end="2915" title="Bianca Beauchamp" label="Bianca Beauchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817205" start="2952" end="2967" title="fetish magazine" label="fetish magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535365" start="3025" end="3033" title="Skin Two" label="Skin Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563215" start="3174" end="3181" title="Marquis (magazine)" label="Marquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q29583" start="3307" end="3323" title="fashion designer" label="fashion designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154060" start="4024" end="4038" title="Bondage rigger" label="Bondage rigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070891" start="4040" end="4050" title="Fetish art" label="Fetish art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190983" start="4052" end="4068" title="Japanese bondage" label="Japanese bondage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063174" start="4070" end="4080" title="Nyotaimori" label="Nyotaimori"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828112" start="4127" end="4152" title="Total enclosure fetishism" label="Total enclosure fetishism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6149288" start="4154" end="4171" title="Uniform fetishism" label="Uniform fetishism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59695" wikidata="Q1881291" url="?curid=59695" title="MCI Inc.">
<text>MCI, Inc. (formerly WorldCom and MCI WorldCom) was a telecommunications company. For a time, it was the second-largest long-distance telephone company in the United States, after AT&amp;T. WorldCom grew largely by acquiring other telecommunications companies, including MCI Communications in 1998, and filed for bankruptcy in 2002 after an accounting scandal, in which several executives, including CEO Bernard Ebbers, were convicted of a scheme to inflate the company&#x27;s assets. In January 2006, the company, by then renamed MCI, was acquired by Verizon Communications and was later integrated into Verizon Business.

WorldCom was originally headquartered in Clinton, Mississippi before relocating to Ashburn, Virginia when it changed its name to MCI.

==History==
===Foundation===
In 1983, in a coffee shop in Hattiesburg, Mississippi, Bernard Ebbers and three other investors formed Long Distance Discount Services, Inc. based in Jackson, Mississippi and in 1985, Ebbers was named chief executive officer. The company acquired over 60 telecommunications firms, and in 1995, it changed its name to WorldCom.

In 1989, it became a corporation as a result of a merger with Advantage Companies Inc. The company name was changed to LDDS WorldCom in 1995, and it relocated to Clinton, Mississippi.

The company grew rapidly in the 1990s, after completing several mergers and acquisitions.

WorldCom&#x27;s first major acquisition was in 1992 with the $720 million acquisition of Advanced Telecommunications Corporation, outbidding larger rivals Sprint Corporation and AT&amp;T to secure the deal, making WorldCom a larger player in the telecoms market.

Other acquisitions included: Metromedia Communication Corp. and Resurgens Communications Group in 1993, IDB Communications Group, Inc (1994), Williams Technology Group, Inc. (1995), and MFS Communications Company (1996), and MCI in 1998. The acquisition of MFS included UUNET Technologies, Inc., which had been acquired by MFS shortly before the merger with WorldCom. In February 1998, WorldCom acquired CompuServe from its parent company H&amp;R Block. WorldCom then retained the CompuServe Network Services Division, sold its online service to America Online, and received AOL&#x27;s network division, ANS. WorldCom acquired the corporate parent of Digex, Intermedia Communications in June 2001 and then sold all of Intermedia&#x27;s non-Digex assets to Allegiance Telecom.

===MCI acquisition===

On November 4, 1997, WorldCom and MCI Communications announced a $37 billion merger to form MCI WorldCom, making it the largest corporate merger in U.S. history. On September 15, 1998, the merger was consummated, forming MCI WorldCom. MCI divested itself of its &quot;internetMCI&quot; business to gain approval from the United States Department of Justice.

=== Proposed Sprint merger ===

On October 5, 1999, Sprint Corporation and MCI WorldCom announced a $129 billion merger. Had the deal been completed, it would have been the largest corporate merger in history. The merged company would have surpassed AT&amp;T as the largest communications company in the United States. However, the deal floundered due to opposition from the U.S. Department of Justice and the European Union on concerns that it would create a monopoly. On July 13, 2000, the boards of directors of both companies terminated the merger. Later that year, MCI WorldCom renamed itself &quot;WorldCom&quot;.

===Accounting scandals===

Between September 2000 and April 2002, the board of directors of WorldCom authorized several loans and loan guarantees to CEO Bernard Ebbers so that he would not have to sell his WorldCom shares to meet margin calls as the share price plummeted during the bursting of the dot-com bubble. By April 2002, the board had lost patience with these loans. Directors also believed that Ebbers did not seem to have a coherent strategy after the Sprint merger collapsed. On April 26, the board voted to ask for Ebbers&#x27; resignation. Ebbers formally resigned on April 30, 2002 and was replaced by John W. Sidgmore, former CEO of UUNET. As part of his departure, Ebbers&#x27;s loans were consolidated into a single $408.2 million promissory note. In 2003, Ebbers defaulted on the note and WorldCom foreclosed on many of his assets.

Beginning modestly during mid-1999 and continuing at an accelerated pace through May 2002, Ebbers, CFO Scott Sullivan, controller David Myers and general accounting director Buford &quot;Buddy&quot; Yates used fraudulent accounting methods to disguise WorldCom&#x27;s decreasing earnings in order to maintain the company&#x27;s stock price.

The fraud was accomplished primarily in two ways:

#Booking &quot;line costs&quot; (interconnection expenses with other telecommunication companies) as capital expenditures on the balance sheet instead of expenses.
#Inflating revenues with bogus accounting entries from &quot;corporate unallocated revenue accounts&quot;.

In June 2002, a small team of internal auditors at WorldCom led by division vice president Cynthia Cooper and senior associate Eugene Morse worked together, often at night and secretly, to investigate and reveal what was ultimately discovered to be $3.8 billion worth of fraudulent entries in WorldCom&#x27;s books. The investigation was triggered by suspicious balance sheet entries discovered during a routine capital expenditure audit. Cooper notified the company&#x27;s audit committee and board of directors in June 2002. The board moved swiftly, forcing Myers to resign and firing Sullivan when he refused to resign. Arthur Andersen withdrew its audit opinion for 2001. Cooper and her team had exposed the largest accounting fraud in American history, displacing the fraud uncovered at Enron less than a year earlier. It would remain the largest accounting fraud ever uncovered until the exposure of Bernard Madoff&#x27;s giant Ponzi scheme in 2008.

By this time, the U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of Mississippi, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission were already looking into the matter as well. The SEC launched a formal inquiry into these matters on June 26, 2002. The SEC was already investigating WorldCom for questionable accounting practices. By the end of 2003, it was estimated that the company&#x27;s total assets had been inflated by about $11 billion.

The fraud came to light just days after Andersen was convicted of obstruction of justice in the Enron scandal, a verdict that effectively put Andersen out of business. In his post-mortem of the Enron scandal, &quot;Conspiracy of Fools,&quot; journalist Kurt Eichenwald argued that Andersen&#x27;s failure to uncover WorldCom&#x27;s deceit would have brought Andersen down even if it had escaped the Enron fraud unscathed.

=== Bankruptcy ===
On July 21, 2002, WorldCom filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in the largest such filing in United States history at the time (overtaken by the bankruptcies of both Lehman Brothers and Washington Mutual in a span of eleven days during September 2008). The WorldCom bankruptcy proceedings were held before U.S. Federal Bankruptcy Judge Arthur Gonzalez, who simultaneously heard the Enron bankruptcy proceedings, which were the second-largest bankruptcy case resulting from one of the largest corporate fraud scandals. None of the criminal proceedings against WorldCom and its officers and agents were originated by referral from Gonzalez or the Department of Justice lawyers. By the bankruptcy reorganization agreement, the company paid $750 million to the SEC in cash and stock in the new MCI, which was intended to be paid to wronged investors.

Effective December 16, 2002, Michael Capellas became chairman and chief executive officer. On April 14, 2003, WorldCom changed its name to MCI, and relocated its corporate headquarters from Clinton, Mississippi, to Ashburn, Virginia.

Even before then, however, employees from the MCI side of the merger had taken over top executive posts, while many longtime executives from the old WorldCom were pushed out. In late 2002, the company began moving most of its operations to its campus in Ashburn, which had opened in 2000. Capellas, for instance, spent most of his time in Northern Virginia. After the name change, one executive from the old MCI said, &quot;We&#x27;re taking our company back.&quot; Another wrote in an email, &quot;My company was not founded in a motel coffee shop.&quot;

In May 2003, in a controversial deal, the company was given a $45 million no-bid contract by the United States Department of Defense to build a cellular phone service in Iraq as part of the U.S.-led reconstruction effort despite the fact that the company was not known for its expertise in building wireless networks.

WorldCom agreed to pay a civil penalty of $2.25 billion to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. The deal was approved by federal judge Jed Rakoff in July 2003. In a sweeping consent decree, the SEC and Rakoff essentially took control of WorldCom. Rakoff appointed former SEC chairman Richard C. Breeden to oversee WorldCom&#x27;s compliance with the SEC agreement. Breeden actively involved himself with the management of the company, and prepared a report for Rakoff, titled Restoring Trust, in which he proposed extensive corporate governance reforms, as part of an effort to &quot;cast the new MCI into what he hoped would become a model of how shareholders should be protected and how companies should be run&quot;.

=== Post-bankruptcy ===

The company emerged from bankruptcy in 2004 with about $5.7 billion in debt and $6 billion in cash. About half of the cash was intended to pay various claims and settlements. Previous bondholders ended up being paid 35.7 cents on the dollar, in bonds and stock in the new MCI company. The previous stockholders&#x27; stock was cancelled.

It had yet to pay many of its creditors, who had waited for two years for a portion of the money owed. Many of the small creditors included former employees, primarily those who were dismissed during June 2002 and whose severance and benefits were withheld when WorldCom filed for bankruptcy.

Citigroup settled with Worldcom investors for $2.65 billion on May 10, 2004. In March 2007, 16 of WorldCom&#x27;s 17 former underwriters reached settlements with investors.

On March 15, 2005, Bernard Ebbers was found guilty of all charges and convicted of fraud, conspiracy and filing false documents with regulators—all related to the $11 billion accounting scandal. Other former WorldCom officials charged with criminal penalties in relation to the company&#x27;s financial misstatements include former CFO Scott Sullivan (entered a guilty plea on March 2, 2004, to one count each of securities fraud, conspiracy to commit securities fraud, and filing false statements), former controller David Myers (pleaded guilty to securities fraud, conspiracy to commit securities fraud, and filing false statements on September 27, 2002), former accounting director Buford Yates (pleaded guilty to conspiracy and fraud charges on October 7, 2002), and former accounting managers Betty Vinson and Troy Normand (both pleading guilty to conspiracy and securities fraud on October 10, 2002).

On July 13, 2005, Bernard Ebbers received a sentence that would have kept him imprisoned for 25 years. At time of sentencing, Ebbers was 63 years old. On September 26, 2006, Ebbers surrendered himself to the Federal Bureau of Prisons prison at Oakdale, Louisiana, the Oakdale Federal Correctional Institution, to begin serving his sentence; he was released in late 2019 for health reasons and died in February 2020, after serving 13 years of his sentence.

In December 2005, Microsoft announced a partnership with MCI to provide Windows Live Messenger customers voice over IP service to make telephone calls—called &quot;MCI Web Calling&quot;. After the merger with Verizon, this product was renamed &quot;Verizon Web Calling&quot;.

In January 2006, the company was acquired by Verizon Communications and was later integrated into Verizon Business.

==See also==
* 1-800-COLLECT
* List of corporate collapses and scandals
* &quot;Vivien v. WorldCom&quot;

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* A book by the former chief audit executive of Worldcom on the demise of the company.

==External links==
*Legacy MCI website | Verizon Communications</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1881291" start="0" end="9" title="MCI Inc." label="MCI, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1881291" start="20" end="28" title="MCI Inc." label="WorldCom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881291" start="33" end="45" title="MCI Inc." label="MCI WorldCom"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="53" end="71" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="158" end="171" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="179" end="187" title="AT&amp;amp;T" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089784" start="270" end="288" title="MCI Communications" label="MCI Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995769" start="337" end="358" title="WorldCom scandal" label="an accounting scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="399" end="402" title="CEO" label="CEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q706548" start="403" end="417" title="Bernard Ebbers" label="Bernard Ebbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q467752" start="551" end="573" title="Verizon Communications" label="Verizon Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921426" start="604" end="620" title="Verizon Business" label="Verizon Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q540861" start="664" end="684" title="Clinton, Mississippi" label="Clinton, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q724884" start="706" end="723" title="Ashburn, Virginia" label="Ashburn, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30022" start="801" end="812" title="Coffeehouse" label="coffee shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q384464" start="816" end="840" title="Hattiesburg, Mississippi" label="Hattiesburg, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q706548" start="842" end="856" title="Bernard Ebbers" label="Bernard Ebbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q28198" start="937" end="957" title="Jackson, Mississippi" label="Jackson, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="988" end="1011" title="chief executive officer" label="chief executive officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q540861" start="1277" end="1297" title="Clinton, Mississippi" label="Clinton, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q731112" start="1364" end="1388" title="mergers and acquisitions" label="mergers and acquisitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q301965" start="1546" end="1564" title="Sprint Corporation" label="Sprint Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="1569" end="1577" title="AT&amp;amp;T" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="1637" end="1645" title="telecoms" label="telecoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q933565" start="1925" end="1930" title="UUNET" label="UUNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122074" start="2059" end="2069" title="CompuServe" label="CompuServe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627799" start="2094" end="2107" title="H&amp;amp;R Block" label="H&amp;amp;R Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="2201" end="2215" title="America Online" label="America Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275616" start="2306" end="2311" title="Digex" label="Digex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="2776" end="2811" title="United States Department of Justice" label="United States Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q301965" start="2866" end="2884" title="Sprint Corporation" label="Sprint Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="3224" end="3238" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="3505" end="3523" title="board of directors" label="board of directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q625360" start="3665" end="3676" title="margin call" label="margin call"/>
<link wikidata="Q79721" start="3734" end="3748" title="dot-com bubble" label="dot-com bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q6262550" start="4052" end="4068" title="John W. Sidgmore" label="John W. Sidgmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q933565" start="4084" end="4089" title="UUNET" label="UUNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q190122" start="4184" end="4199" title="promissory note" label="promissory note"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436210" start="4390" end="4404" title="Scott Sullivan (executive)" label="Scott Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q673633" start="4406" end="4416" title="Comptroller" label="controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q28813" start="4497" end="4502" title="fraud" label="fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q302208" start="4781" end="4800" title="capital expenditure" label="capital expenditure"/>
<link wikidata="Q13516686" start="4834" end="4841" title="expense" label="expense"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452684" start="4982" end="4996" title="internal audit" label="internal audit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5200035" start="5043" end="5057" title="Cynthia Cooper (accountant)" label="Cynthia Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995769" start="5079" end="5091" title="Eugene Morse" label="Eugene Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q392730" start="5575" end="5590" title="Arthur Andersen" label="Arthur Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723024" start="5725" end="5730" title="Enron scandal" label="fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q327646" start="5744" end="5749" title="Enron" label="Enron"/>
<link wikidata="Q14043" start="5858" end="5872" title="Bernard Madoff" label="Bernard Madoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592607" start="5880" end="5898" title="Madoff investment scandal" label="giant Ponzi scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889842" start="5927" end="5981" title="U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of Mississippi" label="U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="5987" end="6018" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="6027" end="6066" title="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission" label="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163445" start="6596" end="6615" title="Conspiracy of Fools" label="Conspiracy of Fools"/>
<link wikidata="Q6446710" start="6634" end="6649" title="Kurt Eichenwald" label="Kurt Eichenwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062835" start="6860" end="6892" title="Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection" label="Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q212900" start="6996" end="7011" title="Lehman Brothers" label="Lehman Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q926203" start="7016" end="7033" title="Washington Mutual" label="Washington Mutual"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798835" start="7166" end="7181" title="Arthur Gonzalez" label="Arthur Gonzalez"/>
<link wikidata="Q327646" start="7212" end="7217" title="Enron" label="Enron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829086" start="7707" end="7723" title="Michael Capellas" label="Michael Capellas"/>
<link wikidata="Q540861" start="7868" end="7888" title="Clinton, Mississippi" label="Clinton, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q724884" start="7893" end="7910" title="Ashburn, Virginia" label="Ashburn, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935088" start="8544" end="8559" title="no-bid contract" label="no-bid contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="8567" end="8602" title="United States Department of Defense" label="United States Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="8852" end="8891" title="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission" label="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q6172629" start="8932" end="8942" title="Jed Rakoff" label="Jed Rakoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162854" start="8971" end="8985" title="consent decree" label="consent decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430566" start="9081" end="9099" title="Richard C. Breeden" label="Richard C. Breeden"/>
<link wikidata="Q380767" start="9321" end="9341" title="corporate governance" label="corporate governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="9568" end="9578" title="bankruptcy" label="bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11693" start="9727" end="9738" title="bondholders" label="bondholders"/>
<link wikidata="Q219508" start="10176" end="10185" title="Citigroup" label="Citigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q706548" start="10369" end="10383" title="Bernard Ebbers" label="Bernard Ebbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400015" start="11466" end="11491" title="Federal Bureau of Prisons" label="Federal Bureau of Prisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008489" start="11502" end="11520" title="Oakdale, Louisiana" label="Oakdale, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440136" start="11526" end="11566" title="Oakdale Federal Correctional Institution" label="Oakdale Federal Correctional Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="11733" end="11742" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q71493" start="11787" end="11809" title="Windows Live Messenger" label="Windows Live Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="11820" end="11833" title="voice over IP" label="voice over IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q467752" start="12037" end="12059" title="Verizon Communications" label="Verizon Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921426" start="12090" end="12106" title="Verizon Business" label="Verizon Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q28208702" start="12124" end="12137" title="1-800-COLLECT" label="1-800-COLLECT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6613692" start="12140" end="12180" title="List of corporate collapses and scandals" label="List of corporate collapses and scandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937871" start="12189" end="12207" title="Vivien v. WorldCom" label="Vivien v. WorldCom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59699" wikidata="Q732115" url="?curid=59699" title="Montserrat (mountain)">
<text>Montserrat () is a multi-peaked mountain range near Barcelona, in Catalonia, Spain. It is part of the Catalan Pre-Coastal Range. The main peaks are Sant Jeroni (1,236 m), Montgrós (1,120 m) and Les Agulles (903 m).

It is well known as the site of the Benedictine abbey, Santa Maria de Montserrat, which hosts the Virgin of Montserrat sanctuary. 

&quot;Montserrat&quot; literally means &quot;serrated (like the common handsaw) mountain&quot; in Catalan. It describes its peculiar aspect with a multitude of rock formations that are visible from a great distance. The mountain is composed of strikingly pink conglomerate, a form of sedimentary rock. Montserrat was designated as a National Park in 1987. The Monastery of Montserrat which houses the virgin that gives its name to the monastery is also on the mountain, although it is also known as &quot;La Moreneta&quot; (&quot;the little tan/dark one&quot; in Catalan).

==Access==
The Benedictine Abbey can be reached by walk, by road, by the Aeri de Montserrat cable car, or by the Montserrat Rack Railway. The lower stations of both the rack railway and the cable car can be reached by Ferrocarrils de la Generalitat de Catalunya train from Barcelona&#x27;s Plaça d&#x27;Espanya station. From the abbey, the Funicular de Sant Joan funicular railway goes up to the top of the mountain, where there are various abandoned hovels in the cliff faces that were previously the abodes of reclusive monks, while the Funicular de la Santa Cova descends to a shrine, where the sanctified statue was originally found.

==Hiking and climbing==
* The highest summit of Montserrat is called &quot;Sant Jeroni&quot; (Saint Jerome) and stands at above sea-level. It is accessible by hiking trails which connect from the top entrance to the Sant Joan funicular, the monastery, or the base of the mountain. Montserrat is part of the GR footpath 172. The Cavall Bernat is an important rock feature popular with climbers.
* The well-known via ferrata &quot;Canal de las Damas&quot; (difficulty level D) leads from Collbató through a canal.

==Geology==
Montserrat is formed of conglomerate that was originally deposited in a fan delta at the margin of the Ebro Basin, part of the foreland basin to the Pyrenees, during the middle Eocene. The conglomerate was derived from the uplifting Catalan Coastal Ranges to the southeast of the basin and the clast type is dominated by Triassic sedimentary rocks. The fan had an original size of between 100 and 150 square kilometres. The resistance of the Montserrat conglomerate to erosion compared to the rest of the fill of the Ebro Basin explains its current mountainous nature.

The dominant clast lithology in the conglomerate is limestone and the sequence is cemented by calcite. The presence of so much carbonate in the rock has led to the formation of typical karst landforms, such as cave systems and karst towers.

==Namesakes==
In 1493, Christopher Columbus named the Caribbean island of Montserrat &quot;Santa Maria de Montserrate&quot;, after the &quot;Virgin of Montserrat&quot;. Again, in 1606, the Spanish expedition of Luis Vaéz de Torres charted Mount Ernest island in the Torres Strait as &quot;Santa Maria de Montserrate&quot;, due to its relatively high peak.

In Bogotá, the Monserrate mountain (3,152 m high) has a funicular and aerial lift similar to those at Montserrat.

==References==
==External links==
* LARSA Montserrat Montserrat General Information
*Gallery of oblique aerial photos of Montserrat, by Doc Searls
*Getting to Montserrat from Barcelona city
*Day Trip to Montserrat from Barcelona</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q732115" start="0" end="10" title="Montserrat (mountain)" label="Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="52" end="61" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="66" end="75" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="77" end="82" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q520924" start="102" end="127" title="Catalan Pre-Coastal Range" label="Catalan Pre-Coastal Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="252" end="263" title="Order of Saint Benedict" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q160742" start="264" end="269" title="abbey" label="abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q771935" start="271" end="296" title="Santa Maria de Montserrat Abbey" label="Santa Maria de Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q301779" start="314" end="334" title="Virgin of Montserrat" label="Virgin of Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455385" start="393" end="401" title="Serration" label="serrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="446" end="453" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q66037955" start="508" end="522" title="List of rock formations" label="rock formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191704" start="608" end="620" title="conglomerate (geology)" label="conglomerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="632" end="648" title="sedimentary rock" label="sedimentary rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="911" end="918" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181050" start="995" end="1013" title="Aeri de Montserrat" label="Aeri de Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q498002" start="1014" end="1023" title="Aerial tramway" label="cable car"/>
<link wikidata="Q427034" start="1035" end="1058" title="Montserrat Rack Railway" label="Montserrat Rack Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q83819" start="1140" end="1183" title="Ferrocarrils de la Generalitat de Catalunya" label="Ferrocarrils de la Generalitat de Catalunya"/>
<link wikidata="Q669990" start="1212" end="1240" title="Plaça d&amp;#x27;Espanya station" label="Plaça d&amp;#x27;Espanya station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780196" start="1262" end="1284" title="Funicular de Sant Joan" label="Funicular de Sant Joan"/>
<link wikidata="Q142031" start="1285" end="1302" title="funicular" label="funicular railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780184" start="1461" end="1487" title="Funicular de la Santa Cova" label="Funicular de la Santa Cova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917535" start="1502" end="1508" title="Santa Cova de Montserrat" label="shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780196" start="1777" end="1796" title="Sant Joan Funicular" label="Sant Joan funicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486662" start="1868" end="1879" title="GR footpath" label="GR footpath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154336" start="1945" end="1953" title="rock climbing" label="climbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q648116" start="1972" end="1983" title="via ferrata" label="via ferrata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2016" end="2032" title="via ferrata#Grading" label="difficulty level"/>
<link wikidata="Q15600" start="2047" end="2055" title="Collbató" label="Collbató"/>
<link wikidata="Q5793728" start="2189" end="2199" title="Ebro Basin" label="Ebro Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978695" start="2213" end="2227" title="foreland basin" label="foreland basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="2235" end="2243" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="2263" end="2269" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q431898" start="2319" end="2340" title="Catalan Coastal Range" label="Catalan Coastal Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="2407" end="2415" title="Triassic" label="Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="2416" end="2433" title="sedimentary rocks" label="sedimentary rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6538759" start="2675" end="2684" title="lithology" label="lithology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="2708" end="2717" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q189315" start="2738" end="2746" title="cement (geology)" label="cemented"/>
<link wikidata="Q171917" start="2750" end="2757" title="calcite" label="calcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="2841" end="2846" title="karst" label="karst"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="2952" end="2961" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q13353" start="2972" end="2982" title="Montserrat" label="Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q356808" start="3109" end="3128" title="Luís Vaz de Torres" label="Luis Vaéz de Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059258" start="3137" end="3149" title="Torres Strait Islands" label="Mount Ernest"/>
<link wikidata="Q179188" start="3164" end="3177" title="Torres Strait" label="Torres Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841" start="3258" end="3264" title="Bogotá" label="Bogotá"/>
<link wikidata="Q152073" start="3270" end="3280" title="Monserrate" label="Monserrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q142031" start="3311" end="3320" title="funicular" label="funicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409250" start="3325" end="3336" title="aerial lift" label="aerial lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287121" start="3506" end="3516" title="Doc Searls" label="Doc Searls"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59700" wikidata="Q7038" url="?curid=59700" title="Girona">
<text>Girona (; ) is the capital city of the province of Girona in the autonomous community of Catalonia, Spain, at the confluence of the Ter, Onyar, Galligants, and Güell rivers. The city had an official population of 103,369 in 2020 but, the population of the Girona–Salt urban area is estimated to be about 156,400 (2020). Girona is also capital of the &quot;comarca&quot; of the Gironès and the vegueria of Girona. Since much of the old quarter of this ancient city has been preserved, Girona is a popular destination for tourists. The city is located northeast of Barcelona.

==History==

The first historical inhabitants in the region were Iberians; Girona is the ancient Gerunda, a city of the Ausetani. Later, the Romans built a citadel there, which was given the name of &quot;Gerunda&quot;. The Visigoths ruled in Girona until it was conquered by the Moors in 715. Charlemagne reconquered it in 785 and made it one of the fourteen original counties of Catalonia. It was sacked by the Moors in 827, 842, 845, 935, and 982. Wilfred the Hairy incorporated Girona into the County of Barcelona in 878.

In the 11th century, Alfonso II of Aragon and I of Barcelona declared Girona a city. The ancient county became a duchy within the Principality of Catalonia in 1351 when King Peter III of Aragon gave the title of Duke to his first-born son, John. In 1414, King Ferdinand I in turn gave the title of Prince of Girona to his first-born son, Alfonso. The title is currently carried by Princess Leonor of Asturias, the second since the 16th century to do so.

The earliest documented evidence of a Jewish community in Girona dates to about 885. The 12th century saw the Jewish community of Girona flourish, having one of the most important Kabbalistic schools in Europe. The Rabbi of Girona, Moshe ben Nahman Gerondi (better known as Nahmanides or Ramban) was appointed Great Rabbi of Catalonia. Centered on the Jewish Call (Call Jueu), the Jewish community of Girona came to an end in 1492, when the Catholic Monarchs outlawed Judaism throughout Spain and Jews were given the choice of conversion or exile (see Alhambra Decree). For 400 years before that time, the Jewish cemetery was located beside the road to France, just north of the old city between the mountain Montjuïc, or &quot;hill of the Jews&quot; in medieval Catalan, and the river Ter.

Girona has undergone twenty-five sieges and been captured seven times. It was besieged by the French royal armies under Charles de Monchy d&#x27;Hocquincourt in 1653, under Bernardin Gigault de Bellefonds in 1684, and twice in 1694 under Anne Jules de Noailles. During the Third siege of Girona of the Peninsular War, the city was besieged from May to December 1809 by 35,000 French Napoleonic troops under Vergier, Augereau and Gouvion Saint-Cyr. Continuously under heavy bombardment, Girona held out obstinately under the leadership of Álvarez de Castro until disease and famine compelled it to capitulate on 12 December. Girona was the center of the Ter department during the French rule, which lasted from 1809 to 1813. The defensive city walls of the western side were demolished at the end of the 19th century to allow for the expansion of the city, while the walls of the eastern side remained untouched but abandoned.

In recent years, the missing parts of the city walls on the eastern side of the city have been reconstructed. Called the &quot;Passeig de la Muralla&quot; it now forms a tourist route around the old city.

== Geography ==
Girona was founded in a strategic place, in the natural corridor between the Empordà plain and the Catalan Coastal Depression, therefore connecting by land the northern Costa Brava and France with Barcelona and other southern populations. This corridor is a defile formed by the Ter river between the Gavarres massif and the Catalan Transversal Range.

The Ter river is the most important water course in the region. In Girona it flows through the north of the town, from southwest to northeast. It is in Girona where the Ter meets the Onyar, the second largest river in the area. The Onyar crosses the city from south to north and it has historically conditioned the city&#x27;s development, as catastrophic floods have periodically affected the town since historic times.

=== Seismic activity ===
Girona is located in a seismic zone, which means it occasionally has earthquakes throughout the year. Most of them are not felt, and some are felt as a minor vibration or light shaking.
The strongest earthquake recorded in Girona was the magnitude 6.7 Catalonia 1428 earthquake.

=== Climate ===
According to the Köppen climate classification, Girona has a humid subtropical climate (&quot;Cfa&quot;) transitioning to a Mediterranean climate (&quot;Csa&quot;), with mild winter daytime temperatures and cool nighttime temperatures, and hot summers. In winter, frost occurs frequently (41.3 days per year from November to March), but snowfall is quite rare. Temperatures in winter can drop to below /, especially during days with thermal inversion. Maximum temperatures in summer above are very rare. Average annual rainfall is usually slightly above . The wettest seasons are autumn (September–November) and spring (April–early June). Thunderstorms can occur throughout the year, more frequently in summer, averaging 23.9 days per year. but usually there still is a significant arid period. This can be seen through the natural vegetation around the city, as drought-tolerant oaks (&quot;Quercus ilex&quot; and, to a lesser extent, &quot;Quercus suber&quot; and &quot;Quercus pubescens&quot;) and pines (&quot;Pinus pinaster&quot;, &quot;Pinus pinea&quot; and &quot;Pinus halepensis&quot;) dominate the majority of the plant communities.

== Main sights ==

Girona is a popular destination for tourists and Barcelona day-trippers - the train journey from Barcelona Sants to Girona takes approximately forty minutes on high-speed trains, eighty with express ones and ninety with regional ones. The old town stands on the steep hill of the Caputxins to the east of the river Onyar, while the more modern section stands on the plains to the west. The city has a number of &quot;Art Nouveau&quot; buildings including the &quot;Farinera Teixidor&quot; by Rafael Masó.

=== Cathedral ===

The ancient cathedral, which stood on the site of the present one, was used by the Moors as a mosque, and after their final expulsion was either entirely remodelled or rebuilt. The present edifice is one of the most important monuments of the school of the Majorcan architect Jaume Fabre and an excellent example of Catalan Gothic architecture. It is approached in ninety steps. An aisle and chapels surround the choir, which opens by three arches into the nave, of which the pointed stone vault is the widest in Christendom (22 meters). Among its interior decorations is a retable which is the work of the Valencian silversmith Pere Bernec. It is divided into three tiers of statuettes and reliefs, framed in canopied niches of cast and hammered silver. A gold and silver altar-frontal was carried off by the French in 1809. The cathedral contains the tombs of Ramon Berenguer and his wife.

=== Old fortifications ===
The old fortifications are another popular sight. Historically, these have played a vital role in protecting Girona from invaders for hundreds of years. The city wall of the old town was an important military construction built in Roman times in the 1st century BC. It was thoroughly rebuilt under the reign of Peter III the Ceremonious in the second half of the 14th century. The Roman wall was used as a foundation. At the start of the 16th century, the wall was absorbed into the city. The walled precinct lost its military value. Bit by bit, the wall was degrading, as parts were gradually altered from the inside and the outside. The walls and lookout towers that make up these fortifications are split in two - a small section to the north of the old town and a much larger section to the east and south. It is possible to walk the walls and climb the towers, where visitors can enjoy panoramic views of Girona and the surrounding countryside.

=== Sant Feliu ===

The Collegiate Church of Sant Feliu is noteworthy from an architectural point of view. Its style is 14th-century Gothic, the façade dating from the 18th, and it is one of the few Spanish churches that possesses a genuine spire. It contains, besides the sepulchre of its patron and the tomb of the valiant Álvarez, a chapel dedicated to St. Narcissus, who according to tradition was one of the early bishops of the see.

=== Sant Pere de Galligants ===

The Benedictine church of the monastery of Sant Pere de Galligants is in the early Romanesque style, dating to about the year 1130, though the monastery dates to about 950. The monastery slightly predates the Monastery of St. Daniel.

=== Plaça de la Independència ===

The Plaça de la Independència is one of the best-known and busiest squares in Girona. Located in the Mercadal district in the city centre, it is also known as Plaça de Sant Agustí, after the former Convent of Sant Agustí. Its name refers to the 1808–1814 War of Spanish Independence, part of the larger Peninsular War, against Napoleon Bonaparte.

The interest of the square lies in its 19th-century style, despite its being surrounded by identical austere neoclassical buildings with porches dedicated to the defenders of the city of Girona during the 1808 and 1809 sieges.
However, the symmetrical proportions of the square correspond more to contemporary interventions than its architectural past. The municipal architect Martí Sureda was the first to conceive an arcaded square with closed and neoclassical loops, and with some buildings having matching aesthetic proportions. The development of the area followed this scheme only in part. The construction of the first theatres in the city transgressed the concept of Martí Sureda. Until the 18th century, what that architect had imagined could not be completed. This part of the city in Noucentisme style is a romantic and timeless creation that nowadays captivates inhabitants and visitors. Today the area has great vitality because of the spread of cafés and restaurants, including some businesses well known for their history like the Café Royal, Cinema Albéniz and Casa Marieta.

=== Cases de l&#x27;Onyar ===
Characteristic of Girona are the picturesque houses overlooking the river Onyar. These were built over many years and give the flavour of a small Mediterranean city. The façanes are painted according to a palette created by Enric Ansesa, James J. Faixó and the architects Fuses and J. Viader.

One of these houses (at Ballesteries 29, Girona) is Casa Masó, the birthplace of the architect Rafael Masó and an example of Noucentisme in Girona. Since 2006 it has been the headquarters of the Fundació Rafael Masó. The river façade can be recognised by its unique white color.

=== Jewish heritage ===

Today, the historic Jewish quarter or &quot;Call&quot; has been restored. In 1492 the Jewish community was forced to choose between conversion and expulsion. After the Jews left, the neighborhood was sealed off and new houses were built over the old ones. When the dictator Francisco Franco died in November 1975, interest in the region&#x27;s cultural history was revived. Some of the old buildings were excavated leading to the discovery of the home of Nahmanides, which was sold to the city in 1987.

A rectangular indentation that once held a mezuzah can be seen on the doorway of an old building on Carrer de Sant Llorenç, while Centre Bonastruc ça Porta on Carrer de la Força is the site of a 15th century synagogue. The Center hosts the Girona Museum of Jewish History and the Nahmanides Institute for Jewish Studies. Excavations also turned up 1,200 old documents, including Talmudic commentary, accounts of domestic life, a description of the ancient synagogue and the names of Girona Jews who converted to Christianity in 1492.

== Culture ==

=== Popular culture ===
The &quot;Barri Vell&quot; and the Girona Cathedral have been the set of several films, e.g. &quot;The Monk&quot; and episode 10 of season 6 of &quot;Game of Thrones&quot;.

=== Sports ===
During the professional cycling season, various non-European pro cyclists have called Girona home, as illustrated in the book by Michael Barry, written during his time with the US Postal Service cycling team. Between races, cyclists do their training rides outside the city, which provides excellent training terrain.

In the Spring of 1997, Marty Jemison, Tyler Hamilton and George Hincapie moved to Girona as teammates of the US Postal Service Professional Cycling Team. This was the first year that American cyclists started living in Girona and meeting for training rides at the Pont de Pedra. Later, other well-known professional cyclists such as Lance Armstrong came to live in the city.

Football is also widely popular. The local Football club is Girona FC, who were promoted to La Liga in 2017. In December 2023, they recorded their first ever league victory over FC Barcelona to temporarily reach the top of the table. The club&#x27;s stadium is Estadi Montilivi.

The city has a roller hockey team, GEiEG, one of the most important in Spain, which competes in the main League OK Liga.

==Education==
The city is the home of the Jaume Vicens Vives Secondary School, as well as the Universitat de Girona (University of Girona).

== Economy and infrastructure ==
===Transport===
====Road====
The town is on the Autopista AP-7 and N-II. The city is also the hub of the local road network with routes to the coast and inland towards the Pyrenees.

====Buses====
The city has a comprehensive urban bus service operated by private companies. There are also services to the other towns in the Girona province and long-distance buses.

====Rail====
Girona is served at its new railway station to the west of the Old Town. There are conventional trains from Barcelona to Portbou and the French border.

Girona is also an important stop on the AVE services from Paris, Marseille, Toulouse and Figueres to Barcelona, and from Figueres to Barcelona and Madrid.

The journey time to Barcelona is approximately 1 hour 35 minutes on the stopping &quot;Regional&quot; trains, 1 hour and 15 minutes by conventional train (&quot;Media Distancia&quot;) or 37 minutes on the AVE. Madrid is reached in 3 h 45 min, also on the AVE.

====Airport====
The town&#x27;s airport, Girona-Costa Brava, is south of the town centre. It grew tremendously principally as a result of Ryanair choosing it as one of their European hubs, but then shrunk again after they relocated most of the flights to Barcelona El Prat.

Girona Airport is approximately a 30-minute bus ride from the bus terminal and train station in Girona city, and an hour from Barcelona centre, to the south. The bus stops in the centre of Barcelona, at the &quot;Estació d&#x27;Autobusos Barcelona Nord&quot;, Barcelona&#x27;s main bus terminal.

Most low-cost airlines mention &quot;Barcelona&quot; in their descriptions of Girona airport.

== Government ==
===Results of the elections since 1931===

==Notable people==

*Maria Pilar Bruguera Sábat (1906–1994), Roman Catholic nun and physician
*Josep Maria Corredor i Pomés (1912-1981), cultural activist
*Carme García (born 1974), visually impaired para-alpine skier, blind sailor and journalist
*Fidel Roig Matons (1887–1977), Catalan painter and musician
*Miguel Molina (born 1989), racing driver
*Josep Maria Nadal i Farreras (1949–), scholar of Catalan language

==Twin towns – sister cities==
Girona is twinned with:
* Girona is a member city of Eurotowns network

==See also==
*&quot;La Girona&quot;
*List of mayors of Girona
*Sant Feliu Pedestrian Bridge

== References ==
==External links==
*Official website
* Government data pages </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7038" start="0" end="6" title="Girona" label="Girona"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="19" end="31" title="capital city" label="capital city"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194" start="39" end="57" title="province of Girona" label="province of Girona"/>
<link wikidata="Q10742" start="65" end="85" title="Autonomous communities of Spain" label="autonomous community"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="89" end="98" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="100" end="105" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q31482" start="132" end="135" title="Ter River" label="Ter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773459" start="137" end="142" title="Onyar" label="Onyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891763" start="160" end="165" title="Güell" label="Güell"/>
<link wikidata="Q13444" start="263" end="267" title="Salt, Girona" label="Salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q937876" start="356" end="363" title="Comarques of Catalonia" label="comarca"/>
<link wikidata="Q12752" start="377" end="384" title="Gironès" label="Gironès"/>
<link wikidata="Q697390" start="393" end="401" title="vegueria" label="vegueria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="563" end="572" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q190992" start="640" end="648" title="Iberians" label="Iberians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763944" start="695" end="703" title="Ausetani" label="Ausetani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="716" end="722" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q88291" start="731" end="738" title="citadel" label="citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="799" end="808" title="Visigoths" label="Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="855" end="860" title="Moors" label="Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="869" end="880" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q28575" start="944" end="952" title="counties" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q504283" start="1026" end="1043" title="Wilfred the Hairy, Count of Barcelona" label="Wilfred the Hairy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233672" start="1073" end="1092" title="County of Barcelona" label="County of Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q299156" start="1123" end="1162" title="Alfonso II of Aragon" label="Alfonso II of Aragon and I of Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q154547" start="1215" end="1220" title="duchy" label="duchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15581" start="1232" end="1257" title="Principality of Catalonia" label="Principality of Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q312311" start="1276" end="1295" title="Peter III of Aragon" label="Peter III of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q166886" start="1314" end="1318" title="Duke" label="Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q47412" start="1362" end="1373" title="Ferdinand I of Aragon" label="Ferdinand I"/>
<link wikidata="Q687246" start="1400" end="1416" title="Principality of Girona" label="Prince of Girona"/>
<link wikidata="Q312304" start="1440" end="1447" title="Alfonso V of Aragon" label="Alfonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q214369" start="1492" end="1498" title="Leonor, Princess of Asturias" label="Leonor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934" start="1502" end="1510" title="Principality of Asturias" label="Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="1667" end="1670" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="1737" end="1748" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="1772" end="1777" title="Rabbi" label="Rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q355455" start="1789" end="1813" title="Nahmanides" label="Moshe ben Nahman Gerondi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9016264" start="1909" end="1920" title="Jewish quarter (diaspora)" label="Jewish Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q186851" start="1998" end="2015" title="Catholic Monarchs" label="Catholic Monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="2044" end="2049" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061030" start="2109" end="2124" title="Alhambra Decree" label="Alhambra Decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q17183378" start="2266" end="2274" title="Montjuïc (Girona)" label="Montjuïc"/>
<link wikidata="Q188055" start="2382" end="2387" title="siege" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898881" start="2522" end="2553" title="Bernardin Gigault de Bellefonds" label="Bernardin Gigault de Bellefonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q564766" start="2587" end="2609" title="Anne Jules de Noailles" label="Anne Jules de Noailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101541" start="2622" end="2643" title="Third siege of Girona (Peninsular War)" label="Third siege of Girona"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="2651" end="2665" title="Peninsular War" label="Peninsular War"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="2732" end="2740" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q314135" start="2765" end="2773" title="Pierre François Charles Augereau, duc de Castiglione" label="Augereau"/>
<link wikidata="Q347652" start="2778" end="2795" title="Laurent, marquis de Gouvion Saint-Cyr" label="Gouvion Saint-Cyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698525" start="2887" end="2904" title="Mariano Álvarez de Castro" label="Álvarez de Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090691" start="3002" end="3016" title="Ter (department)" label="Ter department"/>
<link wikidata="Q57346" start="3087" end="3096" title="city wall" label="city wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q597320" start="3575" end="3582" title="Empordà" label="Empordà"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755817" start="3597" end="3623" title="Catalan Coastal Depression" label="Catalan Coastal Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q216884" start="3667" end="3678" title="Costa Brava" label="Costa Brava"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3683" end="3689" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="3695" end="3704" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699460" start="3756" end="3762" title="Defile (geography)" label="defile"/>
<link wikidata="Q31482" start="3777" end="3786" title="Ter river" label="Ter river"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124887" start="3799" end="3807" title="Gavarres" label="Gavarres"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889521" start="3823" end="3848" title="Catalan Transversal Range" label="Catalan Transversal Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773459" start="4034" end="4039" title="Onyar" label="Onyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="4367" end="4378" title="earthquakes" label="earthquakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="4611" end="4640" title="Köppen-Geiger climate classification system" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="4655" end="4680" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="4718" end="4739" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q190096" start="5027" end="5044" title="thermal inversion" label="thermal inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857578" start="5233" end="5246" title="Thunderstorms" label="Thunderstorms"/>
<link wikidata="Q218155" start="5486" end="5498" title="Quercus ilex" label="Quercus ilex"/>
<link wikidata="Q156137" start="5536" end="5549" title="Quercus suber" label="Quercus suber"/>
<link wikidata="Q161415" start="5566" end="5583" title="Quercus pubescens" label="Quercus pubescens"/>
<link wikidata="Q271582" start="5608" end="5622" title="Pinus pinaster" label="Pinus pinaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q106094" start="5636" end="5647" title="Pinus pinea" label="Pinus pinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q211457" start="5664" end="5680" title="Pinus halepensis" label="Pinus halepensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="6173" end="6184" title="Art Nouveau" label="Art Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261322" start="6462" end="6477" title="Girona Cathedral" label="present edifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q60943" start="7143" end="7158" title="Ramon Berenguer II, Count of Barcelona" label="Ramon Berenguer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509716" start="8176" end="8193" title="Collegiate Church" label="Collegiate Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q9007068" start="8197" end="8207" title="Church of St. Felix, Girona" label="Sant Feliu"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="8629" end="8640" title="Benedictine" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q932383" start="8668" end="8691" title="Sant Pere de Galligants" label="Sant Pere de Galligants"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893249" start="8834" end="8857" title="Monastery of St. Daniel (Girona)" label="Monastery of St. Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="9198" end="9212" title="Peninsular War" label="Peninsular War"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="9222" end="9240" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101541" start="9448" end="9468" title="Third Siege of Girona" label="1808 and 1809 sieges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580216" start="10038" end="10049" title="Noucentisme" label="Noucentisme"/>
<link wikidata="Q185812" start="10308" end="10315" title="Albéniz" label="Albéniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940758" start="10320" end="10332" title="Casa Marieta" label="Casa Marieta"/>
<link wikidata="Q15302972" start="10711" end="10720" title="Masó House" label="Casa Masó"/>
<link wikidata="Q893297" start="10754" end="10765" title="Rafael Masó i Valentí" label="Rafael Masó"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580216" start="10784" end="10795" title="Noucentisme" label="Noucentisme"/>
<link wikidata="Q355455" start="11419" end="11429" title="Nahmanides" label="Nahmanides"/>
<link wikidata="Q247034" start="11511" end="11518" title="mezuzah" label="mezuzah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261322" start="12077" end="12093" title="Girona Cathedral" label="Girona Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715312" start="12141" end="12149" title="The Monk (2011 film)" label="The Monk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12160" end="12182" title="The Winds of Winter (Game of Thrones)#Filming" label="episode 10 of season 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q23572" start="12192" end="12207" title="Game of Thrones" label="Game of Thrones"/>
<link wikidata="Q709483" start="12360" end="12373" title="Michael Barry (cyclist)" label="Michael Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477240" start="12573" end="12586" title="Marty Jemison" label="Marty Jemison"/>
<link wikidata="Q505446" start="12588" end="12602" title="Tyler Hamilton" label="Tyler Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q267142" start="12607" end="12622" title="George Hincapie" label="George Hincapie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2172" start="12883" end="12898" title="Lance Armstrong" label="Lance Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q11945" start="12986" end="12995" title="Girona FC" label="Girona FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q324867" start="13018" end="13025" title="La Liga" label="La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="13104" end="13116" title="FC Barcelona" label="FC Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097709" start="13187" end="13203" title="Estadi Montilivi" label="Estadi Montilivi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748406" start="13221" end="13234" title="roller hockey (quad)" label="roller hockey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13241" end="13246" title="GEiEG" label="GEiEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179674" start="13318" end="13325" title="OK Liga" label="OK Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970579" start="13370" end="13405" title="Jaume Vicens Vives Secondary School" label="Jaume Vicens Vives Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814503" start="13422" end="13443" title="University of Girona" label="Universitat de Girona"/>
<link wikidata="Q788328" start="13550" end="13564" title="Autopista AP-7" label="Autopista AP-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088107" start="13910" end="13925" title="Girona railway station" label="railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="13990" end="13999" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165" start="14003" end="14010" title="Portbou" label="Portbou"/>
<link wikidata="Q433671" start="14075" end="14078" title="AVE" label="AVE"/>
<link wikidata="Q433671" start="14396" end="14399" title="AVE" label="AVE"/>
<link wikidata="Q170614" start="14590" end="14597" title="Ryanair" label="Ryanair"/>
<link wikidata="Q56973" start="14707" end="14724" title="Barcelona El Prat" label="Barcelona El Prat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142410" start="14727" end="14741" title="Girona airport" label="Girona Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="14853" end="14862" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q973726" start="14940" end="14979" title="Estació d&amp;#x27;Autobusos Barcelona Nord" label="Estació d&amp;#x27;Autobusos Barcelona Nord"/>
<link wikidata="Q106448787" start="15200" end="15226" title="Maria Pilar Bruguera Sábat" label="Maria Pilar Bruguera Sábat"/>
<link wikidata="Q10512707" start="15274" end="15302" title="Josep Maria Corredor i Pomés" label="Josep Maria Corredor i Pomés"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043233" start="15335" end="15347" title="Carme García" label="Carme García"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815941" start="15427" end="15444" title="Fidel Roig Matons" label="Fidel Roig Matons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401610" start="15488" end="15501" title="Miguel Molina (racing driver)" label="Miguel Molina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11928731" start="15530" end="15558" title="Josep Maria Nadal i Farreras" label="Josep Maria Nadal i Farreras"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="15638" end="15645" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413854" start="15681" end="15698" title="Eurotowns network" label="Eurotowns network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145770" start="15720" end="15729" title="Girona (ship)" label="La Girona"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895677" start="15737" end="15761" title="List of mayors of Girona" label="List of mayors of Girona"/>
<link wikidata="Q18354833" start="15763" end="15791" title="Sant Feliu Pedestrian Bridge" label="Sant Feliu Pedestrian Bridge"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59701" wikidata="Q172833" url="?curid=59701" title="Broom">
<text>A broom (also known as a broomstick) is a cleaning tool consisting of usually stiff fibers (often made of materials such as plastic, hair, or corn husks) attached to, and roughly parallel to, a cylindrical handle, the broomstick. It is thus a variety of brush with a long handle. It is commonly used in combination with a dustpan.

A distinction is made between a &quot;hard broom&quot; and a &quot;soft broom&quot; and a spectrum in between. Soft brooms are used in some cultures chiefly for sweeping walls of cobwebs and spiders, like a &quot;feather duster&quot;, while hard brooms are for rougher tasks like sweeping dirt off sidewalks or concrete floors, or even smoothing and texturing wet concrete. The majority of brooms are somewhere in between, suitable for sweeping the floors of homes and businesses, soft enough to be flexible and to move even light dust, but stiff enough to achieve a firm sweeping action.

The broom is also a symbolic object associated with witchcraft and ceremonial magic.
== Etymology ==
The word &quot;broom&quot; derives from types of shrubs referred to as brooms. &quot;Common broom&quot; typically refers to whatever shrub is most commonly used to make the bristles for a broomstick in a given region. The name of the shrubs began to be used for the household implement in Late Middle English and gradually replaced the earlier &quot;besom&quot; during the Early Modern English period. The song &quot;Buy Broom Buzzems&quot; (by William Purvis 1752–1832) still refers to the &quot;broom besom&quot; as one type of besom (i.e. &quot;a besom made from broom&quot;).

Flat brooms, made of broom corn, were invented by Shakers in the 19th century with the invention of the broom vice.
A smaller whisk broom or brush is sometimes called a duster.

== Function ==
Brooms are used to clean dust and ash. They may be used to clean homes, appliances such as ovens and fireplaces, or outdoor areas such as streets and yards.

== History ==
The earliest brooms and brushes are from prehistory, when things such as bird wings and burs were fastened to handles of bone, ivory, or wood. The indigenous peoples of the Southwestern United States created brooms from yucca plants for cleaning pueblos. The indigenous people of Saint Lucia created brooms from coconut fronds for cleaning around hearths. Brooms are mentioned in the 1540 manuscript &quot;Codex Mendoza&quot; of the Aztecs, which instructs girls to sweep.

The birch besom was made by fastening twigs to a handle with a strip of ash wood, harvested from a log after washing it in a running stream. The besom became a symbol of breweries in England, where brewers used it as a whisk while fermenting alcoholic beverages, and the brooms were typically displayed by pubs. When not in use, a brewer&#x27;s besom was stored and dried on wall pegs or hanging by a leather cord. The broom was not washed so that yeast would remain in the bristles for future uses. Hearth besoms were created in Ireland to keep ash on a hearth. Until the 18th century, brooms were crafted by hand.

In 1797, the quality of brooms changed when Levi Dickenson, a farmer in Hadley, Massachusetts, made a broom for his wife, using the tassels of sorghum, a grain he was growing for the seeds. His wife spread good words around town, creating demand for Dickenson&#x27;s sorghum brooms. The sorghum brooms held up well, but ultimately, like all brooms, fell apart. Dickenson subsequently invented a machine that would make better brooms, and faster than he could. In 1810, the foot treadle broom machine was invented. This machine played an integral part in the Industrial Revolution.

The Shakers began growing broom corn to create brooms in the present-day United States, which they crafted on treadle wheels and stored hanging on the wall under a cotton hood. The Shaker Theodore Bates invented the flat broom in 1798. Benjamin Franklin grew French broom, a practice which was then taken up by Thomas Jefferson, who had broomsticks made from the plant. Americans commonly kept brooms with their fireplaces by the early 19th century. At this time, brooms were often made by children, the disabled, the elderly, and slaves. By the middle of the century, brooms were created in factories with machine presses, trimmers, and winding machines and then sold door-to-door. People in the American frontier crafted brooms with a wet rawhide fastening, which dried and hardened around the bristles.

Henry Hadley invented a hybridized machine-harvested broom corn at the University of Illinois in 1983 for more efficient creation of brooms. Modern factory-made brooms are made with straw bristles, which are flattened and stitched together before a handle is inserted. In industrialized countries, brooms are sometimes replaced or superseded by powered cleaning instruments such as leaf blowers and vacuum cleaners. Brooms remain commonly used for cleaning purposes in the 21st century.

One source mentions that the United States had 303 broom factories by 1839 and that the number peaked at 1,039 in 1919. Most of these were in the Eastern United States; during the Great Depression in the 1930s, the number of factories declined to 320 in 1939. The state of Oklahoma became a major center for broom production because broom corn grew especially well there, with The Oklahoma Broom Corn Company opening a factory in El Reno in 1906. Faced with competition from imported brooms and synthetic bristles, most of the factories closed by the 1960s.

== Design and types ==
A broom is made up of two parts: the handle, which is a long cylindrical stick, and the stiff fibers lined parallel at its base.

The United States International Cooperation Administration made a distinction between brooms based on bristle quality. Parlor brooms are made of smooth green fibers and typically have brushes 14 to 18 inches long. Carpet brooms are a cheaper variant of the parlor broom that uses bristles rejected for use in parlor brooms for being off-color or lower quality. Standard brooms use bristles that were deemed too low-quality for either parlor brooms or carpet brooms, often dyed green to emulate other brooms. Hearth brooms, or toy brooms, are made of miscellaneous fibers that cannot be used in other brooms. They are not typically sold as consumer products.

Warehouse brooms use heavier fibers such as rattan or palmyra palm and are bound with metal. Different grades of warehouse broom are used to denote the surface it is designed for, such as smelters, decks, or railroads. Their brushes measure about 16 to 18 inches long.

Cob brooms are used to clean webs from high areas and were historically made with round brushes. Whisk brooms use bristles that are shorter and finer than other brooms. Rubber brooms were created in the early 20th century to prevent the debris raised when sweeping with straw brooms.

== Materials and production ==
=== Brush ===
The brush of a broom is most commonly made with the fibers of broom corn. Other common plant materials used in brooms include palmyra, rice straw, rice root, piassava, grass, sedge, and twigs. They may use a mix of materials, with lower quality fibers filling out the brush. Broom making involves botanical knowledge, particularly about broom plants.

For manufactured brooms, the fibers are sorted by quality and fitted into the appropriate type of broom. They are then put through an evener to align the fibers, a saw to remove stems, and a scraper to break open the straw and remove the seeds. The fibers are dyed or bleached to achieve a uniform color, or they are wetted if they are already high quality so they can be more easily wound. The outer fibers of the brush are typically treated with a dye, called broom crystals, to preserve the color after use. 

As an alternative to plant fibers, brooms can be fitted with synthetic brushes made of materials like nylon or plastic.

=== Handle and fastening ===
Wooden broom handles are commonly made from hardwood or fir. Commercial wood broom handles are painted or finished. Lacquers can increase the lifespan of the broom&#x27;s handle in addition to serving an aesthetic purpose. Wooden broom handles are often about 42 inches long and seven-eighths to one and one-eighth inches in diameter.

Metal tension wires, sometimes crafted specifically for use in brooms, are put through a winding machine to fasten the bristles to the handle. The wire is wound through a hole in the handle before fastening the brush, typically over the last six inches of the handle. Additional bristles are added to the sides for a flat brush shape and to provide a surface for sweeping. The stem ends of the fibers are then cut and tapered and the wire is nailed into the handle. The wire is then finished by one of several methods, such as with a metal cap, with a velvet coat, or by being tapered. After the broom is wired, the fibers can again be scraped or seeded.

Twine, often made of cotton or linen, is used to stitch the brush. At least five stitches will typically be used. The outside of the brush may be wrapped with a material like leather, replacing a twine band used to hold the brush together during manufacturing.

Commercially sold brooms may apply a glued label to the fastening with the brand name or broom model, which can be used as a cover for the clamp marks left by a wiring machine.

== Magic ==
In the context of witchcraft, &quot;broomstick&quot; is likely to refer to the broom as a whole, known as a &quot;besom&quot;. The first known reference to witches flying on broomsticks dates to the 11th-century Islamic traditionalist theologian Ibn Qudamahin his book al-Mughnī ( The Persuader ). The first reference to witches flying on broomsticks in Europe dates to 1453, confessed by the male witch Guillaume Edelin. The concept of a flying ointment used by witches appears at about the same time, recorded in 1456.

In Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer&#x27;s 1939 film, &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot;, the Wicked Witch of the West used a broomstick to fly over Oz. She also used it to skywrite &quot;Surrender Dorothy&quot; above the Emerald City. The Wizard commands Dorothy and her three traveling companions to bring the Wicked Witch&#x27;s broomstick to him in order to grant their wishes. Dorothy carries it to the Wizard with the Scarecrow, Tin Man, and Lion after the Wicked Witch&#x27;s death.

In Disney&#x27;s 1940 film &quot;Fantasia&quot;, Mickey Mouse, playing The Sorcerer&#x27;s Apprentice, brings a broom to life to do his chore of filling a well full of water. The broom overdoes its job and when chopped into pieces, each splinter becomes a new broom that flood the room until Yen Sid stops them. This story comes from a poem by Goethe called &quot;Der Zauberlehrling&quot; (&quot;The Sorcerer&#x27;s Apprentice&quot;). The Disney brooms have had recurring cameos in Disney media, mostly portrayed as janitors, albeit not out of control or causing chaos such as in the original appearance.

This flight was also in &quot;Bedknobs and Broomsticks&quot; as well as &quot;Hocus Pocus&quot;.

In Eswatini (Swaziland), witches&#x27; broomsticks are short bundles of sticks tied together without a handle.

Flying brooms play an important role in the fantasy world of Harry Potter, used for transportation as well as for playing the popular airborne game of Quidditch. Flying brooms, along with Flying carpets, are the main means of transportation in the world of Poul Anderson&#x27;s 
Operation Chaos.

The Flying Broom () is a feminist organization in Turkey, deliberately evoking the associations of a Flying Broom with witches.

== Culture ==
Brooms are used in some rituals.

Jumping the broom is a tradition sometimes practiced in African American weddings in which the couple leaps over a broom to symbolically represent the leap into domestic life. The tradition was practiced by enslaved Americans and other groups of low social class in the United States through the 19th century. It was revitalized by Alex Haley after it was prominently featured in his novel &quot;&quot; in 1976 and became part of a broader reclamation of Black heritage at the time. Other marginalized groups, such as the Celts and the Romani, have historically been described as practicing similar traditions in Britain. The precise origin of jumping the broom is uncertain.

The Métis people of Canada have a broom dancing tradition. There are broom dancing exhibitions where people show off their broom dancing skills. The lively broom dance involves fast footwork and jumping.

During World War II, American submarine crews would tie a broom to their boat&#x27;s conning tower when returning to port to indicate that they had &quot;swept&quot; the seas clean of enemy shipping. The tradition has been devalued in recent years by submarine crews who fly a broom simply when returning from their boat&#x27;s shake-down cruise. This tradition may stem from the action of the Dutch admiral Maarten Tromp who tied a broom to his main mast after defeating the British admiral Robert Blake at the Battle of Dungeness in 1652. This has often been interpreted as a message that he would &quot;sweep the British from the seas&quot;. This story remains unsubstantiated, but may have its origin in the tradition of hoisting a broom as a sign that a ship was for sale, which seems more likely as Tromp had captured two of Blake&#x27;s ships in the battle.

In Bhojpuri, it is called &quot;Baṛhanī&quot; (prosperer), as it is believed that it&#x27;s prospers the family and house.

=== Literature ===
* In 1701 Jonathan Swift wrote a &quot;Meditation Upon a Broomstick&quot;, a parody of Robert Boyle&#x27;s &quot;Occasional Reflections upon Several Subjects&quot;:

*In J.K. Rowling&#x27;s &quot;Harry Potter&quot; novels and film adaptations, broomsticks are a common form of transport for wizards and witches. These are also used for the magical sport of Quidditch, in which players use their broomsticks to fly around a field and shoot goals.

===Politics===

For much of the 20th century, political cartoons and propaganda would often depict new or oncoming leaders sweeping away old, corrupt or unpopular figures.

The broom is used as a symbol of the following political parties:
* Aam Aadmi Party, India
* All Progressives Congress, Nigeria

=== Religion ===
* In Jainism, monks and nuns have a little broom with them, in order to gently brush aside ants and small animals, to avoid crushing them. This is part of observing the principle of &quot;Ahinsā&quot;.
* The Shakers are often credited with the invention of the flat broom.

=== Sports ===
* Curling broom
* In baseball and basketball, when the home team is close to accomplishing a sweep (having won the first two games of a three-game series or first three games of a four-game series), some fans will bring brooms to the ballpark and brandish them as a way of taunting the visiting team (examples: Arkansas vs. LSU, 2011; Red Sox vs. Yankees, May 13–15, 2011 and June 7–9, 2011).
* In broomball, broomsticks have their heads removed and are used to push a ball into a goal, on an ice surface. The game is similar to hockey, except players do not wear skates.

== Image gallery ==
==See also==
* Bath broom
* Besom
* Mop
* Squeegee

== Notes ==
== References ==
* 
* 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172833" start="2" end="7" title="Broom" label="broom"/>
<link wikidata="Q172833" start="25" end="35" title="Broom" label="broomstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q65117555" start="42" end="55" title="cleaning tool" label="cleaning tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q614467" start="254" end="259" title="brush" label="brush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128099" start="322" end="329" title="dustpan" label="dustpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357" start="523" end="530" title="spiders" label="spiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061814" start="545" end="559" title="feather duster" label="feather duster"/>
<link wikidata="Q22657" start="696" end="704" title="concrete" label="concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="974" end="984" title="witchcraft" label="witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155334" start="989" end="1005" title="ceremonial magic" label="ceremonial magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q145781" start="1094" end="1100" title="broom (shrub)" label="brooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="1312" end="1331" title="Late Middle English" label="Late Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q13222322" start="1373" end="1378" title="besom" label="besom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472196" start="1396" end="1416" title="Early Modern English" label="Early Modern English"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975247" start="1440" end="1457" title="Broom Buzzems" label="Buy Broom Buzzems"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017141" start="1468" end="1482" title="William Purvis (Blind Willie)" label="William Purvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13222322" start="1553" end="1558" title="besom" label="besom"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="1625" end="1635" title="Sorghum bicolor" label="broom corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370167" start="1654" end="1661" title="Shakers" label="Shakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908683" start="1708" end="1718" title="Shaker broom vice" label="broom vice"/>
<link wikidata="Q42303703" start="2057" end="2060" title="bur" label="bur"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="2142" end="2168" title="Southwestern United States" label="Southwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q156317" start="2189" end="2194" title="yucca" label="yucca"/>
<link wikidata="Q251749" start="2215" end="2221" title="pueblo" label="pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106099" start="2375" end="2388" title="Codex Mendoza" label="Codex Mendoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="2402" end="2408" title="Aztecs" label="Aztecs"/>
<link wikidata="Q128887" start="2515" end="2523" title="ash wood" label="ash wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="2749" end="2752" title="pub" label="pub"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302147" start="3132" end="3153" title="Hadley, Massachusetts" label="Hadley, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="3203" end="3210" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="3618" end="3639" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370167" start="3646" end="3653" title="Shakers" label="Shakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836568" start="3752" end="3759" title="treadle" label="treadle"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="3878" end="3895" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q151046" start="3901" end="3913" title="French broom" label="French broom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="3953" end="3969" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q674484" start="4249" end="4262" title="machine press" label="machine press"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024248" start="4280" end="4295" title="winding machine" label="winding machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q688702" start="4311" end="4323" title="door-to-door" label="door-to-door"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="4339" end="4356" title="American frontier" label="American frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4448003" start="4383" end="4390" title="Rawhide (material)" label="rawhide"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="4520" end="4542" title="University of Illinois" label="University of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450186" start="4831" end="4842" title="leaf blower" label="leaf blower"/>
<link wikidata="Q101674" start="4848" end="4862" title="vacuum cleaner" label="vacuum cleaner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189650" start="5083" end="5104" title="Eastern United States" label="Eastern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="5117" end="5133" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="5210" end="5218" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017220" start="5367" end="5374" title="El Reno, Oklahoma" label="El Reno"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049815" start="5667" end="5707" title="International Cooperation Administration" label="International Cooperation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q323021" start="6352" end="6358" title="rattan" label="rattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q310912" start="6362" end="6374" title="palmyra palm" label="palmyra palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q111913260" start="7066" end="7074" title="piassava" label="piassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q155843" start="7083" end="7088" title="sedge" label="sedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266509" start="7967" end="7975" title="hardwood" label="hardwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q25350" start="7979" end="7982" title="fir" label="fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q119172976" start="8029" end="8037" title="Wood finishing" label="finished"/>
<link wikidata="Q11236878" start="8039" end="8046" title="Lacquer" label="Lacquer"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="9385" end="9395" title="witchcraft" label="witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q13222322" start="9481" end="9486" title="besom" label="besom"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="9523" end="9528" title="witch" label="witch"/>
<link wikidata="Q785506" start="9613" end="9624" title="Ibn Qudamah" label="Ibn Qudamah"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="9688" end="9693" title="witch" label="witch"/>
<link wikidata="Q15818578" start="9771" end="9787" title="Guillaume Edelin" label="Guillaume Edelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q356966" start="9806" end="9821" title="flying ointment" label="flying ointment"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="9892" end="9911" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193695" start="9936" end="9952" title="The Wizard of Oz (1939 film)" label="The Wizard of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822980" start="9964" end="9988" title="Wicked Witch of the West" label="Wicked Witch of the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918164" start="10019" end="10021" title="Land of Oz" label="Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646696" start="10058" end="10075" title="Surrender Dorothy" label="Surrender Dorothy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961610" start="10092" end="10104" title="Emerald City" label="Emerald City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382687" start="10106" end="10116" title="Wizard of Oz (character)" label="The Wizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583524" start="10126" end="10133" title="Dorothy Gale" label="Dorothy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3835867" start="10294" end="10303" title="Scarecrow (Oz)" label="Scarecrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168555" start="10305" end="10312" title="Tin Woodman" label="Tin Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542307" start="10318" end="10322" title="Cowardly Lion" label="Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="10364" end="10370" title="Disney" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q943192" start="10394" end="10402" title="Fantasia (1940 film)" label="Fantasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11934" start="10410" end="10422" title="Mickey Mouse" label="Mickey Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q260514" start="10432" end="10462" title="The Sorcerer&amp;#x27;s Apprentice" label="The Sorcerer&amp;#x27;s Apprentice"/>
<link wikidata="Q17793969" start="10653" end="10660" title="Yen Sid" label="Yen Sid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="10705" end="10711" title="Goethe" label="Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q945138" start="10997" end="11021" title="Bedknobs and Broomsticks" label="Bedknobs and Broomsticks"/>
<link wikidata="Q431140" start="11045" end="11056" title="Hocus Pocus (1993 film)" label="Hocus Pocus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="11068" end="11088" title="Eswatini" label="Eswatini (Swaziland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8337" start="11238" end="11250" title="Harry Potter" label="Harry Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q305561" start="11328" end="11337" title="Quidditch" label="Quidditch"/>
<link wikidata="Q740881" start="11365" end="11379" title="Flying carpets" label="Flying carpets"/>
<link wikidata="Q220883" start="11434" end="11447" title="Poul Anderson" label="Poul Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3883945" start="11456" end="11471" title="Operation Chaos (novel)" label="Operation Chaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q21206094" start="11478" end="11490" title="Flying Broom" label="Flying Broom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="11499" end="11507" title="feminism" label="feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="11524" end="11530" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6311333" start="11651" end="11668" title="Jumping the broom" label="Jumping the broom"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="11707" end="11723" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="11858" end="11876" title="enslaved Americans" label="enslaved Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q296069" start="11983" end="11993" title="Alex Haley" label="Alex Haley"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="12173" end="12178" title="Celts" label="Celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="12187" end="12193" title="Romani people" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q262457" start="12332" end="12344" title="Métis people" label="Métis people"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="12540" end="12552" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187402" start="12618" end="12631" title="conning tower" label="conning tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q470200" start="12941" end="12954" title="Maarten Tromp" label="Maarten Tromp"/>
<link wikidata="Q320959" start="13025" end="13037" title="Robert Blake (admiral)" label="Robert Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576717" start="13045" end="13064" title="Battle of Dungeness" label="Battle of Dungeness"/>
<link wikidata="Q33268" start="13402" end="13410" title="Bhojpuri language" label="Bhojpuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q41166" start="13552" end="13566" title="Jonathan Swift" label="Jonathan Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q3332677" start="13581" end="13609" title="Meditation Upon a Broomstick" label="Meditation Upon a Broomstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q43393" start="13629" end="13641" title="Robert Boyle" label="Robert Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q34660" start="13712" end="13724" title="J.K. Rowling" label="J.K. Rowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q8337" start="13738" end="13750" title="Harry Potter" label="Harry Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q216930" start="13768" end="13784" title="Harry Potter (film series)" label="film adaptations"/>
<link wikidata="Q305561" start="13899" end="13908" title="Quidditch" label="Quidditch"/>
<link wikidata="Q129844" start="14230" end="14245" title="Aam Aadmi Party" label="Aam Aadmi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729266" start="14255" end="14280" title="All Progressives Congress" label="All Progressives Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="14313" end="14320" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4695121" start="14496" end="14502" title="Ahimsa in Jainism" label="Ahinsā"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370167" start="14516" end="14523" title="Shakers" label="Shakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q136851" start="14599" end="14612" title="Curling broom" label="Curling broom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="14618" end="14626" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="14631" end="14641" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046346" start="14652" end="14661" title="home team" label="home team"/>
<link wikidata="Q990637" start="14995" end="15004" title="broomball" label="broomball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614798" start="15205" end="15215" title="Bath broom" label="Bath broom"/>
<link wikidata="Q13222322" start="15218" end="15223" title="Besom" label="Besom"/>
<link wikidata="Q828361" start="15226" end="15229" title="Mop" label="Mop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143580" start="15232" end="15240" title="Squeegee" label="Squeegee"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59703" wikidata="Q49125" url="?curid=59703" title="Toshiba">
<text>is a Japanese multinational electronics company headquartered in Minato, Tokyo. Its diversified products and services include power, industrial and social infrastructure systems, elevators and escalators, electronic components, semiconductors, hard disk drives, printers, batteries, lighting, as well as IT solutions such as quantum cryptography. It was formerly also one of the biggest manufacturers of personal computers, consumer electronics, home appliances, and medical equipment.

The Toshiba name is derived from its former name, Tokyo Shibaura Denki K.K. which in turn was a 1939 merger between Shibaura Seisaku-sho (founded in 1875) and Tokyo Denki (founded in 1890). The company name was officially changed to Toshiba Corporation in 1978. A technology company with a long history and sprawling businesses, Toshiba is a household name in Japan and has long been viewed as a symbol of the country&#x27;s technological prowess post-World War II. As a semiconductor company and the inventor of flash memory, Toshiba had been one of the top 10 in the chip industry until its flash memory unit was spun off as Kioxia in the late 2010s. The company was also relevant in consumer personal computers, releasing the first mass-market laptop in 1985 and later ranking as a major vendor of laptops; it exited the PC business in 2020 having divested it into Dynabook Inc.

Toshiba faced trouble during the 2010s amid a much-publicised accounting scandal that affected its reputation, and the bankruptcy of its subsidiary nuclear energy company Westinghouse in 2017. This forced the conglomerate to shed a number of underperforming businesses, essentially eliminating the company&#x27;s century-long presence in consumer markets. After a rejection to split the company, in 2023 Toshiba was purchased by a consortium led by Japan Industrial Partners (JIP); Toshiba turned private as a result and was delisted from the Tokyo Stock Exchange after 74 years, where it was formerly a constituent of the Nikkei 225 and TOPIX 100 indices. 

==History==
===Tanaka Seisakusho===
 was the first company established by Tanaka Hisashige (1799–1881), one of the most original and productive inventor-engineers during the Tokugawa / Edo period. Established on 11 July 1875, it was the first Japanese company to manufacture telegraph equipment. It also manufactured switches, and miscellaneous electrical and communications equipment.

The company was inherited by Tanaka&#x27;s adopted son, and later became half of the present Toshiba company. Several people who worked at Tanaka Seisakusho or who received Tanaka&#x27;s guidance at a Kubusho (Ministry of Industries) factory later became pioneers themselves. These included who helped make the first power generator in Japan and to establish a company, Hakunetsusha to make bulbs; Oki Kibatarō, the founder of the present Oki Denki (Oki Electric Industry); and Ishiguro Keizaburō, a co-founder of the present Anritsu.

After the demise of the founder in 1881, Tanaka Seisakusho became partly owned by General Electric and expanded into the production of torpedoes and mines at the request of the Imperial Japanese Navy, to become one of the largest manufacturing companies of the time. However, as the Navy started to use competitive bids and then build its own works, the demand decreased substantially and the company started to lose money. The main creditor to the company, Mitsui Bank, took over the insolvent company in 1893 and renamed it Shibaura Seisakusho (Shibaura Engineering Works).

===Shibaura Seisakusho===
 was the new name given to Tanaka Seisakusho after it was declared insolvent in 1893 and taken over by Mitsui Bank.

In 1910, it formed a tie-up with General Electric (GE), which, in exchange for technology, acquired about a quarter of the shares of Shibaura. The relation with GE continued until the beginning of World War II and resumed in 1953 with GE&#x27;s 24 percent shareholding in the successor company, Tokyo Shibaura Denki. This percentage decreased substantially since then.

===Hakunetsusha (Tokyo Denki)===
 was a company established by Miyoshi Shōichi and , two of Japan&#x27;s industrial pioneers during the Tokugawa / Edo period. It specialized in the manufacturing of lightbulbs.

The company was established in 1890 and started out by selling bulbs using bamboo filaments. However, following the opening up of trade with the West through the Unequal treaty, Hakunetsusha met with fierce competition from imports. Its bulb cost about 60 percent more than the imports and the quality was poorer. The company managed to survive with the booms after the First Sino-Japanese War of 1894–95 and the Russo-Japanese War of 1904–05, but afterward its financial position was precarious. 
In 1905, the company was renamed Tokyo Denki (Tokyo Electric) and entered into a financial and technological collaboration with General Electric of the US. General Electric acquired 51 percent share of ownership, sent a vice president, and provided the technology for bulb-making. Production equipment was bought from GE and Tokyo Denki soon started selling its products with GE&#x27;s trademark.

===1939 to 2000===

Toshiba was founded in 1939 by the merger of Shibaura Seisakusho and Tokyo Denki. The merger of Shibaura and Tokyo Denki created a new company called Tokyo Shibaura Denki (Tokyo Shibaura Electric) (). It was soon nicknamed Toshiba, but it was not until 1978 that the company was officially renamed Toshiba Corporation. The company was listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange in May 1949.
The group expanded rapidly, driven by a combination of organic growth and by acquisitions, buying heavy engineering, and primary industry firms in the 1940s and 1950s. Groups created include Toshiba Music Industries/Toshiba EMI (1960), Toshiba International Corporation (the 1970s), Toshiba Electrical Equipment (1974), Toshiba Chemical (1974), Toshiba Lighting and Technology (1989), Toshiba America Information Systems (1989) and Toshiba Carrier Corporation (1999).

The first mini-split ductless air conditioner was sold in 1961 by Toshiba in Japan.

Toshiba is responsible for a number of Japanese firsts, including radar (1912), the TAC digital computer (1954), transistor television, color CRTs and microwave oven (1959), color video phone (1971), Japanese word processor (1978), MRI system (1982), personal computer Pasopia (1981), laptop personal computer (1986), NAND EEPROM (1991), DVD (1995), the Libretto sub-notebook personal computer (1996) and HD DVD (2005).

In 1977, Toshiba acquired the Brazilian company Semp (Sociedade Eletromercantil Paulista), subsequently forming Semp Toshiba through the combination of the two companies&#x27; South American operations.

In 1987, Toshiba Machine, a subsidiary of Toshiba, was accused of illegally selling CNC milling machines used to produce very quiet submarine propellers to the Soviet Union in violation of the CoCom agreement, an international embargo on certain countries to COMECON countries. The Toshiba-Kongsberg scandal involved a subsidiary of Toshiba and the Norwegian company Kongsberg Vaapenfabrikk. The incident strained relations between the United States and Japan, and resulted in the arrest and prosecution of two senior executives, as well as the imposition of sanctions on the company by both countries. Senator John Heinz of Pennsylvania said &quot;What Toshiba and Kongsberg did was ransom the security of the United States for $517 million.&quot;

===2000 to 2010===
In 2001, Toshiba signed a contract with Orion Electric, one of the world&#x27;s largest OEM consumer video electronic makers and suppliers, to manufacture and supply finished consumer TV and video products for Toshiba to meet the increasing demand for the North American market. The contract ended in 2008, ending seven years of OEM production with Orion.

In December 2004, Toshiba quietly announced it would discontinue manufacturing traditional in-house cathode-ray tube (CRT) televisions. In 2005, Matsushita Toshiba Picture Display Co. Ltd. (a joint venture between Panasonic and Toshiba created in 2002) stopped production of CRTs at its factory in Horseheads, New York. A year later, in 2006, it stopped production at its Malaysian factory, following heavy losses. In 2006, Toshiba terminated sales of CRT TVs in Japan and production of in-house plasma TVs. To ensure its future competitiveness in the flat-panel digital television and display market, Toshiba has made a considerable investment in a new kind of display technology called SED. This technology, however, was never sold to the public, as it was not price-competitive with LCDs. Toshiba sold its share in SED Inc. to Canon after Nano-Proprietary, which owns several patents related to SED technology, claimed SED Inc. was not a subsidiary of Canon. Before World War II, Toshiba was a member of the Mitsui Group zaibatsu (family-controlled vertical monopoly). Today Toshiba is a member of the Mitsui keiretsu (a set of companies with interlocking business relationships and shareholdings), and still has preferential arrangements with Mitsui Bank and the other members of the keiretsu. Membership in a keiretsu has traditionally meant loyalty, both corporate and private, to other members of the keiretsu or allied keiretsu. This loyalty can extend as far as the beer the employees consume, which in Toshiba&#x27;s case is Asahi.

In July 2005, BNFL confirmed it planned to sell Westinghouse Electric Company, then estimated to be worth $1.8 billion (£1 billion). The bid attracted interest from several companies including Toshiba, General Electric and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries and when the &quot;Financial Times&quot; reported on 23 January 2006 that Toshiba had won the bid, it valued the company&#x27;s offer at $5 billion (£2.8 billion). The sale of Westinghouse by the Government of the United Kingdom surprised many industry experts, who questioned the wisdom of selling one of the world&#x27;s largest producers of nuclear reactors shortly before the market for nuclear power was expected to grow substantially; China, the United States and the United Kingdom were all expected to invest heavily in nuclear power. The acquisition of Westinghouse for $5.4 billion was completed on 17 October 2006, with Toshiba obtaining a 77 percent share, and partners The Shaw Group a 20 percent share and Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries Co. Ltd. a 3 percent share.

In late 2007, Toshiba took over from Discover Card as the sponsor of the top-most screen of One Times Square in New York City. It displays the iconic 60-second New Year&#x27;s countdown on its screen, as well as messages, greetings, and advertisements for the company. The sponsor of the New Year&#x27;s countdown was taken over by Capital One on 31 December 2018.

In January 2009, Toshiba acquired the HDD business of Fujitsu.

===2010 to 2014===
Toshiba announced on 16 May 2011, that it had agreed to acquire all of the shares of the Swiss-based advanced-power-meter maker Landis+Gyr for $2.3 billion. In 2010 the company released a series of television models including the WL768, YL863, VL963 designed in collaboration with Danish designer Timothy Jacob Jensen.
In April 2012, Toshiba agreed to acquire IBM&#x27;s point-of-sale business for $850 million, making it the world&#x27;s largest vendor of point-of-sale systems.

In July 2012, Toshiba was accused of fixing the prices of LCD panels in the United States at a high level. While such claims were denied by Toshiba, they agreed to settle alongside several other manufacturers for a total of $571 million.

In December 2013, Toshiba completed its acquisition of Vijai Electricals Limited plant at Hyderabad and set up its own base for manufacturing of transmission and distribution products (transformers and switchgears) under the Social Infrastructure Group in India as Toshiba Transmission &amp; Distribution Systems (India) Private Limited.

In January 2014, Toshiba completed its acquisition of OCZ Storage Solutions. OCZ Technology stock was halted on 27 November 2013. OCZ then stated they expected to file a petition for bankruptcy and that Toshiba Corporation had expressed interest in purchasing its assets in a bankruptcy proceeding. On 2 December 2013, OCZ announced Toshiba had agreed to purchase nearly all of OCZ&#x27;s assets for $35 million. The deal was completed on 21 January 2014 when the assets of OCZ Technology Group became a new independently operated subsidiary of Toshiba named OCZ Storage Solutions. OCZ Technology Group then changed its name to ZCO Liquidating Corporation; on 18 August 2014, ZCO Liquidating Corporation and its subsidiaries were liquidated. OCZ Storage Solutions was dissolved on 1 April 2016 and absorbed into Toshiba America Electronic Components, Inc., with OCZ becoming a brand of Toshiba.

In March 2014, Toshiba sued SK Hynix, accusing the company of stealing technology of its NAND flash memory. In the late same year, the two companies settled with a deal in which SK Hynix pays US$278 million to Toshiba. Toshiba had sued Hynix in the early 2000s for patent infringement.

In October 2014, Toshiba and United Technologies agreed a deal to expand their joint venture outside Japan.

===2015 accounting scandal===
Toshiba first announced in May 2015 that it was investigating an accounting scandal and it might have to revise its profits for the previous three years. On 21 July 2015, CEO Hisao Tanaka announced his resignation amid an accounting scandal that he called &quot;the most damaging event for our brand in the company&#x27;s 140-year history&quot;. Profits had been inflated by $1.2 billion over the previous seven years. Eight other senior officials also resigned, including the two previous CEOs. Chairman Masashi Muromachi was appointed acting CEO. Following the scandal, Toshiba Corp. was removed from a stock index showcasing Japan&#x27;s best companies. That was the second reshuffle of the index, which picks companies with the best operating income, return on equity and market value.

Toshiba announced in early 2015 that they would stop making televisions in its own factories. From 2015 onward, Toshiba televisions will be made by Compal for the U.S., or by Vestel and other manufacturers for the European market.

In September 2015, Toshiba shares fell to their lowest point in two and a half years. The firm said in a statement that its net losses for the quarterly period were 12.3 billion yen ($102m; £66m). The company noted poor performances in its televisions, home appliances and personal computer businesses.

In October 2015, Toshiba sold the image sensor business to Sony.

In December 2015, Muromachi said the episode had wiped about $8 billion off Toshiba&#x27;s market value. He forecast a record 550 billion yen (about US$4.6 billion) annual loss and warned the company would have to overhaul its TV and computer businesses. Toshiba would not be raising funds for two years, he said. The next week, a company spokesperson announced Toshiba would seek 300 billion yen ($2.5 billion) in 2016, taking the company&#x27;s indebtedness to more than 1 trillion yen (about $8.3 billion).

In January 2016, Toshiba&#x27;s security division unveiled a new bundle of services for schools that use its surveillance equipment. The program, which is intended for both K-12 and higher education, includes education discounts, alerts, and post-warranty support, among other features, on its IP-based security gear.

In March 2016, Toshiba was preparing to start construction on a cutting-edge new semiconductor plant in Japan that would mass-produce chips based on the ultra-dense flash variant. Toshiba expected to spend approximately 360 billion yen, or $3.2 billion, on the project through May 2019.

In April 2016, Toshiba recalled 100,000 faulty laptop lithium-ion batteries, which were made by Panasonic, that can overheat, posing burn and fire hazards to consumers, according to the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission. Toshiba first announced the recall in January and said it was recalling the batteries in certain Toshiba Notebook computers sold since June 2011.

In May 2016, it was announced that Satoshi Tsunakawa, the former head of Toshiba&#x27;s medical equipment division, was named CEO. This appointment came after the accounting scandal that occurred.

In September 2016, Toshiba announced the first wireless power receiver IC using the Qi 1.2.2 specification, developed in association with the Wireless Power Consortium.

In December 2016, Toshiba Medical Systems Corporation was acquired by Canon.

A Chinese electrical appliance corporation Midea Group bought a controlling 80.1% stake in the Toshiba Home Appliances Group.

===2017 US nuclear construction liabilities===
In late December 2016, the management of Toshiba requested an &quot;urgent press briefing&quot; to announce that the newly-found losses in the Westinghouse subsidiary from Vogtle Electric Generating Plant nuclear plant construction would lead to a write-down of several billion dollars, bankrupting Westinghouse and threatening to bankrupt Toshiba. The exact amount of the liabilities was unavailable.

In January 2017, a person with direct knowledge of the matter reported that the company plans on making its memory chip division a separate business, to save Toshiba from bankruptcy.

In February 2017, Toshiba revealed unaudited details of a 390 billion yen ($3.4 billion) corporate wide loss, mainly arising from its majority owned US based Westinghouse nuclear construction subsidiary which was written down by 712 billion yen ($6.3 billion). On 14 February 2017, Toshiba delayed filing financial results, and chairman Shigenori Shiga, formerly chairman of Westinghouse, resigned.

Construction delays, regulatory changes and cost overruns at Westinghouse-built nuclear facilities Vogtle units 3 and 4 in Waynesboro, Georgia and VC Summer units 2 and 3 in South Carolina, were cited as the main causes of the dramatic fall in Toshiba&#x27;s financial performance and collapse in the share price. Fixed priced construction contracts negotiated by Westinghouse with Georgia Power left Toshiba with uncharted liabilities that resulted in the sale of key Toshiba operating subsidiaries to secure the company&#x27;s future.

Westinghouse filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on 29 March 2017. Toshiba was estimated to have 9 billion dollar annual net loss.

On 11 April 2017, Toshiba filed unaudited quarterly results. Auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers had not signed of the accounts because of uncertainties at Westinghouse. Toshiba stated that &quot;substantial doubt about the company&#x27;s ability to continue as a going concern exists&quot;. On 25 April 2017, Toshiba announced its decision to replace its auditor after less than a year. Earlier in April, the company filed twice-delayed business results without an endorsement from auditor PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC).

On 20 September 2017, Toshiba&#x27;s board approved a deal to sell its memory chip business to a group led by Bain Capital for US$18 billion, with financial backing by companies such as Apple, Dell Technologies, Hoya Corporation, Kingston Technology, Seagate Technology, and SK Hynix. The newly independent company was named Toshiba Memory Corporation, and then renamed Kioxia.

On 15 November 2017, Hisense reached a deal to acquire 95% of Toshiba Visual Solutions (television sets) for US$113.6 million.

Later that month, the company announced that it would pull out of its long-standing sponsorships of the Japanese television programs &quot;Sazae-san&quot;, &quot;Nichiyō Gekijo&quot;, and the video screens topping out One Times Square in New York City. The company cited that the value of these placements were reduced by its exit from consumer-oriented lines of business.

On 6 April 2018, Toshiba announced the completion of the sale of Westinghouse&#x27;s holding company to Brookfield Business Partners and some partners for $4.6 billion.

===Present and future===
In June 2018, Toshiba sold 80.1% of its Client Solutions (personal computers) business unit to Sharp for $36m, with an option allowing Sharp to buy the remaining 19.9% share. Sharp renamed the business to Dynabook, a brand name Toshiba had used in Japan, and started releasing products under that name. On 30 June 2020, Sharp exercised its option to acquire the remaining 19.9% percent of Dynabook shares from Toshiba.

In May 2019, Toshiba announced that it would put non-Japanese investors on its board for the first time in nearly 80 years. In November, the company transferred its logistics service business to SBS Group.

In January 2020, Toshiba unveiled its plan to launch quantum cryptography services by September the same year. It also announced a number of other technologies waiting for commercialization, including an affordable solid-state Lidar based on silicon photomultiplier, high-capacity hydrogen fuel cells, and a proprietary computer algorithm named &quot;Simulated Bifurcation Algorithm&quot; that mimics quantum computing, of which it plans to sell access to other parties such as financial institutions, social networking services, etc. The company claims the algorithm running on a desktop PC at room temperature environment is capable of surpassing the performance of similar algorithms running on existing supercomputers, even that of laser-based quantum computer when a specialized setting is given. It has been added to quantum computing services offered by major cloud platforms including Microsoft Azure.

In October 2020, Toshiba made a decision to pull out of the system LSI business citing mounted losses while reportedly mulling on the sale of its semiconductor fabs as well. In April 2021, CVC Capital Partners made a takeover offer.

On 12 November 2021, Toshiba announced that it would split into three separate companies. Two of the companies will respectively focus on infrastructure and electronic devices; the third, which will retain the Toshiba name, would manage the 40.6% stake in Kioxia and all other remaining assets. The company expected to complete the plan by March 2024 but the plan was challenged by stockholders, and at an extraordinary general meeting on 24 March 2022, they rejected the plan. They also rejected an alternative plan put forward by a large institutional investor that would have had the company search for buyers among private equity firms. Toshiba announced in February 2022 that it plans to split into two companies instead after the original proposal proved unpopular with shareholders.

In March 2023, however, the company announced it had accepted a trillion (billion) buyout offer from a consortium of 20 companies, which was led by Japan Industrial Partners (JIP), a Tokyo-based private equity firm, and includes Orix, Chubu Electric Power, and Rohm. On September 27, after the public offering was completed in the middle of that month, it was reported that it would be transferred to a new parent company, TBJH. On 22 December 2023, it was announced that JIP&#x27;s purchase of the company had been completed, two days after being delisted. This move brought the company back to Japan after it had been run by overseas activist investors.

==Operations==
As of 2012, Toshiba had 39 R&amp;D facilities worldwide, which employed around 4,180 people, and was organized into four main business groupings: the Digital Products Group, the Electronic Devices Group, the Home Appliances Group and the Social Infrastructure Group. In the year ended 31 March 2012, Toshiba had total revenues of , of which 25.2 percent was generated by the Digital Products Group, 24.5 percent by the Electronic Devices Group, 8.7 percent by the Home Appliances Group, 36.6 percent by the Social Infrastructure Group and 5 percent by other activities. In the same year, 45 percent of Toshiba&#x27;s sales were generated in Japan and 55 percent in the rest of the world.

Toshiba invested a total of in R&amp;D in the year ended 31 March 2012, equivalent to 5.2 percent of sales. Toshiba registered a total of 2,483 patents in the United States in 2011, the fifth-largest number of any company (after IBM, Samsung Electronics, Canon and Panasonic).

Toshiba had around 141,256 employees as of 31 March 2018.

==Products, services, and standards==
Toshiba has had a range of products and services, including air conditioners, consumer electronics (including televisions and DVD and Blu-ray players), control systems (including air-traffic control systems, railway systems, security systems and traffic control systems), electronic point of sale equipment, elevators and escalators, home appliances (including refrigerators and washing machines), IT services, lighting, materials and electronic components, medical equipment (including CT and MRI scanners, ultrasound equipment and X-ray equipment), office equipment, business telecommunication equipment personal computers, semiconductors, power systems (including electricity turbines, fuel cells and nuclear reactors) power transmission and distribution systems, and TFT displays.

===HD DVD===
Toshiba had played a critical role in the development and proliferation of DVD. On 19 February 2008, Toshiba announced that it would be discontinuing its HD DVD storage format, the successor of DVD, following defeat in a format war against Blu-ray. The HD DVD format had failed after most of the major US film studios backed the Blu-ray format, which was developed by Sony, Panasonic, Philips and Pioneer Corporation. Conceding the abandonment of HD DVD, Toshiba&#x27;s president, Atsutoshi Nishida said &quot;We concluded that a swift decision would be best [and] if we had continued, that would have created problems for consumers, and we simply had no chance to win&quot;.

Toshiba continued to supply retailers with machines until the end of March 2008, and continued to provide technical support to the estimated one million people worldwide who owned HD DVD players and recorders. Toshiba announced a new line of stand-alone Blu-ray players as well as drives for PCs and laptops, and subsequently joined the BDA, the industry body which oversees the development of the Blu-ray format.

===REGZA===

REGZA (Real Expression Guaranteed by Amazing Architecture) is a unified television brand owned and manufactured by Toshiba. In 2010 REGZA name disappeared from the North American market, and from March 2015 new TVs carrying the Toshiba name are designed and produced by Compal Electronics, a Taiwanese company, to which Toshiba has licensed its name. REGZA is also used in Android-based smartphones that were developed by Fujitsu Toshiba Mobile Communications.

====3D television====
In October 2010, Toshiba unveiled the Toshiba Regza GL1 21&quot; LED-backlit LCD TV glasses-free 3D prototype at CEATEC 2010. This system supports 3D capability without glasses (utilizing an integral imaging system of 9 parallax images with a vertical lenticular sheet). The retail product was released in December 2010.

====4K Ultra HD televisions====
4K Ultra HD (3840×2160p) televisions provides four times the resolution of 1080p Full HD televisions. Toshiba&#x27;s 4K HD LED televisions are powered by a CEVO 4K Quad + dual-core processor.

===Personal computers===
In 1985, Toshiba released the T1100, the world&#x27;s first commercially accepted laptop PC. Toshiba designed and developed PCs, predominantly laptops, under several product lines including Satellite, Portégé, Libretto, Qosmio and Tecra.

Toshiba initialized process of divestment of the personal computer and laptop business, Toshiba Client Solutions, in 2018 with sale of 80.1% of shares to Sharp Corporation. Eventually Toshiba fully exited from the personal computing market in June 2020, transferring the remaining 19.9% shares in Toshiba Client Solutions (since being renamed to Dynabook Inc.) to Sharp. Toshiba&#x27;s divested personal computing business adopted the Dynabook name after a computer concept targeted for children and after one of its product lines.

===Flash memory===
In the 1980s, a Toshiba team led by Fujio Masuoka invented flash memory, both NOR and NAND types. In March 2015, Toshiba announced the development of the first 48-layer, three-dimensional flash memory. The new flash memory is based on a vertical stacking technology that Toshiba calls BiCS (Bit Cost Scaling), stores two bits of data per transistor, and can store 128Gbits (16GB) per chip. This allowed flash memory to keep scaling up the capacity as Moore&#x27;s Law was considered to be obsolete. Toshiba&#x27;s memory division was spun off as Toshiba Memory Corporation, now Kioxia.

==Environmental record==
Toshiba has been judged as making &quot;low&quot; efforts to lessen its impact on the environment. In November 2012, they came second from the bottom in Greenpeace&#x27;s 18th edition of the Guide to Greener Electronics that ranks electronics companies according to their policies on products, energy, and sustainable operations. Toshiba received 2.3 of a possible 10 points, with the top company (WIPRO) receiving 7.1 points. &quot;Zero&quot; scores were received in the categories &quot;Clean energy policy advocacy&quot;, &quot;Use of recycled plastics in products&quot; and &quot;Policy and practice on sustainable sourcing of fibres for paper&quot;.

In 2010, Toshiba reported that all of its new LCD TVs comply with the Energy Star standards and 34 models exceed the requirements by 30% or more.

Toshiba also partnered with China&#x27;s Tsinghua University in 2008 in order to form a research facility to focus on energy conservation and the environment. The new Toshiba Energy and Environment Research Center is located in Beijing where forty students from the university will work to research electric power equipment and new technologies that will help stop the global warming process. Through this partnership, Toshiba hopes to develop products that will better protect the environment and save China. This contract between Tsinghua University and Toshiba originally began in October 2007 when they signed an agreement on joint energy and environment research. The projects that they conduct work to reduce car pollution and to create power systems that don&#x27;t negatively affect the environment.

On 28 December 1970 Toshiba began the construction of unit 3 of the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant which was damaged in the Fukushima I nuclear accidents on 14 March 2011. In April 2011, CEO Norio Sasaki declared nuclear energy would &quot;remain as a strong option&quot; even after the Fukushima I nuclear accidents.

In late 2013, Toshiba (Japan) entered the solar power business in Germany, installing PV systems on apartment buildings.

==See also==
* List of Toshiba subsidiaries

==Footnotes==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="14" end="27" title="multinational corporation" label="multinational"/>
<link wikidata="Q190088" start="65" end="78" title="Minato, Tokyo" label="Minato, Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="228" end="241" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="244" end="259" title="hard disk drive" label="hard disk drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="304" end="306" title="Information technology" label="IT"/>
<link wikidata="Q471906" start="325" end="345" title="quantum cryptography" label="quantum cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="404" end="421" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q581105" start="424" end="444" title="consumer electronics" label="consumer electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q212920" start="446" end="460" title="home appliance" label="home appliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554101" start="467" end="484" title="medical equipment" label="medical equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7496031" start="603" end="623" title="Shibaura Seisakusho" label="Shibaura Seisaku-sho"/>
<link wikidata="Q5640635" start="646" end="657" title="Hakunetsusha" label="Tokyo Denki"/>
<link wikidata="Q18388277" start="751" end="769" title="technology company" label="technology company"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="939" end="951" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="1000" end="1012" title="flash memory" label="flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q28840043" start="1114" end="1120" title="Kioxia" label="Kioxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962" start="1234" end="1240" title="laptop" label="laptop"/>
<link wikidata="Q61055690" start="1355" end="1368" title="Dynabook Inc." label="Dynabook Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1133735" start="1541" end="1553" title="Westinghouse Electric Company" label="Westinghouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q17220913" start="1819" end="1844" title="Japan Industrial Partners" label="Japan Industrial Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589009" start="1867" end="1874" title="Privately held company" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q217475" start="1913" end="1933" title="Tokyo Stock Exchange" label="Tokyo Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q507338" start="1993" end="2003" title="Nikkei 225" label="Nikkei 225"/>
<link wikidata="Q238974" start="2008" end="2013" title="TOPIX" label="TOPIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q717411" start="2103" end="2119" title="Tanaka Hisashige" label="Tanaka Hisashige"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="2214" end="2224" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="2304" end="2313" title="telegraph" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5640635" start="2786" end="2798" title="Hakunetsusha" label="Hakunetsusha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589580" start="2814" end="2826" title="Oki Kibatarō" label="Oki Kibatarō"/>
<link wikidata="Q786947" start="2866" end="2887" title="Oki Electric Industry" label="Oki Electric Industry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2894" end="2912" title="Ishiguro Keizaburō" label="Ishiguro Keizaburō"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852426" start="2942" end="2949" title="Anritsu" label="Anritsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="3034" end="3050" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q165363" start="3087" end="3094" title="torpedo" label="torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q189929" start="3101" end="3106" title="Naval mine" label="mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="3129" end="3151" title="Imperial Japanese Navy" label="Imperial Japanese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q899122" start="3410" end="3416" title="Mitsui" label="Mitsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q7496031" start="3478" end="3497" title="Shibaura Seisakusho" label="Shibaura Seisakusho"/>
<link wikidata="Q899122" start="3658" end="3664" title="Mitsui" label="Mitsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="3705" end="3721" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3869" end="3881" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4105" end="4120" title="Miyoshi Shōichi" label="Miyoshi Shōichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="4189" end="4199" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q864737" start="4415" end="4429" title="Unequal treaty" label="Unequal treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5640635" start="4431" end="4443" title="Hakunetsusha" label="Hakunetsusha"/>
<link wikidata="Q178687" start="4623" end="4646" title="First Sino-Japanese War" label="First Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q159950" start="4666" end="4684" title="Russo-Japanese War" label="Russo-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5640635" start="4784" end="4795" title="Tokyo Denki" label="Tokyo Denki"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="4879" end="4895" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365614" start="5743" end="5779" title="EMI Music Japan" label="Toshiba Music Industries/Toshiba EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="6051" end="6066" title="air conditioner" label="air conditioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q854954" start="6280" end="6297" title="videophone" label="color video phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q54277" start="6315" end="6329" title="word processor" label="word processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456747" start="6375" end="6382" title="Toshiba Pasopia" label="Pasopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250757" start="6460" end="6468" title="Libretto (notebook)" label="Libretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q178990" start="6511" end="6517" title="HD DVD" label="HD DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q656950" start="6819" end="6834" title="milling machine" label="milling machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="6863" end="6872" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="6891" end="6903" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q856371" start="6924" end="6929" title="CoCom" label="CoCom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248258" start="6958" end="6965" title="embargo" label="embargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q191582" start="6990" end="6997" title="COMECON" label="COMECON"/>
<link wikidata="Q11528256" start="7013" end="7038" title="Toshiba-Kongsberg scandal" label="Toshiba-Kongsberg scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357285" start="7098" end="7121" title="Kongsberg Defence &amp;amp; Aerospace" label="Kongsberg Vaapenfabrikk"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="7167" end="7180" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="7185" end="7190" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248258" start="7290" end="7299" title="Economic sanctions" label="sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q705697" start="7342" end="7352" title="John Heinz" label="John Heinz"/>
<link wikidata="Q288837" start="7540" end="7554" title="Orion Electric" label="Orion Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q267558" start="7588" end="7591" title="Original equipment manufacturer" label="OEM"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="7957" end="7973" title="cathode-ray tube" label="cathode-ray tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q53247" start="8071" end="8080" title="Panasonic" label="Panasonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q972851" start="8545" end="8548" title="Surface-conduction electron-emitter display" label="SED"/>
<link wikidata="Q62621" start="8687" end="8692" title="Canon Inc." label="Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8826" end="8838" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q899122" start="8868" end="8880" title="Mitsui" label="Mitsui Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q144281" start="8881" end="8889" title="zaibatsu" label="zaibatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395324" start="8891" end="8908" title="Family business" label="family-controlled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571520" start="8909" end="8926" title="vertical monopoly" label="vertical monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q590428" start="8969" end="8977" title="keiretsu" label="keiretsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="9332" end="9336" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q720479" start="9392" end="9397" title="Asahi Breweries" label="Asahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q261875" start="9414" end="9418" title="BNFL" label="BNFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133735" start="9448" end="9477" title="Westinghouse Electric Company" label="Westinghouse Electric Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="9602" end="9618" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q648280" start="9623" end="9650" title="Mitsubishi Heavy Industries" label="Mitsubishi Heavy Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q183399" start="9670" end="9685" title="Financial Times" label="Financial Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="10092" end="10097" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="10103" end="10116" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="10125" end="10139" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133735" start="10213" end="10225" title="Westinghouse Electric Company" label="Westinghouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763716" start="10333" end="10347" title="The Shaw Group" label="The Shaw Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228562" start="10474" end="10487" title="Discover Card" label="Discover Card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139633" start="10529" end="10545" title="One Times Square" label="One Times Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="10549" end="10562" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q11269" start="10597" end="10612" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034654" start="10769" end="10780" title="Capital One" label="Capital One"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="10841" end="10844" title="Hard disk drive" label="HDD"/>
<link wikidata="Q186394" start="10857" end="10864" title="Fujitsu" label="Fujitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q663679" start="11014" end="11024" title="Landis+Gyr" label="Landis+Gyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807305" start="11183" end="11203" title="Timothy Jacob Jensen" label="Timothy Jacob Jensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="11246" end="11249" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q600457" start="11999" end="12020" title="OCZ Storage Solutions" label="OCZ Storage Solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q600457" start="12687" end="12708" title="OCZ Storage Solutions" label="OCZ Storage Solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q370719" start="12869" end="12877" title="SK Hynix" label="SK Hynix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144498" start="13106" end="13125" title="patent infringement" label="patent infringement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045758" start="13157" end="13176" title="United Technologies" label="United Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="13229" end="13234" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q705272" start="14206" end="14212" title="Compal Electronics" label="Compal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191408" start="14233" end="14239" title="Vestel" label="Vestel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="14653" end="14657" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q53247" start="15874" end="15883" title="Panasonic" label="Panasonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="16421" end="16423" title="Integrated circuit" label="IC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357469" start="16434" end="16436" title="Qi (standard)" label="Qi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616482" start="16492" end="16517" title="Wireless Power Consortium" label="Wireless Power Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6149487" start="16538" end="16573" title="Toshiba Medical Systems Corporation" label="Toshiba Medical Systems Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q62621" start="16590" end="16595" title="Canon Inc." label="Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609533" start="16641" end="16652" title="Midea Group" label="Midea Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133735" start="16915" end="16927" title="Westinghouse Electric Company" label="Westinghouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q947549" start="16944" end="16976" title="Vogtle Electric Generating Plant" label="Vogtle Electric Generating Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133735" start="17517" end="17529" title="Westinghouse Electric Company" label="Westinghouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q947549" start="17858" end="17878" title="Vogtle Electric Generating Plant" label="Vogtle units 3 and 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557235" start="17906" end="17929" title="Virgil C. Summer Nuclear Generating Station" label="VC Summer units 2 and 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062835" start="18320" end="18341" title="Chapter 11 bankruptcy" label="Chapter 11 bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q488048" start="18506" end="18528" title="PricewaterhouseCoopers" label="PricewaterhouseCoopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q803873" start="19064" end="19076" title="Bain Capital" label="Bain Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="19140" end="19145" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q27500963" start="19147" end="19164" title="Dell Technologies" label="Dell Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q368777" start="19166" end="19182" title="Hoya Corporation" label="Hoya Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q683771" start="19184" end="19203" title="Kingston Technology" label="Kingston Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q705392" start="19205" end="19223" title="Seagate Technology" label="Seagate Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q370719" start="19229" end="19237" title="SK Hynix" label="SK Hynix"/>
<link wikidata="Q28840043" start="19279" end="19305" title="Toshiba Memory Corporation" label="Toshiba Memory Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28840043" start="19324" end="19330" title="Kioxia" label="Kioxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527941" start="19354" end="19361" title="Hisense" label="Hisense"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075" start="19421" end="19435" title="television set" label="television set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140442" start="19600" end="19609" title="Sazae-san" label="Sazae-san"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139633" start="19679" end="19695" title="One Times Square" label="One Times Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="19699" end="19712" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q24705550" start="19939" end="19967" title="Brookfield Business Partners" label="Brookfield Business Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="20088" end="20105" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q53227" start="20125" end="20130" title="Sharp Corporation" label="Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q61055690" start="20235" end="20243" title="Dynabook Inc." label="Dynabook"/>
<link wikidata="Q504027" start="20884" end="20889" title="Lidar" label="Lidar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085747" start="20899" end="20922" title="silicon photomultiplier" label="silicon photomultiplier"/>
<link wikidata="Q180253" start="20938" end="20957" title="hydrogen fuel cells" label="hydrogen fuel cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="20977" end="20995" title="Algorithm" label="computer algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q17995793" start="21058" end="21075" title="quantum computing" label="quantum computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q121117" start="21364" end="21377" title="supercomputer" label="supercomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q725967" start="21550" end="21565" title="Microsoft Azure" label="Microsoft Azure"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21635" end="21638" title="Integrated circuit#LSI" label="LSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024566" start="21757" end="21777" title="CVC Capital Partners" label="CVC Capital Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q28840043" start="22058" end="22064" title="Kioxia" label="Kioxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17220913" start="22741" end="22766" title="Japan Industrial Partners" label="Japan Industrial Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q906055" start="22822" end="22826" title="Orix" label="Orix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091203" start="22828" end="22848" title="Chubu Electric Power" label="Chubu Electric Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192667" start="22854" end="22858" title="Rohm" label="Rohm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823717" start="23229" end="23246" title="activist investor" label="activist investor"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="24183" end="24186" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q20718" start="24188" end="24207" title="Samsung Electronics" label="Samsung Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q62621" start="24209" end="24214" title="Canon Inc." label="Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q53247" start="24219" end="24228" title="Panasonic" label="Panasonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="25203" end="25206" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736363" start="25347" end="25359" title="High-definition optical disc format war" label="a format war"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="25368" end="25375" title="Blu-ray Disc" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="25496" end="25500" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q170416" start="25513" end="25520" title="Philips" label="Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q156034" start="25525" end="25544" title="Pioneer Corporation" label="Pioneer Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629209" start="25609" end="25626" title="Atsutoshi Nishida" label="Atsutoshi Nishida"/>
<link wikidata="Q705272" start="26503" end="26521" title="Compal Electronics" label="Compal Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="26606" end="26613" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q229438" start="26814" end="26826" title="3D television" label="3D prototype"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405686" start="26830" end="26836" title="CEATEC" label="CEATEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q238162" start="27071" end="27082" title="4K resolution" label="4K Ultra HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3892868" start="27319" end="27324" title="Toshiba T1100" label="T1100"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962" start="27371" end="27380" title="Laptop" label="laptop PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827638" start="27479" end="27488" title="Dynabook Satellite" label="Satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827635" start="27490" end="27497" title="Dynabook Portégé" label="Portégé"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250757" start="27499" end="27507" title="Toshiba Libretto" label="Libretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926523" start="27509" end="27515" title="Qosmio" label="Qosmio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827643" start="27520" end="27525" title="Dynabook Tecra" label="Tecra"/>
<link wikidata="Q53227" start="27682" end="27699" title="Sharp Corporation" label="Sharp Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q61055690" start="27874" end="27887" title="Dynabook Inc." label="Dynabook Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1268858" start="27985" end="28023" title="Dynabook" label="computer concept targeted for children"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118272" start="28116" end="28129" title="Fujio Masuoka" label="Fujio Masuoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="28139" end="28151" title="flash memory" label="flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q178655" start="28531" end="28547" title="Moore&amp;#x27;s law" label="Moore&amp;#x27;s Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q28840043" start="28626" end="28652" title="Toshiba Memory Corporation" label="Toshiba Memory Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28840043" start="28658" end="28664" title="Kioxia" label="Kioxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81307" start="28845" end="28855" title="Greenpeace" label="Greenpeace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364176" start="29090" end="29095" title="WIPRO" label="WIPRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q106012470" start="29299" end="29319" title="sustainable sourcing" label="sustainable sourcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054823" start="29418" end="29429" title="Energy Star" label="Energy Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q114295" start="30372" end="30409" title="Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant" label="Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q171178" start="30435" end="30464" title="Fukushima I nuclear accidents" label="Fukushima I nuclear accidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827633" start="30767" end="30795" title="List of Toshiba subsidiaries" label="List of Toshiba subsidiaries"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59704" wikidata="Q15088" url="?curid=59704" title="Tarragona">
<text>Tarragona (, ; ) is a coastal city and municipality in Catalonia (Spain). It is the capital and largest town of Tarragonès county, the Camp de Tarragona region and the province of Tarragona. Geographically, it is located on the Costa Daurada area on the Mediterranean shore.

During the period of the Roman Empire, it was one of the most prominent cities of the Iberian Peninsula, as the capital, successively, of the Roman provinces of Hispania Citerior and Hispania Tarraconensis.

The Archaeological Complex of Tàrraco is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

==History==
===Origins===
One Catalan legend holds that Tarragona was named for &quot;Tarraho&quot;, eldest son of Tubal in c. 2407 BC; another (derived from Strabo and Megasthenes) attributes the name to &#x27;Tearcon the Ethiopian&#x27;, a seventh-century BC pharaoh who campaigned in Spain. The real founding date of Tarragona is unknown.

The city&#x27;s origins trace back to a possible Iberian settlement known as Kesse or Kosse, named after the local Iberian tribe, the Cossetans. However, the exact connection of Tarragona to Kesse remains uncertain. Scholars such as William Smith suggest that the city may have been established by the Phoenicians, who referred to it as . According to Samuel Bochart, signifies a citadel. The moniker likely stemmed from its location atop a high rock, approximately above sea level; earning it the epithet . It was seated on the river Sulcis or Tulcis (modern Francolí), on a bay of the Mare Internum (Mediterranean), between the Pyrenees and the River Iberus (modern Ebro). Livy mentions a ; and according to Eratosthenes it had a naval station or roads (); but Artemidorus Ephesius says with more probability that it had none, and scarcely even an anchoring place; and Strabo himself refers to it as &quot;harbourless&quot; ().

===Rome===
Tarraco lies on the main road along the northeastern coast of the Iberian Peninsula. During the Roman Republic, the city was fortified and much enlarged as a Roman colony by the brothers Publius Cornelius Scipio and Gnaeus Cornelius Scipio Calvus, who converted it into a fortress and arsenal against the Carthaginians. The city was first named Colonia Iulia Urbs Triumphalis Tarraco and was capital of the province of Hispania Citerior. Subsequently, it became the capital (&quot;conventus iuridicus&quot;) of the province named after it, Hispania Tarraconensis.

Augustus wintered at Tarraco after his Cantabrian campaign, and bestowed many marks of honour on the city, among which were its honorary titles of &quot;Colonia Victrix Togata&quot; and &quot;Colonia Julia Victrix Tarraconensis&quot;.

According to Mela, it was the richest town on the coast, and Strabo represents its population as equal to that of Carthago Nova (now Cartagena). Its fertile plain and sunny shores are celebrated by Martial and other poets; and its neighbourhood is described as producing good wine and flax. The city also minted coins.

An inscribed stone base for a now lost statue of Tiberius Claudius Candidus was found in Tarragona during the nineteenth century. The 24-line Latin inscription describes the governor and senator&#x27;s career as an ally of the future Roman emperor Septimius Severus, who fought in the civil war following the assassination of Commodus in 192 AD. This important marble block was purchased by the British Museum in 1994.

===From the demise of the Roman empire to the Union of Spain===

After the demise of the Western Roman Empire, the city was captured by the Vandals and the Visigoths. The Visigothic Kingdom&#x27;s rule of Tarracona was ended by the Umayyad conquest of Hispania in 714. It was an important border city of the Caliphate of Córdoba between 750 and 1013. After the demise of the Caliphate, it was part of the Taifa of Zaragoza between 1013 and 1110 and under the control of the Almoravid dynasty between 1110 and 1117. It was taken by the County of Barcelona in 1117. From 1129 to 1173 Tarragona was the capital of the short lived Principality of Tarragona, under the Norman-influence. After the dynastic union of Aragon and Barcelona, it was part of the Principality of Catalonia within the Crown of Aragon from 1164 to 1714. After dynastic union of Aragon and the Crown of Castile, it remained a part of the Crown of Aragon until the foundation of the Spanish Empire in 1516.

During the Reapers&#x27; War, Tarragona was captured by Catalan insurgents with French support in 1641, but it was retaken by Spanish troops in 1644. It was captured by allied Portuguese, Dutch, and British troops in 1705 during the War of the Spanish Succession and remained in their hands until the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713. During the war, the Catalans supported the unsuccessful claim of Archduke Charles, Duke of Teschen against the victorious Bourbon Duke of Anjou, who became Philip V of Spain. He signed the Nueva Planta decrees, which abolished the Crown of Aragon, as well as the Catalan institutions and prohibited the administrative use of Catalan language on 16 January 1716.

===Jewish History===
The Jewish community in Tarragona was established during the Roman era, making it one of the most ancient Jewish communities in Spain. A &quot;laver&quot;, possibly used by the Jews for ritual purification found in Tarragona bears the inscription &quot;peace over Israel, over ourselves, and our children.&quot; Coins with Hebrew inscriptions have also been found, dating to the Visigoth period. During Muslim rule, Jews in Tarragona prospered; Muhammad al-Idrisi nicknamed Tarragona &quot;the city of the Jews.&quot;

After the Christian reconquest, the Jews of Tarragona faced institutional persecution and anti-semitic restrictions until the community&#x27;s destruction in 1492, during the expulsion of the Jews.

===Peninsular War===

During the Peninsular War, in the first siege of Tarragona from 5 May to 29 June 1811, Louis-Gabriel Suchet&#x27;s Army of Aragon of the First French Empire laid siege to a Spanish garrison led by Lieutenant General Juan de Contreras. A British naval squadron commanded by Admiral Edward Codrington harassed the French besiegers with cannon fire and transported large numbers of reinforcements into the city by sea. Nevertheless, Suchet&#x27;s troops stormed into the defences and killed or captured almost all the defenders. It became a subprefecture centre in Bouches-de-l&#x27;Èbre department of French empire.

In the second siege of Tarragona (3–11 June 1813), an overwhelming Anglo-Spanish force under the command of Lieutenant general John Murray, 8th Baronet failed to wrest Tarragona from a small Franco-Italian garrison led by Brigadier general Antoine Marc Augustin Bertoletti. Murray was subsequently removed from command for his indecisive and contradictory leadership. The Anglo-Spanish forces finally captured Tarragona on 19 August.

===Spanish Civil War===

During the Spanish Civil War, Tarragona was in the hands of the Second Spanish Republic until captured by Franco&#x27;s Nationalist troops on 15 January 1939 during the Catalonia Offensive.

==Main sights==

===Ancient remains===
The Roman ruins of Tarraco have been designated a World Heritage Site by UNESCO.

Part of the bases of large Cyclopean walls near the Cuartel de Pilatos are thought to pre-date the Romans. The building just mentioned, a prison in the 19th century, is said to have been the palace of Augustus. The second century Tarragona Amphitheatre near the seashore was extensively used as a quarry after the fall of the Western Roman Empire, and but few vestiges of it now remain. A circus c. long, was built over in the area now called &quot;Plaça de la Font&quot;, though portions of it are still to be traced. Throughout the town Latin, and even apparently Phoenician, inscriptions on the stones of the houses mark the material used for buildings in the town.

Two ancient monuments, at some little distance from the town, have, however, fared rather better. The first of these is Les Ferreres Aqueduct, which spans a valley about north of the city. It is in length, and the loftiest arches, of which there are two tiers, are high. There is a monument about along the coast road east of the city, commonly called the &quot;Tower of the Scipios&quot;; but there is no authority for assuming that they were buried here.

Other Roman buildings include:
*The Roman walls
*The capitol, or citadel
*The Amphitheatre
*The Roman circus
*The Pretorium – Tower
*The Provincial and Colonial fora
*The Necropolis 
*The palace of Augustus, called the house of Pilate
*The so-called tower, or sepulchre, of the Scipios
*Arch of Sura, or of Bara
*The Aurelian Way.

The city is also home to the National Archaeological Museum of Tarragona.

===Religious buildings===

*The Tarragona Cathedral, dating to the 12th–13th centuries, combining Romanesque and Gothic architectural elements.
*The convent of the Poor Clares, near the walls
*The convent of &quot;Santa Teresa&quot;
*The church of the Order of Friars Minor Capuchin, the parish church of the port
*The former convent of &quot;Sant Francesc&quot;
*The Jesuit college was turned into barracks; their church, however, has been restored to them
*The convent of the Dominican Order, now the town hall
*The archiepiscopal palace, situated on the site of the ancient capitol, one tower of which still remains. It was rebuilt in the 19th century.
*Near the sea, in the Roman amphitheatre, are the remains of a church called &quot;Santa Maria del Miracle&quot; (Holy Mary of the Miracle), which belonged to the Knights Templar. It was afterwards used by the Trinitarian Order and was later converted into a penitentiary. It was demolished around 1915.

The seminary of Sant Pau and Santa Tecla was founded in 1570 by the cardinal archbishop, Gaspar Cervantes de Gaeta, and was the first to comply with the decrees of the Council of Trent. In 1858 Archbishop José Domingo Costa y Borrás built a fourth wing. Benito Villamitjana built a new seminary behind the cathedral in 1886, in the courtyard of which stands the old chapel of Sant Pau. Pope Leo XIII raised this to the rank of a pontifical university.

 north of the city is Poblet Monastery, founded in 1151 by Ramon Berenguer IV, Count of Barcelona, which was used for sepultures of the kings.

==Modern Tarragona==

Tarragona is home to one of the largest ports in Spain, which is an export hub for the Spanish car industry. Much of its economic activity comes from a number of chemical industries located west of the city. Among other educational institutions, it also features the Rovira i Virgili University.

The most significant living heritage is the Popular Retinue, a great parade of dances, bestiary and spoken dances, as well as the building of human towers called castells. These cultural traditional are especially visible during the Santa Tecla Festival, and are so popular in Tarragona that they have their own home called the &quot;Casa de la Festa&quot;, Festivities House, which can be visited all year.

A number of beaches, some awarded a Blue Flag designation, line the Mediterranean coast near the city.

Tarragona is located near the resort of Salou and the PortAventura World (PortAventura Park, the most visited theme park in Spain, Ferrari Land and also the PortAventura Caribe Aquatic Park).

The city is served by Camp de Tarragona high-speed railway station, and is located a few kilometres away from Reus Airport, which offers low-cost charter-flights (over a million passengers per year).

Reus is the second city of the Tarragona area (101,767 inhabitants in 2006), known by its commercial activity and for being the place where the architect Antoni Gaudí was born.

The city hosted the 2018 Mediterranean Games, one year later than planned, because of political and economical instability.

== Tourism ==
Tarragona is one of the World Heritage Journeys in the European Union. Tourism is focused on the main sites of Mercat Central de Tarragona (Central Market of Tarragona), La Rambla Nova (the main shopping street), El Serrallo fishing village, the surrounding beaches of the golden coast, the key plazas (Plaça de la Font, Plaça del Fòrum, Plaça del Rei), Balcó del Mediterrani, Praetorium and Roman Circus, Roman Amphitheatre, Model of Roman Tarraco, and the cathedral.

The GR 92 long-distance footpath, which roughly follows the length of the Mediterranean coast of Spain, has a staging point at Tarragona. Stage 25 links northwards to Torredembarra, a distance of , whilst stage 26 links southwards to Cambrils, a distance of .

==Cuisine ==

Tarragona contains a number of small bars, restaurants, and cafes serving tapas and sandwiches, and local seafood and Catalan dishes like &quot;pa amb tomàquet&quot; or &quot;neules i torrons&quot;. Many such outlets are found in the historic centre, including those at the Plaça de la Font, Plaça del Rei and Plaça del Fòrum. The neighborhood of El Serrallo, at the harbour, specialises in seafood cuisine.

Chartreuse liqueur is a famous local drink of Tarragona. Originally created in 1605, it was considered by monks to be an “elixir for long life”. It is produced in yellow, with an alcohol content of 40º, as well as green, with a content of 55º. Between 1903 and 1989, the Chartreuse liqueur made by the French Carthusian Monks was distilled in Tarragona, following the monks&#x27; expulsion from France. Chartreuse is now a key part of the Feast of Santa Tecla. This traditional festival of national interest celebrates the patroness saint of the city.

==Climate==
The climate of Tarragona can be described as a Mediterranean climate (Köppen &quot;Csa&quot;) bordering on a humid subtropical climate (&quot;Cfa&quot;). Despite its location in the Mediterranean region, August tends to have more precipitation than February, which is unusual for the Mediterranean climate. Winters are mildly cool and summers are warm and sultry, while the wettest seasons are spring and autumn, which receive around in May and September.

==Events==
*The Carnival
*Tarragona International Dixieland Festival. Houses 25 bands and 100 concerts and activities the week before Holy Week.
*&quot;Tarraco Viva&quot;. An international cultural festival dedicated to the history of the Roman period, with musical concerts, exhibitions, workshops and conferences.
*Tarragona International Fireworks Displays Competition. The competition selects six international pyrotechnic companies every year. Official website1
*&quot;Sant Magí&quot; Festival, held between 15 and 19 August.
*Santa Tecla Festival, held between 15 and 24 September. It has been celebrated since 1321 and it is considered of national touristic interest by the state.
*Tarragona 2018 XVIII Mediterranean Games, an international multi-sport event held from 22 June to 1 July 2018.
Tarragona was also a candidate to be the Spanish representative as European Capital of Culture in 2016.

==Politics==
The local mayor is elected by the members of the plenary from among its members the day the new municipal corporation is formed after the local election. The officeholder has a mandate for the 4-year duration of the elected body. If the mayor leaves office ahead of time a new voting may take place among the plenary members in order to invest a new mayor (meanwhile, another local councillor, conventionally the first deputy mayor may act as acting mayor). Since 15 June 2019 the mayor is Pau Ricomà. The opening session in which the mayor is invested is traditionally held at the &quot;Saló de Plens&quot;.

;List of mayors
Since the first democratic election after the Francoist dictatorship, Tarragona has had four democratically elected mayors:
*Josep Maria Recasens (PSC): 1979–1989
*Joan Miquel Nadal (CiU): 1989–2007
*Josep Fèlix Ballesteros (PSC): 2007–2019
*Pau Ricomà (ERC): 2019–2023
*Rubén Viñuales (PSC): 2023–present

The local is the body formed by the elected councillors of the &quot;Ajuntament&quot;. The plenary meetings (&quot;Ple&quot;) are held at the Saló de Plens. It is formed by the municipal councillors, elected through closed party list proportional representation and 27 councillors are currently elected on the basis of the population of the municipality. Councillors are grouped in municipal groups on the basis of their political filiation. It has a government commission (&quot;Comissió de Govern&quot;; also &quot;Junta de Govern&quot; or &quot;Junta de Gobierno&quot;) is formed by the mayor, the deputy mayors, and a number of appointed councillors.

==Twin towns and sister cities==
Tarragona is twinned with:
Tarragona had partnerships with:
* Voiron, France

==Notable people==
*Domènec Batet (1872–1937), military general
*Alejandro Cao de Benós (born 1974), political activist

==See also==
*Archaeological Ensemble of Tarraco
*Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Tarragona
*Royal Tarragona Yacht Club
*Gimnàstic de Tarragona

==References==
;Notes
;Sources
*This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Smith, William, ed. (1854–1857). Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography. London: John Murray.

==External links==
*Official Website of Tarragona 
* Tarragona&#x27;s Official Tourist Website
*Government data pages </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15088" start="0" end="9" title="Tarragona" label="Tarragona"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="22" end="27" title="coast" label="coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="55" end="64" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="66" end="71" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q15360" start="112" end="122" title="Tarragonès" label="Tarragonès"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030024" start="135" end="152" title="Camp de Tarragona" label="Camp de Tarragona"/>
<link wikidata="Q98392" start="168" end="189" title="province of Tarragona" label="province of Tarragona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3156566" start="228" end="241" title="Costa Daurada" label="Costa Daurada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="254" end="267" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="301" end="313" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="362" end="379" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126678" start="437" end="454" title="Hispania Citerior" label="Hispania Citerior"/>
<link wikidata="Q216791" start="459" end="481" title="Hispania Tarraconensis" label="Hispania Tarraconensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119914" start="488" end="521" title="Archaeological Ensemble of Tárraco" label="Archaeological Complex of Tàrraco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="527" end="533" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="534" end="553" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481766" start="671" end="676" title="Tubal" label="Tubal"/>
<link wikidata="Q312548" start="725" end="736" title="Megasthenes" label="Megasthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q315714" start="767" end="774" title="Taharqa" label="Tearcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q559411" start="1132" end="1145" title="William Smith (lexicographer)" label="William Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="1201" end="1210" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55018249" start="1251" end="1265" title="Samuel Bochart" label="Samuel Bochart"/>
<link wikidata="Q31334" start="1459" end="1467" title="Francolí (river)" label="Francolí"/>
<link wikidata="Q10965" start="1567" end="1571" title="Ebro" label="Ebro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039" start="1574" end="1578" title="Livy" label="Livy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43182" start="1609" end="1621" title="Eratosthenes" label="Eratosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q472620" start="1662" end="1682" title="Artemidorus Ephesius" label="Artemidorus Ephesius"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="1937" end="1951" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293507" start="2028" end="2052" title="Publius Cornelius Scipio (consul 218 BC)" label="Publius Cornelius Scipio"/>
<link wikidata="Q316475" start="2057" end="2087" title="Gnaeus Cornelius Scipio Calvus" label="Gnaeus Cornelius Scipio Calvus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429397" start="2146" end="2159" title="ancient Carthage" label="Carthaginians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501940" start="2186" end="2224" title="Tarraco" label="Colonia Iulia Urbs Triumphalis Tarraco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126678" start="2260" end="2277" title="Hispania Citerior" label="Hispania Citerior"/>
<link wikidata="Q429699" start="2322" end="2341" title="conventus iuridicus" label="conventus iuridicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q216791" start="2381" end="2403" title="Hispania Tarraconensis" label="Hispania Tarraconensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="2406" end="2414" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q162615" start="2775" end="2784" title="Cartagena, Spain" label="Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098" start="2840" end="2847" title="Martial" label="Martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q45108" start="2927" end="2931" title="flax" label="flax"/>
<link wikidata="Q513468" start="3011" end="3037" title="Tiberius Claudius Candidus" label="Tiberius Claudius Candidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442" start="3210" end="3227" title="Septimius Severus" label="Septimius Severus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434" start="3288" end="3296" title="Commodus" label="Commodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="3357" end="3371" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="3471" end="3491" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="3522" end="3529" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="3538" end="3547" title="Visigoths" label="Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q126936" start="3553" end="3571" title="Visigothic Kingdom" label="Visigothic Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455917" start="3614" end="3642" title="Umayyad conquest of Hispania" label="Umayyad conquest of Hispania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337854" start="3690" end="3710" title="Caliphate of Córdoba" label="Caliphate of Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q33061" start="3787" end="3804" title="Taifa of Zaragoza" label="Taifa of Zaragoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q75613" start="3856" end="3873" title="Almoravid dynasty" label="Almoravid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233672" start="3917" end="3936" title="County of Barcelona" label="County of Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q6086629" start="4009" end="4034" title="Principality of Tarragona" label="Principality of Tarragona"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="4046" end="4052" title="Normans" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q199442" start="4092" end="4098" title="Kingdom of Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233672" start="4103" end="4112" title="County of Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q15581" start="4133" end="4158" title="Principality of Catalonia" label="Principality of Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="4170" end="4185" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Crown of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040" start="4229" end="4235" title="Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q217196" start="4244" end="4260" title="Crown of Castile" label="Crown of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="4332" end="4346" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348955" start="4368" end="4385" title="Reapers&amp;#x27; War" label="Reapers&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="4590" end="4619" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q154674" start="4658" end="4675" title="Treaty of Utrecht" label="Treaty of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q84201" start="4750" end="4783" title="Archduke Charles, Duke of Teschen" label="Archduke Charles, Duke of Teschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="4807" end="4814" title="House of Bourbon" label="Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4815" end="4828" title="Counts and dukes of Anjou#Dukes of Anjou" label="Duke of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q170467" start="4841" end="4858" title="Philip V of Spain" label="Philip V of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990620" start="4874" end="4894" title="Nueva Planta decrees" label="Nueva Planta decrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="4916" end="4931" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Crown of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="5073" end="5079" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060201" start="5255" end="5274" title="ritual purification" label="ritual purification"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="5392" end="5398" title="Hebrew" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q173441" start="5514" end="5532" title="Muhammad al-Idrisi" label="Muhammad al-Idrisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424558" start="5763" end="5784" title="expulsion of the Jews from Spain" label="expulsion of the Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="5820" end="5834" title="Peninsular War" label="Peninsular War"/>
<link wikidata="Q125537" start="5849" end="5867" title="Siege of Tarragona (1811)" label="siege of Tarragona"/>
<link wikidata="Q316518" start="5896" end="5916" title="Louis-Gabriel Suchet" label="Louis-Gabriel Suchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="5946" end="5965" title="First French Empire" label="First French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q117475803" start="6025" end="6042" title="Juan de Contreras" label="Juan de Contreras"/>
<link wikidata="Q958853" start="6090" end="6107" title="Edward Codrington" label="Edward Codrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2921378" start="6371" end="6393" title="Bouches-de-l&amp;#x27;Èbre" label="Bouches-de-l&amp;#x27;Èbre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510442" start="6438" end="6456" title="Siege of Tarragona (1813)" label="siege of Tarragona"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527956" start="6551" end="6575" title="John Murray, 8th Baronet" label="John Murray, 8th Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2854191" start="6664" end="6696" title="Antoine Marc Augustin Bertoletti" label="Antoine Marc Augustin Bertoletti"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="6895" end="6912" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q178038" start="6948" end="6971" title="Second Spanish Republic" label="Second Spanish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="6990" end="7022" title="Francoist Spain" label="Franco&amp;#x27;s Nationalist troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q166495" start="7053" end="7072" title="Catalonia Offensive" label="Catalonia Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="7164" end="7183" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="7187" end="7193" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q245580" start="7223" end="7232" title="Cyclopean masonry" label="Cyclopean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746482" start="7426" end="7448" title="Tarragona Amphitheatre" label="Tarragona Amphitheatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="7522" end="7542" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="7735" end="7740" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36734" start="7762" end="7772" title="Phoenician language" label="Phoenician"/>
<link wikidata="Q623448" start="7986" end="8007" title="Les Ferreres Aqueduct" label="Les Ferreres Aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q3121589" start="8356" end="8371" title="Wall of Tarragona" label="The Roman walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137544" start="8461" end="8471" title="Provincial forum of Tarraco" label="Provincial"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894543" start="8476" end="8489" title="Colonial forum of Tarraco" label="Colonial fora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478458" start="8685" end="8728" title="National Archaeological Museum of Tarragona" label="National Archaeological Museum of Tarragona"/>
<link wikidata="Q974716" start="8763" end="8782" title="Tarragona Cathedral" label="Tarragona Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q733658" start="8895" end="8906" title="Poor Clares" label="Poor Clares"/>
<link wikidata="Q124862" start="8983" end="9013" title="Order of Friars Minor Capuchin" label="Order of Friars Minor Capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="9099" end="9105" title="Society of Jesus" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="9209" end="9224" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominican Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="9550" end="9565" title="Knights Templar" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q917518" start="9597" end="9614" title="Trinitarian Order" label="Trinitarian Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708296" start="9781" end="9806" title="Gaspar Cervantes de Gaeta" label="Gaspar Cervantes de Gaeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="9860" end="9876" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9897" end="9924" title="José Domingo Costa y Borrás" label="José Domingo Costa y Borrás"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9946" end="9965" title="Benito Villamitjana" label="Benito Villamitjana"/>
<link wikidata="Q43922" start="10078" end="10091" title="Pope Leo XIII" label="Pope Leo XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q645157" start="10167" end="10183" title="Poblet Monastery" label="Poblet Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q319439" start="10204" end="10242" title="Ramon Berenguer IV, Count of Barcelona" label="Ramon Berenguer IV, Count of Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q238179" start="10281" end="10286" title="List of Aragonese monarchs" label="kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q17079546" start="10351" end="10356" title="List of coastal settlements of the Mediterranean Sea" label="ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133193" start="10578" end="10605" title="Rovira i Virgili University" label="Rovira i Virgili University"/>
<link wikidata="Q943526" start="10770" end="10778" title="Castell" label="castells"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895460" start="10841" end="10861" title="Santa Tecla Festival" label="Santa Tecla Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q458651" start="11053" end="11062" title="Blue Flag beach" label="Blue Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q875157" start="11151" end="11157" title="resort" label="resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q662789" start="11161" end="11166" title="Salou" label="Salou"/>
<link wikidata="Q908792" start="11175" end="11193" title="PortAventura World" label="PortAventura World"/>
<link wikidata="Q58051219" start="11195" end="11212" title="PortAventura Park" label="PortAventura Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q908792" start="11252" end="11264" title="Ferrari Land" label="Ferrari Land"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11278" end="11310" title="PortAventura World#PortAventura Caribe Aquatic Park" label="PortAventura Caribe Aquatic Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3096129" start="11336" end="11380" title="Camp de Tarragona railway station" label="Camp de Tarragona high-speed railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332979" start="11424" end="11436" title="Reus Airport" label="Reus Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q487096" start="11515" end="11519" title="Reus" label="Reus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25328" start="11669" end="11681" title="Antoni Gaudí" label="Antoni Gaudí"/>
<link wikidata="Q500524" start="11713" end="11737" title="2018 Mediterranean Games" label="2018 Mediterranean Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q14216151" start="12306" end="12311" title="GR 92" label="GR 92"/>
<link wikidata="Q995637" start="12469" end="12482" title="Torredembarra" label="Torredembarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q828572" start="12536" end="12544" title="Cambrils" label="Cambrils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411695" start="12721" end="12736" title="pa amb tomàquet" label="pa amb tomàquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q779839" start="12986" end="13004" title="Chartreuse (liqueur)" label="Chartreuse liqueur"/>
<link wikidata="Q220979" start="13295" end="13311" title="Carthusians" label="Carthusian Monks"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="13598" end="13619" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="13621" end="13627" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="13660" end="13685" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618" start="14024" end="14032" title="Carnival" label="Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893973" start="14034" end="14076" title="Tarragona International Dixieland Festival" label="Tarragona International Dixieland Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686644" start="14325" end="14379" title="Tarragona International Fireworks Displays Competition" label="Tarragona International Fireworks Displays Competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895460" start="14540" end="14560" title="Santa Tecla Festival" label="Santa Tecla Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q500524" start="14697" end="14737" title="2018 Mediterranean Games" label="Tarragona 2018 XVIII Mediterranean Games"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15416" end="15426" title="Pau Ricomà" label="Pau Ricomà"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="15598" end="15620" title="Francoist Spain" label="Francoist dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055003" start="15699" end="15702" title="Socialists&amp;#x27; Party of Catalonia" label="PSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q150398" start="15735" end="15738" title="Convergence and Union" label="CiU"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055003" start="15777" end="15780" title="Socialists&amp;#x27; Party of Catalonia" label="PSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q150068" start="15806" end="15809" title="Republican Left of Catalonia" label="ERC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055003" start="15839" end="15842" title="Socialists&amp;#x27; Party of Catalonia" label="PSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268683" start="16075" end="16092" title="Closed list" label="closed party list"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="16093" end="16120" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="16561" end="16568" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q238205" start="16610" end="16616" title="Voiron" label="Voiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993737" start="16646" end="16659" title="Domènec Batet" label="Domènec Batet"/>
<link wikidata="Q181758" start="16691" end="16713" title="Alejandro Cao de Benós" label="Alejandro Cao de Benós"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16761" end="16795" title="Tarraco#Archaeological ensemble" label="Archaeological Ensemble of Tarraco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365705" start="16797" end="16836" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Tarragona" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Tarragona"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374902" start="16838" end="16864" title="Royal Tarragona Yacht Club" label="Royal Tarragona Yacht Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q257984" start="16866" end="16888" title="Gimnàstic de Tarragona" label="Gimnàstic de Tarragona"/>
<link wikidata="Q559411" start="16998" end="17012" title="William Smith (lexicographer)" label="Smith, William"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59705" wikidata="Q13666" url="?curid=59705" title="Messina">
<text>Messina ( , ; ; ) is a harbour city and the capital of the Italian Metropolitan City of Messina. It is the third largest city on the island of Sicily, and the 13th largest city in Italy, with a population of more than 218,000 inhabitants in the city proper and about 650,000 in the Metropolitan City. It is located near the northeast corner of Sicily, at the Strait of Messina and it is an important access terminal to Calabria region, Villa San Giovanni, Reggio Calabria on the mainland. According to Eurostat the FUA of the metropolitan area of Messina has, in 2014, 277,584 inhabitants.The city&#x27;s main resources are its seaports (commercial and military shipyards), cruise tourism, commerce, and agriculture (wine production and cultivating lemons, oranges, mandarin oranges, and olives). The city has been a Roman Catholic Archdiocese and Archimandrite seat since 1548 and is home to a locally important international fair. The city has the University of Messina, founded in 1548 by Ignatius of Loyola.

==History==


Founded by Greek colonists of Magna Graecia in the 8th century BC, Messina was originally called Zancle (), from the Greek meaning &quot;scythe&quot; because of the shape of its natural harbour (though a legend attributes the name to King Zanclus). A &quot;comune&quot; of its Metropolitan City, located at the southern entrance of the Strait of Messina, is to this day called &#x27;Scaletta Zanclea&#x27;. Solinus wrote that the city of Metauros was established by people from Zancle.

In the early 5th century BC Anaxilas of Rhegium renamed it Messene () in honour of the Greek city Messene (See also List of traditional Greek place names). Later, Micythus was the ruler of Rhegium and Zancle, and he also founded the city of Pyxus.
The city was sacked in 397 BC by the Carthaginians and then reconquered by Dionysius I of Syracuse.

In 288 BC the Mamertines seized the city by treachery, killing all the men and taking the women as their wives. The city became a base from which they ravaged the countryside, leading to a conflict with the expanding regional empire of Syracuse. Hiero II, tyrant of Syracuse, defeated the Mamertines near Mylae on the Longanus River and besieged Messina. Carthage assisted the Mamertines because of a long-standing conflict with Syracuse over dominance in Sicily. When Hiero attacked a second time in 264 BC, the Mamertines petitioned the Roman Republic for an alliance, hoping for more reliable protection. Although initially reluctant to assist lest it encourage other mercenary groups to mutiny, Rome was unwilling to see Carthaginian power spread further over Sicily and encroach on Italy. Rome, therefore, entered into an alliance with the Mamertines. In 264 BC, Roman troops were deployed to Sicily, the first time a Roman army acted outside the Italian Peninsula. At the end of the First Punic War it was a free city allied with Rome. In Roman times Messina, then known as Messana, had an important pharos (lighthouse). Messana was the base of Sextus Pompeius, during his war against Octavian.

After the fall of the Western Roman Empire the city was successively ruled by Goths from 476, then by the Byzantine Empire in 535, by the Arabs in 842, and in 1061 by the Norman brothers Robert Guiscard and Roger Guiscard (later count Roger I of Sicily). In 1189 the English King Richard I (&quot;The Lionheart&quot;) stopped at Messina en route to the Holy Land for the Third Crusade and briefly occupied the city after a dispute over the dowry of his sister, who had been married to William the Good, King of Sicily. 

One of the major cities on Sicily, Messina was heavily involved in the rivalry between the Anjou dynasty in Naples and the Aragonese House of Barcelona. Initially a stronghold of Anjou support on Sicily, in 1282 the city joined the revolt of the Sicilian Vespers, resulting in the city being subjected to a major siege by Charles I of Anjou. Messina remained a major naval base for the remainder of the ensuing twenty-year War of the Sicilian Vespers, and was besieged a second time in 1302. In 1345 Orlando d&#x27;Aragona, the illegitimate son of Frederick II of Sicily was the &quot;strategos&quot; of Messina. 

In 1347 Messina was one of the first points of entry for the black death into Western Europe. Genoese galleys travelling from the infected city of Kaffa carried plague into the Messina ports. Kaffa had been infected via Asian trade routes and the siege of Kaffa from infected Mongol armies led by Janibeg; it was a departure point for many Italian merchants who fled the city to Sicily. Contemporary accounts from Messina tell of the arrival of &quot;Death Ships&quot; from the East, which floated to shore with all the passengers on board already dead or dying of plague. Plague-infected rats probably also came aboard these ships. The black death ravaged Messina and rapidly spread northward into mainland Italy from Sicily in the following few months.

In 1548 St. Ignatius founded there the first Jesuit college in the world, which later gave birth to the &quot;Studium Generale&quot; (the current University of Messina). The Christian ships that won the Battle of Lepanto (1571) left from Messina: the Spanish author Miguel de Cervantes, who took part in the battle, recovered for some time in the &quot;Grand Hospital&quot;. The city reached the peak of its splendour in the early 17th century, under Spanish domination: at the time it was one of the ten greatest cities in Europe.

In 1674 the city rebelled against the foreign garrison. It managed to remain independent for some time, thanks to the help of the French king Louis XIV, but in 1678, with the Peace of Nijmegen, it was reconquered by the Spaniards and sacked: the university, the senate and all the privileges of autonomy it had enjoyed since the Roman times were abolished. A massive fortress was built by the occupants and Messina decayed steadily. In 1743, 48,000 died of a second wave of plague in the city.

In 1783 an earthquake devastated much of the city, and it took decades to rebuild and rekindle the cultural life of Messina. In 1847 it was one of the first cities in Italy where Risorgimento riots broke out. In 1848 it rebelled openly against the reigning Bourbons, but was heavily suppressed again. Only in 1860, after the Battle of Milazzo, the Garibaldine troops occupied the city. One of the main figures of the unification of Italy, Giuseppe Mazzini, was elected deputy at Messina in the general elections of 1866. Another earthquake of less intensity damaged the city on 16 November 1894. The city was almost entirely destroyed by an earthquake and associated tsunami on the morning of 28 December 1908, killing about 100,000 people and destroying most of the ancient architecture. The city was largely rebuilt in the following year. However, thousands of residents displaced by the earthquake lived in shanty towns outside the city until the late 1930s, when further reconstruction finally commenced.
It incurred further damage from the massive Allied air bombardments of 1943; before and during the Allied invasion of Sicily. Messina, owing to its strategic importance as a transit point for Axis troops and supplies sent to Sicily from mainland Italy, was a prime target for the British and American air forces, which dropped some 6,500 tons of bombs in the span of a few months. These raids destroyed one-third of the city, and caused 854 deaths among the population. The city was awarded a Gold Medal of Military Valor and one for Civil Valor by the Italian government in memory of the event and the subsequent effort of reconstruction.

In June 1955 Messina was the location of the Messina Conference of Western European foreign ministers which led to the creation of the European Economic Community. The conference was held mainly in Messina&#x27;s City Hall building (it), and partly in nearby Taormina.

The city is home to a small Greek-speaking minority, which arrived from the Peloponnese between 1533 and 1534 when fleeing the expansion of the Ottoman Empire. They were officially recognised in 2012.
==Geography==
===Climate===
Messina has a subtropical Mediterranean climate with long, hot summers with low diurnal temperature variation and consistently dry weather. In winter, Messina is rather wet and mild. Diurnals remain low and remain averaging above lows even during winter. It is rather rainier than Reggio Calabria on the other side of the Messina Strait, a remarkable climatic difference for such a small distance.

==Government==

==Main sights==

===Religious architecture===


* The cathedral (12th century), containing the remains of the king Conrad, ruler of Germany and Sicily in the 13th century. The building had to be almost entirely rebuilt in 1919–20, following the devastating 1908 earthquake, and again in 1943, after a fire triggered by Allied bombings. The original Norman structure can be recognised in the apsidal area. The façade has three late Gothic portals, the central of which probably dates back to the early 15th century. The architrave is decorated with a sculpture of &quot;Christ Among the Evangelists&quot; and various representations of men, animals and plants. The tympanum dates back to 1468. The interior is organised in a nave and two equally long aisles divided by files of 28 columns. Some decorative elements belong the original building, although the mosaics in the apse are reconstructions. Tombs of illustrious men besides Conrad IV include those of Archbishops Palmer (died in 1195), Guidotto de Abbiate (14th century) and Antonio La Legname (16th century). Special interest is held by the Chapel of the Sacrament (late 16th century), with scenic decorations and 14th-century mosaics. The bell tower holds the Messina astronomical clock, one of the largest astronomical clocks in the world, built-in 1933 by the Ungerer Company of Strasbourg. The belfry&#x27;s mechanically animated statues, which illustrate events from the civil and religious history of the city every day at noon, are a popular tourist attraction.
* The Sanctuary of Santa Maria del Carmelo (near the Courthouse), built-in 1931, contains a 17th-century statue of the Virgin Mary. See also Chiesa del Carmine.
* The Sanctuary of Montevergine, where the incorrupt body of Saint Eustochia Smeralda Calafato is preserved.
* The Church of the Santissima Annunziata dei Catalani (late 12th–13th century). Dating from the late Norman period, it was transformed in the 13th century when the nave was shortened and the façade added. It has a cylindrical apse and a high dome emerging from a high tambour. Noteworthy is the external decoration of the transept and the dome area, with a series of blind arches separated by small columns, clearly reflecting Arabic architectural influences.
* The Church of Santa Maria degli Alemanni (early 13th century), which was formerly a chapel of the Teutonic Knights. It is a rare example of pure Gothic architecture in Sicily, as is witnessed by the arched windows and shapely buttresses.

===Civil and military architecture===


* The Botanical Garden Pietro Castelli of the University of Messina.
* The Palazzo Calapaj-d&#x27;Alcontresj, an example of 18th-century Messinese architecture which is one of the few noble palazzi to have survived the 1908 earthquake.
* The Forte del Santissimo Salvatore, a 16th-century fort in the Port of Messina.
* The Forte Gonzaga, a 16th-century fort overlooking Messina.
* The Porta Grazia, 17th-century gate of the &quot;Real Cittadella di Messina&quot;, by Domenico Biundo and Antonio Amato, a fortress still existing in the harbour.
* The Pylon, built in 1957 together with a twin located across the Strait of Messina, to carry a 220 kV overhead power line bringing electric power to the island. At the time of their construction, the two electric pylons were the highest in the world. The power line has since been replaced by an underwater cable, but the pylon still stands as a freely accessible tourist attraction.
* The San Ranieri lighthouse, built in 1555.
* The Palazzo della Provincia (Palazzo dei Leoni), provincial Seat, built in 1914 by Alessandro Giunta.
* The Palace of Culture, built in 2009.

===Monuments===
*The Fountain of Orion, a monumental civic sculpture located next to the cathedral, built in 1547 by Giovanni Angelo Montorsoli, student of Michelangelo, with a Neoplatonic-alchemical program. It was considered by art historian Bernard Berenson &quot;the most beautiful fountain of the sixteenth century in Europe&quot;.
*The Fountain of Neptune, looking towards the harbour, built by Montorsoli in 1557.
*The monument to John of Austria, by Andrea Camalech (1572)
*The Senatory Fountain, built in 1619.
*The Four Fountains, though only two elements of the four-cornered complex survive today.
*LaFenice, a sculpture on Piazza della Memoria


===Museums===
*Museo Regionale di Messina (MuMe) hosting notable paintings by Caravaggio, Antonello da Messina, Alonzo Rodriguez, Mattia Preti
*The Galleria d&#x27;Arte Contemporanea di Messina, hostings paintings by Giò Pomodoro, Renato Guttuso, Lucio Fontana, Corrado Cagli, Giuseppe Migneco, Max Liebermann

==Public transport==

=== Railways ===
The new Messina Centrale station building was projected following the modern criteria of the futurist architect Angiolo Mazzoni, and is extended through the stations square. It is at almost contiguous with Messina Marittima station, located by the port and constituting a Ferry transport in the Strait of Messina to Villa San Giovanni station across the Strait of Messina. In 2021 the harbor of Messina was the busiest passenger port in Europe with over 8.232.000 passenger crossings in one year.

The station is electrified and served by regional trains. For long-distance transport it counts some InterCity and ICN night trains to Rome, linking it also with Milan, Turin, Venice, Genoa, Bologna, Florence, and other cities. It is also part of the projected Berlin–Palermo railway axis.

Since 2010, a suburban train service has been carried out along the Messina-Catania-Syracuse railway with routes serving the stations of Fiumara Gazzi, Contesse, Tremestieri, Mili Marina, Galati, Ponte Santo Stefano, Ponte Schiavo, San Paolo and Giampilieri.

=== Bus and tram ===

Messina&#x27;s public bus system is operated by ATM Messina: starting from 8 October 2018, has reorganized the offer of public transport, introducing a bus line (line 1 - Shuttle 100) which with a frequency of approx. 15 minutes, it crosses 38 of the total 50 km of the coast of the City of Messina. Thus, a comb service is created, with interchange stops at which the buses to and from the villages terminate, and with the tram which reaches a frequency of about 20 minutes. About 36 different routes reach every part of the city and also the modern Messina tramway (at &quot;Repubblica&quot; stop, on station&#x27;s square), opened in 2003. This line is and links the city&#x27;s central railway station with the city centre and harbour.

The industrial plan provides for the purchase of about 66 buses in the three-year period 2020–2022 to improve the environmental performance and comfort of the fleet. Furthermore, the resources equal to 1.82 million euros, coming from the PON Metro 2014-2020 will allow:
*Installation of the AVM system on the vehicles;
*Installation of turnstiles on electric buses;
*Implementation of the electronic ticketing system;
*Installation of electronic poles.

==Sports team==
*A.C.R. Messina
*S.S.D. Città di Messina

==Notable people==

List of notable people from Messina or connected to Messina, listed by career and then in alphabetical order by last name.

=== Actors ===

* Adolfo Celi, actor (1922–1986)
*Tano Cimarosa, actor (1922–2008)
*Maria Grazia Cucinotta, actress (born 1968)
*Nino Frassica, actor (born 1950)
*Massimo Mollica, actor (1929–2013)
*Adua Del Vesco, actress (born 1992)
*Ninni Bruschetta, actor (born 1962)
* Marina La Rosa, actress and Grande Fratello (season 1) contestant (born 1977)
*Gino Buzzanca, actor (1912–1985)

=== Artists and designers ===

* Girolamo Alibrandi, painter (1470–1524)
* Anna Maria Arduino (1672 – 1700), 17th century painter, writer and socialite, served as the Princess of Piombino, from Messina.
* Antonio Barbalonga, painter (17th century)
* Francesco Comande, painter (16th century)
* Antonello da Messina, major painter of the Renaissance (1430–1479)
* Giuseppe Migneco, painter (1908–1997)
* Giovanni Quagliata, painter (1603–1673)
* Filippo Juvarra, Baroque architect (1678–1736)
* Mariano Riccio, painter (1510–1593)
* Alonzo Rodriguez, painter (1578–1648)
* Valentina Romeo (born 1977), cartoonist, illustrator, billiards player
* Giovanni Tuccari, painter (1667–1743)
* Pino da Messina, painter (born 15th century)

=== Politicians, civil service, military ===

* Giuseppe La Farina, leader of the Italian Risorgimento (1815–1863)
* Gaetano Martino, politician, physician and professor. (1900–1967)
* Giuseppe Natoli, lawyer and politician (1815–1867)
* Luigi Rizzo, naval officer and First World War hero (1887–1951)
* Carlo Stagno D&#x27;Alcontres, politician, Prince of Alcontres and mayor of Messina (1913–1981)

=== Musicians, composers ===

* Mario Aspa, composer (1797–1868)
* Filippo Bonaffino (fl. 1623), Italian madrigal composer
* Alberto Urso, singer (born 1997)
* Peppino D&#x27;Agostino, guitarist (born 1956)

=== Religion ===

* Eustochia Smeralda Calafato, saint (1434–1485)
* Annibale Maria Di Francia, saint (1851–1927)
* Pope Leo II, bishop of Rome (611–683)

=== Sport ===

* Tony Cairoli, motocross world champion (born 1985)
* Vincenzo Nibali, cyclist (born 1984)
* Antonio Stelitano, Italian footballer (born 1987)
* Antonino Ragusa, Italian footballer (born 1990)

=== Researchers, academics ===
*Aristocles of Messene, peripatetic philosopher (1st century AD)
*Dicaearchus, Greek philosopher and mathematician (350 BC—323 BC)
*Caio Domenico Gallo, historian (1697–1780)
*Francesco Maurolico, astronomer, mathematician and humanist (1494–1575)
*Agostino Scilla, painter, paleontologist, geologist and pioneer in the study of fossils (1629–1700)
*Giuseppe Seguenza, naturalist and geologist (1833–1889)
*Giuseppe Sergi, anthropologist and psychologist (1841–1936)
*Michele Parrinello, physicist (born 1945)
* Giulio Tarro, doctor and scientist (born 1938)
*Gaetano Martino, scientist (1900–1967)

=== Others ===
*Stefano D&#x27;Arrigo, writer (1919–1992)
*Guido delle Colonne, judge and writer (13th century)
*Santi Visalli, American photographer and photojournalist (born 1932)
* Tommaso Cannizzaro, writer (1838–1921)

==Literary references==

Numerous writers set their works in Messina, including:
*Plutarch – &quot;The Life of Pompey&quot; (40 BC?)
*Giovanni Boccaccio – &quot;Decameron&quot; IV day V novel, &quot;Lisabetta da Messina&quot; – IV day IV Novel, &quot;Gerbino ed Elissa&quot; (1351)
*Matteo Bandello – &quot;Novelliere&quot; First Part, novel XXII (1554)
*William Shakespeare – &quot;Much Ado about Nothing&quot; (1598) and &quot;Antony and Cleopatra&quot; (1607)
*Molière – &quot;L&#x27;Étourdi ou Les Contre-temps&quot; (1654)
*Friedrich Schiller – &quot;Die Braut von Messina&quot; (&quot;The Bride of Messina&quot;, 1803)
*Silvio Pellico – &quot;Eufemio da Messina&quot; (1818)
*Friedrich Nietzsche – &quot;Idyllen aus Messina&quot; (&quot;Idylls from Messina&quot;, 1882)
*Giovanni Pascoli – poem &quot;L&#x27;Aquilone&quot; (1904)
*Elio Vittorini – &quot;Le donne di Messina&quot; (&quot;Women of Messina&quot;, 1949) and &quot;Conversazione in Sicilia&quot; (&quot;Conversations in Sicily&quot;, 1941)
*Stefano D&#x27;Arrigo – &quot;Horcynus Orca&quot; (1975)
*Julien Green – &quot;Demain n&#x27;existe pas&quot; (1985)

==Twin Towns==
* Southampton, England, United Kingdom
* Townsville, Australia
* Nîmes, France
* Corfu, Greece
* Kochi, India

==See also==

* International Rally of Messina
* Messina Centrale railway station
* Messina Grand Prix held between 1959 and 1961
* Strait of Messina Bridge
* Torre Faro 224 metres tall lattice tower
* Zanclean Age of the Pliocene Epoch in geology, named for Zancle, ancient Messina
* Messinian Age of the Miocene Epoch in geology, named for Messina

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13666" start="0" end="7" title="Messina" label="Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="44" end="51" title="capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q20991250" start="67" end="95" title="Metropolitan City of Messina" label="Metropolitan City of Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="143" end="149" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q134705" start="359" end="376" title="Strait of Messina" label="Strait of Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458" start="419" end="427" title="Calabria" label="Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q54689" start="436" end="454" title="Villa San Giovanni" label="Villa San Giovanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q8471" start="456" end="471" title="Reggio Calabria" label="Reggio Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q217659" start="502" end="510" title="Eurostat" label="Eurostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175539" start="515" end="518" title="Larger urban zone" label="FUA"/>
<link wikidata="Q39804" start="674" end="680" title="cruise ship" label="cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q125337" start="766" end="782" title="mandarin oranges" label="mandarin oranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="817" end="831" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365005" start="832" end="861" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Messina-Lipari-Santa Lucia del Mela" label="Archdiocese and Archimandrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245318" start="950" end="971" title="University of Messina" label="University of Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q44281" start="992" end="1010" title="Ignatius of Loyola" label="Ignatius of Loyola"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="1038" end="1043" title="Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q184313" start="1057" end="1070" title="Magna Graecia" label="Magna Graecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130912" start="1164" end="1170" title="scythe" label="scythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066056" start="1266" end="1273" title="Zanclus" label="Zanclus"/>
<link wikidata="Q747074" start="1284" end="1290" title="comune" label="comune"/>
<link wikidata="Q134705" start="1363" end="1380" title="Strait of Messina" label="Strait of Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q520487" start="1434" end="1441" title="Gaius Julius Solinus" label="Solinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11936633" start="1465" end="1473" title="Metauros" label="Metauros"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473927" start="1542" end="1561" title="Anaxilas of Rhegium" label="Anaxilas of Rhegium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022117" start="1612" end="1619" title="Messene" label="Messene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572457" start="1630" end="1667" title="List of traditional Greek place names" label="List of traditional Greek place names"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934135" start="1677" end="1685" title="Micythus" label="Micythus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8471" start="1703" end="1710" title="Rhegium" label="Rhegium"/>
<link wikidata="Q610420" start="1755" end="1760" title="Pyxus" label="Pyxus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4244801" start="1775" end="1791" title="Battle of Messene" label="sacked in 397 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="1799" end="1812" title="Carthage" label="Carthaginians"/>
<link wikidata="Q332750" start="1837" end="1860" title="Dionysius I of Syracuse" label="Dionysius I of Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164281" start="1877" end="1887" title="Mamertines" label="Mamertines"/>
<link wikidata="Q13670" start="2099" end="2107" title="Syracuse, Sicily" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q313675" start="2109" end="2117" title="Hiero II" label="Hiero II"/>
<link wikidata="Q487929" start="2168" end="2173" title="Mylae" label="Mylae"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673597" start="2181" end="2195" title="Longanus River" label="Longanus River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="2218" end="2226" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235331" start="2264" end="2286" title="Sicilian Wars" label="long-standing conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="2402" end="2416" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="2815" end="2832" title="Italian Peninsula" label="Italian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286" start="2852" end="2867" title="First Punic War" label="First Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868074" start="2969" end="2975" title="History of lighthouses" label="pharos"/>
<link wikidata="Q295228" start="3014" end="3029" title="Sextus Pompeius" label="Sextus Pompeius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="3054" end="3062" title="Caesar Augustus" label="Octavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="3087" end="3107" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="3143" end="3148" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="3171" end="3187" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="3203" end="3208" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="3236" end="3242" title="Normans" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q203792" start="3252" end="3267" title="Robert Guiscard" label="Robert Guiscard"/>
<link wikidata="Q315297" start="3272" end="3286" title="Roger I of Sicily" label="Roger Guiscard"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="3345" end="3382" title="Richard I of England" label="Richard I (&amp;quot;The Lionheart&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="3418" end="3427" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="3436" end="3449" title="Third Crusade" label="Third Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q367387" start="3550" end="3582" title="William the Good, King of Sicily" label="William the Good, King of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q661534" start="3719" end="3737" title="House of Barcelona" label="House of Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q207327" start="3832" end="3848" title="Sicilian Vespers" label="Sicilian Vespers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15884336" start="3878" end="3904" title="Siege of Messina (1282)" label="subjected to a major siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q203829" start="3908" end="3926" title="Charles I of Anjou" label="Charles I of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599340" start="4009" end="4036" title="War of the Sicilian Vespers" label="War of the Sicilian Vespers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19958467" start="4086" end="4108" title="Orlando d&amp;#x27;Aragona" label="Orlando d&amp;#x27;Aragona"/>
<link wikidata="Q367226" start="4134" end="4156" title="Frederick III of Sicily" label="Frederick II of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q335954" start="4171" end="4180" title="strategos" label="strategos"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="4262" end="4273" title="black death" label="black death"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="4295" end="4302" title="Genoa" label="Genoese"/>
<link wikidata="Q158491" start="4348" end="4353" title="Feodosia" label="Kaffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q96506039" start="4448" end="4462" title="siege of Kaffa" label="siege of Kaffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="4477" end="4483" title="Mongol" label="Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q735288" start="4498" end="4505" title="Janibeg" label="Janibeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q44281" start="4965" end="4977" title="Ignatius of Loyola" label="St. Ignatius"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="5002" end="5008" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245318" start="5103" end="5124" title="University of Messina" label="University of Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q165425" start="5160" end="5184" title="Battle of Lepanto (1571)" label="Battle of Lepanto (1571)"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="5208" end="5215" title="Spain" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682" start="5223" end="5242" title="Miguel de Cervantes" label="Miguel de Cervantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q760026" start="5507" end="5544" title="Messina revolt" label="rebelled against the foreign garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="5632" end="5641" title="Louis XIV of France" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q316900" start="5665" end="5682" title="Peace of Nijmegen" label="Peace of Nijmegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930982" start="5849" end="5865" title="Real Cittadella" label="massive fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q133780" start="5964" end="5970" title="plague (disease)" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348869" start="5996" end="6006" title="1783 Calabrian earthquakes" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="6164" end="6176" title="Risorgimento" label="Risorgimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="6242" end="6250" title="House of Bourbon" label="Bourbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q531702" start="6310" end="6327" title="Battle of Milazzo (1860)" label="Battle of Milazzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="6333" end="6342" title="Garibaldi" label="Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="6402" end="6422" title="unification of Italy" label="unification of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q187336" start="6424" end="6440" title="Giuseppe Mazzini" label="Giuseppe Mazzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q841424" start="6454" end="6460" title="Italian Chamber of Deputies" label="deputy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348910" start="6623" end="6636" title="1908 Messina earthquake" label="an earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="6652" end="6659" title="tsunami" label="tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="7093" end="7118" title="Allied invasion of Sicily" label="Allied invasion of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q15042072" start="7487" end="7515" title="Gold Medal of Military Valor" label="Gold Medal of Military Valor"/>
<link wikidata="Q544107" start="7680" end="7698" title="Messina Conference" label="Messina Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="7702" end="7716" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q20901295" start="7719" end="7735" title="foreign minister" label="foreign minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="7770" end="7797" title="European Economic Community" label="European Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7848" end="7866" title="Palazzo Zanca" label="City Hall building"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7868" end="7870" title=":it:Palazzo Zanca" label="it"/>
<link wikidata="Q199952" start="7894" end="7902" title="Taormina" label="Taormina"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="7933" end="7947" title="Greek language" label="Greek-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="7981" end="7992" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="8049" end="8063" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8148" end="8181" title="Mediterranean climate#Hot-summer Mediterranean climate" label="subtropical Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283759" start="8214" end="8243" title="diurnal temperature variation" label="diurnal temperature variation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8415" end="8430" title="Reggio Calabria#Climate" label="Reggio Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q134705" start="8456" end="8470" title="Messina Strait" label="Messina Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q733217" start="8603" end="8612" title="Messina Cathedral" label="cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q157179" start="8664" end="8670" title="Conrad IV of Germany" label="Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="8681" end="8688" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348910" start="8806" end="8821" title="1908 Messina earthquake" label="1908 earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q136693" start="8898" end="8904" title="Norman architecture" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="8980" end="8986" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q223209" start="9213" end="9221" title="tympanum (architecture)" label="tympanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q170463" start="9421" end="9425" title="apse" label="apse"/>
<link wikidata="Q200334" start="9747" end="9757" title="bell tower" label="bell tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q546826" start="9768" end="9794" title="Messina astronomical clock" label="Messina astronomical clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="9889" end="9899" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3585949" start="10217" end="10235" title="Chiesa del Carmine (Messina)" label="Chiesa del Carmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q752380" start="10280" end="10289" title="incorruptibility" label="incorrupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="10298" end="10303" title="Saint" label="Saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q276019" start="10304" end="10331" title="Eustochia Smeralda Calafato" label="Eustochia Smeralda Calafato"/>
<link wikidata="Q3669197" start="10352" end="10400" title="Church of the Santissima Annunziata dei Catalani" label="Church of the Santissima Annunziata dei Catalani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495836" start="10615" end="10622" title="tambour" label="tambour"/>
<link wikidata="Q202949" start="10669" end="10677" title="transept" label="transept"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="10907" end="10923" title="Teutonic Knights" label="Teutonic Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q331900" start="11035" end="11043" title="buttress" label="buttress"/>
<link wikidata="Q603242" start="11111" end="11126" title="Pietro Castelli" label="Pietro Castelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245318" start="11134" end="11155" title="University of Messina" label="University of Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748665" start="11330" end="11360" title="Forte del Santissimo Salvatore" label="Forte del Santissimo Salvatore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3909251" start="11389" end="11404" title="Port of Messina" label="Port of Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q13196191" start="11412" end="11425" title="Forte Gonzaga" label="Forte Gonzaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930982" start="11519" end="11534" title="Real Cittadella" label="Real Cittadella"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356853" start="11639" end="11644" title="Pylons of Messina" label="Pylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144320" start="11737" end="11756" title="overhead power line" label="overhead power line"/>
<link wikidata="Q914711" start="11848" end="11854" title="transmission tower" label="pylons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3891490" start="12174" end="12191" title="Palace of Culture (Messina)" label="Palace of Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q27040" start="12326" end="12352" title="Giovanni Angelo Montorsoli" label="Giovanni Angelo Montorsoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="12365" end="12377" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q359047" start="12453" end="12469" title="Bernard Berenson" label="Bernard Berenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968667" start="12635" end="12662" title="John of Austria (Messina)" label="monument to John of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12667" end="12682" title="Andrea Camalech" label="Andrea Camalech"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460721" start="12820" end="12828" title="LaFenice" label="LaFenice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526140" start="12883" end="12909" title="Regional Museum of Messina" label="Museo Regionale di Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q42207" start="12946" end="12956" title="Caravaggio" label="Caravaggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594" start="12958" end="12978" title="Antonello da Messina" label="Antonello da Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650564" start="12980" end="12996" title="Alonzo Rodriguez" label="Alonzo Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q468632" start="12998" end="13010" title="Mattia Preti" label="Mattia Preti"/>
<link wikidata="Q321182" start="13085" end="13097" title="Giò Pomodoro" label="Giò Pomodoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q381277" start="13099" end="13113" title="Renato Guttuso" label="Renato Guttuso"/>
<link wikidata="Q312392" start="13115" end="13128" title="Lucio Fontana" label="Lucio Fontana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997862" start="13130" end="13143" title="Corrado Cagli" label="Corrado Cagli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3771003" start="13145" end="13161" title="Giuseppe Migneco" label="Giuseppe Migneco"/>
<link wikidata="Q158062" start="13163" end="13177" title="Max Liebermann" label="Max Liebermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339195" start="13243" end="13259" title="station building" label="station building"/>
<link wikidata="Q245188" start="13288" end="13303" title="Modern architecture" label="modern criteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q131221" start="13311" end="13319" title="Futurism" label="futurist"/>
<link wikidata="Q535532" start="13330" end="13345" title="Angiolo Mazzoni" label="Angiolo Mazzoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3970094" start="13424" end="13449" title="Messina Marittima railway station" label="Messina Marittima station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3909251" start="13466" end="13470" title="Port of Messina" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q3971321" start="13534" end="13560" title="Villa San Giovanni railway station" label="Villa San Giovanni station"/>
<link wikidata="Q134705" start="13572" end="13589" title="Strait of Messina" label="Strait of Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q529938" start="13817" end="13826" title="InterCity" label="InterCity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13831" end="13834" title="InterCity#Italy" label="ICN"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="13851" end="13855" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="13878" end="13883" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="13885" end="13890" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="13892" end="13898" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="13900" end="13905" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="13907" end="13914" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="13916" end="13924" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q606091" start="13977" end="14004" title="Berlin–Palermo railway axis" label="Berlin–Palermo railway axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854143" start="14840" end="14855" title="Trams in Messina" label="Messina tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q29390" start="15501" end="15515" title="A.C.R. Messina" label="A.C.R. Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391284" start="15517" end="15540" title="S.S.D. Città di Messina" label="S.S.D. Città di Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q365044" start="15704" end="15715" title="Adolfo Celi" label="Adolfo Celi"/>
<link wikidata="Q983069" start="15736" end="15749" title="Tano Cimarosa" label="Tano Cimarosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q234775" start="15770" end="15792" title="Maria Grazia Cucinotta" label="Maria Grazia Cucinotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q559570" start="15815" end="15828" title="Nino Frassica" label="Nino Frassica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851366" start="15849" end="15864" title="Massimo Mollica" label="Massimo Mollica"/>
<link wikidata="Q17280057" start="15885" end="15899" title="Rosalinda Cannavò" label="Adua Del Vesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993073" start="15922" end="15938" title="Ninni Bruschetta" label="Ninni Bruschetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775552" start="15988" end="16014" title="Grande Fratello (season 1)" label="Grande Fratello (season 1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525082" start="16039" end="16052" title="Gino Buzzanca" label="Gino Buzzanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q326959" start="16106" end="16124" title="Girolamo Alibrandi" label="Girolamo Alibrandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q22069306" start="16148" end="16166" title="Anna Maria Arduino" label="Anna Maria Arduino"/>
<link wikidata="Q157824" start="16252" end="16260" title="Piombino" label="Piombino"/>
<link wikidata="Q458780" start="16278" end="16296" title="Antonio Barbalonga" label="Antonio Barbalonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5479301" start="16323" end="16340" title="Francesco Comande" label="Francesco Comande"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594" start="16367" end="16387" title="Antonello da Messina" label="Antonello da Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3771003" start="16436" end="16452" title="Giuseppe Migneco" label="Giuseppe Migneco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525920" start="16476" end="16494" title="Giovanni Quagliata" label="Giovanni Quagliata"/>
<link wikidata="Q85000" start="16518" end="16533" title="Filippo Juvarra" label="Filippo Juvarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896999" start="16567" end="16581" title="Mariano Riccio" label="Mariano Riccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650564" start="16605" end="16621" title="Alonzo Rodriguez" label="Alonzo Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q4007713" start="16645" end="16660" title="Valentina Romeo" label="Valentina Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q326902" start="16718" end="16734" title="Giovanni Tuccari" label="Giovanni Tuccari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677794" start="16758" end="16773" title="Pino da Messina" label="Pino da Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q735843" start="16852" end="16870" title="Giuseppe La Farina" label="Giuseppe La Farina"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="16894" end="16906" title="Italian unification" label="Risorgimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q139055" start="16921" end="16936" title="Gaetano Martino" label="Gaetano Martino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3771076" start="16989" end="17004" title="Giuseppe Natoli" label="Giuseppe Natoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q337707" start="17042" end="17053" title="Luigi Rizzo" label="Luigi Rizzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16606525" start="17175" end="17191" title="List of mayors of Messina" label="mayor of Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293350" start="17237" end="17247" title="Mario Aspa" label="Mario Aspa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448702" start="17272" end="17289" title="Filippo Bonaffino" label="Filippo Bonaffino"/>
<link wikidata="Q64027169" start="17330" end="17342" title="Alberto Urso" label="Alberto Urso"/>
<link wikidata="Q3899403" start="17365" end="17388" title="Peppino D&amp;#x27;Agostino" label="Peppino D&amp;#x27;Agostino"/>
<link wikidata="Q276019" start="17433" end="17460" title="Eustochia Smeralda Calafato" label="Eustochia Smeralda Calafato"/>
<link wikidata="Q566864" start="17482" end="17507" title="Hannibal Mary Di Francia" label="Annibale Maria Di Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q103328" start="17529" end="17540" title="Pope Leo II" label="Pope Leo II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641189" start="17585" end="17597" title="Tony Cairoli" label="Tony Cairoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q312322" start="17638" end="17653" title="Vincenzo Nibali" label="Vincenzo Nibali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3609" start="17655" end="17662" title="road bicycle racing" label="cyclist"/>
<link wikidata="Q59624494" start="17677" end="17694" title="Antonio Stelitano" label="Antonio Stelitano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3619118" start="17729" end="17744" title="Antonino Ragusa" label="Antonino Ragusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q666667" start="17810" end="17831" title="Aristocles of Messene" label="Aristocles of Messene"/>
<link wikidata="Q352621" start="17875" end="17886" title="Dicaearchus" label="Dicaearchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649856" start="17941" end="17960" title="Caio Domenico Gallo" label="Caio Domenico Gallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q736315" start="17985" end="18004" title="Francesco Maurolico" label="Francesco Maurolico"/>
<link wikidata="Q395714" start="18058" end="18073" title="Agostino Scilla" label="Agostino Scilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3771433" start="18159" end="18176" title="Giuseppe Seguenza" label="Giuseppe Seguenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088839" start="18216" end="18230" title="Giuseppe Sergi" label="Giuseppe Sergi"/>
<link wikidata="Q479473" start="18277" end="18295" title="Michele Parrinello" label="Michele Parrinello"/>
<link wikidata="Q139055" start="18369" end="18384" title="Gaetano Martino" label="Gaetano Martino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338386" start="18425" end="18446" title="Stefano D&amp;#x27;Arrigo" label="Stefano D&amp;#x27;Arrigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248842" start="18468" end="18487" title="Guido delle Colonne" label="Guido delle Colonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7420184" start="18522" end="18535" title="Santi Visalli" label="Santi Visalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="18715" end="18723" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402" start="18767" end="18785" title="Giovanni Boccaccio" label="Giovanni Boccaccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q19054" start="18916" end="18931" title="Matteo Bandello" label="Matteo Bandello"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="18988" end="19007" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q130851" start="19016" end="19038" title="Much Ado about Nothing" label="Much Ado about Nothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q606830" start="19062" end="19082" title="Antony and Cleopatra" label="Antony and Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q687" start="19097" end="19104" title="Molière" label="Molière"/>
<link wikidata="Q22670" start="19162" end="19180" title="Friedrich Schiller" label="Friedrich Schiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q435151" start="19259" end="19273" title="Silvio Pellico" label="Silvio Pellico"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="19315" end="19334" title="Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Friedrich Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q375998" start="19410" end="19426" title="Giovanni Pascoli" label="Giovanni Pascoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q468658" start="19470" end="19484" title="Elio Vittorini" label="Elio Vittorini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338386" start="19642" end="19663" title="Stefano D&amp;#x27;Arrigo" label="Stefano D&amp;#x27;Arrigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q334952" start="19700" end="19712" title="Julien Green" label="Julien Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="19777" end="19788" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q190021" start="19816" end="19826" title="Townsville" label="Townsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q42807" start="19840" end="19845" title="Nîmes" label="Nîmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q121378" start="19856" end="19861" title="Corfu" label="Corfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800" start="19872" end="19877" title="Kochi" label="Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987153" start="19902" end="19932" title="International Rally of Messina" label="International Rally of Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3970096" start="19935" end="19967" title="Messina Centrale railway station" label="Messina Centrale railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822016" start="19970" end="19988" title="Messina Grand Prix" label="Messina Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q373856" start="20018" end="20042" title="Strait of Messina Bridge" label="Strait of Messina Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356853" start="20045" end="20055" title="Pylons of Messina" label="Torre Faro"/>
<link wikidata="Q146094" start="20088" end="20096" title="Zanclean" label="Zanclean"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="20108" end="20116" title="Pliocene" label="Pliocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="20126" end="20133" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q508465" start="20171" end="20180" title="Messinian" label="Messinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="20192" end="20199" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59707" wikidata="Q48432" url="?curid=59707" title="1930 FIFA World Cup">
<text>The 1930 FIFA World Cup was the inaugural FIFA World Cup, the world championship for men&#x27;s national football teams. It took place in Uruguay from 13 to 30 July 1930. FIFA, football&#x27;s international governing body, selected Uruguay as the host nation, as the country would be celebrating the centenary of its first constitution and the Uruguay national football team had retained their football title at the 1928 Summer Olympics. All matches were played in the Uruguayan capital, Montevideo, the majority at the purpose built Estadio Centenario.

Thirteen teams (seven from South America, four from Europe, and two from North America) entered the tournament. Only a handful of European teams chose to participate because of the difficulty of traveling to South America due to the Great Depression. The teams were divided into four groups, with the winner of each group progressing to the semi-finals. The first two World Cup matches took place simultaneously and were won by France and the United States, who defeated Mexico 4–1 and Belgium 3–0, respectively. Lucien Laurent of France scored the first goal in World Cup history, while United States goalkeeper Jimmy Douglas posted the first clean sheet in the tournament the same day.

Argentina, Uruguay, the United States, and Yugoslavia won their respective groups to qualify for the semi-finals. In the final, hosts and pre-tournament favourites Uruguay defeated Argentina 4–2 in front of 68,346 people to become the first nation to win the World Cup. Francisco Varallo from Argentina was the last surviving player from this World Cup. He died in 2010 at the age of 100. The 2030 FIFA World Cup opening match to be played at Estadio Centenario will honor the centennial anniversary of the World Cup.

The 1930 FIFA World Cup final is the first and only one to date to have been contested between two Spanish-speaking sides. It is also the only one to be contested between two South American nations, as the 1950 match between Brazil and Uruguay, often erroneously referred to as the &quot;1950 World Cup final&quot;, was actually the deciding match of the final group stage rather than an actual cup final.

==Participants==
FIFA, the governing body of world football, had been discussing the creation of a competition for national teams for several years prior to 1930. The organisation had managed the football segment of the Summer Olympics on behalf of the International Olympic Committee (IOC) since the early 20th century and the success of the competition at the 1924 and 1928 Olympic Games led to the formation of the FIFA World Cup. At the 17th FIFA congress, held in Amsterdam in May 1928, the competition was proposed by president Jules Rimet and accepted by the organisation&#x27;s board, with vice-president Henri Delaunay proclaiming &quot;international football can no longer be held within the confines of the Olympics&quot;.
The first World Cup was the only one without qualification. Every country affiliated with FIFA was invited to compete and given a deadline of 28 February 1930 to accept. The competition was originally planned as a 16-team knockout tournament with a potential second division if enough teams entered; however, the number of teams failed to reach 16, so there were no qualifications. Plenty of interest was shown by nations in the Americas; Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia, Chile, Mexico, Paraguay, Peru and the United States all entered. A total of seven South American teams participated, more than in any subsequent World Cup Finals. However, because of the long, costly trip by ship across the Atlantic Ocean and the length of absence required for players, very few European teams were inclined to take part due to an ongoing economic crisis. Some refused to countenance travel to South America in any circumstances, and no European entries were received before the February deadline. In an attempt to gain some European participation, the Uruguayan Football Association sent a letter of invitation to The Football Association, even though the British Home Nations (England, Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales) had resigned from FIFA at the time. This was rejected by the FA Committee on 18 November 1929. Out of the two Asian countries affiliated to FIFA at the time, Japan and Siam (modern-day Thailand), neither elected to enter the competition, while Egypt, the lone African team to enter, was delayed due to a storm in the Mediterranean, and missed the ship travelling to Uruguay.

Two months before the start of the tournament, no team from Europe had officially entered. FIFA president Rimet intervened and four European teams eventually made the trip by sea: Belgium, France, Romania and Yugoslavia. The Romanians, managed by Constantin Rădulescu and coached by their captain Rudolf Wetzer and Octav Luchide, entered the competition following the intervention of the newly crowned King Carol II. He selected the squad personally and negotiated with employers to ensure that the players would still have jobs upon their return. The French entered at the personal intervention of Rimet, but neither France&#x27;s star defender Manuel Anatol nor the team&#x27;s regular coach Gaston Barreau could be persuaded to make the trip. The Belgians participated at the instigation of German-Belgian FIFA vice-president Rodolphe Seeldrayers.

The Romanians boarded the SS &quot;Conte Verde&quot; at Genoa, Italy; the French and Yugoslavs were picked up at Villefranche-sur-Mer, France, on 21 June 1930; and the Belgians embarked at Barcelona, Spain. The &quot;Conte Verde&quot; carried Rimet, the trophy and the three designated European referees: Belgians John Langenus and Henri Christophe, along with Thomas Balvay, a Parisian who may have been English. The Brazilian team were picked up when the boat docked in Rio de Janeiro on 29 June before arriving in Uruguay on 4 July. The official ball used for the tournament was the T-Model.

===List of invited teams===

The following 16 teams planned to compete at the final tournament. However, 13 teams participated due to withdrawals of Egypt, Japan and Siam.

Asia (0)
* (withdrew)
* (withdrew)
Africa (0)
* (missed ship)

North America (2)
*
South America (7)
*
*
*
* (hosts)

Europe (4)
*
*

==Venues==

Italy, Sweden, the Netherlands, Spain, Hungary, and Uruguay all lodged applications to host the event. Uruguay&#x27;s bid became the clear selection after all the other countries withdrew their bids.

All matches took place in Montevideo. Three stadiums were used: Estadio Centenario, Estadio Pocitos, and Estadio Gran Parque Central. The Estadio Centenario was built both for the tournament and as a celebration of the centenary of Uruguayan independence. Designed by Juan Scasso, it was the primary stadium for the tournament, referred to by Rimet as a &quot;temple of football&quot;. With a capacity of 90,000, it was the largest football stadium outside the British Isles. The stadium hosted 10 of the 18 matches, including both semi-finals and the final. However, the construction schedule was rushed and delayed by a rainy winter, therefore the Centenario was not ready for use until five days into the tournament. Early matches were played at smaller stadiums usually used by Montevideo football clubs Nacional and Peñarol, the 20,000 capacity Gran Parque Central and the Pocitos.

==Match officials==
Fifteen referees participated in the tournament: four Europeans – two Belgians (Henri Christophe and John Langenus), a Frenchman (Thomas Balvay) and a Romanian (Constantin Rădulescu, also the Romanian team coach), and eleven from the Americas – among them six Uruguayans. To eliminate differences in the application of the Laws of the Game, the referees were invited to one short meeting to iron out the most conflicting issues that could arise.

Of all the refereeing appointments, the two that attracted the most attention were that of Gilberto de Almeida Rêgo in the match between Argentina and France, in which the Brazilian referee blew for full-time six minutes early, and that of the Bolivian Ulises Saucedo&#x27;s Argentina and Mexico encounter, which Argentina won 6–3. During the game, Saucedo, who was also the coach of Bolivia, awarded three penalties.

The following is the list of officials to serve as referees and linesmen. Officials in italics were only employed as linesmen during the tournament.
;Europe
* Thomas Balvay
* Henri Christophe
* John Langenus
* &quot;Constantin Rădulescu&quot;

;North America
* &quot;Gaspar Vallejo&quot;

;South America
* &quot;Gualberto Alonso&quot;
* &quot;Martin Aphesteguy&quot;
* Domingo Lombardi
* José Macías
* Francisco Mateucci
* Almeida Rêgo
* Ulises Saucedo
* Anibal Tejada
* Ricardó Vallarino
* Álberto Warnken
==Format and draw==
The 13 teams were drawn into four groups, with Group 1 containing four teams and the others containing three. Each group played a round-robin format, with the four group winners progressing to the knockout semi-final stage.

Uruguay, Argentina, Brazil, and the United States were seeded and kept apart in the draw; which took place in Montevideo once all the teams arrived.

Since there were no qualifying games, the opening two matches of the tournament were the first World Cup games ever played, taking place simultaneously on 13 July 1930; France beat Mexico 4–1 at the Estadio Pocitos, while the United States defeated Belgium 3–0 at the same time at the Estadio Gran Parque Central. France&#x27;s Lucien Laurent was the scorer of the first World Cup goal.

==Tournament summary==

===Group 1===
The first group was the only one to contain four teams: Argentina, Chile, France, and Mexico. Two days after France&#x27;s victory over Mexico, they faced group favourites Argentina. Injuries hindered France; goalkeeper Alex Thépot had to leave the field after 20 minutes and Laurent, after a fierce tackle by Luis Monti, spent most of the match limping. However, they held out for most of the match, only succumbing to an 81st-minute goal scored from a Monti free kick. The game featured an officiating controversy when referee Almeida Rêgo erroneously blew the final whistle six minutes early, with Frenchman Marcel Langiller clear on goal; play resumed only after protests from the French players. Although France had played twice in 48 hours, Chile had yet to play their first match. They faced Mexico the following day, gaining a comfortable 3–0 win.

France&#x27;s final match, against Chile, featured the first penalty kick of the World Cup. The first goalkeeper to save a penalty was Thépot of France on 19 July 1930, saving from Chile&#x27;s Carlos Vidal in the 30th minute of the match. In Argentina&#x27;s second match, against Mexico, three penalty kicks were awarded. During the same match on 19 July 1930, Mexico&#x27;s Óscar Bonfiglio saved another penalty in the 23rd minute of the match against Argentina&#x27;s Fernando Paternoster. Guillermo Stábile scored a hat-trick in his international debut as Argentina won 6–3, despite the absence of their captain Manuel Ferreira, who had returned to Buenos Aires to take a law exam. Qualification was decided by the group&#x27;s final match, contested by Argentina and Chile, who had beaten France and Mexico, respectively. The game was marred by a brawl sparked by a foul on Arturo Torres by Monti. Argentina won 3–1 against their neighbours and advanced to the semi-finals.

===Group 2===
The second group contained Brazil, Bolivia, and Yugoslavia. Brazil, the group seeds, were expected to progress, but in the group&#x27;s opening match, unexpectedly lost 2–1 to Yugoslavia. Going into the tournament Bolivia had never previously won an international match. For their opener they paid tribute to the hosts by wearing shirts each emblazoned with a single letter, spelling &quot;Viva Uruguay&quot; as the team lined up. Both of Bolivia&#x27;s matches followed a similar pattern, a promising start gradually transformed into heavy defeat. Against Yugoslavia, they held out for an hour before conceding but were four goals down by the final whistle. Misfortune played its part; several Bolivian goals were disallowed. Against Brazil, when both teams had only pride to play for, the score was 1–0 to Brazil at half-time. Brazil added three more in the second half, two of them scored by the multi-sportsman Preguinho. Yugoslavia qualified for the semi-finals.

===Group 3===
Hosts Uruguay were in a group with Peru and Romania. The opening match in this group saw the first player expulsion from the competition when Plácido Galindo of Peru was sent off against Romania. The Romanians made their man advantage pay; their 3–1 win included two late goals and the fastest goal of the tournament; Adalbert Deșu opened the scoring after just 50 seconds. This match had the smallest crowd of any in World Cup history. The official attendance was 2,459, but the actual figure is generally accepted to be around 300.

Due to construction delays at Estadio Centenario, Uruguay&#x27;s first match was not played until five days into the tournament. The first to be held at the Centenario, it was preceded by a ceremony in honour of the Uruguayan centenary celebrations. The Uruguayan team spent the four weeks preceding the match in a training camp, at which strict discipline was exercised. Goalkeeper Andrés Mazali was dropped from the squad for breaking a curfew to visit his wife. One hundred years from the day of the creation of Uruguay&#x27;s first constitution, the hosts won a tight match against Peru. The result was viewed as a poor performance by the Uruguayan press. performance of the Peruvian goalkeeper Jorge Pardon drew particular praise from neutral observers. Uruguay subsequently defeated Romania with ease, scoring four first-half goals to win 4–0.

===Group 4===
The fourth group comprised Belgium, Paraguay, and the United States. The American team, which contained a significant number of new caps, were reputedly nicknamed &quot;the shot-putters&quot; by an unnamed source in the French contingent. They beat their first opponent, Belgium, 3–0. Both sides struggled early on due to heavy rain and snowfall before the U.S. took control. Belgian reports bemoaned the state of the pitch and refereeing decisions, claiming that the second goal was offside. The group&#x27;s second match, played in windy conditions, witnessed the first tournament hat-trick, scored by Bert Patenaude of the United States against Paraguay. Until 10 November 2006, the first hat-trick that FIFA acknowledged had been scored by Stábile of Argentina, two days after Patenaude; however, in 2006 FIFA announced that Patenaude&#x27;s claim to being the first hat-trick scorer was valid, as a goal previously assigned to teammate Tom Florie was reattributed to Patenaude. With the United States having secured qualification, the final match in the group was a dead rubber. Paraguay beat Belgium by a 1–0 margin.

===Semi-finals===
The four group winners, Argentina, Yugoslavia, Uruguay and the United States, moved to the semi-finals. The two semi-final matches saw identical scores. The first semi-final was played between the United States and Argentina on a rain-drenched pitch. The United States team, which featured six British-born players, lost midfielder Raphael Tracey after 10 minutes to a broken leg as the match became violent. A Monti goal halfway through the first half gave Argentina a 1–0 half-time lead. In the second half, the strength of the United States team was overwhelmed by the pace of the Argentinian attacks, the match finishing 6–1 to Argentina.

In the second semi-final, there were shades of the 1924 Summer Olympics match between Yugoslavia and Uruguay. Here, though, Yugoslavia took a surprise lead through Đorđe Vujadinović. Uruguay then took a 2–1 lead. Then shortly before half-time, Yugoslavia had a goal disallowed by a controversial offside decision. The hosts scored three more in the second half to win 6–1, Pedro Cea completing a hat-trick.

===Third and fourth place===
The now-traditional third-place play-off was not established until 1934, so the format of the 1930 World Cup is unique in not distinguishing between the third and fourth-placed teams. Occasional sources, notably a FIFA Bulletin from 1984, incorrectly imply that a third-place match occurred and was won 3–1 by Yugoslavia. Accounts differ as to whether a third-place match was originally scheduled. According to a 2009 book by Hyder Jawad, Yugoslavia refused to play a third-place match because they were upset with the refereeing in their semi-final against Uruguay.

At the end of the championship, the captains of the United States team (Tom Florie) and Yugoslavia (Milutin Ivković) both received bronze medals. Yet a FIFA technical committee report on the 1986 World Cup included full retrospective rankings of all teams at all previous World Cup finals; this report ranked the United States third and Yugoslavia fourth, due to a better goal difference on otherwise identical records, a practice since continued by FIFA. In 2010, the son of Kosta Hadži, the chief of the Yugoslav delegation at the 1930 World Cup and the vice-president of the Football Association of Yugoslavia at the time, claimed that Yugoslavia, as a team, has been awarded one bronze medal, which has been kept by Hadži himself and his family for the following 80 years. According to this source, Yugoslavia was placed third because of the semi-final loss to the eventual champions, Uruguay. The official recording however shows the United States team claiming third place.

The Yugoslavia team achieved the joint–biggest success in both Yugoslav and Serbian subsequent World Cup footballing history, by earning fourth place, a result that would be repeated in 1962.

===Final===
The resounding wins for Uruguay and Argentina in the semi-finals meant the final was a repeat of the matchup in the 1928 Olympic final, which Uruguay had won 2–1 after a replay.

The final was played at the Estadio Centenario on 30 July. Feelings ran high around the La Plata Basin as the Argentine supporters crossed the river with the war cry &quot;Victoria o muerte&quot; (&quot;victory or death&quot;), dispelling any uncertainty as to whether the tournament had captured the imagination of the public. The ten boats earmarked to carry Argentine fans from Buenos Aires to Montevideo proved inadequate, and any number of assorted craft attempted the crossing. An estimated 10–15,000 Argentinians made the trip, but the port at Montevideo was so overwhelmed that many did not even make landfall before kick-off, let alone reach the stadium. At the stadium, supporters were searched for weapons. The gates were opened at eight o&#x27;clock, six hours before kick-off, and by noon the ground was full, with an official attendance of 93,000. A disagreement overshadowed the build-up to the match as the teams failed to agree on who should provide the match ball, forcing FIFA to intervene and decree that the Argentine team would provide the ball for the first half and the Uruguayans would provide their own for the second. Uruguay made one change from their semi-final line-up. Castro replaced Anselmo, who missed out due to illness. Monti played for Argentina despite receiving death threats on the eve of the match. The referee was Belgian John Langenus, who only agreed to officiate a few hours before the game, having sought assurances for his safety. One of his requests was for a boat to be ready at the harbour within one hour of the final whistle, in case he needed to make a quick escape.

The hosts scored the opening goal through Pablo Dorado, a low shot from a position on the right. Argentina, displaying superior passing ability, responded strongly. Within eight minutes they were back on level terms; Carlos Peucelle received a Ferreira through-ball, beat his marker and equalised. Shortly before half-time leading tournament goalscorer Guillermo Stábile gave Argentina a 2–1 lead. Uruguay captain Nasazzi protested, maintaining that Stábile was offside but to no avail. In the second half Uruguay gradually became ascendant. Shortly after Stábile missed a chance to score again, Uruguay attacked in numbers and Pedro Cea scored an equaliser. Ten minutes later, a goal by Santos Iriarte gave Uruguay the lead, and just before full-time Castro made it 4–2 to seal the win. Langenus ended the match a minute later and Uruguay added the title of World Cup winner to their mantle of Olympic champions. Jules Rimet presented the World Cup Trophy, which was later named for him, to the head of the Uruguayan Football Association, Raúl Jude. The following day was declared a national holiday in Uruguay; in the Argentinian capital, Buenos Aires, a mob threw stones at the Uruguayan consulate. Francisco Varallo (who played as a forward for Argentina) was the last player in the final to die, on 30 August 2010.

France, Yugoslavia and the United States all played friendlies in South America following the competition. Brazil played France on 1 August, Yugoslavia on 10 August and the United States on 17 August, while Argentina hosted Yugoslavia on 3 August.

Uruguay&#x27;s aggregate goal difference of +12 over four games, at an average of +3 per match, remains the highest average goal difference per match of any World Cup champion and the second-highest of any World Cup finals participant, after Hungary in 1954.

==Group stage==

===Group 1===







===Group 2===




===Group 3===




===Group 4===




==Knockout stage==
===Bracket===
===Semi-finals===
----
===Final===


==Goalscorers==


==FIFA retrospective ranking==
In 1986, FIFA published a report that ranked all teams in each World Cup up to and including 1986, based on progress in the competition, overall results and quality of the opposition. The rankings for the 1930 tournament were as follows:

==See also==

*&quot;See You in Montevideo&quot;: 2015 Serbian film recreating the tournament from the point of view of the Yugoslav team
==Notes==
==References==
Bibliography
*
*
*

==External links==

*1930 FIFA World Cup Uruguay , FIFA.com
*1930 FIFA World Cup at RSSSF.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q48432" start="4" end="23" title="1930 FIFA World Cup" label="1930 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="42" end="56" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q831533" start="85" end="104" title="List of men&amp;#x27;s national association football teams" label="men&amp;#x27;s national"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="105" end="113" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="171" end="175" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485448" start="207" end="221" title="sports governing body" label="governing body"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774607" start="317" end="335" title="Constitution of Uruguay" label="first constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q134916" start="344" end="374" title="Uruguay national football team" label="Uruguay national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q838619" start="416" end="436" title="Football at the 1928 Summer Olympics" label="1928 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335" start="488" end="498" title="Montevideo" label="Montevideo"/>
<link wikidata="Q498245" start="534" end="552" title="Estadio Centenario" label="Estadio Centenario"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="788" end="804" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="983" end="989" title="France national football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q164134" start="998" end="1011" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national soccer team" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q164089" start="1026" end="1032" title="Mexico national football team" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q166776" start="1041" end="1048" title="Belgium national football team" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q315286" start="1068" end="1082" title="Lucien Laurent" label="Lucien Laurent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661219" start="1168" end="1181" title="Jimmy Douglas (American soccer)" label="Jimmy Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q262031" start="1199" end="1210" title="clean sheet" label="clean sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q79800" start="1244" end="1253" title="Argentina national football team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q188363" start="1287" end="1297" title="Yugoslavia national football team" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q63843" start="1361" end="1370" title="1930 FIFA World Cup final" label="the final"/>
<link wikidata="Q10131" start="1514" end="1531" title="Francisco Varallo" label="Francisco Varallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q79800" start="1537" end="1546" title="Argentina national football team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935989" start="1637" end="1656" title="2030 FIFA World Cup" label="2030 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q498245" start="1687" end="1705" title="Estadio Centenario" label="Estadio Centenario"/>
<link wikidata="Q754483" start="1969" end="2006" title="Uruguay v Brazil (1950 FIFA World Cup)" label="1950 match between Brazil and Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="2187" end="2191" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="2221" end="2229" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q159821" start="2390" end="2405" title="Summer Olympics" label="Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="2423" end="2454" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q748692" start="2532" end="2536" title="Football at the 1924 Summer Olympics" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q838619" start="2541" end="2559" title="Football at the 1928 Summer Olympics" label="1928 Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="2588" end="2602" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="2639" end="2648" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q199642" start="2704" end="2715" title="Jules Rimet" label="Jules Rimet"/>
<link wikidata="Q367673" start="2783" end="2797" title="Henri Delaunay" label="Henri Delaunay"/>
<link wikidata="Q565657" start="2949" end="2962" title="FIFA World Cup qualification" label="qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q79800" start="3343" end="3352" title="Argentina national football team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q83459" start="3354" end="3360" title="Brazil national football team" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q193386" start="3362" end="3369" title="Bolivia national football team" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172025" start="3371" end="3376" title="Chile national football team" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q164089" start="3378" end="3384" title="Mexico national football team" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q172020" start="3386" end="3394" title="Paraguay national football team" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q212166" start="3396" end="3400" title="Peru national football team" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q164134" start="3409" end="3422" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national soccer team" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="3595" end="3609" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="3727" end="3742" title="Great Depression" label="economic crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q722749" start="3941" end="3971" title="Uruguayan Football Association" label="Uruguayan Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q9500" start="4003" end="4027" title="The Football Association" label="The Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040745" start="4053" end="4065" title="Home Nations" label="Home Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="4067" end="4074" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q190978" start="4076" end="4092" title="Northern Ireland national football team" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34044" start="4094" end="4102" title="Scotland national football team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q180857" start="4107" end="4112" title="Wales national football team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q170566" start="4272" end="4277" title="Japan national football team" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q239549" start="4282" end="4286" title="Thailand national football team" label="Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="4299" end="4307" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q28089" start="4358" end="4363" title="Egypt national football team" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="4431" end="4444" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q166776" start="4670" end="4677" title="Belgium national football team" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="4679" end="4685" title="France national football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q168397" start="4687" end="4694" title="Romania national football team" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q188363" start="4699" end="4709" title="Yugoslavia national football team" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q868852" start="4737" end="4757" title="Constantin Rădulescu (footballer, born 1896)" label="Constantin Rădulescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q530851" start="4787" end="4800" title="Rudolf Wetzer" label="Rudolf Wetzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q212897" start="4892" end="4905" title="Carol II of Romania" label="King Carol II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756677" start="5136" end="5149" title="Manuel Anatol" label="Manuel Anatol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382192" start="5184" end="5198" title="Gaston Barreau" label="Gaston Barreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q312662" start="5319" end="5339" title="Rodolphe Seeldrayers" label="Rodolphe Seeldrayers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128573" start="5368" end="5394" title="SS Conte Verde" label="SS &amp;quot;Conte Verde&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="5398" end="5403" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q207080" start="5455" end="5475" title="Villefranche-sur-Mer" label="Villefranche-sur-Mer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="5531" end="5540" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q461172" start="5656" end="5669" title="John Langenus" label="John Langenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q940710" start="5674" end="5690" title="Henri Christophe (referee)" label="Henri Christophe"/>
<link wikidata="Q535333" start="5703" end="5716" title="Thomas Balvay" label="Thomas Balvay"/>
<link wikidata="Q83459" start="5760" end="5769" title="Brazil national football team" label="Brazilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="5814" end="5828" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q28089" start="6087" end="6092" title="Egypt national football team" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q170566" start="6094" end="6099" title="Japan national football team" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q239549" start="6104" end="6108" title="Thailand national football team" label="Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="6111" end="6115" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="6146" end="6152" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="6174" end="6187" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="6194" end="6207" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="6229" end="6235" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335" start="6484" end="6494" title="Montevideo" label="Montevideo"/>
<link wikidata="Q498245" start="6522" end="6540" title="Estadio Centenario" label="Estadio Centenario"/>
<link wikidata="Q741103" start="6542" end="6557" title="Estadio Pocitos" label="Estadio Pocitos"/>
<link wikidata="Q786149" start="6563" end="6590" title="Estadio Gran Parque Central" label="Estadio Gran Parque Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="6919" end="6932" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q499616" start="7266" end="7274" title="Club Nacional de Football" label="Nacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q16320" start="7279" end="7286" title="Peñarol" label="Peñarol"/>
<link wikidata="Q384677" start="7904" end="7928" title="Gilberto de Almeida Rêgo" label="Gilberto de Almeida Rêgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q714181" start="8066" end="8080" title="Ulises Saucedo" label="Ulises Saucedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q535333" start="8391" end="8404" title="Thomas Balvay" label="Thomas Balvay"/>
<link wikidata="Q940710" start="8407" end="8423" title="Henri Christophe (referee)" label="Henri Christophe"/>
<link wikidata="Q461172" start="8426" end="8439" title="John Langenus" label="John Langenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q868852" start="8448" end="8468" title="Constantin Rădulescu (footballer, born 1896)" label="Constantin Rădulescu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8499" end="8513" title="Gaspar Vallejo" label="Gaspar Vallejo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8544" end="8560" title="Gualberto Alonso" label="Gualberto Alonso"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8575" end="8592" title="Martin Aphesteguy" label="Martin Aphesteguy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8601" end="8617" title="Domingo Lombardi" label="Domingo Lombardi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8620" end="8631" title="José Macías (football referee)" label="José Macías"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8634" end="8652" title="Francisco Mateucci" label="Francisco Mateucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q384677" start="8655" end="8667" title="Gilberto de Almeida Rêgo" label="Almeida Rêgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q714181" start="8670" end="8684" title="Ulises Saucedo" label="Ulises Saucedo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8687" end="8700" title="Anibal Tejada" label="Anibal Tejada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8703" end="8720" title="Ricardó Vallarino" label="Ricardó Vallarino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8723" end="8738" title="Álberto Warnken" label="Álberto Warnken"/>
<link wikidata="Q841144" start="8889" end="8900" title="Round-robin tournament" label="round-robin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9039" end="9045" title="single-elimination tournament#Seeding" label="seeded"/>
<link wikidata="Q315286" start="9462" end="9476" title="Lucien Laurent" label="Lucien Laurent"/>
<link wikidata="Q736747" start="9780" end="9791" title="Alex Thépot" label="Alex Thépot"/>
<link wikidata="Q315333" start="9870" end="9880" title="Luis Monti" label="Luis Monti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379266" start="10020" end="10029" title="free kick (association football)" label="free kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q384677" start="10089" end="10101" title="Gilberto de Almeida Rêgo" label="Almeida Rêgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q557987" start="10171" end="10187" title="Marcel Langiller" label="Marcel Langiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q279532" start="10478" end="10490" title="Penalty kick (association football)" label="penalty kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q164287" start="10611" end="10623" title="Carlos Vidal" label="Carlos Vidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q293200" start="10794" end="10809" title="Óscar Bonfiglio" label="Óscar Bonfiglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q206672" start="10889" end="10909" title="Fernando Paternoster" label="Fernando Paternoster"/>
<link wikidata="Q309645" start="10911" end="10928" title="Guillermo Stábile" label="Guillermo Stábile"/>
<link wikidata="Q123086" start="10938" end="10947" title="hat-trick" label="hat-trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q732682" start="11034" end="11049" title="Manuel Ferreira (footballer)" label="Manuel Ferreira"/>
<link wikidata="Q715575" start="11297" end="11310" title="Arturo Torres Carrasco" label="Arturo Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q456600" start="12327" end="12336" title="Preguinho" label="Preguinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621986" start="12537" end="12552" title="Plácido Galindo" label="Plácido Galindo"/>
<link wikidata="Q904755" start="12713" end="12726" title="Adalbert Deșu" label="Adalbert Deșu"/>
<link wikidata="Q176479" start="13313" end="13326" title="Andrés Mazali" label="Andrés Mazali"/>
<link wikidata="Q746404" start="13629" end="13641" title="Jorge Pardon" label="Jorge Pardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q179304" start="13927" end="13931" title="cap (sport)" label="caps"/>
<link wikidata="Q8524" start="14213" end="14218" title="football pitch" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q18531" start="14279" end="14286" title="Offside (association football)" label="offside"/>
<link wikidata="Q123086" start="14378" end="14387" title="hat-trick" label="hat-trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q360524" start="14399" end="14413" title="Bert Patenaude" label="Bert Patenaude"/>
<link wikidata="Q172020" start="14443" end="14451" title="Paraguay national football team" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428737" start="14736" end="14746" title="Tom Florie" label="Tom Florie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245513" start="14866" end="14877" title="dead rubber" label="dead rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q594999" start="15269" end="15283" title="Raphael Tracey" label="Raphael Tracey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8132" start="15632" end="15652" title="1924 Summer Olympics" label="1924 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q342095" start="15745" end="15762" title="Đorđe Vujadinović" label="Đorđe Vujadinović"/>
<link wikidata="Q191471" start="15954" end="15963" title="Pedro Cea" label="Pedro Cea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910276" start="16038" end="16058" title="third place playoff" label="third-place play-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477177" start="16085" end="16089" title="1934 FIFA World Cup" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428737" start="16658" end="16668" title="Tom Florie" label="Tom Florie"/>
<link wikidata="Q726274" start="16686" end="16701" title="Milutin Ivković" label="Milutin Ivković"/>
<link wikidata="Q46938" start="16777" end="16791" title="1986 FIFA World Cup" label="1986 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447681" start="17164" end="17198" title="Football Association of Yugoslavia" label="Football Association of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447681" start="17630" end="17638" title="Football Association of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q754433" start="17643" end="17650" title="Football Association of Serbia" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q160813" start="17753" end="17757" title="1962 FIFA World Cup" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17888" end="17906" title="Football at the 1928 Summer Olympics#Gold medal match" label="1928 Olympic final"/>
<link wikidata="Q498245" start="17979" end="17997" title="Estadio Centenario" label="Estadio Centenario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362283" start="18039" end="18053" title="Río de la Plata Basin" label="La Plata Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q570364" start="18576" end="18584" title="kick-off (association football)" label="kick-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q357405" start="19614" end="19626" title="Pablo Dorado" label="Pablo Dorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q465954" start="19789" end="19804" title="Carlos Peucelle" label="Carlos Peucelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736098" start="19848" end="19854" title="marking (association football)" label="marker"/>
<link wikidata="Q191471" start="20200" end="20209" title="Pedro Cea" label="Pedro Cea"/>
<link wikidata="Q438513" start="20260" end="20274" title="Santos Iriarte" label="Santos Iriarte"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20512" end="20528" title="FIFA World Cup Trophy#Jules Rimet Trophy" label="World Cup Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7299792" start="20612" end="20621" title="Raúl Jude" label="Raúl Jude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="20713" end="20725" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q10131" start="20774" end="20791" title="Francisco Varallo" label="Francisco Varallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q493386" start="20945" end="20955" title="exhibition game" label="friendlies"/>
<link wikidata="Q131075" start="21395" end="21399" title="1954 FIFA World Cup" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q12755725" start="21873" end="21894" title="See You in Montevideo" label="See You in Montevideo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59711" wikidata="Q229871" url="?curid=59711" title="Messalina">
<text>Valeria Messalina (; ) was the third wife of Roman emperor Claudius. She was a paternal cousin of Emperor Nero, a second cousin of Emperor Caligula, and a great-grandniece of Emperor Augustus. A powerful and influential woman with a reputation for promiscuity, she allegedly conspired against her husband and was executed on the discovery of the plot. Her notorious reputation may have resulted from political bias, but works of art and literature have perpetuated it into modern times.

==Early life==
Messalina was the daughter of Domitia Lepida and her first cousin Marcus Valerius Messalla Barbatus. Her mother was the youngest child of the consul Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus and Antonia Major. Her mother&#x27;s brother, Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus, had been the first husband of the future Empress Agrippina the Younger and the biological father of the future Emperor Nero, making Nero Messalina&#x27;s first cousin despite a seventeen-year age difference. Messalina&#x27;s grandmothers Claudia Marcella the Younger and Antonia the Elder were maternal half sisters. Claudia Marcella Minor, Messalina&#x27;s paternal grandmother, was the daughter of Augustus&#x27; sister Octavia the Younger. Antonia Major was the elder daughter of Octavia by her marriage to Mark Antony, and was Claudius&#x27; maternal aunt. There was, therefore, a large amount of inbreeding in the family.

Little is known about Messalina&#x27;s life prior to her marriage in 38 to Claudius, her first cousin once removed, who was then about 47 years old. Two children were born as a result of their union: a daughter Claudia Octavia (born 39 or 40), a future empress, stepsister, and first wife to the emperor Nero; and a son, Britannicus. When the Emperor Caligula was murdered in 41, the Praetorian Guard proclaimed Claudius the new emperor and Messalina became empress.

==Messalina&#x27;s history==

After her accession to power, Messalina enters history with a reputation as ruthless, predatory, and sexually insatiable, while Claudius is painted as easily led by her and unaware of her many adulteries. The historians who relayed such stories, principally Tacitus and Suetonius, wrote some 70 years after the events in an environment hostile to the imperial line to which Messalina had belonged. There was also the later Greek account of Cassius Dio who, writing a century and a half after the period described, was dependent on the received account of those before him. It has also been observed of his attitude throughout his work that he was &quot;suspicious of women&quot;. Neither can Suetonius be regarded as trustworthy. &quot;Encyclopaedia Britannica&quot; suggests of his fictive approach that he was &quot;free with scandalous gossip,&quot; and that &quot;he used &#x27;characteristic anecdote&#x27; without exhaustive inquiry into its authenticity.&quot; He manipulates the facts to suit his thesis.

Tacitus himself claimed to be transmitting &quot;what was heard and written by my elders&quot; but without naming sources other than the memoirs of Agrippina the Younger, who had arranged to displace Messalina&#x27;s children in the imperial succession and was therefore particularly interested in sullying her predecessor&#x27;s name. Examining his narrative style and comparing it to that of the satires of Juvenal, another critic remarks on &quot;how the writers manipulate it in order to skew their audience&#x27;s perception of Messalina&quot;. Indeed, Tacitus seems well aware of the impression he is creating when he admits that his account may seem fictional, if not melodramatic (&quot;fabulosus&quot;). It has therefore been argued that the chorus of condemnation against Messalina from these writers is largely a result of the political sanctions that followed her death, although some authors have still seen &quot;something of substance beyond mere invention&quot;.

==Messalina&#x27;s victims==
The accusations against Messalina center largely on three areas: her treatment of other members of the imperial family; her treatment of members of the senatorial order; and her unrestrained sexual behaviour. Her husband&#x27;s family, especially female, seemed to be specially targeted by Messalina. Within the first year of Claudius&#x27; reign, his niece Julia Livilla, only recently recalled from banishment upon the death of her brother Caligula, was exiled again on charges of adultery with Seneca the Younger. Claudius ordered her execution soon after, while Seneca was allowed to return seven years later, following the death of Messalina. Another niece, Julia Livia, was attacked for immorality and incest by Messalina in 43possibly because she feared Julia&#x27;s son Rubellius Plautus as a rival claimant to the imperial succession,with the result that Claudius ordered her execution.

In the final two years of her life, she also intensified her attacks on her husband&#x27;s only surviving niece, Agrippina the Younger, and Agrippina&#x27;s young son Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus (the later Emperor Nero). The public sympathized with Agrippina, who had twice been exiled and was the only surviving daughter of Germanicus after Messalina secured the execution of Julia Livilla. Agrippina was implicated in the alleged crimes of Statilius Taurus, whom it was alleged she directed to partake in &quot;magical and superstitious practices&quot;. Taurus committed suicide, and, according to Tacitus, Messalina was only prevented from further persecuting Agrippina because she was distracted by her new lover, Gaius Silius.

According to Suetonius, Messalina realized early on that the young Nero could be a potential rival to her own son, who was three years younger. He repeated a tale that Messalina sent several assassins into Nero&#x27;s bedchamber to murder him, but they were frightened off by what they thought was a snake slithering out from under his bed. In the Secular Games of 48, Nero won greater applause from the crowd than did Messalina&#x27;s own son Britannicus, something which scholars have speculated led Messalina to plot to destroy Nero and his mother once and for all.

Two very prominent senators, Appius Silanus and Valerius Asiaticus, also met their death on the instigation of Messalina. The former was married to Messalina&#x27;s mother Domitia Lepida, but according to Dio and Tacitus, Messalina coveted him for herself. In 42, Messalina and the freedman Narcissus devised an elaborate ruse, whereby they each informed Claudius that they had had identical dreams during the night portending that Silanus would murder Claudius. When Silanus arrived that morning (after being summoned by either Messalina or Narcissus), he confirmed their portent and Claudius had him executed.

Valerius Asiaticus was one of Messalina&#x27;s final victims. Asiaticus was immensely rich and incurred Messalina&#x27;s wrath because he owned the Gardens of Lucullus, which she desired for herself, and because he was the lover of her hated rival Poppaea Sabina the Elder, with whom she was engaged in a fierce rivalry over the affections of the actor Mnester. In 46, she convinced Claudius to order his arrest on charges of failing to maintain discipline amongst his soldiers, adultery with Sabina, and for engaging in homosexual acts. Although Claudius hesitated to condemn him to death, he ultimately did so on the recommendation of Messalina&#x27;s ally, and Claudius&#x27; partner in the consulship for that year, Lucius Vitellius. The murder of Asiaticus, without notifying the senate and without trial, caused great outrage amongst the senators, who blamed both Messalina and Claudius. Despite this, Messalina continued to target Poppaea Sabina until she committed suicide.

The same year as the execution of Asiaticus, Messalina ordered the poisoning of Marcus Viniciusbecause he refused to sleep with her according to gossip. About this time she also arranged for the execution of one of Claudius&#x27; freedmen secretaries, Polybius. According to Dio, this murder of one of their own turned the other freedmen, previously her close allies, against Messalina for good.

==Downfall==

In the year 48, Claudius went to Ostia to visit the new harbor he was constructing and was informed while there that Messalina had gone so far as to marry her latest lover, Senator Gaius Silius in Rome. It was only when Messalina held a costly wedding banquet in Claudius&#x27; absence that the freedman Narcissus decided to inform him. The exact motivations for Messalina&#x27;s actions are unknownit has been interpreted as a move to overthrow Claudius and install Silius as Emperor, with Silius adopting Britannicus and thereby ensuring her son&#x27;s future accession. Other historians have speculated that Silius convinced Messalina that Claudius&#x27; overthrow was inevitable, and her best hopes of survival lay in a union with him. Tacitus stated that Messalina hesitated even as Silius insisted on marriage, but ultimately conceded because &quot;she coveted the name of wife&quot;, and because Silius had divorced his own wife the previous year in anticipation of a union with Messalina. Another theory is that Messalina and Silius merely took part in a sham marriage as part of a Bacchic ritual as they were in the midst of celebrating the Vinalia, a festival of the grape harvest.

Tacitus and Dio state that Narcissus convinced Claudius that it was a move to overthrow him and persuaded him to appoint the deputy Praetorian Prefect, Lusius Geta, to the charge of the Guard because the loyalty of the senior Prefect Rufrius Crispinus was in doubt. Claudius rushed back to Rome, where he was met by Messalina on the road with their children. The leading Vestal Virgin, Vibidia, came to entreat Claudius not to rush to condemn Messalina. He then visited the house of Silius, where he found a great many heirlooms of his Claudii and Drusii forebears, taken from his house and gifted to Silius by Messalina. When Messalina attempted to gain access to her husband in the palace, she was repulsed by Narcissus and shouted down with a list of her various offences compiled by the freedman. Despite the mounting evidence against her, Claudius&#x27;s feelings were softening and he asked to see her in the morning for a private interview. Narcissus, pretending to act on Claudius&#x27; instructions, ordered an officer of the Praetorian Guard to execute her. When the troop of guards arrived at the Gardens of Lucullus, where Messalina had taken refuge with her mother, she was given the honorable option of taking her own life. Unable to muster the courage to slit her own throat, she was run through with a sword by one of the guards. Upon hearing the news, the Emperor did not react and simply asked for another chalice of wine. The Roman Senate then ordered a &quot;damnatio memoriae&quot; so that Messalina&#x27;s name would be removed from all public and private places and all statues of her would be taken down.

==Erasure from memory==
In Messalina&#x27;s time, the condemnation of &quot;damnatio memoriae&quot; followed on an offence within the context of the Roman imperial cult. The cult was directed from above by members of the imperial circle through official initiatives within the pro-imperial power structure. It was effective among the wider public, however, only insofar as there was personal assent. Theoretically the sentence of &quot;damnatio memoriae&quot; was supposed to erase all mention of the offender from the public sphere. The person&#x27;s name was gouged from inscriptions and even from coinage. Sculptures might be smashed or at the very least would be dismounted and stored away out of sight.

Such measures were not totally effective and several images of Messalina have survived for one reason or another. One such is the doubtfully ascribed bust in the Uffizi Gallery that may in fact be of Agrippina, Messalina&#x27;s successor as wife of Claudius (see above). Another in the Louvre is thought to be of Messalina holding her child Britannicus. In fact it is based on a famous Greek sculpture by Cephisodotus the Elder of Eirene carrying the child Ploutos, of which there were other Roman imitations.
Some of the surviving engraved gems that feature Messalina were also indebted to ancient Greek models. They include the carved sardonyx of Messalina accompanied by Claudius in a dragon chariot, which commemorated his part in the Roman conquest of Britain. This was modelled on depictions of Dionysus and Ariadne after his Indian victory and is now in the Bibliothèque nationale de France (Cabinet des Médailles). In its Roman adaptation, Messalina is in front guiding the chariot while Claudius stands behind her steadying his flying robe. The piece was once in the collection of Peter Paul Rubens, who made an ink sketch of it, although identifying the woman erroneously as Agrippina. However, there is another version of this victory celebration known as the Hague cameo, which may be a later imitation. In a chariot drawn by centaurs, the laurel-wreathed Messalina reclines in the post of honour, bearing the attributes of Ceres. Beside her sits Claudius with one arm about her neck and Jupiter&#x27;s thunderbolt in his other hand. In front stands the child Britannicus in complete armour, with his elder sister Octavia next to him.

Yet another carved sardonyx now in the national library of France represents a bust of the laureled Messalina, with on either side of her the heads of her son and daughter emerging from a cornucopia. This too once belonged to Rubens and a Flemish engraving after his drawing of it is in the British Museum. A simple white portrait bust of the empress is also held by the Bibliothèque nationale. A portrait oval in yellow carnelian was once recorded as being in the collection of Lord Montague; another in sardonyx once belonged to the Antikensammlung Berlin.
Two authors especially supplemented the gossip and officially dictated versions recorded by later historians and added to Messalina&#x27;s notoriety. One such story is the account of her all-night sex competition with a prostitute in Book X of Pliny the Elder&#x27;s &quot;Natural History&quot;, according to which the competition lasted &quot;night and day&quot; and Messalina won with a score of 25 partners.

The poet Juvenal mentions Messalina twice in his satires. As well as the story in his tenth satire that she compelled Gaius Silius to divorce his wife and marry her, the sixth satire contains the notorious description of how the Empress used to work clandestinely all night in a brothel under the name of the She-Wolf. In the course of that account, Juvenal coined the phrase frequently applied to Messalina thereafter, &quot;meretrix augusta&quot; (the imperial whore). In so doing, he coupled her reputation with that of Cleopatra, another victim of imperially directed character assassination, whom the poet Propertius had earlier described as &quot;meretrix regina&quot; (the harlot queen).

The earlier propaganda against Cleopatra is described as &quot;rooted in the hostile Roman literary tradition&quot;. Similar literary tactics, including the suggestive mingling of historical fact and gossip in the officially approved annals, is what has helped prolong the scandalous reputation of Messalina as well.

==Messalina in the arts==
To call a woman &quot;a Messalina&quot; indicates a devious and sexually voracious personality. The historical figure and her fate were often used in the arts to make a moral point, but there was often as well a prurient fascination with her sexually-liberated behaviour. In modern times, that has led to exaggerated works which have been described as romps.
The ambivalent attitude to Messalina can be seen in the late mediaeval French prose work in the J. Paul Getty Museum illustrated by the Master of Boucicaut, &quot;Tiberius, Messalina, and Caligula reproach one another in the midst of flames&quot;. It recounts a dialogue that takes place in hell between the three characters from the same imperial line. Messalina wins the debate by demonstrating that their sins were far worse than hers and suggests that they repent of their own wickedness before reproaching her as they had done.

While Messalina&#x27;s wicked behavior towards others is given full emphasis, and even exaggerated in early works, her sexual activities have been treated more sympathetically. In the 1524 illustrations of 16 sexual positions known as &quot;I Modi&quot;, each was named after a couple from Classical history or myth, which included &quot;Messalina in the Booth of Lisisca&quot;. Although early editions were destroyed by religious censorship, Agostino Caracci&#x27;s later copies have survived (see above).

Other artistic illustrations of Messalina&#x27;s reported depravity, supposedly based on ancient medals and cameos, appear in the works of Pierre-François Hugues d&#x27;Hancarville. His main account, padded with more general quotations condemning the laxity of the times, takes up three chapters of his &quot;Monuments of the Private Lives of the Twelve Caesars&quot; (1780). Chapter 29 deals with Messalina&#x27;s public marriage to Gaius Silius. The following chapters are illustrated by cameos ascribed to a certain Pythodorus of Trallès. In the first, Messalina sits naked while a maid dresses her hair in preparation for taking up her role as the courtesan Lisisica; in the other she offers fourteen myrtle wreaths to Priapus following her triumph in exhausting as many fit young men in a sexual contest. She also sits before a private shrine to Priapus in an illustration for the author&#x27;s other pornographic work, &quot;Monuments of the Secret Cult of Roman Women&quot; (1787).

===Later painting and sculpture===
One of the avenues to drawing a moral lesson from the story of Messalina in painting was to picture her violent end. An early example was Francesco Solimena&#x27;s &quot;The Death of Messalina&quot; (1708). In this scene of vigorous action, a Roman soldier pulls back his arm to stab the Empress while fending off her mother. A witness in armour observes calmly from the shadows in the background. Georges Rochegrosse&#x27;s painting of 1916 is a reprise of the same scene. A mourning woman dressed in black leaves with her face covered as a soldier drags back Messalina&#x27;s head, watched by a courtier with the order for execution in his hand. The Danish royal painter Nicolai Abildgaard, however, preferred to feature &quot;The Dying Messalina and her Mother&quot; (1797) in a quieter setting. The mother weeps beside her daughter as she lies extended on the ground in a garden setting.

In 1870 the French committee for the Prix de Rome set Messalina&#x27;s death as the competition subject for that year. The winning entry by Fernand Lematte, &quot;The Death of Messalina&quot;, is based on the description of the occasion by Tacitus. Following the decision that she must die, &quot;Evodus, one of the freedmen, was appointed to watch and complete the affair. Hurrying on before with all speed to the gardens, he found Messalina stretched upon the ground, while by her side sat Lepida, her mother, who, though estranged from her daughter in prosperity, was now melted to pity by her inevitable doom, and urged her not to wait for the executioner&quot;. In Messalina&#x27;s hand is the thin dagger that she dare not use, while Evodus bends over her threateningly and Lepida tries to fend him off. In an earlier French treatment by , the lesson of poetic justice is made plainer by specifically identifying the scene of Messalina&#x27;s death as the garden which she had obtained by having its former owner executed on a false charge. Now she crouches at the foot of a wall carved with the name of Lucullus and is condemned by the dark-clothed intermediary as a soldier advances on her drawing his sword.

Two Low Countries painters emphasised the behaviour of Messalina that led up to her end by picturing her wedding with Gaius Silius. The one by Nicolaus Knüpfer, dated about 1650, is so like contemporary brothel scenes that its subject is ambiguous and has been disputed. A richly dressed drunkard lies back on a bed between two women while companions look anxiously out of the window and another struggles to draw his sword. The later &quot;Landscape with Messalina&#x27;s Wedding&quot; by Victor Honoré Janssens pictures the seated empress being attired before the ceremony. Neither scene looks much like a wedding, but rather they indicate the age&#x27;s sense of moral outrage at this travesty of marriage. That was further underlined by a contemporary Tarot card in which card 6, normally titled &quot;The Lover(s)&quot;, has been retitled &quot;Shameless&quot; (&quot;impudique&quot;) and pictures Messalina leaning against a carved chest. Beneath is the explanation that &quot;she reached such a point of insolence that, because of the stupidity of her husband, she dared to marry a young Roman publicly in the Emperor&#x27;s absence&quot;.

The wild scenes following the wedding that took place in Rome are dramatised by Tacitus. &quot;Messalina meanwhile, more wildly profligate than ever, was celebrating in mid-autumn a representation of the vintage in her new home. The presses were being trodden; the vats were overflowing; women girt with skins were dancing, as Bacchanals dance in their worship or their frenzy. Messalina with flowing hair shook the thyrsus, and Silius at her side, crowned with ivy and wearing the buskin, moved his head to some lascivious chorus&quot;. Such was the scene of drunken nudity painted by :fr:Gustave Surand in 1905.
Other artists show similar scenes of debauchery or, like the Italian A. Pigma in &quot;When Claudius is away, Messalina will play&quot; (1911), hint that it will soon follow. What was to follow is depicted in Federico Faruffini&#x27;s &quot;The orgies of Messalina&quot; (1867–1868). A more private liaison is treated in Joaquín Sorolla&#x27;s &quot;Messalina in the Arms of the Gladiator&quot; (1886). This takes place in an interior, with the empress reclining bare breasted against the knees of a naked gladiator.

Juvenal&#x27;s account of her nights spent in the brothel is commonly portrayed. Gustave Moreau painted her leading another man onto the bed while an exhausted prostitute sleeps in the background, while in Paul Rouffio&#x27;s painting of 1875 she reclines bare-breasted as a slave offers grapes. The Dane Peder Severin Krøyer depicted her standing, her full body apparent under the thin material of her dress. The ranks of her customers are just visible behind the curtain against which she stands (see above). Two drawings by Aubrey Beardsley were produced for a private printing of Juvenal&#x27;s satires (1897). The one titled &quot;Messalina and her companion&quot; showed her on the way to the brothel, while a rejected drawing is usually titled &quot;Messalina returning from the bath&quot;. About that period, too, Roman resident Pavel Svedomsky reimagined the historical scene. There the disguised seductress is at work in a light-suffused alley, enticing a passer-by into the brothel from which a maid looks out anxiously.

Alternatively, artists drew on Pliny&#x27;s account of her sex competition. The Brazilian Henrique Bernardelli (1857–1936) showed her lying across the bed at the moment of exhaustion afterwards. So also did Eugène Cyrille Brunet&#x27;s dramatic marble sculpture, dating from 1884 (see above), while in the Czech Jan Štursa&#x27;s standing statue of 1912 she is holding a last piece of clothing by her side at the outset.

==Drama and spectacle==
One of the earliest stage productions to feature the fall of the empress was &quot;The Tragedy of Messalina&quot; (1639) by Nathanael Richards, where she is depicted as a monster and used as a foil to attack the Roman Catholic wife of the English king Charles I. She is treated as equally villainous in the Venetian Pietro Zaguri&#x27;s &quot;La Messalina&quot; (1656). This was a 4-act prose tragedy with four songs, described as an &quot;opera scenica&quot;, that revolved around the affair with Gaius Silius that brought about her death. Carlo Pallavicino was to follow with a full blown Venetian opera in 1679 that combined eroticism with morality.

During the last quarter of the 19th century the idea of the femme fatale came into prominence and encouraged many more works featuring Messalina. 1874 saw the Austrian verse tragedy &quot;Arria und Messalina&quot; by Adolf Wilbrandt which was staged with success across Europe for many years. It was followed in 1877 by Pietro Cossa&#x27;s Italian verse tragedy, where Messalina figures as a totally unrestrained woman in pursuit of love. Another 5-act verse tragedy was published in Philadelphia in 1890, authored by Algernon Sydney Logan (1849–1925), who had liberal views on sex.

As well as plays, the story of Messalina was adapted to ballet and opera. The 1878 ballet by Luigi Danesi (1832–1908) to music by Giuseppe Giaquinto (d. 1881) was an Italian success with several productions. On its arrival in France in 1884 it was made a fantastical spectacle at the Éden-Théâtre, with elephants, horses, massive crowd scenes and circus games in which rows of bare-legged female gladiators preceded the fighters. Isidore de Lara&#x27;s opera &quot;Messaline&quot;, based on a 4-act verse tragedy by Armand Silvestre and Eugène Morand, centred upon the love of the empress for a poet and then his gladiator brother. It opened in Monte Carlo in 1899 and went on to Covent Garden. The ailing Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec saw the Bordeaux production and was inspired to paint six scenes from it, including Messalina descending a staircase, seated while a bearded character in a dark tunic stands to one side, or the same character stands and kneels before her, as well as resting extras. Later there was also an Italian production of the opera in translation.

In 2009 the theme was updated by Benjamin Askew in his UK play &quot;In Bed With Messalina&quot;, which features her final hours.

===Stars of stage and screen===
From the last quarter of the 19th century onwards, the role of Messalina has been as much about the stardom of those who played her as about the social message of the works in which she appeared. The star&#x27;s name appeared in large print on the posters of the works in which she played. She was constantly featured in the gossip columns. Her role was iconised photographically, copies of which she often inscribed for her admirers. Pictures of her as Messalina adorned the theatre magazines and were sold in their thousands as postcards. This was as true in drama and opera as it was of those who portrayed the empress in movies and television films or miniseries. The role itself added to or established their reputations. And, with the growing permissiveness of modern times, that might rather amount to notoriety for those adult films in which athletic stamina was more of a requirement than acting ability.
Wilbrandt&#x27;s &quot;Arria und Messalina&quot; was specially written for Charlotte Wolter, who was painted in her role by Hans Makart in 1875. There she reclines on a chaise-longue as the lights of Rome burn in the background. As well as a preparatory photograph of her dressed as in the painting, there were also posed cabinet photos of her in a plainer dress. Other stars were involved when the play went on tour in various translations. Lilla Bulyovszkyné (1833–1909) starred in the Hungarian production in 1878 and Irma Temesváryné-Farkas in that of 1883; Louise Fahlman (1856–1918) played in the 1887 Stockholm production, Marie Pospíšilová (1862–1943) in the 1895 Czech production.

In Italy, Cossa&#x27;s drama was acted with Virginia Marini in the role of Messalina.

Both the Parisian leads in Danesi&#x27;s ballet were photographed by Nadar: Elena Cornalba in 1885 and Mlle Jaeger later. During its 1898 production in Turin, Anita Grassi was the lead.

Meyriane Héglon starred in the Monte Carlo and subsequent London productions of De Lara&#x27;s &quot;Messaline&quot;, while Emma Calvé starred in the 1902 Paris production, where she was succeeded by Cécile Thévenet. Others who sang in the role were Maria Nencioni in 1903, Jeanne Dhasty in the Nancy (1903) and Algiers (1907) productions, Charlotte Wyns (1868–) in the 1904 Aix les Bains production, and Claire Croiza, who made her debut in the 1905 productions in Nancy and Lille.

===Films===
After a slow start in the first half of the 20th century, the momentum of films about or featuring Messalina increased with censorship&#x27;s decline. The following starred in her part:
* Madeleine Roch (1883–1930) in the French silent film &quot;Messaline&quot; (1910).
* Maria Caserini in the 1910 Italian silent film &quot;The Love of an Empress&quot; (&quot;Messalina&quot;).
* Rina De Liguoro in the 1923 Italian silent film &quot;Messalina&quot;, a sword-and-sandal precursor alternatively titled &quot;The Fall of an Empress&quot;. A cut version with dubbed dialogue was released in 1935.
* Greta Walkyria in the 1930 Brazilian syncronized film Messalina, directed by Luiz de Barros.
* Merle Oberon in the 1937 uncompleted film of &quot;I, Claudius&quot;.
* María Félix in the 1951 Italian sword-and-sandal film &quot;Messalina&quot;. This also carried the titles &quot;Empress of Rome&quot; and &quot;The Affairs of Messalina&quot;.
* Ludmilla Dudarova during a flashback in &quot;Nerone e Messalina&quot; (Italy, 1953), which had the English title &quot;Nero and the Burning of Rome&quot;.
* Susan Hayward in the 1954 Biblical epic &quot;Demetrius and the Gladiators&quot;, a completely fictionalized interpretation in which a reformed Messalina bids a penitential public farewell to her Christian gladiator lover, Demetrius, and takes her place on the throne next to her husband, the new emperor Claudius.
* Belinda Lee in the 1960 sword-and-sandal film &quot;Messalina, venere imperatrice&quot;.
* Lisa Gastoni in &quot;The Final Gladiator&quot; (&quot;L&#x27;ultimo gladiatore&quot;), or alternatively &quot;The Gladiator of Messalina&quot;, an Italian sword-and-sandal film also titled &quot;Messalina vs. the Son of Hercules&quot; (1963).
*Nicola Pagett in the 1968 ITV television series &quot;The Caesars&quot;. The series is noted for its historically accurate depiction of Roman history and personages, including a less sensationalised portrayal of Messalina.
* Sheila White in the 1976 BBC serial &quot;I, Claudius&quot;.
* Anneka Di Lorenzo in the 1979 film &quot;Caligula&quot;, and the 1977 comedy &quot;Messalina, Messalina&quot;, which used many of the same set pieces as the earlier-filmed, but later-released &quot;Caligula&quot;. An alternative European title for the 1977 production was &quot;Messalina, Empress and Whore&quot;.
* Betty Roland in the Franco-Italian &quot;porno peplum&quot; &quot;Caligula and Messalina&quot; (1981).
* Raquel Evans in the 1982 Spanish comedy &quot;Bacanales Romanas&quot;, released in English as the &quot;porno peplum&quot; &quot;My Nights with Messalina&quot;.
* Jennifer O&#x27;Neill in the 1985 TV series &quot;AD&quot;.
* Sonia Aquino in the 2004 TV movie &quot;Imperium: Nero&quot;.
* Tabea Tarbiat in the 2013 film &quot;Nymphomaniac Volume II&quot;.

==Fiction==
An early fiction concerning the Empress, &quot;La Messalina&quot; by Francesco Pona, appeared in Venice in 1633. This managed to combine a high degree of eroticism with a demonstration of how private behavior has a profound effect on public affairs. Nevertheless, a passage such as
:Messalina tossing in the turbulence of her thoughts did not sleep at night; and if she did sleep, Morpheus slept at her side, prompting stirrings in her, robing and disrobing a thousand images that her sexual fantasies during the day had suggested
helps explain how the novel was at once among the most popular, and the most frequently banned, books of the century, despite its moral pretensions.

Much the same point about the catastrophic effect of sexuality was made by Gregorio Leti&#x27;s political pamphlet, &quot;The amours of Messalina, late queen of Albion, in which are briefly couch&#x27;d secrets of the imposture of the Cambrion prince, the Gothick league, and other court intrigues of the four last years reign, not yet made publick&quot; (1689). This was yet another satire on a Stuart Queen, Mary of Modena in this case, camouflaged behind the character of Messalina.

A very early treatment in English of Messalina&#x27;s liaison with Gaius Silius and her subsequent death appeared in the fictionalised story included in the American author Edward Maturin&#x27;s &quot;Sejanus And Other Roman Tales&quot; (1839). But the part she plays in Robert Graves&#x27; novels, &quot;I, Claudius&quot; and &quot;Claudius the God&quot; (1934–35), is better known. In it she is portrayed as a teenager at the time of her marriage but credited with all the actions mentioned in the ancient sources. An attempt to create a film based on them in 1937 failed, but they were adapted into a very successful TV series in 1976.

In 19th century France, the story of Messalina was subject to literary transformation. It underlaid &quot;La femme de Claude&quot; (Claudius&#x27; wife, 1873), the novel by Alexandre Dumas fils, where the hero is Claude Ruper, an embodiment of the French patriotic conscience after the country&#x27;s defeat in the Franco-Prussian War. In contrast, his wife Césarine (the female Caesar) is a creature totally corrupt at all levels, who sells her husband&#x27;s work to the enemy and is eventually shot by him. Alfred Jarry&#x27;s &#x27;pataphysical&#x27; novel &quot;Messaline&quot; of 1901 (titled &quot;The Garden of Priapus&quot; in Louis Colman&#x27;s English translation), though lightly based on the historical account, is chiefly the product of the author&#x27;s fanciful and extravagant imagination and has been compared with the treatment of Classical themes by Art Nouveau artists.

In fact, Jarry&#x27;s was just one of five contemporary French novels treating Messalina in a typically fin de siècle manner. They also included Prosper Castanier&#x27;s &quot;L&#x27;Orgie Romaine&quot; (Roman Orgy, 1897), Nonce Casanova&#x27;s &quot;Messaline, roman de la Rome impériale&quot; (Mesalina, a novel of imperial Rome, 1902) and Louis Dumont&#x27;s &quot;La Chimère, Pages de la Décadence&quot; (The Chimaera, Decadent Pages, 1902). However, the most successful and inventive stylistically was Felicien Champsaur&#x27;s novel &quot;L&#x27;Orgie Latine&quot; (1903) Although Messalina is referenced throughout its episodic coverage of degenerate times, she features particularly in the third section, &quot;The Naked Empress&quot; (&quot;L&#x27;impératice nue&quot;), dealing with her activities in the brothel, and the sixth, &quot;Messalina&#x27;s End&quot;, beginning with her wedding to Silius and ending with her enforced death.

Sensational fictional treatments have persisted, as in Vivian Crockett&#x27;s &quot;Messalina, the wickedest woman in Rome&quot; (1924), Alfred Schirokauer&#x27;s &quot;Messalina – Die Frau des Kaisers&quot; (Caesar&#x27;s wife, 1928), Marise Querlin&#x27;s &quot;Messaline, impératrice du feu&quot; (The fiery empress, 1955), Jack Oleck&#x27;s &quot;Messalina: a novel of imperial Rome&quot; (1959) and Siegfried Obermeier&#x27;s &quot;Messalina, die lasterhafte Kaiserin&quot; (The empress without principle, 2002). Oleck&#x27;s novel went through many editions and was later joined by Kevin Matthews&#x27; &quot;The Pagan Empress&quot; (1964). Both have since been included under the genre &quot;toga porn&quot;. They are rivalled by Italian and French adult comics, sometimes of epic proportions, such as the 59 episodes devoted to Messalina in the Italian Venus of Rome series (1967–74). More recent examples include Jean-Yves Mitton&#x27;s four-part series in France (2011–13) and Thomas Mosdi&#x27;s &quot;Messaline&quot; in the Succubus series (#4, 2014), in which &quot;a woman without taboos or scruples throws light on pitiless ancient Rome&quot;.

Contrasting views have lately been provided by two French biographies. Jacqueline Dauxois gives the traditional picture in her lurid biography in Pygmalion&#x27;s Legendary Queens series (2013), while the historian Jean-Noël Castorio (b. 1971) seeks to uncover the true facts of the woman behind Juvenal&#x27;s 6th satire in his revisionist &quot;Messaline, la putain impériale&quot; (The imperial whore, 2015).

==Notes==
==References==
* Minaud, Gérard, &quot;Les vies de 12 femmes d&#x27;empereur romain – Devoirs, Intrigues &amp; Voluptés &quot;, Paris, L&#x27;Harmattan, 2012, ch. 2, &quot;La vie de Messaline, femme de Claude&quot;, pp. 39–64.
* Tatum, W. Jeffrey; &quot;The Patrician Tribune: Publius Clodius Pulcher&quot; (The University of North Carolina Press, 1999).
* Mudd, Mary; &quot;I, Livia: The Counterfeit Criminal. the Story of a Much Maligned Woman&quot; (Trafford Publishing, 2012).
*
*
* Dina Sahyouni, &quot; Le pouvoir critique des modèles féminins dans les &quot;Mémoires secrets&quot; : le cas de Messaline &quot;, in &quot;Le règne de la critique. L&#x27;imaginaire culturel des mémoires secrets&quot;, sous la direction de Christophe Cave, Paris, Honoré Champion, 2010, pp. 151–160.


==Sources==
*Cassius Dio, &quot;Roman History&quot;, LX. 14–18, 27–31
*Josephus, &quot;Antiquities of the Jews&quot; XX. 8; &quot;The Wars of the Jews&quot; II. 12
*Juvenal, &quot;Satires&quot; 6, 10, 14
*Pliny the Elder, &quot;Natural History&quot; 10
*Plutarch, &quot;Lives&quot;
*Seneca the Younger, &quot;Apocolocyntosis divi Claudii&quot;; &quot;Octavia&quot;, 257–261
*Suetonius, &quot;Lives of the Twelve Caesars&quot;: Claudius 17, 26, 27, 29, 36, 37, 39; Nero 6; Vitellius 2
*Tacitus, Annals, XI. 1, 2, 12, 26–38
*Sextus Aurelius Victor, epitome of &quot;Book of Caesars&quot;, 4</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q229871" start="0" end="17" title="Messalina" label="Valeria Messalina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="59" end="67" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="106" end="110" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409" start="139" end="147" title="Caligula" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="183" end="191" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q261290" start="248" end="259" title="promiscuity" label="promiscuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q268964" start="533" end="547" title="Domitia Lepida" label="Domitia Lepida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246807" start="569" end="602" title="Marcus Valerius Messalla Barbatus (consul 20)" label="Marcus Valerius Messalla Barbatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q351495" start="652" end="679" title="Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus (consul 16 BC)" label="Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q233704" start="684" end="697" title="Antonia Major" label="Antonia Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q351503" start="726" end="753" title="Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus (consul 32)" label="Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q154732" start="804" end="825" title="Agrippina the Younger" label="Agrippina the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="874" end="878" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q8265475" start="993" end="1021" title="Claudia Marcella the Younger" label="Claudia Marcella the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q233704" start="1026" end="1043" title="Antonia the Elder" label="Antonia the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="1155" end="1163" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q229483" start="1177" end="1196" title="Octavia the Younger" label="Octavia the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="1265" end="1276" title="Mark Antony" label="Mark Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="1458" end="1466" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q231262" start="1594" end="1609" title="Claudia Octavia" label="Claudia Octavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="1687" end="1691" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q313115" start="1704" end="1715" title="Britannicus" label="Britannicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409" start="1734" end="1742" title="Caligula" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q181733" start="1767" end="1783" title="Praetorian Guard" label="Praetorian Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="2139" end="2146" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="2151" end="2160" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="2321" end="2332" title="Cassius Dio" label="Cassius Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q154732" start="3043" end="3064" title="Agrippina the Younger" label="Agrippina the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q193800" start="3304" end="3311" title="Juvenal" label="Juvenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510883" start="4056" end="4072" title="Senate of the Roman Empire" label="senatorial order"/>
<link wikidata="Q237629" start="4262" end="4275" title="Julia Livilla" label="Julia Livilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409" start="4346" end="4354" title="Caligula" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="4401" end="4419" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q266030" start="4567" end="4578" title="Julia Livia" label="Julia Livia"/>
<link wikidata="Q942138" start="4682" end="4699" title="Rubellius Plautus" label="Rubellius Plautus"/>
<link wikidata="Q154732" start="4914" end="4935" title="Agrippina the Younger" label="Agrippina the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="4968" end="4995" title="Nero" label="Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q191039" start="5126" end="5136" title="Germanicus" label="Germanicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333763" start="5243" end="5259" title="Statilius Taurus" label="Statilius Taurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q285517" start="5519" end="5531" title="Gaius Silius (lover of Messalina)" label="Gaius Silius"/>
<link wikidata="Q739680" start="5882" end="5895" title="Secular Games" label="Secular Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q721170" start="6133" end="6147" title="Appius Silanus" label="Appius Silanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181866" start="6152" end="6170" title="Valerius Asiaticus" label="Valerius Asiaticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364594" start="6865" end="6884" title="Gardens of Lucullus" label="Gardens of Lucullus"/>
<link wikidata="Q545141" start="6965" end="6989" title="Poppaea Sabina the Elder" label="Poppaea Sabina the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6885941" start="7070" end="7077" title="Mnester" label="Mnester"/>
<link wikidata="Q351491" start="7437" end="7453" title="Lucius Vitellius the Elder" label="Lucius Vitellius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247301" start="7780" end="7795" title="Marcus Vinicius (consul 30)" label="Marcus Vinicius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364198" start="7952" end="7960" title="Polybius (freedman)" label="Polybius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012797" start="8144" end="8149" title="Ostia Antica" label="Ostia"/>
<link wikidata="Q285517" start="8292" end="8304" title="Gaius Silius (lover of Messalina)" label="Gaius Silius"/>
<link wikidata="Q724689" start="8415" end="8424" title="Tiberius Claudius Narcissus" label="Narcissus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="9201" end="9208" title="Bacchus" label="Bacchic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772953" start="9261" end="9268" title="Vinalia" label="Vinalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q692343" start="9436" end="9454" title="Praetorian Prefect" label="Praetorian Prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622466" start="9456" end="9467" title="Lusius Geta" label="Lusius Geta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321555" start="9538" end="9555" title="Rufrius Crispinus" label="Rufrius Crispinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q188761" start="9675" end="9688" title="Vestal Virgin" label="Vestal Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q385338" start="9840" end="9847" title="Claudia gens" label="Claudii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095316" start="9852" end="9858" title="Drusus (cognomen)" label="Drusii"/>
<link wikidata="Q223590" start="10783" end="10800" title="damnatio memoriae" label="damnatio memoriae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235185" start="11083" end="11102" title="Roman imperial cult" label="Roman imperial cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q51252" start="11805" end="11819" title="Uffizi Gallery" label="Uffizi Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="11929" end="11935" title="Louvre" label="Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q378772" start="12048" end="12070" title="Cephisodotus the Elder" label="Cephisodotus the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q214987" start="12074" end="12080" title="Eirene (goddess)" label="Eirene"/>
<link wikidata="Q205251" start="12100" end="12107" title="Ploutos" label="Ploutos"/>
<link wikidata="Q180884" start="12280" end="12288" title="sardonyx" label="sardonyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258062" start="12382" end="12407" title="Roman conquest of Britain" label="Roman conquest of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="12444" end="12452" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184874" start="12457" end="12464" title="Ariadne" label="Ariadne"/>
<link wikidata="Q193563" start="12508" end="12540" title="Bibliothèque nationale de France" label="Bibliothèque nationale de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599" start="12733" end="12750" title="Peter Paul Rubens" label="Peter Paul Rubens"/>
<link wikidata="Q83203" start="12981" end="12988" title="centaur" label="centaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q32102" start="13079" end="13084" title="Ceres (mythology)" label="Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q332682" start="13479" end="13489" title="cornucopia" label="cornucopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="13582" end="13596" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q324369" start="13712" end="13721" title="carnelian" label="carnelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q475394" start="13826" end="13848" title="Antikensammlung Berlin" label="Antikensammlung Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="14094" end="14109" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q442" start="14123" end="14138" title="Natural History (Pliny)" label="Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q193800" start="14271" end="14278" title="Juvenal" label="Juvenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q285517" start="14380" end="14392" title="Gaius Silius (lover of Messalina)" label="Gaius Silius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426233" start="14432" end="14444" title="Satire VI" label="sixth satire"/>
<link wikidata="Q635" start="14785" end="14794" title="Cleopatra" label="Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q63241849" start="14834" end="14857" title="character assassination" label="character assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q8827" start="14873" end="14883" title="Propertius" label="Propertius"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="15722" end="15731" title="mediaeval" label="mediaeval"/>
<link wikidata="Q731126" start="15757" end="15777" title="J. Paul Getty Museum" label="J. Paul Getty Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q894982" start="15797" end="15816" title="Master of Boucicaut" label="Master of Boucicaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464946" start="16436" end="16442" title="I Modi" label="I Modi"/>
<link wikidata="Q316269" start="16638" end="16654" title="Agostino Caracci" label="Agostino Caracci"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920822" start="16842" end="16883" title="Pierre-François Hugues d&amp;#x27;Hancarville" label="Pierre-François Hugues d&amp;#x27;Hancarville"/>
<link wikidata="Q206878" start="17426" end="17433" title="Priapus" label="Priapus"/>
<link wikidata="Q736065" start="17866" end="17884" title="Francesco Solimena" label="Francesco Solimena"/>
<link wikidata="Q346846" start="18126" end="18145" title="Georges Rochegrosse" label="Georges Rochegrosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q319854" start="18401" end="18419" title="Nicolai Abildgaard" label="Nicolai Abildgaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q576434" start="18658" end="18670" title="Prix de Rome" label="Prix de Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406521" start="18761" end="18776" title="Fernand Lematte" label="Fernand Lematte"/>
<link wikidata="Q60372936" start="18784" end="18806" title="The Death of Messalina" label="The Death of Messalina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="18861" end="18868" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q936917" start="19982" end="19998" title="Nicolaus Knüpfer" label="Nicolaus Knüpfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149073" start="20329" end="20351" title="Victor Honoré Janssens" label="Victor Honoré Janssens"/>
<link wikidata="Q583269" start="20595" end="20600" title="Tarot" label="Tarot"/>
<link wikidata="Q662509" start="20645" end="20657" title="The Lovers" label="The Lover(s)"/>
<link wikidata="Q331341" start="21169" end="21198" title="Bacchanalia" label="representation of the vintage"/>
<link wikidata="Q209599" start="21314" end="21324" title="Maenad" label="Bacchanals"/>
<link wikidata="Q536850" start="21403" end="21410" title="thyrsus" label="thyrsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q605341" start="21469" end="21475" title="buskin" label="buskin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21573" end="21591" title=":fr:Gustave Surand" label=":fr:Gustave Surand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3741711" start="21810" end="21828" title="Federico Faruffini" label="Federico Faruffini"/>
<link wikidata="Q351746" start="21922" end="21937" title="Joaquín Sorolla" label="Joaquín Sorolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q203828" start="22200" end="22214" title="Gustave Moreau" label="Gustave Moreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q365068" start="22424" end="22444" title="Peder Severin Krøyer" label="Peder Severin Krøyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q272566" start="22646" end="22662" title="Aubrey Beardsley" label="Aubrey Beardsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372981" start="22956" end="22971" title="Pavel Svedomsky" label="Pavel Svedomsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q16037648" start="23359" end="23380" title="Eugène Cyrille Brunet" label="Eugène Cyrille Brunet"/>
<link wikidata="Q700213" start="23464" end="23474" title="Jan Štursa" label="Jan Štursa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015517" start="23722" end="23740" title="Nathanael Richards" label="Nathanael Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="23850" end="23859" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="23905" end="23913" title="Venice" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q285517" start="24096" end="24108" title="Gaius Silius (lover of Messalina)" label="Gaius Silius"/>
<link wikidata="Q320534" start="24139" end="24156" title="Carlo Pallavicino" label="Carlo Pallavicino"/>
<link wikidata="Q222573" start="24312" end="24324" title="femme fatale" label="femme fatale"/>
<link wikidata="Q67953" start="24469" end="24484" title="Adolf Wilbrandt" label="Adolf Wilbrandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761648" start="24572" end="24584" title="Pietro Cossa" label="Pietro Cossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202813" start="25120" end="25132" title="Éden-Théâtre" label="Éden-Théâtre"/>
<link wikidata="Q971436" start="25266" end="25281" title="Isidore de Lara" label="Isidore de Lara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6821834" start="25301" end="25310" title="Messaline" label="Messaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q55018" start="25516" end="25529" title="Royal Opera House" label="Covent Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q82445" start="25542" end="25567" title="Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec" label="Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q72173" start="27059" end="27075" title="Charlotte Wolter" label="Charlotte Wolter"/>
<link wikidata="Q511444" start="27108" end="27119" title="Hans Makart" label="Hans Makart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059232" start="27153" end="27166" title="chaise-longue" label="chaise-longue"/>
<link wikidata="Q40116" start="27831" end="27836" title="Nadar" label="Nadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q452065" start="28073" end="28083" title="Emma Calvé" label="Emma Calvé"/>
<link wikidata="Q19629960" start="28149" end="28164" title="Cécile Thévenet" label="Cécile Thévenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q935302" start="28354" end="28367" title="Claire Croiza" label="Claire Croiza"/>
<link wikidata="Q543" start="28569" end="28579" title="censorship" label="censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847183" start="28718" end="28732" title="Maria Caserini" label="Maria Caserini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935895" start="28827" end="28842" title="Rina De Liguoro" label="Rina De Liguoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3855334" start="28881" end="28890" title="Messalina (1924 film)" label="Messalina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433443" start="28900" end="28916" title="sword-and-sandal" label="sword-and-sandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q230958" start="29138" end="29150" title="Merle Oberon" label="Merle Oberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146440" start="29189" end="29200" title="I, Claudius (film)" label="I, Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q465189" start="29210" end="29221" title="María Félix" label="María Félix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433443" start="29242" end="29258" title="sword-and-sandal" label="sword-and-sandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3855335" start="29270" end="29279" title="Messalina (1951 film)" label="Messalina"/>
<link wikidata="Q19984707" start="29388" end="29405" title="Ludmilla Dudarova" label="Ludmilla Dudarova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874824" start="29508" end="29536" title="Nero and the Burning of Rome" label="Nero and the Burning of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q248837" start="29546" end="29559" title="Susan Hayward" label="Susan Hayward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1213081" start="29592" end="29620" title="Demetrius and the Gladiators" label="Demetrius and the Gladiators"/>
<link wikidata="Q289075" start="29863" end="29874" title="Belinda Lee" label="Belinda Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306980" start="29915" end="29944" title="Messalina, venere imperatrice" label="Messalina, venere imperatrice"/>
<link wikidata="Q367172" start="29954" end="29966" title="Lisa Gastoni" label="Lisa Gastoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819880" start="30009" end="30033" title="L&amp;#x27;ultimo gladiatore" label="L&amp;#x27;ultimo gladiatore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2194769" start="30199" end="30212" title="Nicola Pagett" label="Nicola Pagett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720918" start="30253" end="30264" title="The Caesars (TV series)" label="The Caesars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493172" start="30424" end="30436" title="Sheila White (actress)" label="Sheila White"/>
<link wikidata="Q135096" start="30466" end="30477" title="I, Claudius (TV series)" label="I, Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q56055085" start="30487" end="30504" title="Anneka Di Lorenzo" label="Anneka Di Lorenzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q217685" start="30528" end="30536" title="Caligula (film)" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3855332" start="30570" end="30590" title="Messalina, Messalina" label="Messalina, Messalina"/>
<link wikidata="Q240460" start="31071" end="31092" title="Jennifer O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Jennifer O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q278193" start="31121" end="31123" title="A.D. (miniseries)" label="AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q726110" start="31133" end="31145" title="Sonia Aquino" label="Sonia Aquino"/>
<link wikidata="Q316732" start="31173" end="31187" title="Nero (2004 film)" label="Imperium: Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346699" start="31234" end="31256" title="Nymphomaniac (film)" label="Nymphomaniac Volume II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081061" start="31346" end="31360" title="Francesco Pona" label="Francesco Pona"/>
<link wikidata="Q194012" start="31658" end="31666" title="Morpheus (mythology)" label="Morpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154640" start="32033" end="32046" title="Gregorio Leti" label="Gregorio Leti"/>
<link wikidata="Q232475" start="32368" end="32382" title="Mary of Modena" label="Mary of Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q16063321" start="32618" end="32632" title="Edward Maturin" label="Edward Maturin"/>
<link wikidata="Q201732" start="32716" end="32729" title="Robert Graves" label="Robert Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q135215" start="32750" end="32761" title="I, Claudius" label="I, Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q135215" start="32778" end="32794" title="Claudius the God" label="Claudius the God"/>
<link wikidata="Q135096" start="33065" end="33074" title="I, Claudius (TV series)" label="TV series"/>
<link wikidata="Q169150" start="33258" end="33278" title="Alexandre Dumas fils" label="Alexandre Dumas fils"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="33400" end="33419" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841" start="33595" end="33607" title="Alfred Jarry" label="Alfred Jarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845" start="33615" end="33639" title="pataphysics" label="&amp;#x27;pataphysical&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="33956" end="33967" title="Art Nouveau" label="Art Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q265581" start="34082" end="34095" title="fin de siècle" label="fin de siècle"/>
<link wikidata="Q338922" start="34485" end="34503" title="Felicien Champsaur" label="Felicien Champsaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q122172" start="35062" end="35080" title="Alfred Schirokauer" label="Alfred Schirokauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6114445" start="35252" end="35262" title="Jack Oleck" label="Jack Oleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q100877" start="35329" end="35348" title="Siegfried Obermeier" label="Siegfried Obermeier"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="37311" end="37322" title="Cassius Dio" label="Cassius Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="37369" end="37377" title="Josephus" label="Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232616" start="37385" end="37408" title="Antiquities of the Jews" label="Antiquities of the Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q44276" start="37428" end="37448" title="The Wars of the Jews" label="The Wars of the Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q193800" start="37463" end="37470" title="Juvenal" label="Juvenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707099" start="37478" end="37485" title="Satires of Juvenal" label="Satires"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426233" start="37492" end="37493" title="Satire VI" label="6"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707099" start="37495" end="37497" title="Satire X" label="10"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707099" start="37499" end="37501" title="Satire XIV" label="14"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="37503" end="37518" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="37552" end="37560" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="37581" end="37599" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="37673" end="37682" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229963" start="37690" end="37717" title="Lives of the Twelve Caesars" label="Lives of the Twelve Caesars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="37783" end="37790" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q564358" start="37792" end="37798" title="Annals (Tacitus)" label="Annals"/>
<link wikidata="Q275606" start="37828" end="37843" title="Aurelius Victor" label="Aurelius Victor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59713" wikidata="Q986177" url="?curid=59713" title="Mediterranean seas">
<text>In oceanography, a mediterranean sea ( ) is a mostly enclosed sea that has limited exchange of water with outer oceans and whose water circulation is dominated by salinity and temperature differences rather than by winds or tides. The eponymous Mediterranean Sea, for example, is almost completely enclosed by Africa, Asia, and Europe.

==List of mediterranean seas by ocean==
===Atlantic Ocean===
* The Arctic Ocean (a.k.a. the &quot;Arctic Mediterranean Sea&quot;)
* The American Mediterranean Sea (the combination of the Caribbean Sea and the Gulf of Mexico)
* Baffin Bay
* The Baltic Sea
* The namesake Mediterranean Sea (including the Adriatic Sea, the Aegean Sea (including the Sea of Crete and the Thracian Sea), the Alboran Sea, the Balearic Sea, the Black Sea, the Ionian Sea, the Ligurian Sea, the Sea of Azov, the Sea of Marmara, and the Tyrrhenian Sea)

===Indian Ocean===
* The Persian Gulf
* The Red Sea

===Pacific Ocean===
* The Australasian Mediterranean Sea (including the Banda Sea, the Java Sea, the Sulawesi Sea, and the Sulu Sea)

== List of mediterranean seas by type ==
There are two types of mediterranean sea.

=== Concentration basin ===
A concentration basin has a higher salinity than the outer ocean due to evaporation, and its water exchange consists of inflow of the fresher oceanic water in the upper layer and outflow of the saltier mediterranean water in the lower layer of the connecting channel.

* The Eurafrican Mediterranean Sea (a concentration basin as a whole, but the Adriatic Sea and the Black Sea are dilution basins (see below) owing to the Po River, and the Danube, Dnieper, and Don rivers respectively)
* The Persian Gulf
* The Red Sea

=== Dilution basin ===
A dilution basin has a lower salinity due to freshwater gains such as rainfall and rivers, and its water exchange consists of outflow of the fresher mediterranean water in the upper layer and inflow of the saltier oceanic water in the lower layer of the channel. Renewal of deep water may not be sufficient to supply oxygen to the bottom.

* The Adriatic Sea
* The American Mediterranean Sea
* The Arctic Ocean (a.k.a. the &quot;Arctic Mediterranean Sea&quot;)
* The Australasian Mediterranean Sea
* Baffin Bay
* The Baltic Sea
* The Black Sea

==Exceptions==
* Hudson Bay is so shallow it functions like a huge estuary.
* Having shallow channels and deep basins, the Sea of Japan could form a mediterranean sea, but the strong currents from the Pacific prevent it from having an independent water circulation.

==See also==

* Inland sea
* Marginal sea

==References==
==Further reading==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q43518" start="3" end="15" title="oceanography" label="oceanography"/>
<link wikidata="Q986177" start="19" end="36" title="Mediterranean seas" label="mediterranean sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q165" start="62" end="65" title="sea" label="sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="112" end="117" title="ocean" label="ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q179615" start="163" end="171" title="salinity" label="salinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="245" end="262" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="310" end="316" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="318" end="322" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="328" end="334" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q788" start="404" end="416" title="Arctic Ocean" label="Arctic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q470088" start="473" end="499" title="American Mediterranean Sea" label="American Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="524" end="537" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="546" end="560" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q37040" start="564" end="574" title="Baffin Bay" label="Baffin Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="581" end="591" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="607" end="624" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="640" end="652" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="658" end="668" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q193149" start="684" end="696" title="Sea of Crete" label="Sea of Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q379063" start="705" end="717" title="Thracian Sea" label="Thracian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q199408" start="724" end="735" title="Alboran Sea" label="Alboran Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q200712" start="741" end="753" title="Balearic Sea" label="Balearic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="759" end="768" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q37495" start="774" end="784" title="Ionian Sea" label="Ionian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q42820" start="790" end="802" title="Ligurian Sea" label="Ligurian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q35000" start="808" end="819" title="Sea of Azov" label="Sea of Azov"/>
<link wikidata="Q35367" start="825" end="839" title="Sea of Marmara" label="Sea of Marmara"/>
<link wikidata="Q38882" start="849" end="863" title="Tyrrhenian Sea" label="Tyrrhenian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="891" end="903" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="910" end="917" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q267739" start="945" end="975" title="Australasian Mediterranean Sea" label="Australasian Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q171510" start="991" end="1000" title="Banda Sea" label="Banda Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q49364" start="1006" end="1014" title="Java Sea" label="Java Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q19270" start="1020" end="1032" title="Sulawesi Sea" label="Sulawesi Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q160194" start="1042" end="1050" title="Sulu Sea" label="Sulu Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210950" start="1424" end="1431" title="channel (geography)" label="channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="1440" end="1468" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Eurafrican Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q643" start="1588" end="1596" title="Po (river)" label="Po River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="1606" end="1612" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q40855" start="1614" end="1621" title="Dnieper" label="Dnieper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229" start="1627" end="1630" title="Don (river)" label="Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="1658" end="1670" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="1677" end="1684" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="2026" end="2032" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="2055" end="2067" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q470088" start="2074" end="2100" title="American Mediterranean Sea" label="American Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q788" start="2107" end="2119" title="Arctic Ocean" label="Arctic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q267739" start="2176" end="2206" title="Australasian Mediterranean Sea" label="Australasian Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q37040" start="2209" end="2219" title="Baffin Bay" label="Baffin Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="2226" end="2236" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="2243" end="2252" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040" start="2271" end="2281" title="Hudson Bay" label="Hudson Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="2321" end="2328" title="estuary" label="estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q27092" start="2377" end="2389" title="Sea of Japan" label="Sea of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578218" start="2537" end="2547" title="Inland sea" label="Inland sea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2550" end="2562" title="List of seas on Earth#Marginal seas by ocean" label="Marginal sea"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59715" wikidata="Q219142" url="?curid=59715" title="Scientific notation">
<text>Scientific notation is a way of expressing numbers that are too large or too small to be conveniently written in decimal form, since to do so would require writing out an inconveniently long string of digits. It may be referred to as scientific form or standard index form, or standard form in the United Kingdom. This base ten notation is commonly used by scientists, mathematicians, and engineers, in part because it can simplify certain arithmetic operations. On scientific calculators, it is usually known as &quot;SCI&quot; display mode.
In scientific notation, nonzero numbers are written in the form 

or &quot;m&quot; times ten raised to the power of &quot;n&quot;, where &quot;n&quot; is an integer, and the coefficient &quot;m&quot; is a nonzero real number (usually between 1 and 10 in absolute value, and nearly always written as a terminating decimal). The integer &quot;n&quot; is called the exponent and the real number &quot;m&quot; is called the &quot;significand&quot; or &quot;mantissa&quot;. The term &quot;mantissa&quot; can be ambiguous where logarithms are involved, because it is also the traditional name of the fractional part of the common logarithm. If the number is negative then a minus sign precedes &quot;m&quot;, as in ordinary decimal notation. In normalized notation, the exponent is chosen so that the absolute value (modulus) of the significand &quot;m&quot; is at least 1 but less than 10.

Decimal floating point is a computer arithmetic system closely related to scientific notation.

== History ==
== Styles ==
=== Normalized notation ===

Any real number can be written in the form in many ways: for example, 350 can be written as or or .

In &quot;normalized&quot; scientific notation (called &quot;standard form&quot; in the United Kingdom), the exponent &quot;n&quot; is chosen so that the absolute value of &quot;m&quot; remains at least one but less than ten (). Thus 350 is written as . This form allows easy comparison of numbers: numbers with bigger exponents are (due to the normalization) larger than those with smaller exponents, and subtraction of exponents gives an estimate of the number of orders of magnitude separating the numbers. It is also the form that is required when using tables of common logarithms. In normalized notation, the exponent &quot;n&quot; is negative for a number with absolute value between 0 and 1 (e.g. 0.5 is written as ). The 10 and exponent are often omitted when the exponent is 0. For a series of numbers that are to be added or subtracted (or otherwise compared), it can be convenient to use the same value of &quot;m&quot; for all elements of the series.

Normalized scientific form is the typical form of expression of large numbers in many fields, unless an unnormalized or differently normalized form, such as engineering notation, is desired. Normalized scientific notation is often called exponential notation – although the latter term is more general and also applies when &quot;m&quot; is not restricted to the range 1 to 10 (as in engineering notation for instance) and to bases other than 10 (for example, ).

=== Engineering notation ===

Engineering notation (often named &quot;ENG&quot; on scientific calculators) differs from normalized scientific notation in that the exponent &quot;n&quot; is restricted to multiples of 3. Consequently, the absolute value of &quot;m&quot; is in the range 1 ≤ |&quot;m&quot;| &lt; 1000, rather than 1 ≤ |&quot;m&quot;| &lt; 10. Though similar in concept, engineering notation is rarely called scientific notation. Engineering notation allows the numbers to explicitly match their corresponding SI prefixes, which facilitates reading and oral communication. For example, can be read as &quot;twelve-point-five nanometres&quot; and written as , while its scientific notation equivalent would likely be read out as &quot;one-point-two-five times ten-to-the-negative-eight metres&quot;.

=== E notation ===
Calculators and computer programs typically present very large or small numbers using scientific notation, and some can be configured to uniformly present all numbers that way. Because superscript exponents like 107 can be inconvenient to display or type, the letter &quot;E&quot; or &quot;e&quot; (for &quot;exponent&quot;) is often used to represent &quot;times ten raised to the power of&quot;, so that the notation for a decimal significand &quot;m&quot; and integer exponent &quot;n&quot; means the same as . For example  is written as or , and  is written as or . While common in computer output, this abbreviated version of scientific notation is discouraged for published documents by some style guides.

Most popular programming languages – including Fortran, C/C++, Python, and JavaScript – use this &quot;E&quot; notation, which comes from Fortran and was present in the first version released for the IBM 704 in 1956. The E notation was already used by the developers of SHARE Operating System (SOS) for the IBM 709 in 1958. Later versions of Fortran (at least since FORTRAN IV as of 1961) also use &quot;D&quot; to signify double precision numbers in scientific notation, and newer Fortran compilers use &quot;Q&quot; to signify quadruple precision. The MATLAB programming language supports the use of either &quot;E&quot; or &quot;D&quot;.

The ALGOL 60 (1960) programming language uses a subscript ten &quot;10&quot; character instead of the letter &quot;E&quot;, for example: codice_1. This presented a challenge for computer systems which did not provide such a character, so ALGOL W (1966) replaced the symbol by a single quote, e.g. codice_2, and some Soviet ALGOL variants allowed the use of the Cyrillic letter &quot;ю&quot;, e.g. . Subsequently, the ALGOL 68 programming language provided a choice of characters: , , , , or codice_3. The ALGOL &quot;10&quot; character was included in the Soviet GOST 10859 text encoding (1964), and was added to Unicode 5.2 (2009) as .

Some programming languages use other symbols. For instance, Simula uses (or for long), as in . Mathematica supports the shorthand notation (reserving the letter for the mathematical constant &quot;e&quot;).


The first pocket calculators supporting scientific notation appeared in 1972. To enter numbers in scientific notation calculators include a button labeled &quot;EXP&quot; or &quot;×10&quot;x&quot;&quot;, among other variants. The displays of pocket calculators of the 1970s did not display an explicit symbol between significand and exponent; instead, one or more digits were left blank (e.g. codice_4, as seen in the HP-25), or a pair of smaller and slightly raised digits were reserved for the exponent (e.g. codice_4, as seen in the Commodore PR100). In 1976, Hewlett-Packard calculator user Jim Davidson coined the term &quot;decapower&quot; for the scientific-notation exponent to distinguish it from &quot;normal&quot; exponents, and suggested the letter &quot;D&quot; as a separator between significand and exponent in typewritten numbers (for example, ); these gained some currency in the programmable calculator user community. The letters &quot;E&quot; or &quot;D&quot; were used as a scientific-notation separator by Sharp pocket computers released between 1987 and 1995, &quot;E&quot; used for 10-digit numbers and &quot;D&quot; used for 20-digit double-precision numbers. The Texas Instruments TI-83 and TI-84 series of calculators (1996–present) use a small capital codice_6 for the separator.

In 1962, Ronald O. Whitaker of Rowco Engineering Co. proposed a power-of-ten system nomenclature where the exponent would be circled, e.g. 6.022 × 103 would be written as &quot;6.022③&quot;.

== Significant figures ==

A significant figure is a digit in a number that adds to its precision. This includes all nonzero numbers, zeroes between significant digits, and zeroes indicated to be significant. Leading and trailing zeroes are not significant digits, because they exist only to show the scale of the number. Unfortunately, this leads to ambiguity. The number is usually read to have five significant figures: 1, 2, 3, 0, and 4, the final two zeroes serving only as placeholders and adding no precision. The same number, however, would be used if the last two digits were also measured precisely and found to equal 0 – seven significant figures.

When a number is converted into normalized scientific notation, it is scaled down to a number between 1 and 10. All of the significant digits remain, but the placeholding zeroes are no longer required. Thus would become if it had five significant digits. If the number were known to six or seven significant figures, it would be shown as or . Thus, an additional advantage of scientific notation is that the number of significant figures is unambiguous.

=== Estimated final digits ===
It is customary in scientific measurement to record all the definitely known digits from the measurement and to estimate at least one additional digit if there is any information at all available on its value. The resulting number contains more information than it would without the extra digit, which may be considered a significant digit because it conveys some information leading to greater precision in measurements and in aggregations of measurements (adding them or multiplying them together).

Additional information about precision can be conveyed through additional notation. It is often useful to know how exact the final digit or digits are. For instance, the accepted value of the mass of the proton can properly be expressed as , which is shorthand for . However it is still unclear whether the error ( in this case) is the maximum possible error, standard error, or some other confidence interval.

== Use of spaces ==
In normalized scientific notation, in E notation, and in engineering notation, the space (which in typesetting may be represented by a normal width space or a thin space) that is allowed &quot;only&quot; before and after &quot;×&quot; or in front of &quot;E&quot; is sometimes omitted, though it is less common to do so before the alphabetical character.

== Further examples of scientific notation ==
* An electron&#x27;s mass is about . In scientific notation, this is written .
* The Earth&#x27;s mass is about . In scientific notation, this is written .
* The Earth&#x27;s circumference is approximately . In scientific notation, this is . In engineering notation, this is written . In SI writing style, this may be written (&quot;&quot;).
* An inch is defined as &quot;exactly&quot; . Using scientific notation, this value can be uniformly expressed to any desired precision, from the nearest tenth of a millimeter to the nearest nanometer , or beyond.
* Hyperinflation means that too much money is put into circulation, perhaps by printing banknotes, chasing too few goods. It is sometimes defined as inflation of 50% or more in a single month. In such conditions, money rapidly loses its value. Some countries have had events of inflation of 1 million percent or more in a single month, which usually results in the rapid abandonment of the currency. For example, in November 2008 the monthly inflation rate of the Zimbabwean dollar reached 79.6 billion percent (470% per day); the approximate value with three significant figures would be %, or more simply a rate of .

== Converting numbers ==
Converting a number in these cases means to either convert the number into scientific notation form, convert it back into decimal form or to change the exponent part of the equation. None of these alter the actual number, only how it&#x27;s expressed.

=== Decimal to scientific ===
First, move the decimal separator point sufficient places, &quot;n&quot;, to put the number&#x27;s value within a desired range, between 1 and 10 for normalized notation. If the decimal was moved to the left, append codice_7; to the right, codice_8. To represent the number in normalized scientific notation, the decimal separator would be moved 6 digits to the left and codice_9 appended, resulting in . The number would have its decimal separator shifted 3 digits to the right instead of the left and yield as a result.

=== Scientific to decimal ===
Converting a number from scientific notation to decimal notation, first remove the codice_7 on the end, then shift the decimal separator &quot;n&quot; digits to the right (positive &quot;n&quot;) or left (negative &quot;n&quot;). The number would have its decimal separator shifted 6 digits to the right and become , while would have its decimal separator moved 3 digits to the left and be .

=== Exponential ===
Conversion between different scientific notation representations of the same number with different exponential values is achieved by performing opposite operations of multiplication or division by a power of ten on the significand and an subtraction or addition of one on the exponent part. The decimal separator in the significand is shifted &quot;x&quot; places to the left (or right) and &quot;x&quot; is added to (or subtracted from) the exponent, as shown below.

== Basic operations ==

Given two numbers in scientific notation,
formula_1
and
formula_2

Multiplication and division are performed using the rules for operation with exponentiation:
formula_3
and
formula_4

Some examples are:
formula_5
and
formula_6

Addition and subtraction require the numbers to be represented using the same exponential part, so that the significand can be simply added or subtracted:
Next, add or subtract the significands:
formula_7

An example:
formula_8

== Other bases ==
While base ten is normally used for scientific notation, powers of other bases can be used too, base 2 being the next most commonly used one.

For example, in base-2 scientific notation, the number 1001b in binary (=9d) is written as or using binary numbers (or shorter if binary context is obvious). In E notation, this is written as (or shorter: 1.001E11) with the letter &quot;E&quot; now standing for &quot;times two (10b) to the power&quot; here. In order to better distinguish this base-2 exponent from a base-10 exponent, a base-2 exponent is sometimes also indicated by using the letter &quot;B&quot; instead of &quot;E&quot;, a shorthand notation originally proposed by Bruce Alan Martin of Brookhaven National Laboratory in 1968, as in (or shorter: 1.001B11). For comparison, the same number in decimal representation: (using decimal representation), or 1.125B3 (still using decimal representation). Some calculators use a mixed representation for binary floating point numbers, where the exponent is displayed as decimal number even in binary mode, so the above becomes or shorter 1.001B3.

This is closely related to the base-2 floating-point representation commonly used in computer arithmetic, and the usage of IEC binary prefixes (e.g. 1B10 for 1×210 (kibi), 1B20 for 1×220 (mebi), 1B30 for 1×230 (gibi), 1B40 for 1×240 (tebi)).

Similar to &quot;B&quot; (or &quot;b&quot;), the letters &quot;H&quot; (or &quot;h&quot;) and &quot;O&quot; (or &quot;o&quot;, or &quot;C&quot;) are sometimes also used to indicate &quot;times 16 or 8 to the power&quot; as in 1.25 = = 1.40H0 = 1.40h0, or 98000 = = 2.7732o5 = 2.7732C5.

Another similar convention to denote base-2 exponents is using a letter &quot;P&quot; (or &quot;p&quot;, for &quot;power&quot;). In this notation the significand is always meant to be hexadecimal, whereas the exponent is always meant to be decimal. This notation can be produced by implementations of the &quot;printf&quot; family of functions following the C99 specification and (Single Unix Specification) IEEE Std 1003.1 POSIX standard, when using the &quot;%a&quot; or &quot;%A&quot; conversion specifiers. Starting with C++11, C++ I/O functions could parse and print the P notation as well. Meanwhile, the notation has been fully adopted by the language standard since C++17. Apple&#x27;s Swift supports it as well. It is also required by the IEEE 754-2008 binary floating-point standard. Example: 1.3DEp42 represents .

Engineering notation can be viewed as a base-1000 scientific notation.

== See also ==
* Positional notation
* ISO/IEC 80000 – an international standard which guides the use of physical quantities and units of measurement in science
* Suzhou numerals – a Chinese numeral system formerly used in commerce, with order of magnitude written below the significand
* RKM code – a notation to specify resistor and capacitor values, with symbols for powers of 1000

== References ==
== External links ==

* Decimal to Scientific Notation Converter
* Scientific Notation to Decimal Converter
* Scientific Notation in Everyday Life
* An exercise in converting to and from scientific notation
* Scientific Notation Converter
* &quot;Scientific Notation&quot; chapter from &quot;Lessons In Electric Circuits Vol 1 DC&quot; free ebook and &quot;Lessons In Electric Circuits&quot; series.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q219142" start="0" end="19" title="Scientific notation" label="Scientific notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="43" end="50" title="real numbers" label="numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q427968" start="113" end="125" title="decimal form" label="decimal form"/>
<link wikidata="Q219142" start="234" end="249" title="Scientific notation" label="scientific form"/>
<link wikidata="Q219142" start="253" end="272" title="Scientific notation" label="standard index form"/>
<link wikidata="Q219142" start="277" end="290" title="Scientific notation" label="standard form"/>
<link wikidata="Q81365" start="319" end="327" title="base ten" label="base ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q11205" start="440" end="461" title="arithmetic operations" label="arithmetic operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933722" start="466" end="488" title="scientific calculators" label="scientific calculators"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="700" end="707" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q50700" start="717" end="728" title="coefficient" label="coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="756" end="767" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q81365" start="844" end="863" title="decimal" label="terminating decimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q33456" start="906" end="914" title="exponent" label="exponent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096921" start="969" end="980" title="significand" label="significand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366982" start="1137" end="1152" title="fractional part" label="fractional part"/>
<link wikidata="Q966582" start="1160" end="1176" title="common logarithm" label="common logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1282" end="1301" title="#Normalized notation" label="normalized notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q120812" start="1338" end="1352" title="absolute value" label="absolute value"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249173" start="1429" end="1451" title="Decimal floating point" label="Decimal floating point"/>
<link wikidata="Q120812" start="1835" end="1849" title="absolute value" label="absolute value"/>
<link wikidata="Q518730" start="2147" end="2166" title="orders of magnitude" label="orders of magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q966582" start="2249" end="2265" title="common logarithm" label="common logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q632025" start="2803" end="2823" title="engineering notation" label="engineering notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q33456" start="2884" end="2895" title="exponentiation" label="exponential"/>
<link wikidata="Q843684" start="3072" end="3076" title="radix" label="base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055293" start="3313" end="3322" title="multiple (mathematics)" label="multiples"/>
<link wikidata="Q131299" start="3633" end="3644" title="SI prefixes" label="SI prefixes"/>
<link wikidata="Q31087" start="3942" end="3952" title="Calculator" label="Calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="3958" end="3974" title="computer program" label="computer program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359501" start="4127" end="4138" title="superscript" label="superscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q6203" start="4468" end="4468" title="Avogadro constant" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q468999" start="4492" end="4492" title="Planck length" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="4702" end="4709" title="Fortran" label="Fortran"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="4711" end="4712" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="4713" end="4716" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="4718" end="4724" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="4730" end="4740" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q25826" start="4855" end="4862" title="IBM 704" label="IBM 704"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390171" start="4925" end="4947" title="SHARE Operating System" label="SHARE Operating System"/>
<link wikidata="Q548219" start="4962" end="4969" title="IBM 709" label="IBM 709"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="5021" end="5031" title="FORTRAN IV" label="FORTRAN IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243369" start="5078" end="5094" title="double precision" label="double precision"/>
<link wikidata="Q448573" start="5184" end="5203" title="quadruple precision" label="quadruple precision"/>
<link wikidata="Q169478" start="5209" end="5215" title="MATLAB" label="MATLAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q188436" start="5301" end="5309" title="ALGOL" label="ALGOL 60"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538458" start="5535" end="5542" title="ALGOL W" label="ALGOL W"/>
<link wikidata="Q186250" start="5680" end="5681" title="Yu (Cyrillic)" label="ю"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166735" start="5714" end="5722" title="ALGOL 68" label="ALGOL 68"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514108" start="5860" end="5870" title="GOST 10859" label="GOST 10859"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="5910" end="5917" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q212569" start="5995" end="6001" title="Simula" label="Simula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243369" start="6015" end="6019" title="Double precision" label="long"/>
<link wikidata="Q81294" start="6030" end="6041" title="Mathematica" label="Mathematica"/>
<link wikidata="Q82435" start="6104" end="6139" title="e (mathematical constant)" label="mathematical constant &amp;quot;e&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q31087" start="6154" end="6171" title="pocket calculator" label="pocket calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q608913" start="6562" end="6567" title="HP-25" label="HP-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q208305" start="6680" end="6695" title="Commodore International" label="Commodore PR100"/>
<link wikidata="Q80978" start="6707" end="6722" title="Hewlett-Packard" label="Hewlett-Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q53227" start="7172" end="7177" title="Sharp Corporation" label="Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q206190" start="7178" end="7193" title="pocket computer" label="pocket computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193412" start="7333" end="7350" title="Texas Instruments" label="Texas Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646829" start="7351" end="7356" title="TI-83 series" label="TI-83"/>
<link wikidata="Q393223" start="7361" end="7366" title="TI-84 Plus series" label="TI-84"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163271" start="7410" end="7423" title="small caps" label="small capital"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7825" end="7852" title="significant figures#Identifying significant digits" label="indicated to be significant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="9497" end="9503" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q620994" start="9653" end="9667" title="standard error" label="standard error"/>
<link wikidata="Q208498" start="9683" end="9702" title="confidence interval" label="confidence interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q380933" start="9808" end="9813" title="Space (punctuation)" label="space"/>
<link wikidata="Q837721" start="9824" end="9835" title="typesetting" label="typesetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249586" start="9884" end="9894" title="thin space" label="thin space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="10132" end="10140" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="10212" end="10217" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="10225" end="10229" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10289" end="10315" title="Earth#Size and shape" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s circumference"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="10415" end="10431" title="International System of Units" label="SI writing style"/>
<link wikidata="Q218593" start="10474" end="10478" title="inch" label="inch"/>
<link wikidata="Q174789" start="10634" end="10644" title="millimeter" label="millimeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q178674" start="10660" end="10669" title="nanometer" label="nanometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q185565" start="10685" end="10699" title="Hyperinflation" label="Hyperinflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q182803" start="11147" end="11164" title="Zimbabwean dollar" label="Zimbabwean dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q40276" start="13137" end="13151" title="Multiplication" label="Multiplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226939" start="13156" end="13164" title="division (mathematics)" label="division"/>
<link wikidata="Q33456" start="13214" end="13228" title="exponentiation" label="exponentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q32043" start="13299" end="13307" title="Addition" label="Addition"/>
<link wikidata="Q40754" start="13312" end="13323" title="subtraction" label="subtraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913" start="13753" end="13759" title="binary numeral system" label="binary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14225" end="14242" title="Bruce Alan Martin" label="Bruce Alan Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q585777" start="14246" end="14276" title="Brookhaven National Laboratory" label="Brookhaven National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376876" start="14351" end="14373" title="decimal representation" label="decimal representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q117879" start="14686" end="14700" title="floating-point" label="floating-point"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583973" start="14775" end="14790" title="binary prefixes" label="binary prefixes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583973" start="14813" end="14817" title="kibi-" label="kibi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583973" start="14836" end="14840" title="mebi-" label="mebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583973" start="14859" end="14863" title="gibi-" label="gibi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583973" start="14882" end="14886" title="tebi-" label="tebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q838016" start="15489" end="15495" title="printf" label="printf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151257" start="15536" end="15539" title="C99" label="C99"/>
<link wikidata="Q635130" start="15559" end="15584" title="Single Unix Specification" label="Single Unix Specification"/>
<link wikidata="Q635130" start="15586" end="15601" title="IEEE Std 1003.1" label="IEEE Std 1003.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q14658" start="15602" end="15607" title="POSIX" label="POSIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061570" start="15703" end="15708" title="C++11" label="C++11"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="15710" end="15713" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q15952161" start="15852" end="15857" title="C++17" label="C++17"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="15859" end="15864" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118377" start="15872" end="15877" title="Swift (programming language)" label="Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q951059" start="15926" end="15939" title="IEEE 754-2008" label="IEEE 754-2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q632025" start="16004" end="16024" title="Engineering notation" label="Engineering notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747853" start="16093" end="16112" title="Positional notation" label="Positional notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q568496" start="16115" end="16128" title="ISO/IEC 80000" label="ISO/IEC 80000"/>
<link wikidata="Q752499" start="16239" end="16254" title="Suzhou numerals" label="Suzhou numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836637" start="16365" end="16373" title="RKM code" label="RKM code"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59716" wikidata="Q51660" url="?curid=59716" title="Sixth Crusade">
<text>The Sixth Crusade (1228–1229), also known as the Crusade of Frederick II, was a military expedition to recapture Jerusalem and the rest of the Holy Land. It began seven years after the failure of the Fifth Crusade and involved very little actual fighting. The diplomatic maneuvering of the Holy Roman Emperor and King of Sicily, Frederick II, resulted in the Kingdom of Jerusalem regaining some control over Jerusalem for much of the ensuing fifteen years as well as over other areas of the Holy Land.

== Western Europe after the Fifth Crusade ==
The Fifth Crusade ended in 1221, having failed to gain any more influence in the Near East. Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor, never joined the campaign, despite his vow to do so. The forces he sent to Egypt arrived too late to make a difference in the debacle, partially due to the lack of effective leadership. They would have to wait for many more years for Frederick&#x27;s actions. When Pope Innocent III died in 1216, his successor Honorius III did not immediately hold Frederick to his vow, but reminded him that the Christian world had waited for his action. Opposingly Gregory IX, the successor to Honorius, who became pope in March 1227, took a more hardline stance against the emperor. In Syria and Egypt, the Ayyubids were engaged in civil strife , in which the sultan al-Kamil fought against many of his brothers and other relatives. The sultan had yet to withdraw his offer of territory in exchange for peace that had been made during the Fifth Crusade, and Fredrick would eventually accept this deal.

===Frederick II and the Papacy===
The failure of the Fifth Crusade was a devastating blow to Christendom. Of all the European sovereigns, only Frederick II, the Holy Roman Emperor, was in a position to regain Jerusalem after the loss. Frederick was, like many of the 13th-century rulers, a serial &quot;crucesignatus&quot;. When he was formally crowned as King of Germany at Aachen on 15 July 1215, he astonished the crowd by taking the cross and calling upon the nobles present to do the same. Twenty years separated the crusader vows of the emperor Henry VI of Germany and his son Frederick and it is unclear whether the father&#x27;s German Crusade of 1197 impacted the son&#x27;s objectives for the Fifth Crusade.

The emperor again took the vow when he was re-crowned in Rome by the pope on 22 November 1220. At the same time, Frederick&#x27;s oldest son Henry VII of Germany took the title of King of the Romans, and Constance of Aragon was crowned empress. A year later, Honorius III reminded Frederick that he had not fulfilled his vow, and in December 1221, sent Nicola de Chiaromonte, cardinal-bishop of Tusculum, to confer with Frederick. They returned to Veroli in April 1222 to confer with the pontiff. A strategy meeting for the next Crusade did not happen until March 1223 at Ferentino and included the pope and emperor, plus John of Brienne, Latin patriarch Raoul of Mérencourt, the masters of the military orders, and many others. Frederick again vowed to go on Crusade in addition to signing an agreement with the errant Thomas of Celano, negotiated by Thomas of Aquino. But neither this nor the one signed two years later at San Germano assured Frederick&#x27;s departure.

A new date was set for the expedition of 24 June 1225. At the same time, Frederick, widowed since June 1222, planned a strategic wedding. After the retreat of the Crusaders from Egypt in 1221, John of Brienne returned to Acre. He hoped to find a suitable husband for his daughter Isabella II of Jerusalem, then just 9 years of age. Leaving Odo of Montbéliard as &quot;bailli&quot; of the kingdom, he travelled to Italy, accompanied by patriarch Raoul of Mérencourt and Hospitaller master Guérin de Montaigu. In Apulia, he met with Frederick II and arranged for the marriage of Isabella II to the emperor. The pope gave his blessing, and it was John&#x27;s understanding that he remain regent until 1226. When John left Italy, marrying Berengaria of León in 1224, he entrusted Hermann of Salza to conclude the arrangements for the wedding of his daughter.

Once again, preachers were sent throughout Europe to gain support for a new crusade, this time to be led by Frederick. Despite readying transport ships, the situation did not look good to meet the target date. Hermann of Salza and Raoul of Mérencourt were sent to the pope to apprise him of the situation. That would be one of the patriarch&#x27;s last official acts, as he died in late 1224, succeeded by the bishop of Valence, Gérold of Lausanne. Honorius III sent cardinal bishop Conrad of Porto as papal legate to Germany, urging the clergy there to continue to pursue the crusade. The pope also urged Louis VIII of France to join Frederick, and to resolve his quarrel with Raymond VII of Toulouse. None of these efforts were fruitful and all were convinced that the timetable set at Ferentino was unachievable. The pope while at Rieti agreed to a delay on 18 July 1225, just days before the deadline and ten years after Frederick had originally committed to a crusade.

=== Agreement of San Germano ===
The Agreement of San Germano of 25 July 1225, signed at present day Cassino, was between Frederick II and Honorius III. A Dominican named Guala de Roniis was responsible for the negotiations. Frederick promised to depart on the Crusade by 15 August 1227 and remain for two years. During this period, he was to maintain 1000 knights in Syria, provide transport for additional forces, and provide Rome with 100,000 ounces in gold in the care of Hermann of Salza, John of Brienne and the patriarch. These funds would be returned to the emperor once he arrived at Acre. If, for any reason (including his death), he did not arrive, the money would be employed for the needs of the Holy Land. He also promised that if he went on Crusade that he would lead. After the agreement was signed, Guala became Bishop of Brescia. Based on the terms of the agreement, Frederick&#x27;s forces ceased to occupy portions of the pontifical states. Moreover, all papal possessions in the Kingdom of Sicily were to be restored to the pope.

Frederick attested to the terms at the high altar with his hand on the Gospels. Apostolic legate Rainald of Urslingen, the duke of Spoleto, swore &quot;on the soul of the emperor&quot; that the agreement would be upheld under the pain of excommunication. In a letter to the pope, Frederick reiterated the terms and accepted the ban in the event the Crusade did not happen. He had committed himself beyond all retreat.

=== Situation in Italy ===
After agreeing with Honorius to launch a Crusade before 1228, Frederick summoned an imperial Diet at Cremona, the main pro-imperial city in Lombardy. The main arguments for holding the Diet would be to continue the struggle against heresy, to organize the crusade, and to restore the imperial power in northern Italy, long usurped by the numerous communes located there. Those assembled responded with the reformation of the Lombard League, which had already defeated the emperor Frederick I in the 12th century, and again Milan was chosen as the league&#x27;s leader. The Diet was cancelled as well as the Truce of Constance. The situation was stabilized only through a compromise reached by Honorius between Frederick and the league. During his sojourn in northern Italy, Frederick also invested the Teutonic Knights with the territories in what would become East Prussia, starting what was later called the Northern Crusades.

=== King of Jerusalem ===
Frederick II desired to go to the Holy Land as king of Jerusalem. He married John of Brienne&#x27;s daughter Isabella II by proxy in August 1225 at Acre, presided over by Giacomo, the bishop of Patti. In accordance with her father&#x27;s wishes, she was crowned queen of Jerusalem a few days later at Tyre. Frederick sent fourteen galleys for her, under the command of admiral Henry of Malta, pardoned since his role at the disaster at Mansurah during the Fifth Crusade. They were formally married at Brindisi on 9 November 1227.

John and Frederick&#x27;s relationship became frayed, as Frederick claimed the kingship of Jerusalem. John had allegedly been given assurances that he would be king of Jerusalem for the rest of his life. According to one version, John got into a disagreement with his new son-in-law because Frederick seduced a niece of Isabella who was her lady-in-waiting. In the other version of the chronicle, John often chastised his son-in-law, concluding that John wanted to seize Sicily for his nephew Walter IV of Brienne. Frederick declared that John had lost his claim to the kingdom when Isabella married him. He proclaimed himself king of Jerusalem for the first time in December 1225, taking the crown at a special ceremony at Foggia.

John of Brienne left for Rome, where Honorius sympathized with him, and ignored Frederick&#x27;s claims. Balian of Sidon, Simon of Maugastel, the archbishop of Tyre, and the other Jerusalemite lords who had escorted Isabella to Brindisi acknowledged Frederick as their lawful king. Notably, these did not include the Ibelins. Nevertheless, the law––the Assizes of Jerusalem––required that the monarch be a resident of the kingdom. Frederick&#x27;s first royal decree was to bestow new privileges upon Hermann of Salza and the Teutonic Knights, placing them on equal footing as the Templars and Hospitallers. Thomas of Aquino, the emperor&#x27;s long-time advisor, replaced Odo of Montbéliard as &quot;bailli&quot; of the kingdom.

=== Financing the Crusade ===
In November 1222, John of Brienne arrived at Brindisi, the first king of Jerusalem to visit Europe, with multiple objectives. The treasury of the kingdom was depleted and additional funds were badly needed. He also wanted to ensure that future crusades were not hampered by the divided leadership shown in Egypt, and that the kingdom would lead such efforts. John&#x27;s pleas for support at the courts of England and Spain were for naught, and the pledge he received from Philip II of France on his death-bed was from an account already allocated to the Holy Land. Henry III of England did eventually implement a levy but it is not clear that much was made from the voluntary contributions.

The conciliar decree &quot;Ad Liberandam&quot; published at the Fourth Lateran Council in 1215 formed a system of public financing of Crusades. The disbursements from the papal camera formed essential aid to the crusade movement, although the monies collected by individual &quot;crucesignati&quot; remained important. While some of these funds went directly to local Crusaders, by 1220, Innocent III had consolidated distribution. Frederick did not benefit from this, and from 1221 to 1228 there was limited ecclesiastical impost directed toward his planned Crusade. The funds for this imperial Sixth Crusade would have to be raised by the emperor. The gold sequestered after San Germano was quickly spent due to the delay of the crusade, and Frederick implemented a levy on Sicily beginning in 1228. He also gained financial support from Cyprus and as his new role as king of Jerusalem, but the lack of funds contributed to the small size of the Crusader army.

== Ayyubids after 1221 ==
The defeat of the Crusaders in the Fifth Crusade was a joint effort of the brothers al-Kamil, al-Mu&#x27;azzam and al-Ashraf. After 1221, al-Mu&#x27;azzam returned to Damascus, suspicious of his brothers and their motivations. In June 1222, he conducted an expedition against Guy I Embriaco to enforce the truce, and unsuccessfully attacked his cousin al-Nasir Kilij Arslan, emir of Hama, and later occupying Ma&#x27;arrat al-Numan and Salamiyah. Al-Mu&#x27;azzam was forced to halt his siege of Hama and to surrender his other conquests by order of al-Kamil. He then formed an alliance with Gökböri, a former general of Saladin&#x27;s, possibly at the request of the sultan al-Nasir, against his brother al-Ashraf.

Another brother, al-Muzaffar Ghazi, had been installed at Mayyafariqin and Akhlat, losing Akhlat to al-Ashraf after revolting against him. Ghazi joined the rebellion of al-Mu&#x27;azzam&#x27;s, which was quickly suppressed by al-Ashraf and the Alleppine forces. Again attacking at Homs, al-Mu&#x27;azzam was restrained by threats from al-Kamil. Now opposing both of his well-positioned brothers, al-Mu&#x27;azzam reached out to disaffected members of the sultan&#x27;s Egyptian forces, challenging the sultan to come to Syria if he dared. Against al-Ashraf, he enlisted the aid of the Khwarazmians under the shah Jalal al-Din Mangburni to attack Diyar Bakr.

In 1226, al-Mu&#x27;azzam again moved on Homs, while Gökböri attacked Mosul and al-Jazira. Al-Ashraf stopped his brother at Homs and called on the Seljuk Sultan of Rûm, Kayqubad I, to help him with Gökböri. In the end, both al-Ashraf and Badr al-Din Lu&#x27;lu&#x27;, ruler of Mosul, succumbed to al-Mu&#x27;azzam, but not before Jalal had invested himself in Akhlat and later Azerbaijan. His suzerainty over Akhlat was recognized by al-Mu&#x27;azzam, who also held al-Ashraf at Damascus. At this point, al-Kamil began exploring peace with the West, dispatching the emir Fakhr ad-Din ibn as-Shaikh to meet Frederick II (see below).

By May 1227, al-Kamil was concerned for his sultanate, feeling increasingly boxed in. The arrival of the Crusaders began, and he was again considering his offer of Jerusalem made to Frederick II in 1226, that appearing to him as the only viable option. However, by May 1227, al-Ashraf had been released from Damascus, and the emirs al-Nasir Kilij Arslan at Hama and al-Mujahid at Homs turned against al-Mu&#x27;azzam. Fearing the Crusaders gathering at Acre, al-Mu&#x27;azzam began, as he did in the Fifth Crusade, to dismantle the defences of his fortresses, including Jerusalem.

Al-Mu&#x27;azzam died on 12 November 1227, and was succeeded by his son an-Nasir Dā’ūd, with al-Kamil&#x27;s approval. Peace among the Ayyubids did not last long. Dā’ūd refused his uncle&#x27;s request to abandon Krak de Montreal. Then, yet another brother, al-Aziz Uthman of Banyas, attacked emir Bahram Shah of Baalbek. Ordered to stand down by Dā’ūd, al-Aziz persisted and al-Kamil responded by taking Jerusalem and Nablus in July 1228. Al-Ashraf was summoned to Damascus and he met al-Kamil at Tall al-Ajul. There it was decided that al-Ashraf would take Damascus, leaving Dā’ūd with al-Jazira. Al-Kamil remained in Jerusalem to conduct negotiations with Frederick II.

== Crusade begins ==
By 1226, it was clear that the Sixth Crusade would, in fact, happen with an invasion of Syria and Palestine with the objective of conquering Jerusalem. Frederick II was to lead the Crusade, essentially boxed in by the terms of San Germano. After the death of Honorius III in 1227, the new pope Gregory IX entered the curia with determination to proceed and a long-held dislike for Frederick.

=== Overview ===
The initial phase of the Crusade was a complex endeavour involving multiple deployments, negotiations with the Ayyubids, a delay of the departure of Frederick due to illness, a subsequent excommunication, and, finally, arrival of the emperor at Acre. The key points in the timeline are:
* August 1227: First wave departs Brindisi, arrives in Syria in October
* 1226–1227: Frederick&#x27;s negotiations with al-Kamil
* September 1227: The second wave, including Frederick, departs and returns
* November 1227: Frederick is excommunicated by Gregory IX
* June 1228: Frederick finally sets sail.
After a five-week stopover in Cyprus, in September 1228, Frederick arrived at Acre.

=== German and Sicilian participation ===
The new role of Frederick also affected the objective of the Crusade. In 1224, the plans to invade Egypt required suitable ships able to enter the Nile delta. Now, the emphasis was a campaign to focus on Jerusalem, with men from Germany and finance from Sicily. Oliver of Paderborn, so effective in recruiting for the Fifth Crusade, participated in the recruitment and even joined the army gathering in Italy, but was not as successful. His diminished role was replaced by bishop Conrad of Hildesheim. The landgrave Louis of Thuringia took the cross in 1226 and with Walran of Limburg inspired hundreds of Thuringian and Austrian knights to join. They also drew significant support from Cologne, Lübeck and Worms. Many prelates and &quot;ministeriales&quot; also joined, including the poet Freidank. The numbers and prowess of the German crusades provided hope to the expedition planners.

=== English participation ===
Henry III of England took the cross upon his coronation in May 1220 and had planned a crusade after Louis IX of France&#x27;s failures. In 1223, Honorius III appealed to Henry to assist in the Holy Land. But, like his father John Lackland before him, crises closer to home took precedence. Nevertheless, there was to be significant English participation in the Sixth Crusade.

William Briwere, the bishop of Exeter, participated in the Crusade as a proxy for his uncle William Brewer, who died before he was able to fulfill his crusading vows. Brewer had taken the cross in 1189, but was excused because of administrative duties. Briwere went on the Crusade with Peter des Roches, bishop of Winchester. An army of other Crusaders accompanied them to the Holy Land, although whether they were English or mercenaries recruited on the Continent is unclear. The contingent left from Brindisi in August 1227.

The bishops were influential advisors to Frederick II. As the pope had ordered that no one collaborate with the excommunicate Frederick, both bishops ignored the papal orders and worked closely with Frederick. The financial resources both bishops brought were especially appreciated by the crusaders. The fortifications of Caesarea and Jaffa were implemented with their money. Both witnessed the treaty signing in February 1229 with al-Kamil.

=== Negotiations between the emperor and the sultan ===
As described above, the sultan al-Kamil was in a desperate civil conflict in 1226. Having unsuccessfully tried negotiations with the West beginning in 1219, he again tried this approach. The sultan sent the emir Fakhr ad-Din ibn as-Shaikh to Frederick asking him to come to Acre for discussions, offering return of much of the Holy Land to Christian control in exchange for military support against his brother al-Mu&#x27;azzam at Damascus. Fakhr ad-Din reportedly was somewhat amazed when he reached Palermo and discovered that Frederick spoke Arabic, had admiration for Muslim society and contempt for Rome.

Frederick responded by sending his &quot;bailli&quot; and trusted advisor Thomas of Aquino and Berardus de Castacca, archbishop of Palermo, to meet with al-Kamil. Other than an exchange of gifts, nothing was accomplished. The bishop is reported to have continued on the Damascus to negotiate with al-Mu&#x27;azzam who, rejecting the overture, attempted to make peace with the younger Ayyubid brother al-Ashraf. The negotiations would continue in the autumn of 1227, after Frederick&#x27;s excommunication, as described below.

=== Crusaders depart ===
The port of Brindisi was designated as the departure point and by mid-summer 1227, large numbers of Crusaders had arrived. The crowded conditions and high heat contributed to general discontent and disease among the assembled troops. Many returned home, leaving some transports unused. Others died, including Siegfried von Rechberg, the bishop of Augsburg.

The first contingents of Crusaders sailed August 1227 and arrived in Syria early October. They included Germans under the command of Thomas of Aquino and Henry of Limburg, and French and English under the command of the bishops Peter des Roches and William Briwere. Arriving at Acre, they joined with forces of the kingdom and fortified the coastal towns of Caesarea and Jaffa. They forced the Muslims of Damascus out of Sidon and fortified the island of Qal&#x27;at al-Bahr. The Germans rebuilt Montfort Castle, northeast of Acre, for the Teutonic Knights.

The emperor and his contingent were delayed while their ships were refitted. They sailed on 8 September 1227, but before they reached their first stop of Otranto many, including Frederick, were struck with the plague. Louis of Thuringia had, in fact, died. Frederick disembarked to secure medical attention. Resolved to keep his oath, he sent a fleet of twenty galleys on to Acre. This included Hermann of Salza, Gérold of Lausanne, Odo of Montbéliard and Balian of Sidon. The Crusade was now under the command of Henry IV, Duke of Limburg.

In February or March 1228, al-Aziz Uthman of Banyas ambushed a group of crusaders near Tyre, killing or capturing some seventy horsemen.

=== Frederick&#x27;s excommunication ===
Frederick II sent his emissaries to inform Gregory IX of the situation. These included Rainald of Spoleto, Nicolò dei Maltraversi, Lando of Anagni, the archbishop of Reggio, and Marino Filangieri, the archbishop of Bari, but the pope refused to meet with them, and would not listen to Frederick&#x27;s side of the story. Frederick II, the Holy Roman Emperor, was excommunicated on 29 September 1227.

The pope did not know, or care, about Frederick&#x27;s illness, just that he had not lived up to his agreement. His letter to the emperor of 10 October 1227 laying out conditions for his rehabilitation referred less to the crusade than to infractions in Sicily. In his circular letter announcing the excommunication, Frederick was branded a wanton violator of his sacred oath taken many times, at Aachen, Veroli, Ferentino, and San Germano, and was held responsible for the deaths of Crusaders at Brindisi. He was accused of feigning his illness, relaxing at Pozzouli, rather than in the Holy Land. Frederick&#x27;s response was more factual, and included an appeal for more to take the cross.

In November 1227, the sultan&#x27;s emissary Fakhr ad-Din ibn as-Shaikh was again sent to meet with the emperor. It is here that it is believed the Fakhr ad-Din was knighted by Frederick, as described by Jean de Joinville, chronicler of the Seventh Crusade.&quot;&quot; The negotiations were conducted in secret, causing concern among the German Crusaders. Even the amiable poet Freidank, positively disposed towards the emperor, expressed his sorrow. Shortly after Fakhr ad-Din had departed, the emperor&#x27;s negotiator Thomas of Aquino sent word that al-Mu&#x27;azzam had suddenly died on 12 November 1227. This revelation changed the balance of power, and Frederick dispatched Richard Filangieri, marshal of the Kingdom of Sicily, to Syria with 500 knights to augment to force already there as he prepared for a departure in the spring of 1228.

==The Sixth Crusade==
Frederick made his last effort to be reconciled with Gregory, sending Albert I of Käfernburg, the archbishop of Magdeburg, and two Sicilian justiciars to speak with the pope. It had no effect and Frederick sailed from Brindisi on 28 June 1228. The fleet was under the command of admiral Henry of Malta, and clergymen Berardus de Castacca, Nicolò dei Maltraversi, Marino Filangieri, and Giacomo of Patti, now archbishop of Capua, accompanied him. He had only a small force with him, since the main force had sailed in August 1227 and reinforcements in April 1228. Guérin de Montaigu, master of the Hospitallers who had helped convince the pope to break the truce with the Muslims, refused to accompany Frederick as an excommunicate. He was replaced by Bertrand de Thessy, who embarked with the emperor.

===Stopover in Cyprus===
The route of Frederick&#x27;s fleet can be traced day-by-day. On 29 June 1228 it stopped in Otranto, whence it crossed the Adriatic Sea to the island of Othonoi on 30 June. It was in Corfu on 1 July, Porto Guiscardo in Cephalonia on 2 July, Methoni on 4 July, Portocaglie near Cape Matapan on 5 July, Cerigo on 6 July and it reached Souda Bay on Crete on 7 July. The fleet moved slowly along the Cretan coast, pausing for a whole day at Heraklion before crossing the Aegean Sea to Rhodes during 12–15 July. They sailed along the Anatolian coast to Phenika, where they stayed on 16–17 July replenishing their water supplies. The fleet then crossed the sea to Cyprus, arriving at Limassol on 21 July.

The Kingdom of Cyprus had been an imperial fief since the emperor Henry VI, Frederick&#x27;s father, had accepted the homage of Aimery of Lusignan and made him king on the eve of the German Crusade in 1196. Hugh I of Cyprus had ruled the island kingdom since the death of his father Aimery in 1205. Upon his death, his wife Alice of Champagne became regent of the young king Henry I of Cyprus. Alice was the aunt of the empress Isabella II and had attended her coronation in Tyre. In the meantime, John of Ibelin, the Old Lord of Beirut, had been appointed regent without the knowledge of either Alice or Frederick.

The emperor arrived with the clear intent of stamping his authority on the kingdom and was treated cordially by the local barons. Frederick claimed that the regency of John of Ibelin was illegitimate and demanded the surrender of John&#x27;s mainland fief of Beirut to the imperial throne. Here he erred, for John pointed out that the kingdoms of Cyprus and Jerusalem were constitutionally separate and he could not be punished for offences in Cyprus by seizure of Beirut. This would have important consequences for the crusade, as it alienated the powerful Ibelin faction, turning them against the emperor.

Frederick sailed to Acre from Famagusta on 3 September 1228. He was accompanied by the king Henry I of Cyprus, John of Ibelin, and many Cypriote nobles. He left the Cypriote baron Amalric Barlais as &quot;bailli&quot; of Cyprus, supported by Gavin of Chenichy.

===In the Kingdom of Jerusalem===
Frederick II arrived in Acre on 7 September 1228 and was received warmly by the Templars, Hospitallers and clergy, but denied the kiss of peace due to his excommunication. He yielded to pressure and made overtures to the pope, sending Henry of Malta and archbishop Marino Filangieri to announce his arrival in Syria and to request absolution. Rainald of Spoleto was named Frederick&#x27;s regent in Sicily authorized to negotiate with Rome. But Gregory IX had already made up his mind, sending word to the Latin patriarch and masters of the military orders that the emperor&#x27;s ban still held, despite his arrival.

When Frederick and his companions arrived at Acre, John of Ibelin went immediately to Beirut to ensure that the city could withstand an imperial attack, returning to face the &quot;Haute Cour.&quot; Frederick did not immediately take action as Acre was split in its support for Frederick. Frederick&#x27;s own army and the Teutonic Knights supported him, but the Templars, the patriarch and the Syrian clergy followed the hostile papal line. The Pisans and Genoese supported the emperor and the English vacillated, first for Frederick, shifting to the pope, then back. He gave nominal commands to faithful adherents—Hermann of Salza, Odo of Montbéliard, Richard Filangieri—in order for Crusaders to avoid jeopardizing their positions in the eyes of the curia. Once news of Frederick&#x27;s excommunication had spread, public support for him waned considerably. The position of the Hospitallers and Templars was more complicated. They refused to join the emperor&#x27;s army directly, but they supported the Crusade once Frederick agreed to have his name removed from official orders. The Outremer barons greeted Frederick enthusiastically at first, but were wary of the emperor&#x27;s history of centralization and his desire to impose imperial authority. This was largely due to Frederick&#x27;s treatment of John of Ibelin in Cyprus, and his apparent disdain for their constitutional concerns.

Frederick&#x27;s army was not large. Of the troops he had sent under duke Henry of Limburg in 1227 had mostly returned home out of impatience or of fear of offending the Church. The few who had sailed East under the patriarch Gérold of Lausanne remained as did the knights under Richard Filangieri. Even augmented with the forces available in Outremer, he could not muster an effective army capable of striking a decisive blow on the Muslims. Further, he got word that his regent Rainald of Spoleto had failed in his attack on the March of Ancona and that Gregory IX was planning to invade his own kingdom. He could neither afford nor mount a lengthening campaign in the Holy Land. The Sixth Crusade would be one of negotiation.

===Treaty of Jaffa===

After resolving the internecine struggles in Syria, al-Kamil&#x27;s position was stronger than it was a year before when he made his original offer to Frederick. He likely did not know that Frederick&#x27;s force was a mere shadow of the army that had amassed when the Crusade had originally been called. Frederick realised that his only hope of success in the Holy Land was to negotiate for the return of Jerusalem as he lacked the manpower to engage in battle. He sent Thomas of Aquino and Balian of Sidon to inform the sultan of his arrival in the Holy Land. Al-Kamil was friendly but non-committal. In reply, Frederick received the ambassadors of the sultan, including Fakhr ad-Din ibn as-Shaikh, at the Hospitaller camp at Recordane, near Acre. The sultan relocated from Nablus to Hiribya, northeast of Gaza, and Thomas and Balian were sent to resume negotiations.

Frederick hoped that a token show of force, a threatening march down the coast, would be enough to convince al-Kamil to honor a proposed agreement that had been negotiated some years earlier. The masters of the Templars and Hospitallers, Pedro de Montaigu and Bertrand de Thessy, accompanied the emperor, at a distance behind as he was excommunicate. In January 1229, Frederick received notice that John of Brienne, serving the curia as rector of a Patrimony of Saint Peter, had taken San Germano and was threatening Capua. This placed Frederick in an awkward position. If he delayed in the Holy Land too long, he could lose his empire. If he left without results, he would be dishonored. He directed Henry of Malta to send twenty galleys to Syria by the following Easter. Fortunately, al-Kamil was occupied with a siege in Damascus against his nephew an-Nasir Dā’ūd. He then agreed to cede Jerusalem to the Franks, along with a narrow corridor to the coast.

The treaty was concluded on 18 February 1229, and also involved a ten-year truce. The English bishops Peter des Roches and William Briwere were witness to the signing. No complete copy of the treaty has survived, either in Latin nor Arabic. In it, al-Kamil surrendered Jerusalem with the exception of some Muslim holy sites. Frederick also received Bethlehem and Nazareth, part of Sidon district, and Jaffa and Toron, dominating the coast. Other lordships may have been returned to Christian control, but sources disagree. It was, however, a treaty of compromise. The Muslims retained control over the Temple Mount area of Jerusalem, the Jami Al-Aqsa, and the Dome of the Rock. The Transjordan castles stayed in Ayyubid hands. Whether Frederick was permitted to restore Jerusalem&#x27;s fortifications was unclear, although the Crusaders did in fact restore Jerusalem&#x27;s defensive walls.

The agreement, known sometimes as the Treaty of Jaffa, also included the agreement signed by the different Ayyubid rulers at Tell Ajul near Gaza, of which, from al-Kamil&#x27;s perspective, the treaty with Frederick was just an extension, which allows this agreement to be also called the Treaty of Jaffa and Tell Ajul. Frederick seems to have pledged his support to the sultan against all enemies, including Christian ones. The other Crusader states—Principality of Antioch and County of Tripoli—would receive no support in the event of war with the Muslims. The strongholds of the Hospitallers and Templars were left &quot;in statu quo&quot;, and aid was not to be provided from any source. Prisoners from this conflict and the previous crusade were to be released. The provisions for the military orders and the possessions of Bohemond IV of Antioch likely reflect their lack of support provided to Frederick.

===In Jerusalem===

The patriarch and the masters of the military orders—Gérold of Lausanne, Pedro de Montaigu and Bertrand de Thessy—all felt betrayed by the treaty and its concessions making the protection of the Holy city near-impossible. Hermann of Salza approached Gérold with a proposal of reconciliation, but the patriarch saw only deceit, trying to prevent Frederick&#x27;s entry into Jerusalem by threatening excommunication of the army and placing the city under interdict. He sent archbishop Peter of Caesarea to meet the army, but he was too late.

Frederick entered Jerusalem on 17 March 1229 and received the formal surrender of the city by al-Kamil&#x27;s agent. He went to the Church of the Holy Sepulchre the next day and placed the crown on his own head. Hermann of Salza read the emperor&#x27;s statement, blaming his excommunication not on the pope, but his advisors. It is unknown whether he intended this to be interpreted as his official coronation as King of Jerusalem; the absence of the patriarch rendered it questionable. There is evidence to suggest that the crown Frederick wore was actually the imperial one, but in any case proclaiming his lordship over Jerusalem was a provocative act. Legally, he was actually only regent for his son with Isabella, Conrad II of Jerusalem, who had been born shortly before Frederick left in 1228. Conrad&#x27;s maternal grandparents were Maria of Montferrat and John of Brienne.

Still wearing his crown, Frederick proceeded to the palace of the Hospitallers where he met with the English bishops and members of the military orders to discuss the fortifications of the city. Not until the morning of 19 March 1229 did Peter of Caesarea arrive to enforce the interdict, which he wisely chose not to do. At any rate, Frederick&#x27;s interest in Jerusalem was waning, as he was planning to immediately leave. While Frederick was on his way to the harbour he was pelted with dung and entrails by the unappreciative people of Acre. Odo of Montbéliard and John of Ibelin quelled the unrest.

On 1 May 1229, Frederick departed from Acre, landing at Cyprus to attend the wedding by proxy of Henry I of Cyprus to Alice of Montferrat, with the bride later transported to Cyprus by the emperor&#x27;s supporters. He arrived at Brindisi on 10 June 1229, and it was a month before the pope was aware that he had left the Holy Land. By the autumn, he had regained full possession of his empire. Frederick obtained from the pope relief from his excommunication on 28 August 1230 with the Treaty of San Germano, and he returned to the Hospitallers and the Templars the goods confiscated in Sicily.

==Legacy==
The results of the Sixth Crusade were not universally acclaimed. Two letters from the Christian side tell differing stories. In his correspondence to Henry III of England, Frederick touts the great success of the endeavour. In contrast, the letter to the &quot;all the faithful&quot; by the patriarch Gérold of Lausanne paints a darker picture of the emperor and his accomplishments. On the Muslim side, al-Kamil himself was pleased with the accord, but Arabic sources referred to the treaty as &quot;one of the most disastrous events of Islam,&quot; laying the blame solely with the sultan. The Muslim historians expressed equal disdain for the sultan and the Holy Roman Emperor.

The ten-year expiration of Frederick&#x27;s treaty with al-Kamil caused Pope Gregory IX to call for a new crusade to secure the Holy Lands for Christendom beyond 1239. This initiated the Barons&#x27; Crusade, a disorganized affair which wound up with relatively limited support from both Frederick and the pope, but which nevertheless regained more land than even the Sixth Crusade.

Frederick had set a precedent, in having achieved success on crusade without papal involvement. He achieved success without fighting since he lacked manpower to engage Ayyubids. This was due to the engagement of Ayyubids with the rebellion in Syria. Further crusades would be launched by individual kings, such as Theobald I of Navarre (the Barons&#x27; Crusade), Louis IX of France (the Seventh and Eighth Crusades), and Edward I of England (the Ninth Crusade), effectively demonstrating an erosion of papal authority.

In the Ayyubid camp, the treaty allowed the sultan al-Kamil and his brother al-Ashraf to focus their energies into defeating their nephew an-Nasir Dā’ūd, emir of Damascus, capturing his capital city in June 1229. An-Nasir, was left subordinate to al-Kamil and in possession of Kerak.

==Participants==
A partial list of those that participated in the Sixth Crusade can be found in the category collections of Christians of the Sixth Crusade and Muslims of the Sixth Crusade.

==Primary sources==
The of the Sixth Crusade is concerned with the &quot;history of the histories&quot; of the military campaigns discussed herein as well as biographies of the important figures of the period. The primary sources include works written in the medieval period, generally by participants in the Crusade or written contemporaneously with the event. The primary Western sources of the Sixth Crusade include several eyewitness accounts, and are as follows.

* &quot;Estoire d’Eracles émperor&quot; (History of Heraclius) is an anonymous history of Jerusalem down to 1277, a continuation of William of Tyre&#x27;s work and drawing from both Ernoul and the Rothelin Continuation.
*&quot;Historia Orientalis&quot; (&quot;Historia Hierosolymitana&quot;) and &quot;Epistolae,&quot; by theologian and historian Jacques de Vitry.
*&quot;Flores Historiarum&quot;, by English chronicler Roger of Wendover, covering the period from 1188 up to 1235.
*&quot;Grand chronique,&quot; by English chronicler Matthew Paris.
*&quot;Gestes des Chiprois&quot; (Deeds of the Cypriots), by several authors including Philip of Novara. Includes &quot;The wars of Frederick II against the Ibelins in Syria and Cyprus&quot;.
*&quot;Historia diplomatica Frederici secundi,&quot; a history of the diplomacy of Frederick II, by French archivist and historian Jean L. Huillard-Bréholles.
*&quot;Ryccardi di Sancto Germano Notarii Chronicon,&quot; by Richard of San Germano.
The Arabic sources of the Crusade include the following.

* &quot;Complete Work of History&quot;, particularly &quot;Part 3:&quot; &quot;The Years 589–629/1193–1231. The Ayyubids after Saladin and the Mongol Menace,&quot; by Ali ibn al-Athir, an Arab or Kurdish historian.
* &quot;Kitāb al-rawḍatayn&quot; (The Book of the Two Gardens) and its sequel &quot;al-Dhayl ʿalā l-rawḍatayn&quot;, by Arab historian Abū Shāma.
* &quot;Tarikh al-Mukhtasar fi Akhbar al-Bashar&quot; (History of Abu al-Fida), by Kurdish historian Abu’l-Fida.
* &quot;History of Egypt,&quot; by Egyptian historian Al-Makrizi.
*&quot;The Necklace of Pearls&quot; (&quot;Perles d’Historie&quot;), by Arab Islamic scholar Badr al-Din al-Ayni.
*&quot;History of the Patriarchs of Alexandria,&quot; begun in the 10th century, and continued into the 13th century.

Many of these primary sources can be found in Crusade Texts in Translation. German historian Reinhold Röhricht also compiled two collections of works concerning the Sixth Crusade: &quot;Beiträge zur Geschichte der Kreuzzüg&quot; (1888), &quot;Geschichte der Kreuzzüge im Umriss&quot; (1898), and &quot;Die Kreuzfahrt Kaiser Friedrich des Zweiten (1228–1229)&quot; (1872). He also collaborated on the work &quot;Annales de Terre Sainte&quot; that provides a chronology of the Crusade correlated with the original sources.

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q51660" start="4" end="17" title="Sixth Crusade" label="Sixth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q51660" start="49" end="72" title="Sixth Crusade" label="Crusade of Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="113" end="122" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="143" end="152" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q51659" start="200" end="213" title="Fifth Crusade" label="Fifth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="290" end="308" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q842151" start="313" end="327" title="King of Sicily" label="King of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="329" end="341" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q55502" start="359" end="379" title="Kingdom of Jerusalem" label="Kingdom of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q51659" start="552" end="565" title="Fifth Crusade" label="Fifth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="640" end="652" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="654" end="672" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q128076" start="939" end="956" title="Pope Innocent III" label="Pope Innocent III"/>
<link wikidata="Q160182" start="985" end="997" title="Honorius III" label="Honorius III"/>
<link wikidata="Q124831" start="1125" end="1135" title="Pope Gregory IX" label="Gregory IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q180114" start="1268" end="1276" title="Ayyubid dynasty" label="Ayyubids"/>
<link wikidata="Q293464" start="1328" end="1336" title="al-Kamil" label="al-Kamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q782985" start="1920" end="1935" title="King of the Romans" label="King of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017" start="1939" end="1945" title="Aachen" label="Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q150953" start="2115" end="2134" title="Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry VI of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q646409" start="2201" end="2215" title="Crusade of 1197" label="German Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q163102" start="2424" end="2444" title="Henry (VII) of Germany" label="Henry VII of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q782985" start="2463" end="2481" title="King of the Romans" label="King of the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q234253" start="2487" end="2506" title="Constance of Aragon, Holy Roman Empress" label="Constance of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2659" end="2686" title="Roman Catholic Suburbicarian Diocese of Frascati#1200–1400" label="cardinal-bishop of Tusculum"/>
<link wikidata="Q42466" start="2731" end="2737" title="Veroli" label="Veroli"/>
<link wikidata="Q50197" start="2855" end="2864" title="Ferentino" label="Ferentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q332704" start="2905" end="2920" title="John of Brienne" label="John of Brienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q521402" start="2938" end="2957" title="Raoul of Mérencourt" label="Raoul of Mérencourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438027" start="3135" end="3151" title="Thomas I of Aquino" label="Thomas of Aquino"/>
<link wikidata="Q332704" start="3450" end="3465" title="John of Brienne" label="John of Brienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q233809" start="3537" end="3561" title="Isabella II of Jerusalem" label="Isabella II of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505474" start="3597" end="3615" title="Odo of Montbéliard" label="Odo of Montbéliard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3625" end="3631" title="Officers of the Kingdom of Jerusalem#Bailiffs" label="bailli"/>
<link wikidata="Q521402" start="3702" end="3721" title="Raoul of Mérencourt" label="Raoul of Mérencourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374289" start="3745" end="3763" title="Guérin de Montaigu" label="Guérin de Montaigu"/>
<link wikidata="Q457667" start="3992" end="4010" title="Berengaria of León" label="Berengaria of León"/>
<link wikidata="Q57994" start="4033" end="4049" title="Hermann von Salza" label="Hermann of Salza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5878433" start="4542" end="4560" title="Gérold of Lausanne" label="Gérold of Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q66608" start="4596" end="4611" title="Conrad of Urach" label="Conrad of Porto"/>
<link wikidata="Q165284" start="4719" end="4739" title="Louis VIII of France" label="Louis VIII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q180073" start="4791" end="4814" title="Raymond VII, Count of Toulouse" label="Raymond VII of Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q13396" start="4947" end="4952" title="Rieti" label="Rieti"/>
<link wikidata="Q116592" start="5189" end="5196" title="Cassino" label="Cassino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815454" start="5259" end="5274" title="Guala de Roniis" label="Guala de Roniis"/>
<link wikidata="Q867347" start="5917" end="5934" title="Bishop of Brescia" label="Bishop of Brescia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="6030" end="6047" title="Papal States" label="pontifical states"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="6088" end="6105" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="Kingdom of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q88858" start="6237" end="6257" title="Rainald of Urslingen" label="Rainald of Urslingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3715904" start="6263" end="6278" title="duke of Spoleto" label="duke of Spoleto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6231" start="6687" end="6694" title="Cremona" label="Cremona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="6726" end="6734" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q623476" start="7011" end="7025" title="Lombard League" label="Lombard League"/>
<link wikidata="Q79789" start="7066" end="7077" title="Frederick Barbarossa" label="Frederick I"/>
<link wikidata="Q693411" start="7193" end="7211" title="Peace of Constance" label="Truce of Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q51662" start="7496" end="7512" title="Northern Crusade" label="Northern Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7651" end="7662" title="Isabella II of Jerusalem#Marriage with Frederick II" label="Isabella II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7726" end="7741" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Patti#Diocese of Patti" label="bishop of Patti"/>
<link wikidata="Q434744" start="7919" end="7933" title="Henry, Count of Malta" label="Henry of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7966" end="7986" title="Fifth Crusade#Disaster at Mansurah" label="disaster at Mansurah"/>
<link wikidata="Q13496" start="8043" end="8051" title="Brindisi" label="Brindisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q611914" start="8566" end="8586" title="Walter IV, Count of Brienne" label="Walter IV of Brienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q13464" start="8797" end="8803" title="Foggia" label="Foggia"/>
<link wikidata="Q804953" start="8911" end="8926" title="Balian Grenier" label="Balian of Sidon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8952" end="8970" title="See of Tyre#Latin archbishops of Tyre" label="archbishop of Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142429" start="9123" end="9130" title="House of Ibelin" label="Ibelins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867198" start="9159" end="9179" title="Assizes of Jerusalem" label="Assizes of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438027" start="9414" end="9430" title="Thomas I of Aquino" label="Thomas of Aquino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9507" end="9513" title="Officers of the Kingdom of Jerusalem#Bailiffs" label="bailli"/>
<link wikidata="Q332704" start="9585" end="9600" title="John of Brienne" label="John of Brienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q13496" start="9612" end="9620" title="Brindisi" label="Brindisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q34428" start="10040" end="10059" title="Philip II of France" label="Philip II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="10133" end="10153" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q719992" start="10324" end="10346" title="Fourth Council of the Lateran" label="Fourth Lateran Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q620030" start="10431" end="10443" title="Apostolic Camera" label="papal camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q293464" start="11334" end="11342" title="al-Kamil" label="al-Kamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q286553" start="11344" end="11360" title="Al-Mu&amp;#x27;azzam Isa" label="al-Mu&amp;#x27;azzam"/>
<link wikidata="Q287826" start="11365" end="11374" title="Al-Ashraf Musa, Emir of Damascus" label="al-Ashraf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553577" start="11526" end="11540" title="Guy I Embriaco" label="Guy I Embriaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932011" start="11602" end="11623" title="al-Nasir Kilij Arslan" label="al-Nasir Kilij Arslan"/>
<link wikidata="Q173545" start="11633" end="11637" title="Hama" label="Hama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503775" start="11659" end="11681" title="Siege of Ma&amp;#x27;arra" label="Ma&amp;#x27;arrat al-Numan"/>
<link wikidata="Q75621" start="11686" end="11695" title="Salamiyah" label="Salamiyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639250" start="11842" end="11849" title="Gökböri" label="Gökböri"/>
<link wikidata="Q8581" start="11871" end="11885" title="Saladin" label="Saladin&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q284750" start="11925" end="11933" title="al-Nasir" label="al-Nasir"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148945" start="11984" end="12001" title="al-Muzaffar Ghazi" label="al-Muzaffar Ghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q945404" start="12025" end="12037" title="Silvan, Diyarbakır" label="Mayyafariqin"/>
<link wikidata="Q400362" start="12042" end="12048" title="Ahlat" label="Akhlat"/>
<link wikidata="Q131301" start="12248" end="12252" title="Homs" label="Homs"/>
<link wikidata="Q486918" start="12552" end="12564" title="Anushtegin dynasty" label="Khwarazmians"/>
<link wikidata="Q559416" start="12580" end="12602" title="Jalal al-Din Mangburni" label="Jalal al-Din Mangburni"/>
<link wikidata="Q5285024" start="12613" end="12623" title="Diyar Bakr" label="Diyar Bakr"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639250" start="12679" end="12686" title="Gökböri" label="Gökböri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12696" end="12701" title="List of rulers of Mosul#Zengid emirs" label="Mosul"/>
<link wikidata="Q104834542" start="12706" end="12715" title="Al-Jazira (caliphal province)" label="al-Jazira"/>
<link wikidata="Q975405" start="12773" end="12793" title="Sultanate of Rum" label="Seljuk Sultan of Rûm"/>
<link wikidata="Q61964" start="12795" end="12805" title="Kayqubad I" label="Kayqubad I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841102" start="12864" end="12892" title="Badr al-Din Lu&amp;#x27;lu&amp;#x27;" label="Badr al-Din Lu&amp;#x27;lu&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="13003" end="13013" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393675" start="13197" end="13223" title="Fakhr ad-Din ibn as-Shaikh" label="Fakhr ad-Din ibn as-Shaikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932011" start="13591" end="13612" title="al-Nasir Kilij Arslan" label="al-Nasir Kilij Arslan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15982256" start="13625" end="13635" title="al-Mujahid" label="al-Mujahid"/>
<link wikidata="Q287145" start="13913" end="13927" title="An-Nasir Dawud" label="an-Nasir Dā’ūd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362749" start="14054" end="14070" title="Montreal (castle)" label="Krak de Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q115493280" start="14099" end="14113" title="Al-Aziz Uthman ibn al-Adil" label="al-Aziz Uthman"/>
<link wikidata="Q263922" start="14117" end="14123" title="Baniyas" label="Banyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197328" start="14139" end="14150" title="Bahramshah" label="Bahram Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q178835" start="14154" end="14161" title="Baalbek" label="Baalbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896876" start="14339" end="14351" title="Tell el-Ajjul" label="Tall al-Ajul"/>
<link wikidata="Q124831" start="14830" end="14840" title="Pope Gregory IX" label="Gregory IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q72542" start="15928" end="15947" title="Oliver of Paderborn" label="Oliver of Paderborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q90961" start="16146" end="16166" title="Conrad II (bishop of Hildesheim)" label="Conrad of Hildesheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q63399" start="16182" end="16200" title="Louis IV, Landgrave of Thuringia" label="Louis of Thuringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83660" start="16233" end="16250" title="Waleran III, Duke of Limburg" label="Walran of Limburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q700101" start="16398" end="16423" title="Ministerialis" label="&amp;quot;ministeriales&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453903" start="16456" end="16464" title="Freidank" label="Freidank"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="16586" end="16606" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q346" start="16686" end="16711" title="Louis IX of France" label="Louis IX of France&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q160182" start="16731" end="16743" title="Pope Honorius III" label="Honorius III"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="16811" end="16824" title="John, King of England" label="John Lackland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578122" start="16963" end="16978" title="William Briwere" label="William Briwere"/>
<link wikidata="Q465869" start="16984" end="17000" title="bishop of Exeter" label="bishop of Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568456" start="17055" end="17069" title="William Brewer (justice)" label="William Brewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648032" start="17249" end="17265" title="Peter des Roches" label="Peter des Roches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271558" start="17267" end="17287" title="bishop of Winchester" label="bishop of Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q319242" start="17814" end="17822" title="Caesarea Maritima" label="Caesarea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17827" end="17832" title="Jaffa#Crusader/Ayyubid period" label="Jaffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393675" start="18203" end="18229" title="Fakhr ad-Din ibn as-Shaikh" label="Fakhr ad-Din ibn as-Shaikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3638476" start="18697" end="18717" title="Berard of Castagna" label="Berardus de Castacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365235" start="18719" end="18740" title="archbishop of Palermo" label="archbishop of Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19491" end="19509" title="Prince-Bishopric of Augsburg#1000 to 1300" label="bishop of Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438027" start="19645" end="19661" title="Thomas I of Aquino" label="Thomas of Aquino"/>
<link wikidata="Q202239" start="19666" end="19682" title="Henry IV, Duke of Limburg" label="Henry of Limburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648032" start="19740" end="19756" title="Peter des Roches" label="Peter des Roches"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578122" start="19761" end="19776" title="William Briwere" label="William Briwere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918974" start="19967" end="19986" title="Sidon Sea Castle" label="Qal&amp;#x27;at al-Bahr"/>
<link wikidata="Q14201945" start="20008" end="20023" title="Montfort Castle" label="Montfort Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q52174" start="20225" end="20232" title="Otranto" label="Otranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q202239" start="20585" end="20610" title="Henry IV, Duke of Limburg" label="Henry IV, Duke of Limburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q115493280" start="20640" end="20664" title="al-Aziz Uthman ibn al-Adil" label="al-Aziz Uthman of Banyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q88858" start="20879" end="20897" title="Rainald of Urslingen" label="Rainald of Spoleto"/>
<link wikidata="Q124650714" start="20923" end="20938" title="Lando (archbishop of Messina)" label="Lando of Anagni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331670" start="20944" end="20964" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Reggio Calabria-Bova" label="archbishop of Reggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q55227612" start="20970" end="20987" title="Marino Filangieri" label="Marino Filangieri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20993" end="21011" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Bari-Bitonto#Archbishops" label="archbishop of Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q72425" start="21752" end="21760" title="Pozzuoli" label="Pozzouli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393675" start="21933" end="21959" title="Fakhr ad-Din ibn as-Shaikh" label="Fakhr ad-Din ibn as-Shaikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q328747" start="22092" end="22109" title="Jean de Joinville" label="Jean de Joinville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453903" start="22267" end="22275" title="Freidank" label="Freidank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438027" start="22411" end="22427" title="Thomas I of Aquino" label="Thomas of Aquino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149477" start="22570" end="22588" title="Richard Filangieri" label="Richard Filangieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q95611" start="22831" end="22853" title="Albert I of Käfernburg" label="Albert I of Käfernburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q434744" start="23048" end="23062" title="Henry of Malta" label="Henry of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23169" end="23188" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Capua#Archbishops, 966–1500" label="archbishop of Capua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374289" start="23324" end="23342" title="Guérin de Montaigu" label="Guérin de Montaigu"/>
<link wikidata="Q828639" start="23512" end="23530" title="Bertrand de Thessy" label="Bertrand de Thessy"/>
<link wikidata="Q52174" start="23681" end="23688" title="Otranto" label="Otranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="23712" end="23724" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q54239" start="23742" end="23749" title="Othonoi" label="Othonoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q121378" start="23772" end="23777" title="Corfu" label="Corfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q178488" start="23808" end="23818" title="Cephalonia" label="Cephalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q998805" start="23830" end="23837" title="Methoni, Messenia" label="Methoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q849911" start="23866" end="23878" title="Cape Matapan" label="Cape Matapan"/>
<link wikidata="Q207239" start="23890" end="23896" title="Cerigo" label="Cerigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633779" start="23922" end="23931" title="Souda Bay" label="Souda Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="23935" end="23940" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q160544" start="24026" end="24035" title="Heraklion" label="Heraklion"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="24056" end="24066" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="24070" end="24076" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="24118" end="24126" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185632" start="24267" end="24275" title="Limassol" label="Limassol"/>
<link wikidata="Q213638" start="24293" end="24310" title="Kingdom of Cyprus" label="Kingdom of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q150953" start="24355" end="24363" title="Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q453325" start="24417" end="24435" title="Aimery of Cyprus" label="Aimery of Lusignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q646409" start="24472" end="24486" title="German Crusade" label="German Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q552405" start="24496" end="24512" title="Hugh I of Cyprus" label="Hugh I of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q269826" start="24613" end="24631" title="Alice of Champagne" label="Alice of Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q506087" start="24664" end="24681" title="Henry I of Cyprus" label="Henry I of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q174759" start="24787" end="24801" title="John of Ibelin, the Old Lord of Beirut" label="John of Ibelin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25165" end="25171" title="Beirut#Middle Ages" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142429" start="25464" end="25478" title="House of Ibelin" label="Ibelin faction"/>
<link wikidata="Q193190" start="25545" end="25554" title="Famagusta" label="Famagusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q453287" start="25695" end="25710" title="Amalric Barlais" label="Amalric Barlais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456750" start="25941" end="25954" title="kiss of peace" label="kiss of peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q434744" start="26046" end="26060" title="Henry, Count of Malta" label="Henry of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q88858" start="26154" end="26172" title="Rainald of Urslingen" label="Rainald of Spoleto"/>
<link wikidata="Q381637" start="26611" end="26621" title="High Court of Jerusalem" label="Haute Cour"/>
<link wikidata="Q57994" start="27046" end="27062" title="Hermann von Salza" label="Hermann of Salza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505474" start="27064" end="27082" title="Odo of Montbéliard" label="Odo of Montbéliard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149477" start="27084" end="27102" title="Richard Filangieri" label="Richard Filangieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q174759" start="27740" end="27754" title="John of Ibelin, the Old Lord of Beirut" label="John of Ibelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q202239" start="27901" end="27917" title="Henry IV, Duke of Limburg" label="Henry of Limburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5878433" start="28053" end="28071" title="Gerold of Lausanne" label="Gérold of Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149477" start="28106" end="28124" title="Richard Filangieri" label="Richard Filangieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q88858" start="28307" end="28325" title="Rainald of Urslingen" label="Rainald of Spoleto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054409" start="28358" end="28373" title="March of Ancona" label="March of Ancona"/>
<link wikidata="Q110363021" start="28410" end="28433" title="War of the Keys" label="invade his own kingdom."/>
<link wikidata="Q1438027" start="29051" end="29067" title="Thomas I of Aquino" label="Thomas of Aquino"/>
<link wikidata="Q804953" start="29072" end="29087" title="Balian of Sidon" label="Balian of Sidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393675" start="29253" end="29279" title="Fakhr ad-Din ibn as-Shaikh" label="Fakhr ad-Din ibn as-Shaikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910426" start="29308" end="29317" title="Tel Afek" label="Recordane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5769818" start="29366" end="29373" title="Hiribya" label="Hiribya"/>
<link wikidata="Q293464" start="29559" end="29567" title="al-Kamil" label="al-Kamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q523344" start="29689" end="29706" title="Pedro de Montaigu" label="Pedro de Montaigu"/>
<link wikidata="Q828639" start="29711" end="29729" title="Bertrand de Thessy" label="Bertrand de Thessy"/>
<link wikidata="Q766473" start="29900" end="29924" title="Patrimony of Saint Peter" label="Patrimony of Saint Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q58477" start="29968" end="29973" title="Capua" label="Capua"/>
<link wikidata="Q111182030" start="30266" end="30283" title="Siege of Damascus (1229)" label="siege in Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q287145" start="30303" end="30317" title="An-Nasir Dawud" label="an-Nasir Dā’ūd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648032" start="30513" end="30529" title="Peter des Roches" label="Peter des Roches"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578122" start="30534" end="30549" title="William Briwere" label="William Briwere"/>
<link wikidata="Q5776" start="30760" end="30769" title="Bethlehem" label="Bethlehem"/>
<link wikidata="Q430776" start="30774" end="30782" title="Nazareth" label="Nazareth"/>
<link wikidata="Q163490" start="30792" end="30806" title="Sidon" label="Sidon district"/>
<link wikidata="Q180294" start="30812" end="30817" title="Jaffa" label="Jaffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q681554" start="30822" end="30827" title="Toron" label="Toron"/>
<link wikidata="Q193163" start="31013" end="31025" title="Temple Mount" label="Temple Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192963" start="31049" end="31061" title="Qibli Mosque" label="Jami Al-Aqsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q172077" start="31071" end="31087" title="Dome of the Rock" label="Dome of the Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q13142258" start="31342" end="31357" title="Treaty of Jaffa (1229)" label="Treaty of Jaffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896876" start="31429" end="31438" title="Tall al-Ajjul" label="Tell Ajul"/>
<link wikidata="Q47492" start="31444" end="31448" title="Gaza City" label="Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q13142258" start="31593" end="31622" title="Treaty of Jaffa and Tell Ajul" label="Treaty of Jaffa and Tell Ajul"/>
<link wikidata="Q235030" start="31755" end="31778" title="Principality of Antioch" label="Principality of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q272033" start="31783" end="31800" title="County of Tripoli" label="County of Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q349097" start="32134" end="32156" title="Bohemond IV of Antioch" label="Bohemond IV of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5878433" start="32291" end="32309" title="Gerold of Lausanne" label="Gérold of Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q523344" start="32311" end="32328" title="Pedro de Montaigu" label="Pedro de Montaigu"/>
<link wikidata="Q828639" start="32333" end="32351" title="Bertrand de Thessy" label="Bertrand de Thessy"/>
<link wikidata="Q57994" start="32460" end="32476" title="Hermann von Salza" label="Hermann of Salza"/>
<link wikidata="Q115812383" start="32721" end="32738" title="Peter of Limoges (bishop)" label="Peter of Caesarea"/>
<link wikidata="Q187702" start="32911" end="32939" title="Church of the Holy Sepulchre" label="Church of the Holy Sepulchre"/>
<link wikidata="Q157179" start="33500" end="33522" title="Conrad IV of Germany" label="Conrad II of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q234706" start="33622" end="33641" title="Maria of Montferrat" label="Maria of Montferrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q332704" start="33646" end="33661" title="John of Brienne" label="John of Brienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505474" start="34212" end="34230" title="Odo of Montbéliard" label="Odo of Montbéliard"/>
<link wikidata="Q174759" start="34235" end="34249" title="John of Ibelin, the Old Lord of Beirut" label="John of Ibelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q506087" start="34368" end="34385" title="Henry I of Cyprus" label="Henry I of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q458701" start="34389" end="34408" title="Alice of Montferrat" label="Alice of Montferrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q13496" start="34501" end="34509" title="Brindisi" label="Brindisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748198" start="34758" end="34779" title="Treaty of San Germano" label="Treaty of San Germano"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="35029" end="35049" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q293464" start="35617" end="35625" title="al-Kamil" label="al-Kamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q124831" start="35633" end="35648" title="Pope Gregory IX" label="Pope Gregory IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q641707" start="35704" end="35715" title="Christendom" label="Christendom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788485" start="35748" end="35768" title="Barons&amp;#x27; Crusade" label="Barons&amp;#x27; Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q314562" start="36259" end="36280" title="Theobald I of Navarre" label="Theobald I of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788485" start="36286" end="36306" title="Barons&amp;#x27; Crusade" label="Barons&amp;#x27; Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q346" start="36309" end="36327" title="Louis IX of France" label="Louis IX of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q51661" start="36333" end="36340" title="Seventh Crusade" label="Seventh"/>
<link wikidata="Q243684" start="36345" end="36359" title="Eighth Crusade" label="Eighth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="36367" end="36386" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q316743" start="36392" end="36405" title="Ninth Crusade" label="Ninth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q287826" start="36542" end="36551" title="Al-Ashraf Musa, Emir of Damascus" label="al-Ashraf"/>
<link wikidata="Q287145" start="36604" end="36618" title="An-Nasir Dawud" label="an-Nasir Dā’ūd"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36620" end="36636" title="List of rulers of Damascus#Ayyubid emirs (some were also Sultans of Egypt)" label="emir of Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q31572" start="36743" end="36748" title="Kerak" label="Kerak"/>
<link wikidata="" start="36875" end="36906" title=":Category:Christians of the Sixth Crusade" label="Christians of the Sixth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="" start="36911" end="36939" title=":Category:Muslims of the Sixth Crusade" label="Muslims of the Sixth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q112754" start="37156" end="37170" title="primary source" label="primary source"/>
<link wikidata="Q59266947" start="37413" end="37450" title="Estoire d&amp;#x27;Eracles" label="&amp;quot;Estoire d’Eracles émperor&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q311822" start="37543" end="37565" title="William of Tyre" label="William of Tyre&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1222790" start="37593" end="37599" title="Ernoul" label="Ernoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q86754658" start="37608" end="37629" title="Rothelin Continuation" label="Rothelin Continuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q654608" start="37758" end="37774" title="Jacques de Vitry" label="Jacques de Vitry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746719" start="37783" end="37801" title="Flores Historiarum" label="Flores Historiarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q727241" start="37831" end="37848" title="Roger of Wendover" label="Roger of Wendover"/>
<link wikidata="Q649642" start="37899" end="37914" title="Chronica Majora" label="Grand chronique"/>
<link wikidata="Q369366" start="37944" end="37957" title="Matthew Paris" label="Matthew Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q260081" start="38046" end="38062" title="Philip of Novara" label="Philip of Novara"/>
<link wikidata="Q349351" start="38372" end="38394" title="Richard of San Germano" label="Richard of San Germano"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116230" start="38456" end="38492" title="The Complete History" label="&amp;quot;Complete Work of History&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q334854" start="38621" end="38637" title="Ali ibn al-Athir" label="Ali ibn al-Athir"/>
<link wikidata="Q481455" start="38804" end="38813" title="Abū Shāma" label="Abū Shāma"/>
<link wikidata="Q311462" start="38916" end="38926" title="Abu&amp;#x27;l-Fida" label="Abu’l-Fida"/>
<link wikidata="Q293604" start="38982" end="38992" title="Al-Maqrizi" label="Al-Makrizi"/>
<link wikidata="Q257745" start="39087" end="39106" title="Badr al-Din al-Ayni" label="Badr al-Din al-Ayni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637685" start="39115" end="39154" title="History of the Patriarchs of Alexandria" label="History of the Patriarchs of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q17310859" start="39273" end="39301" title="Crusade Texts in Translation" label="Crusade Texts in Translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q75565" start="39320" end="39337" title="Reinhold Röhricht" label="Reinhold Röhricht"/>
<link wikidata="Q104868684" start="39638" end="39661" title="Annales de Terre Sainte" label="Annales de Terre Sainte"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59718" wikidata="Q193794" url="?curid=59718" title="Identity matrix">
<text>In linear algebra, the identity matrix of size formula_1 is the formula_2 square matrix with ones on the main diagonal and zeros elsewhere. It has unique properties, for example when the identity matrix represents a geometric transformation, the object remains unchanged by the transformation. In other contexts, it is analogous to multiplying by the number 1.

==Terminology and notation==
The identity matrix is often denoted by formula_3, or simply by formula_4 if the size is immaterial or can be trivially determined by the context. 

formula_5

The term unit matrix has also been widely used, but the term &quot;identity matrix&quot; is now standard. The term &quot;unit matrix&quot; is ambiguous, because it is also used for a matrix of ones and for any unit of the ring of all formula_2 matrices.

In some fields, such as group theory or quantum mechanics, the identity matrix is sometimes denoted by a boldface one, formula_7, or called &quot;id&quot; (short for identity). Less frequently, some mathematics books use formula_8 or formula_9 to represent the identity matrix, standing for &quot;unit matrix&quot; and the German word respectively.

In terms of a notation that is sometimes used to concisely describe diagonal matrices, the identity matrix can be written as
formula_10
The identity matrix can also be written using the Kronecker delta notation:
formula_11

==Properties==
When formula_12 is an formula_13 matrix, it is a property of matrix multiplication that
formula_14
In particular, the identity matrix serves as the multiplicative identity of the matrix ring of all formula_2 matrices, and as the identity element of the general linear group formula_16, which consists of all invertible formula_2 matrices under the matrix multiplication operation. In particular, the identity matrix is invertible. It is an involutory matrix, equal to its own inverse. In this group, two square matrices have the identity matrix as their product exactly when they are the inverses of each other.

When formula_2 matrices are used to represent linear transformations from an formula_1-dimensional vector space to itself, the identity matrix formula_3 represents the identity function, for whatever basis was used in this representation.

The formula_21th column of an identity matrix is the unit vector formula_22, a vector whose formula_21th entry is 1 and 0 elsewhere. The determinant of the identity matrix is 1, and its trace is formula_1.

The identity matrix is the only idempotent matrix with non-zero determinant. That is, it is the only matrix such that:

# When multiplied by itself, the result is itself
# All of its rows and columns are linearly independent.

The principal square root of an identity matrix is itself, and this is its only positive-definite square root. However, every identity matrix with at least two rows and columns has an infinitude of symmetric square roots.

The rank of an identity matrix formula_3 equals the size formula_1, i.e.:
formula_27

==See also==
* Binary matrix (zero-one matrix)
* Elementary matrix
* Exchange matrix
* Matrix of ones
* Pauli matrices (the identity matrix is the zeroth Pauli matrix)
* Householder transformation (the Householder matrix is built through the identity matrix)
* Square root of a 2 by 2 identity matrix
* Unitary matrix
* Zero matrix

==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q82571" start="3" end="17" title="linear algebra" label="linear algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q193794" start="23" end="38" title="Identity matrix" label="identity matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739329" start="74" end="87" title="square matrix" label="square matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q199" start="93" end="96" title="one" label="one"/>
<link wikidata="Q651480" start="105" end="118" title="main diagonal" label="main diagonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q204" start="123" end="127" title="zero" label="zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196371" start="216" end="240" title="geometric transformation" label="geometric transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916484" start="734" end="748" title="matrix of ones" label="matrix of ones"/>
<link wikidata="Q118084" start="761" end="765" title="unit (ring theory)" label="unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915729" start="773" end="803" title="matrix ring" label="ring of all formula_2 matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q874429" start="830" end="842" title="group theory" label="group theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="846" end="863" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q332791" start="1224" end="1241" title="diagonal matrix" label="diagonal matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q192826" start="1342" end="1357" title="Kronecker delta" label="Kronecker delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049914" start="1456" end="1477" title="matrix multiplication" label="matrix multiplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q185813" start="1543" end="1566" title="multiplicative identity" label="multiplicative identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915729" start="1574" end="1585" title="matrix ring" label="matrix ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q185813" start="1624" end="1640" title="identity element" label="identity element"/>
<link wikidata="Q524607" start="1648" end="1668" title="general linear group" label="general linear group"/>
<link wikidata="Q242188" start="1703" end="1713" title="invertible matrix" label="invertible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052516" start="1835" end="1852" title="involutory matrix" label="involutory matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q207643" start="2054" end="2075" title="linear transformation" label="linear transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q321119" start="2176" end="2193" title="identity function" label="identity function"/>
<link wikidata="Q189569" start="2208" end="2213" title="Basis (linear algebra)" label="basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q36255" start="2301" end="2312" title="unit vector" label="unit vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q178546" start="2385" end="2396" title="determinant" label="determinant"/>
<link wikidata="Q321102" start="2434" end="2439" title="trace (linear algebra)" label="trace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751720" start="2487" end="2504" title="idempotent matrix" label="idempotent matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q27670" start="2659" end="2679" title="linear independence" label="linearly independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q964330" start="2686" end="2707" title="Square root of a matrix" label="principal square root"/>
<link wikidata="Q77601250" start="2762" end="2779" title="Positive-definite matrix" label="positive-definite"/>
<link wikidata="Q656784" start="2909" end="2913" title="rank (linear algebra)" label="rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994977" start="3006" end="3019" title="Logical matrix" label="Binary matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q609566" start="3040" end="3057" title="Elementary matrix" label="Elementary matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3750339" start="3060" end="3075" title="Exchange matrix" label="Exchange matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916484" start="3078" end="3092" title="Matrix of ones" label="Matrix of ones"/>
<link wikidata="Q336233" start="3095" end="3109" title="Pauli matrices" label="Pauli matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q304490" start="3161" end="3187" title="Householder transformation" label="Householder transformation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3252" end="3291" title="Square root of a 2 by 2 matrix#Identity matrix" label="Square root of a 2 by 2 identity matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q727103" start="3294" end="3308" title="Unitary matrix" label="Unitary matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q338028" start="3311" end="3322" title="Zero matrix" label="Zero matrix"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59719" wikidata="Q228317" url="?curid=59719" title="C5">
<text>C5, C05, C V or C-5 may refer to:

== Military use ==
* Lockheed C-5 Galaxy, a military transport aircraft
* C-5 North Star, a 1940s Canadian military aircraft
* , a 1906 Royal Navy C-class submarine
* , a 1908 United States Navy C-class submarine
* , an 1889 United States Navy protected cruiser
* Albatros C.V, a World War I German military reconnaissance aircraft
* AEG C.V, a World War I prototype German two-seat biplane reconnaissance aircraft
* DFW C.V, a World War I German military reconnaissance aircraft
* Fokker C.V, a 1924 Dutch light reconnaissance and bomber biplane aircraft
* Halberstadt C.V, a World War I German single-engined reconnaissance biplane
* Fokker C-5, an American military version of the Fokker F.VII aircraft
* , a 1915 German Type UC I U-boat
* C-5 (blimp), a United States Navy airship that attempted a trans-Atlantic flight in 1919

== Transport, vehicles, roads, public transport routes ==
===Road===
* C5 automatic, a successor to Ford C4 transmission
* Chevrolet Corvette C5, the fifth generation of the Chevrolet Corvette sports car
* Citroën C5, a car manufactured by Citroën
* Omoda C5, a car manufactured by Chery
* Sauber C5, a sportscar by Sauber
* Audi A6 (C5), the second generation of the Audi A6 built from 1997 to 2004
* Sinclair C5, an electric vehicle designed by Clive Sinclair
* Circumferential Road 5 or C-5, an arterial road of Manila, Philippines
===Air travel and aircraft vehicles===
* Kinner C-5, an American five cylinder radial engine for small aircraft of the 1930s
* Spartan C5, a passenger and utility aircraft produced in the United States in the early 1930s
===Rail===
* Bavarian C V, an 1899 German express train locomotive model
* WLWR Class C5, a Waterford, Limerick and Western Railway Irish steam locomotive 
* Finnish Steam Locomotive Class C5
* LNER Class C5, a class of British steam locomotives 
===Other===
* Crown C-5, a series of forklifts by the Crown Equipment Corporation
* Saturn C-5, an American man-rated expendable rocket

== Biology ==
* Cervical vertebra 5, one of the cervical vertebrae of the vertebral column
* Cervical spinal nerve 5
* Complement component 5, a protein of the complement system
** C5-convertase, an enzyme which splits C5 into C5b
** Complement component 5a, an inflammatory peptide
* ATC code C05 &quot;Vasoprotectives&quot;, a subgroup of the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Classification System
* C05, Malignant neoplasm of palate ICD-10 code

== Other uses ==
* C5 (classification), a Paralympic cycling classification
* C5 Envelope size
* C5, a decision tree learning algorithm
* C5 Generic Collection Library for C Sharp and CLI, a software library by Niels Kokholm and Peter Sestoft
* C5 line socket, a polarised, three pole, mains voltage IEC appliance connector
* ChorusOS, a computer operating system
* C5, CommutAir IATA code
* C5 or Tenor C, a musical note
* c5, a square of the chessboard using algebraic chess notation
* Microsoft Dynamics C5, enterprise resource planning software
* Channel 5 (disambiguation)
* Nokia C5 (disambiguation), a series of smartphones
* Caldwell 5 (IC 342), an intermediate spiral galaxy in Camelopardalis
* Concrete5, an open source content management system
* A line of earphones from Bowers &amp; Wilkins
* &quot;Tha Carter V&quot;, a 2018 album by Lil Wayne
* Central 5, an informal political cooperation between Austria, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Slovakia, and Slovenia
* C5, the cycle graph with 5 vertices

== See also ==
* CV (disambiguation) 
* 5C (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q228317" start="0" end="2" title="C5" label="C5"/>
<link wikidata="Q228317" start="4" end="7" title="C5" label="C05"/>
<link wikidata="Q228317" start="9" end="12" title="C5" label="C V"/>
<link wikidata="Q228317" start="16" end="19" title="C5" label="C-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q182012" start="56" end="75" title="Lockheed C-5 Galaxy" label="Lockheed C-5 Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q302439" start="109" end="123" title="C-5 North Star" label="C-5 North Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q320425" start="299" end="311" title="Albatros C.V" label="Albatros C.V"/>
<link wikidata="Q291362" start="369" end="376" title="AEG C.V" label="AEG C.V"/>
<link wikidata="Q656394" start="452" end="459" title="DFW C.V" label="DFW C.V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860313" start="517" end="527" title="Fokker C.V" label="Fokker C.V"/>
<link wikidata="Q324521" start="593" end="608" title="Halberstadt C.V" label="Halberstadt C.V"/>
<link wikidata="Q964770" start="671" end="681" title="Fokker C-5" label="Fokker C-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q5005859" start="778" end="789" title="C-5 (blimp)" label="C-5 (blimp)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467671" start="939" end="951" title="C5 automatic" label="C5 automatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135711" start="991" end="1012" title="Chevrolet Corvette C5" label="Chevrolet Corvette C5"/>
<link wikidata="Q822665" start="1074" end="1084" title="Citroën C5" label="Citroën C5"/>
<link wikidata="Q111462303" start="1118" end="1126" title="Omoda C5" label="Omoda C5"/>
<link wikidata="Q64506339" start="1184" end="1190" title="Sauber" label="Sauber"/>
<link wikidata="Q758718" start="1236" end="1243" title="Audi A6" label="Audi A6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429206" start="1270" end="1281" title="Sinclair C5" label="Sinclair C5"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121735" start="1332" end="1354" title="Circumferential Road 5" label="Circumferential Road 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414065" start="1444" end="1454" title="Kinner C-5" label="Kinner C-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573892" start="1530" end="1540" title="Spartan C5" label="Spartan C5"/>
<link wikidata="Q812185" start="1637" end="1649" title="Bavarian C V" label="Bavarian C V"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605371" start="1756" end="1778" title="Steam locomotives of Ireland" label="Irish steam locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957547" start="1782" end="1815" title="Finnish Steam Locomotive Class C5" label="Finnish Steam Locomotive Class C5"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513038" start="1818" end="1831" title="LNER Class C5" label="LNER Class C5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446709" start="1925" end="1952" title="Crown Equipment Corporation" label="Crown Equipment Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q54363" start="1955" end="1965" title="Saturn C-5" label="Saturn C-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q900457" start="2024" end="2043" title="Cervical vertebra 5" label="Cervical vertebra 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q900457" start="2056" end="2074" title="cervical vertebrae" label="cervical vertebrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065354" start="2101" end="2124" title="Cervical spinal nerve 5" label="Cervical spinal nerve 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q426181" start="2127" end="2149" title="Complement component 5" label="Complement component 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q225935" start="2189" end="2202" title="C5-convertase" label="C5-convertase"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118278" start="2242" end="2265" title="Complement component 5a" label="Complement component 5a"/>
<link wikidata="Q433888" start="2293" end="2305" title="ATC code C05" label="ATC code C05"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143025" start="2414" end="2442" title="Oral cancer" label="Malignant neoplasm of palate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008261" start="2475" end="2494" title="C5 (classification)" label="C5 (classification)"/>
<link wikidata="Q170124" start="2537" end="2550" title="Envelope size" label="Envelope size"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2553" end="2555" title="C4.5 algorithm#Improvements in C5.0/See5 algorithm" label="C5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370" start="2594" end="2643" title="C5 Generic Collection Library for C Sharp and CLI" label="C5 Generic Collection Library for C Sharp and CLI"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2756" end="2779" title="IEC 60320#C5 and C6 connectors" label="IEC appliance connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q670316" start="2782" end="2790" title="ChorusOS" label="ChorusOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q528492" start="2826" end="2835" title="CommutAir" label="CommutAir"/>
<link wikidata="Q843813" start="2854" end="2861" title="Tenor C" label="Tenor C"/>
<link wikidata="Q738653" start="2917" end="2941" title="algebraic chess notation" label="algebraic chess notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q27556059" start="2944" end="2965" title="Microsoft Dynamics C5" label="Microsoft Dynamics C5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166447" start="3007" end="3033" title="Channel 5 (disambiguation)" label="Channel 5 (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185043" start="3036" end="3061" title="Nokia C5 (disambiguation)" label="Nokia C5 (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q757396" start="3101" end="3107" title="IC 342" label="IC 342"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935459" start="3160" end="3169" title="Concrete5" label="Concrete5"/>
<link wikidata="Q366353" start="3239" end="3259" title="Bowers &amp;amp; Wilkins" label="Bowers &amp;amp; Wilkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q15846214" start="3268" end="3280" title="Tha Carter V" label="Tha Carter V"/>
<link wikidata="Q97656904" start="3316" end="3325" title="Central 5" label="Central 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q622506" start="3440" end="3451" title="cycle graph" label="cycle graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q217437" start="3486" end="3505" title="CV (disambiguation)" label="CV (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641048" start="3509" end="3528" title="5C (disambiguation)" label="5C (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59720" wikidata="Q121507" url="?curid=59720" title="Alicia Keys">
<text>Alicia Augello Cook (born January 25, 1981), known professionally as Alicia Keys, is an American singer and songwriter. A classically trained pianist, Keys began composing songs at the age of 12 and was signed by Columbia Records at 15. After disputes with the label, she signed with J Records to release her debut studio album, &quot;Songs in A Minor&quot; (2001). Met with critical acclaim and commercial success, the album sold over 12 million copies worldwide and won five awards at the 44th Annual Grammy Awards. It contained the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100-number one single &quot;Fallin. Her second album, &quot;The Diary of Alicia Keys&quot; (2003), was met with continued success, selling eight million units worldwide and spawning the singles &quot;You Don&#x27;t Know My Name&quot;, &quot;If I Ain&#x27;t Got You&quot;, and &quot;Diary&quot; (featuring Tony! Toni! Toné!). Its release earned an additional four Grammy Awards.

Her 2004 duet with Usher, &quot;My Boo&quot;, became her second number-one single in the US. Keys&#x27;s first live album, &quot;Unplugged&quot; (2005), spawned the single &quot;Unbreakable&quot; and made her the first female artist to have an &quot;MTV Unplugged&quot; project debut atop the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200. Her third album, &quot;As I Am&quot; (2007), sold seven million units worldwide and yielded her third &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100-number one single, &quot;No One&quot;. In 2007, Keys made her film debut in the action-thriller &quot;Smokin&#x27; Aces&quot;, and performed the theme song to the James Bond film &quot;Quantum of Solace&quot; with her single &quot;Another Way to Die&quot; (with Jack White) the following year. Her fourth album, &quot;The Element of Freedom&quot; (2009), peaked atop the UK Albums Chart, sold four million copies worldwide, and was supported by the singles &quot;Doesn&#x27;t Mean Anything&quot;, &quot;Try Sleeping with a Broken Heart&quot;, and &quot;Un-Thinkable (I&#x27;m Ready)&quot;.

Keys guest appeared on Jay-Z&#x27;s 2009 single &quot;Empire State of Mind&quot;, which became her fourth number-one hit in the US. Her fifth album, &quot;Girl on Fire&quot; (2012), was her fourth non-consecutive album to peak the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, and was supported by its lead single of the same name; her sixth album, &quot;Here&quot; (2016), peaked at number two on the chart. Her seventh and eighth studio albums, &quot;Alicia&quot; (2020) and &quot;Keys&quot; (2021), spawned the singles &quot;Show Me Love&quot; (featuring Miguel), &quot;Underdog&quot;, &quot;Lala&quot; and &quot;Best of Me&quot;. Her ninth, &quot;Santa Baby&quot; (2022), was a holiday album and her first independent release. In 2023, she wrote, composed and co-produced her first two times Tony Awards&#x27; winner Broadway musical, &quot;Hell&#x27;s Kitchen&quot;.

Keys has sold over 90 million records worldwide, making her one of the world&#x27;s best-selling music artists. She was named by &quot;Billboard&quot; as the Top Artist of the 2000s in the R&amp;B/Hip-Hop category, and placed tenth on their list of Top 50 R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Artists of the Past 25 Years. She has received numerous accolades in her career, including 17 Grammy Awards, 17 NAACP Image Awards, 12 ASCAP Awards, and an award from the Songwriters Hall of Fame and National Music Publishers Association. Keys was also honored with the Producers &amp; Engineers Wing Award and the Global Impact Award by the Recording Industry Association of America. VH1 included her on their 100 Greatest Artists of All Time and 100 Greatest Women in Music lists, while &quot;Time&quot; has named her in their 100 list of most influential people in 2005 and 2017. Keys is also acclaimed for her humanitarian work, philanthropy, and activism. She co-founded the nonprofit HIV/AIDS-fighting organization Keep a Child Alive in 2003, for which she serves as Global Ambassador.

==Early life, family and education==
Alicia Augello Cook was born on January 25, 1981, in the Hell&#x27;s Kitchen neighborhood of Manhattan, New York City. She is the only child of Teresa Augello, who was a paralegal and part-time actress, and one of three children of Craig Cook, who was a flight attendant. Keys&#x27;s father is African American and her mother is of Italian and &quot;Irish or Scottish&quot; descent; her mother&#x27;s paternal grandparents were immigrants from Sciacca, Sicily; and Lamezia Terme, in Calabria. Named after her Puerto Rican godmother, Keys has said that she was comfortable with her multiracial heritage because she felt she was able to &quot;relate to different cultures&quot;. Keys&#x27;s father left when she was two years old. She was subsequently raised by her mother during her formative years at Manhattan Plaza in Hell&#x27;s Kitchen. Keys has stated that her parents never had a relationship, and her father was not in her life. Although she did not like to speak about her father in order to not feed stereotypes, Keys remarked in 2001: &quot;I&#x27;m not in contact with him. That&#x27;s fine. When I was younger, I minded about that. [It] made me angry. But it helped show me what a strong woman my mother was, and made me want to be strong like her. Probably, it was better for me this way.&quot; Keys and her mother lived in a one-bedroom apartment. Her mother often worked three jobs to provide for Keys, who &quot;learned how to survive&quot; from her mother&#x27;s example of tenacity and self-reliance.

From a young age, Keys struggled with self-esteem issues, hiding little by little when her differences made her vulnerable to judgment, and later uninvited sexual attention. Living in the rough neighborhood of Hell&#x27;s Kitchen, she was, from an early age, regularly exposed to street violence, drugs, prostitution, and subjected to sexual propositions in the sex trade- and crime-riddled area. &quot;I saw a variety of people growing up, and lifestyles, lows and highs. I think it makes you realize right away what you want and what you don&#x27;t want,&quot; Keys said. Keys recalled feeling fearful early on of the &quot;animal instinct&quot; she witnessed, and eventually feeling &quot;high&quot; due to recurrent harassment. Her experiences in the streets had led her to carry a homemade knife for protection. She became very wary, emotionally guarded, and she began wearing gender-neutral clothing and what would become her trademark cornrows. Keys explained that she is grateful for growing up where she did as it prepared her for the parallels in the music industry, particularly as she was a teenager starting out; she could maintain a particular focus and not derail herself. She credits her &quot;tough&quot; mother for anchoring her on a right path as opposed to many people she knew who ended up on the wrong path and in jail. Keys attributed her unusual maturity as a young girl to her mother, who depended on her to be responsible while she worked to provide for them and gave Keys as many opportunities as possible.

Keys loved music and singing from early childhood. She recalled her mother playing jazz records of artists such as Thelonious Monk, Billie Holiday, Ella Fitzgerald, and Louis Armstrong on Sunday mornings—early musical moments Keys considers influential in kindling her interest in and emotional connection to music. In preschool, Keys sang in her school&#x27;s production of the musical &quot;Cats&quot; and was cast as Dorothy Gale in a production of &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot;. Keys discovered that she had a passion for the piano by age six, as she loved the sound and feel of the instrument and desired to play and learn it. When Keys was ten, a neighborhood friend who was moving home gave her family an old upright piano. This proved pivotal for Keys&#x27;s musical development, which allowed her to practice, to play, and to benefit fully from music lessons at an early age. Keys began receiving classical piano lessons by age seven, practicing six hours a day, learning the Suzuki method and playing composers such as Beethoven, Mozart, Chopin, and Satie. She was particularly drawn to &quot;blue, dark, shadowy&quot; and melancholic compositions, as well as the passionate romanticism of &quot;blue composers&quot; like Chopin. Inspired by the film &quot;Philadelphia&quot;, Keys wrote her first song about her departed grandfather on her piano by age 12. The scene in the film in which Tom Hanks&#x27;s character listens to opera on a record player notably affected Keys, who &quot;never showed emotion very well&quot;. After seeing the film, Keys, &quot;for the first time, could express how [she] felt through the music.&quot;

Keys&#x27;s mother had encouraged her to participate in different extracurricular activities, including music, dance, theater, and gymnastics, so she could &quot;find her muse&quot;. Her extracurricular activities gave her focus and drive, and helped keep her out of trouble. Keys remained so occupied with her various pursuits that she experienced her first burnout before adolescence. Before her 13th birthday, she expressed to her mother that she was too overwhelmed and wanted to disengage, at which point her mother took some time off with her and encouraged her to keep focusing on piano. Keys would continue studying classical music until the age of 18. Keys regards her education in classical piano and dedication to classical music as vital for her stability in her youth and her development as a musician and songwriter. Keys later said of her classical background:

Keys enrolled in the Professional Performing Arts School at the age of 12, where she took music, dance, and theater classes and majored in choir. In her preteen years, Keys and her bass-playing friend formed their first group, though neither &quot;knew too much about how pop songs worked&quot;. Keys would continue singing, writing songs, and performing in musical groups throughout junior high and high school. She became an accomplished pianist; according to some sources, after her classical-music teacher had nothing left to teach her, she began studying jazz at age 14 (this claim, however, was challenged by Keys&#x27;s music teacher herself). Living in the &quot;musical melting pot&quot; city, Keys had already been discovering other genres of music, including soul music, hip hop, R&amp;B, and taken affinity to artists like Marvin Gaye and Curtis Mayfield. Keen on dissecting music, Keys continued developing her songwriting and finding her own &#x27;flow and style&quot; through her exploration of the intricacies in different music.

Keys spent more time in Harlem during her teenage years. She connected with the cultural and racial diversity in the neighborhood, where she expanded upon her musical exploration, and her character was also solidified. &quot;Harlem raised me in a lot of ways,&quot; Keys remarked. &quot;[It] taught me how to think fast, how to play the game ... taught me leadership, how to get out of bad situations when you need to, how to hold my own.&quot; During this period, she met her good friend who would later become her long-term collaborator and boyfriend Kerry Brothers Jr., also famously known as Krucial.

== Career ==
===1985–1997===
In 1985, at the age of four, Keys appeared on &quot;The Cosby Show&quot; as Maria, one of Rudy&#x27;s slumber-party friends.

In 1994, manager Jeff Robinson met 13-year-old Keys, who participated in his brother&#x27;s youth organization called Teens in Motion. Robinson&#x27;s brother had been giving Keys vocal lessons in Harlem. His brother had talked to him about Keys and advised him to go see her, but Robinson shrugged it off as he had &quot;heard that story 1,000 times&quot;. At the time, Keys was part of a three-member band that had formed in the Bronx and was performing in Harlem. Robinson eventually agreed to his brother&#x27;s request, and went to see Keys perform with her group at the Police Athletic League center in Harlem. He was soon taken by Keys, her soulful singing, playing contemporary and classical music and performing her own songs. Robinson was excited by audiences&#x27; reactions to her. Impressed by her talents, charisma, image, and maturity, Robinson considered her to be the &quot;total package&quot;, and took her under his wing. By this time, Keys had already written two of the songs that she would later include on her debut album: &quot;Butterflyz&quot; and &quot;The Life&quot;.

Robinson wanted Keys to be informed and prepared for the music industry, so he took her everywhere with him, including all the meetings with attorneys and negotiations with record labels, while the teenager often became disgruntled with the process. Robinson had urged Keys to pursue a solo career, as she remained reluctant, preferring the musical interactions of a group. She took Robinson&#x27;s advice after her group disbanded, and contacted Robinson who in 1995 introduced her to A&amp;R executive Peter Edge.

Robinson and Edge helped Keys assemble some demos of songs she had written and set up a showcases for label executives. Keys performed on the piano for executives of various labels, and a bidding war ensued. Edge was keen to sign Keys himself but was unable to do so at that time due to being on the verge of leaving his present record company, Warner Bros. Records, to work at Clive Davis&#x27; Arista Records. During this period, Columbia Records had approached Keys for a record deal, offering her a $26,000 white baby grand piano; after negotiations with her and her manager, she signed to the label, at age 15. Keys was also finishing high school, and her academic success had provided her opportunity for scholarship and early admission to university. That year, Keys accepted a scholarship to study at Columbia University in Manhattan. She graduated from high school early as valedictorian, at the age of 16, and began attending Columbia University at that age while working on her music. Keys attempted to manage a difficult schedule between university and working in the studio into the morning, compounding stress and a distant relationship with her mother. She often stayed away from home, and wrote some of the most &quot;depressing&quot; poems of her life during this period. Keys decided to drop out of college after a month to pursue music full-time.

Columbia Records had recruited a team of songwriters, producers and stylists to work on Keys and her music. They wanted Keys to submit to their creative and image decisions. Keys said they were not receptive to her contributions and being a musician and music creator. While Keys worked on her songs, Columbia executives attempted to change her material; they wanted her to sing and have others create the music, forcing big-name producers on her who demanded she also write with people with whom she was not comfortable. She would go into sessions already prepared with music she had composed, but the label would dismiss her work in favor of their vision. &quot;It was a constant battle, it was a lot of -isms&quot;, Keys recalled. &quot;There was the sexism, but it was more the ageism – you&#x27;re too young, how could you possibly know what you want to do? – and oh God, that just irked me to death, I hated that.&quot; &quot;The music coming out was very disappointing&quot;, she recalled. &quot;You have this desire to have something good, and you have thoughts and ideas, but when you finish the music it&#x27;s shit, and it keeps on going like that.&quot; Keys would be in &quot;perpetual music industry purgatory&quot; under Columbia, while they ultimately &quot;relegated [her] to the shelf&quot;. She had performed &quot;Little Drummer Girl&quot; for So So Def&#x27;s Christmas compilation in 1996, and later co-wrote the song &quot;Dah Dee Dah (Sexy Thing)&quot; for the &quot;Men in Black&quot; (1997) film soundtrack, the only released recording Keys made with Columbia.

Keys &quot;hated&quot; the experience of writing with the people Columbia brought in. &quot;I remember driving to the studio one day with dread in my chest,&quot; she recalled. Keys said the producers would also sexually proposition her. &quot;It&#x27;s all over the place. And it&#x27;s crazy. And it&#x27;s very difficult to understand and handle,&quot; she said. Keys had already built a &quot;protect yourself&quot; mentality from growing up in Hell&#x27;s Kitchen, which served her as a young teen then in the industry having to rebuff the advances of producers and being around people who &quot;just wanted to use [her]&quot;. Keys felt like she could not show weakness. Executives at Columbia also wanted to manufacture her image, with her &quot;hair blown out and flowing&quot;, short dresses, and asking her to lose weight; &quot;they wanted me to be the same as everyone else,&quot; Keys felt. &quot;I had horrible experiences,&quot; she recalled. &quot;They were so disrespectful ... I started figuring, &#x27;Hey, nothing&#x27;s worth all this.&#x27;&quot; As months passed, Keys had grown more frustrated and depressed with the situation, while the label requested the finished tracks. Keys recalled, &quot;it was around that time that I realized that I couldn&#x27;t do it with other people. I had to do it more with myself, with the people that I felt comfortable with or by myself with my piano.&quot; Keys decided to sit in with some producers and engineers to ask questions and watch them technically work on other artists&#x27; music. &quot;The only way it would sound like anything I would be remotely proud of is if I did it,&quot; Keys determined. &quot;I already knew my way around the keyboard, so that was an advantage. And the rest was watching people work on other artists and watching how they layer things.&quot;

Her partner Kerry &quot;Krucial&quot; Brothers suggested to Keys she buy her own equipment and record on her own. Keys began working separately from the label, exploring more production and engineering on her own with her own equipment. She had moved out of her mother&#x27;s apartment and into a sixth-floor walk-up apartment in Harlem with Brothers, where she fit a recording studio into their bedroom and worked on her music. Keys felt being on her own was &quot;necessary&quot; for her sanity. She was &quot;going through a lot&quot; with herself and with her mother, and she &quot;needed the space&quot;; &quot;I needed to have my own thoughts, to do my own thing.&quot; Keys and Brothers later moved to Queens and together they turned the basement into KrucialKeys Studios. Keys would return to her mother&#x27;s house periodically, particularly when she felt &quot;lost or unbalanced or alone&quot;. &quot;She would probably be working and I would sit at the piano,&quot; she reminisced. During this time, she composed the song &quot;Troubles&quot;, which started as &quot;a conversation with God&quot;, working on it further in Harlem. Around this time the album &quot;started coming together&quot;, and she composed and recorded most of the songs that would appear on her album. &quot;Finally, I knew how to structure my feelings into something that made sense, something that can translate to people&quot;, Keys. &quot;That was a changing point. My confidence was up, way up.&quot; The different experience reinvigorated Keys and her music. While the album was nearly completed, Columbia&#x27;s management changed and more creative differences emerged with the new executives. Keys brought her songs to the executives, who rejected her work, saying it &quot;sounded like one long demo&quot;. They wanted Keys to sing over loops, and told Keys they will bring in a &quot;top&quot; team and get her &quot;a more radio-friendly sound&quot;. Keys would not allow it; &quot;they already had set the monster loose&quot;, she recalled. &quot;Once I started producing my own stuff there wasn&#x27;t any going back.&quot; Keys stated that Columbia had the &quot;wrong vision&quot; for her. &quot;They didn&#x27;t want me to be an individual, didn&#x27;t really care,&quot; Keys concluded. &quot;They just wanted to put me in a box.&quot; Control over her creative process was &quot;everything&quot; to Keys.

Keys had wanted to leave Columbia since they began &quot;completely disrespecting [her] musical creativity&quot;. Leaving Columbia was &quot;a hell of a fight,&quot; she recalled. &quot;Out of spite, they were threatening to keep everything I&#x27;d created even though they hated it. I thought I&#x27;d have to start over again just to get out, but I didn&#x27;t care.&quot; Keys said in 2001: &quot;It&#x27;s been one trial, one test of confidence and faith after the next.&quot; To Keys, &quot;success doesn&#x27;t just mean that I&#x27;m the singer, and you give me my 14 points, and that&#x27;s all. That&#x27;s not how it&#x27;s going to go down.&quot; Edge, who was by that time head of A&amp;R at Arista Records, said, &quot;I didn&#x27;t see that there was much hands-on development at Columbia, and she was smart enough to figure that out and to ask to be released from her contract, which was a bold move for a new artist.&quot; Edge introduced Keys to Arista&#x27;s then-president, Clive Davis, in 1998.

===1998–2002: Breakthrough with &quot;Songs in A Minor&quot;===
Robinson and Keys, with Davis&#x27;s help, were able to negotiate out of the Columbia contract and she signed to Arista Records in late 1998. Keys was also able to leave with the music she had created. Davis gave Keys the creative freedom and control she wanted, and encouraged her to be herself. Keys said of Davis&#x27;s instinct: &quot;he knows which artists are the ones that maybe are needing to craft their own sound and style and songs, and you just have to let an artist go and find that space. And I think he somehow knew that and saw that in me and really just let me find that.&quot; After signing with Davis, Keys continued honing her songs. Keys almost chose Wilde as her stage name at the age of 16 until her manager suggested the name Keys after a dream he had. She felt that name embodied her both as a performer and person. Keys contributed her songs &quot;Rock wit U&quot; and &quot;Rear View Mirror&quot; to the soundtracks of the films &quot;Shaft&quot; (2000) and &quot;Dr. Dolittle 2&quot; (2001).

In 2000, Davis was ousted from Arista, and the release of Keys&#x27;s album was put on hold. Later that year, Davis formed J Records and immediately signed Keys to the label. &quot;He didn&#x27;t try to divert me to something else,&quot; Keys said on following Davis to his new label. He understood that she wants to be herself and not &quot;made into what somebody else thinks I should be.&quot;

Keys played small shows across America, performed at industry showcases for months and then on television. Davis thought &quot;pop stations might feel she&#x27;s too urban. Urban might feel she&#x27;s too traditional&quot;, and as he felt Keys was a &quot;compelling, hypnotic performer&quot; best experienced in person, he had Keys perform her music to different crowds in different places to spread the word. &quot;I created opportunities for those who saw her to spread the word&quot;, Davis recalled. &quot;She is her own ambassador.&quot; Davis wanted to &quot;let people discover her, and you can only do that with a few artists.&quot; Keys later performed on &quot;The Tonight Show&quot; in promotion for her upcoming debut. Davis wrote a letter to Oprah asking her to have Keys, Jill Scott, and India.Arie perform on her show to promote new women in music. Oprah booked Keys the day she heard her song &quot;Fallin, her debut single. Keys performed the song on Oprah&#x27;s show the week prior to the release of her debut album. &quot;Fallin, released as a single in April, went to No. 1 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100, and stayed atop the chart for six consecutive weeks. &quot;Ebony&quot; magazine wrote that at the time &quot;the music that was pumping on the airwaves was hip-hop and rap – not Alicia&#x27;s unique blend of classical meets soul, meets hip-hop, meets, well, Alicia. What could have been a recipe for disaster ... turned into the opportunity of a lifetime.&quot; Keys as an artist since her early days, Davis said, &quot;does her own thing. She has set out her own vision. That&#x27;s the way it is for artists of her ilk ... They don&#x27;t try to fit in. They try to establish their own paths ... [she has] sure natural instinct and sure vision&quot; and &quot;a respect for musical history.&quot;
&quot;Songs in A Minor&quot;, which included material that Columbia Records had rejected, was released on June 5, 2001, to critical acclaim. Musically, it incorporated classical piano in an R&amp;B, soul and jazz-fused album. &quot;Jam!&quot; described the music as &quot;old-school urban sounds and attitude set against a backdrop of classical piano and sweet, warm vocals&quot;. &quot;USA Today&quot; wrote that Keys &quot;taps into the blues, soul, jazz and even classical music to propel haunting melodies and hard-driving funk&quot;. &quot;Songs in A Minor&quot; would be &quot;lauded for its mix of traditional soul values and city-girl coolness&quot;, wrote &quot;The Guardian&quot;. &quot;PopMatters&quot; wrote that &quot;Keys&#x27;s &quot;Songs in A Minor&quot; is a testament to her desire (and patience) to create a project that most reflects her sensibilities as a 20-year-old woman and as a musical, cultural, and racial hybrid.&quot;
&quot;Songs in A Minor&quot; debuted on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 chart at number one, selling 236,000 in its first week at retail. In its second week, word of mouth and exposure from television performances was so significant that record stores requested another 450,000 copies. The album went on to sell over 6.2 million copies in the United States and 12 million internationally. It was certified six times Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America. &quot;Songs in A Minor&quot; established Keys&#x27;s popularity both inside and outside of the United States where she became the best-selling new artist and R&amp;B artist of the year.

The album&#x27;s second single, &quot;A Woman&#x27;s Worth&quot;, was released in February 2002 and peaked at seven on the Hot 100 and number three on &quot;Billboard&quot;″s Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs; becoming her second top ten single on both charts. Released in June, &quot;How Come You Don&#x27;t Call Me&quot;, Keys&#x27;s cover of Prince&#x27;s song, served as the album&#x27;s third single, peaking at 59 on the Hot 100. The album&#x27;s fourth single &quot;Girlfriend&quot; was released in the United Kingdom where it peaked at 82. The following year, the album was reissued as &quot;Remixed &amp; Unplugged in A Minor&quot;, which included eight remixes and seven unplugged versions of the songs from the original.

&quot;Songs in A Minor&quot; received six Grammy Award nominations, including Record of the Year for &quot;Fallin. At the 2002 Grammy Awards, Keys won five awards: Song of the Year, Best Woman R&amp;B Vocal Performance, and Best R&amp;B Song for &quot;Fallin, Best New Artist, and Best R&amp;B Album. Keys tied Lauryn Hill&#x27;s record for the most Grammy wins for a woman solo artist in a year. That year, Keys wrote and produced the song &quot;Impossible&quot; for Christina Aguilera&#x27;s album &quot;Stripped&quot; (2002), also providing background vocals and piano. During the early 2000s, Keys also made small cameos in television series &quot;Charmed&quot; and &quot;American Dreams&quot;.

===2003–2005: &quot;The Diary of Alicia Keys&quot; and &quot;Unplugged&quot;===

Keys followed up her debut with &quot;The Diary of Alicia Keys&quot;, which was released in December 2003. The album debuted at number one on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, selling over 618,000 copies its first week of release, becoming the largest first-week sales for a female artist in 2003. It sold 4.4 million copies in the United States and was certified four times Platinum by the RIAA. It sold eight million copies worldwide, becoming the sixth-biggest-selling album by a female artist and the second-biggest-selling album by a female R&amp;B artist. The album&#x27;s lead single, &quot;You Don&#x27;t Know My Name&quot;, peaked at number three on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 and number one on the Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs chart for eight consecutive weeks, her first Top 10 single in both charts since 2002&#x27;s &quot;A Woman&#x27;s Worth&quot;. The album&#x27;s second single, &quot;If I Ain&#x27;t Got You&quot;, was released in February 2004 and peaked at number 4 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 and number one on the Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs for six weeks. The album&#x27;s third single, &quot;Diary&quot;, peaked at number 8 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 and number two on the Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs chart, being their third consecutive Top 10 single in both charts. The album&#x27;s fourth and final single, &quot;Karma&quot;, which peaked at number 20 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 and number 17 on the Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs, first release to fail to achieve top ten status on both charts. &quot;If I Ain&#x27;t Got You&quot; became the first single by a female artist to remain on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs chart for over a year. Keys also collaborated with recording artist Usher on the song &quot;My Boo&quot; from his 2004 album, &quot;Confessions (Special Edition)&quot;. The song topped the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 for six weeks and Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs for three weeks, became her first number-one single on the Hot 100 since 2001&#x27;s &quot;Fallin&#x27;&quot;. Keys won Best R&amp;B Video for &quot;If I Ain&#x27;t Got You&quot; at the 2004 MTV Video Music Awards; she performed the song and &quot;Higher Ground&quot; with Lenny Kravitz and Stevie Wonder.

While attending the Cannes Film Festival in May 2004, it was announced that Keys intended to make her film debut in a biopic about biracial piano prodigy Philippa Schuyler. The film was to be co-produced by Halle Berry and Marc Platt. September 25, Alicia Keys headlined The Great Wall Concert, initially called the Wall of Hope concert, on the Northern Gate Juyongguan section of the Great Wall of China, commemorating the 20th anniversary of the wall&#x27;s restoration project that was part of a series of benefit concerts.

Later that year, Keys released her book &quot;Tears for Water: Songbook of Poems and Lyrics&quot;, a collection of unreleased poems from her journals and lyrics. The title derived from one of her poems, &quot;Love and Chains&quot;, from the line: &quot;I don&#x27;t mind drinking my tears for water.&quot; She said the title is the foundation of her writing because &quot;everything I have ever written has stemmed from my tears of joy, of pain, of sorrow, of depression, even of question&quot;. The book sold over US$500,000 and Keys made &quot;The New York Times&quot; bestseller list in 2005. The following year, she won a second consecutive award for Best R&amp;B Video at the MTV Video Music Awards for the video &quot;Karma&quot;. Keys performed &quot;If I Ain&#x27;t Got You&quot; and then joined Jamie Foxx and Quincy Jones in a rendition of &quot;Georgia on My Mind&quot;, the Hoagy Carmichael song made famous by Ray Charles in 1960 at the 2005 Grammy Awards. That evening, she won four Grammy Awards: Best Female R&amp;B Vocal Performance for &quot;If I Ain&#x27;t Got You&quot;, Best R&amp;B Song for &quot;You Don&#x27;t Know My Name&quot;, Best R&amp;B Album for &quot;The Diary of Alicia Keys&quot;, and Best R&amp;B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals&quot; for &quot;My Boo&quot; with Usher.

Keys performed and taped her installment of the &quot;MTV Unplugged&quot; series in July 2005 at the Brooklyn Academy of Music. During this session, Keys added new arrangements to her original songs and performed a few choice covers. The session was released on CD and DVD in October 2005. Simply titled &quot;Unplugged&quot;, the album debuted at number one on the U.S. &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 chart with 196,000 units sold in its first week of release. The album sold one million copies in the United States, where it was certified Platinum by the RIAA, and two million copies worldwide. The debut of Keys&#x27;s &quot;Unplugged&quot; was the highest for an &quot;MTV Unplugged&quot; album since Nirvana&#x27;s 1994 &quot;MTV Unplugged in New York&quot; and the first &quot;Unplugged&quot; by a female artist to debut at number one. The album&#x27;s first single, &quot;Unbreakable&quot;, peaked at number 34 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 and number four on the Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs. It remained at number one on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot Adult R&amp;B Airplay for 11 weeks. The album&#x27;s second and final single, &quot;Every Little Bit Hurts&quot;, was released in January 2006, it failed to enter the U.S. charts.

Keys opened a recording studio in Long Island, New York, called The Oven Studios, which she co-owns with her production and songwriting partner Kerry &quot;Krucial&quot; Brothers. The studio was designed by renowned studio architect John Storyk of WSDG, designer of Jimi Hendrix&#x27; Electric Lady Studios. Keys and Brothers are the co-founders of KrucialKeys Enterprises, a production and songwriting team who have assisted Keys in creating her albums as well as creating music for other artists.

===2006–2008: Film debut and &quot;As I Am&quot;===

In 2006, Keys won three NAACP Image Awards, including Outstanding Female Artist and Outstanding Song for &quot;Unbreakable&quot;. She also received the Starlight Award from the Songwriters Hall of Fame. In October 2006, she played the voice of Mommy Martian in the &quot;Mission to Mars&quot; episode of Nick Jr.’s CGI-animated children&#x27;s television series &quot;The Backyardigans&quot;, in which she sang an original song, &quot;Almost Everything Is Boinga Here&quot;. That same year, Keys nearly had a mental breakdown. Her grandmother had died and her family was heavily dependent on her. She felt she needed to &quot;escape&quot; and went to Egypt for three weeks. She explained: &quot;That trip was definitely the most crucial thing I&#x27;ve ever done for myself in my life to date. It was a very difficult time that I was dealing with, and it just came to the point where I really needed to—basically, I just needed to run away, honestly. And I needed to get as far away as possible.&quot;

In November 2006 Keys performed live with David Bowie at a fundraising event in New York. This would be Bowie&#x27;s last public performance.

Keys made her film debut in early 2007 in the crime film &quot;Smokin&#x27; Aces&quot;, co-starring as an assassin named Georgia Sykes opposite Ben Affleck and Andy García. Keys received much praise from her co-stars in the film; Ryan Reynolds called her &quot;so natural&quot; and said she would &quot;blow everybody away.&quot; &quot;Smokin&#x27; Aces&quot; was a moderate hit at the box office, earning $57,103,895 worldwide during its theatrical run. In the same year, Keys earned further praise for her second film, &quot;The Nanny Diaries&quot;, based on the 2002 novel of the same name, in which she co-starred alongside Scarlett Johansson and Chris Evans. &quot;The Nanny Diaries&quot; had a hit moderate performance at the box office, earning only $44,638,886 worldwide during its theatrical run. She also guest starred as herself in the &quot;One Man Is an Island&quot; episode of the drama series &quot;Cane&quot;.

Keys released her third studio album, &quot;As I Am&quot;, in November 2007; it debuted at number one on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, selling 742,000 copies in its first week. It gained Keys her largest first week sales of her career and became her fourth-consecutive number-one album, tying her with Britney Spears for the most consecutive number-one debuts on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 by a female artist. The week became the second-largest sales week of 2007 and the largest sales week for a female solo artist since singer Norah Jones&#x27; album &quot;Feels like Home&quot; in 2004. The album has sold three million copies in the United States and has been certified three times Platinum by the RIAA. It has sold five million copies worldwide. Keys received five nominations for &quot;As I Am&quot; at the 2008 American Music Award and ultimately won two. The album&#x27;s lead single, &quot;No One&quot;, peaked at number one on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 for five consecutive weeks and Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs for ten consecutive weeks, became her first number-one single on the Hot 100 since 2004&#x27;s &quot;My Boo&quot; and becoming Keys&#x27;s third and fifth number-one single on each chart, respectively. The album&#x27;s second single, &quot;Like You&#x27;ll Never See Me Again&quot;, was released in late 2007 and peaked at number 12 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 and number one on the Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs for seven consecutive weeks. From October 27, 2007, when &quot;No One&quot; reached No. 1, through February 16, 2008, the last week &quot;Like You&#x27;ll Never See Me Again&quot; was at No. 1, the Keys was on top of the chart for 17 weeks, more consecutive weeks than any other artist on the Hot R&amp;B/Hip/Hop Songs chart. The album&#x27;s third single, &quot;Teenage Love Affair&quot;, which peaked at number 54 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 and number three on the Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs. The album&#x27;s fourth and final single, &quot;Superwoman&quot;, which peaked at number 82 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 and number 12 on the Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs.
&quot;No One&quot; earned Keys the awards for Best Female R&amp;B Vocal Performance and Best R&amp;B Song at the 2008 Grammy Awards. Keys opened the ceremony singing Frank Sinatra&#x27;s 1950s song &quot;Learnin&#x27; the Blues&quot; as a &quot;duet&quot; with archival footage of Sinatra in video and &quot;No One&quot; with John Mayer later in the show. Keys also won Best Female R&amp;B Artist during the show. She starred in &quot;Fresh Takes&quot;, a commercial micro-series created by Dove Go Fresh, which premiered during &quot;The Hills&quot; on MTV from March to April 2008. The premiere celebrated the launch of new Dove Go Fresh. She also signed a deal as spokesperson with Glacéau&#x27;s VitaminWater to endorse the product, and was in an American Express commercial for the &quot;Are you a Cardmember?&quot; campaign. Keys, along with The White Stripes&#x27; guitarist and lead vocalist Jack White, recorded the theme song to &quot;Quantum of Solace&quot;, the first duet in Bond soundtrack history. In 2008, Keys was ranked in at number 80 the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 All-Time Top Artists. She also starred in the feature &quot;The Secret Life of Bees&quot;. Her role earned her a nomination for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Motion Picture at the NAACP Image Awards. She also received three nominations at the 2009 Grammy Awards and won Best Female R&amp;B Vocal Performance for &quot;Superwoman&quot;.

In an interview with &quot;Blender&quot; magazine, Keys allegedly said &quot;&#x27;Gangsta rap&#x27; was a ploy to convince black people to kill each other, &#x27;gangsta rap&#x27; didn&#x27;t exist&quot; and went on to say that it was created by &quot;the government&quot;. The magazine also claimed she said that Tupac Shakur and The Notorious B.I.G. were &quot;essentially assassinated, their beefs stoked by the government and the media, to stop another great black leader from existing&quot;. Keys later wrote a statement clarifying the issues and saying her words were misinterpreted. Later that year, Keys was criticized by anti-smoking campaigners after billboard posters for her forthcoming concerts in Indonesia featured a logo for the A Mild cigarette brand sponsored by tobacco firm Philip Morris. She apologized after discovering that the concert was sponsored by the firm and asked for &quot;corrective actions&quot;. In response, the company withdrew its sponsorship.

===2009–2011: &quot;The Element of Freedom&quot;, marriage and motherhood===
In 2009, Keys approached Clive Davis for permission to submit a song for Whitney Houston&#x27;s sixth studio album &quot;I Look to You&quot;. She subsequently co-wrote and produced the single &quot;Million Dollar Bill&quot; with record producer Swizz Beatz. Months later, she was featured on rapper Jay-Z&#x27;s song &quot;Empire State of Mind&quot; which was the lead single from his eleventh studio album &quot;The Blueprint 3&quot;. The song was a commercial and critical success, topping the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100, becoming her fourth number-one song on that chart. Additionally, it won Grammy Awards for &#x27;Best Rap/Sung Collaboration and &#x27;Best Rap Song&#x27; the following year, among a total of five nominations.
The following month, the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers honored Keys with the Golden Note Award, an award given to artists &quot;who have achieved extraordinary career milestones&quot;. She collaborated with Spanish recording artist Alejandro Sanz for &quot;Looking for Paradise&quot;, which topped the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot Latin Songs chart, this was Keys&#x27;s first number one on all three charts, which also made her the first African-American of non-Hispanic origin to reach number 1 on the &quot;Hot Latin Tracks&quot;.

Keys released her fourth studio album, &quot;The Element of Freedom&quot;, in December 2009. It debuted at number two on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, selling 417,000 copies in its first week. It was preceded by the release of its lead single &quot;Doesn&#x27;t Mean Anything&quot; which peaked at sixty on the Hot 100, and fourteen on &quot;Billboard&quot;″s Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs. Keys was ranked as the top R&amp;B recording artist of the 2000–2009 decade by &quot;Billboard&quot; magazine and ranked at number five as artist of the decade, while &quot;No One&quot; was ranked at number six on the magazine&#x27;s top songs of the decade. In the United Kingdom, &quot;The Element of Freedom&quot; became Keys&#x27;s first album to top the UK Albums Chart. The album&#x27;s second single, &quot;Try Sleeping with a Broken Heart&quot;, was released in November and peaked at number twenty-seven on the Hot 100 and number two on the Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. The album&#x27;s third single &quot;Put It in a Love Song&quot; featured recording artist Beyoncé. In February 2010, Keys released the fourth single, &quot;Empire State of Mind (Part II) Broken Down&quot; peaked at fifty-five on the Hot 100 and seventy-six on the Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. In May, &quot;Un-Thinkable (I&#x27;m Ready)&quot; featuring rapper Drake was released as the album&#x27;s fifth single. While only peaking at twenty-one on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100, it topped the Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs for twelve consecutive weeks. The song became the album&#x27;s most successful single; Keys eighth number one on the chart; and Key&#x27;s first number one song in five years. The album&#x27;s sixth and final single, &quot;Wait Til You See My Smile&quot;, was released in December 2010 in the United Kingdom.

In May 2010, a representative for Keys and Swizz Beatz confirmed that they were engaged and expecting a child together. Keys and Beatz had a wedding celebration near the Mediterranean Sea on July 31, 2010. On October 14, 2010, Keys gave birth to their first son, in New York City. She recorded a song together with Eve called &quot;Speechless&quot;, dedicated to her son.

In June 2011, &quot;Songs in A Minor&quot; was re-released as deluxe and collector&#x27;s editions in commemoration of its 10th anniversary. To support the release, Keys embarked on a four-city promotional tour, titled Piano &amp; I: A One Night Only Event With Alicia Keys, featuring only her piano. Keys is also set to co-produce the Broadway premiere of &quot;Stick Fly&quot;, which was opened in December 2011. At the end of June, a wax figure of Keys was unveiled at Madame Tussauds New York. On September 26, 2011, was the premiere of &quot;Project 5&quot;, known as &quot;Five&quot;, a short film that marks the debut of Keys as a director. It is a documentary of five episodes that tell stories of five women who had breast cancer and how it affected their lives. The production also has co-direction of the actresses Jennifer Aniston, Demi Moore and film director Patty Jenkins. On October 7, 2011, Sony Music&#x27;s RCA Music Group announced that it would be absorbing Keys&#x27;s longtime label, J Records, as well as Arista and Jive Records. With the shutdown, Keys (and various other artists previously signed to the three labels) released her following music material under RCA Records.

===2012–2015: &quot;Girl on Fire&quot;===
Keys released her fifth studio album &quot;Girl on Fire&quot;, her first album through RCA Records on November 27, 2012. Keys has stated that she wants the album to &quot;liberate&quot; and &quot;empower&quot; fans. The album&#x27;s title track was released on September 4 as its lead single and peak number eleven on &quot;Billboard&quot; hot 100, the single was Keys&#x27;s first top twenty own single on the chart since 2007 single &quot;Like You&#x27;ll Never See Me Again&quot;, she performed the song for the first time at the 2012 MTV Video Music Awards on September 6. &quot;Girl on Fire&quot; is an uptempo anthem. &quot;Brand New Me&quot; was released as the album&#x27;s second single. A softer ballad, it was noted as significantly different from the album&#x27;s lead single. Prior, two songs from &quot;Girl on Fire&quot; were released as promotion. The first was a song titled &quot;New Day&quot;. The song was later revealed to be the solo version of 50 Cent&#x27;s lead single featuring Dr. Dre and Keys. Another song, &quot;Not Even the King&quot; was uploaded to VEVO as a promotional song. Co-written by Scottish singer-songwriter Emeli Sandé, its lyrics talk about a rich love that couldn&#x27;t be afforded by &quot;the king&quot;. Overall sales of the album were considerably lower than Keys&#x27;s previous ones.

In September 2012, Keys collaborated with Reebok for her own sneakers collection. In October 2012, Keys announced her partnership with Bento Box Entertainment&#x27;s Bento Box Interactive to create an education mobile application titled &quot;The Journals of Mama Mae and LeeLee&quot; for iOS devices about the relationship between a young New York City girl and her wise grandmother. The app featured two of Keys&#x27;s original songs, &quot;Follow the Moon&quot; and &quot;Unlock Yourself&quot;.
In January 2013, BlackBerry CEO Thorsten Heins and Keys officially unveiled the BlackBerry 10 mobile platform in New York City. Heins announced that Keys would be the company&#x27;s new Global Creative Director. In January 2014, BlackBerry said it will part ways with Keys at the end of that month.

In June 2013, Keys&#x27;s VH1 Storytellers special was released on CD and DVD. In December 2013, Keys was featured on &quot;I Will Pray (Pregherò)&quot; released as a single from Italian singer Giorgia&#x27;s studio album &quot;Senza paura&quot;. In 2014, Keys collaborated with Kendrick Lamar on the song &quot;It&#x27;s On Again&quot; for &quot;The Amazing Spider-Man 2&quot; soundtrack. In July 2014, it was reported that Keys had changed management from Red Light Management&#x27;s Will Botwin to Ron Laffitte and Guy Oseary at Maverick.

On September 8, 2014, Keys uploaded the music video to a new song called &quot;We Are Here&quot; to her Facebook page, accompanied by a lengthy status update describing her motivation and inspiration to write the song. It was released digitally the following week. Keys was also working with Pharrell Williams on her sixth studio album, first set for a 2015 release. In an interview with &quot;Vibe&quot;, Keys described the sound of the album as &quot;aggressive&quot;. One of the songs on the album is called &quot;Killing Your Mother&quot;. In the same interview Keys revealed one of the songs on the album was titled &quot;Killing Your Mother&quot; with &quot;WWD&quot;, Keys discussed her first beauty campaign with Givenchy as the face of the new fragrance Dahlia Divin. In November 2014, Keys announced that she is releasing a series of children&#x27;s books. The first book released is entitled &quot;Blue Moon: From the Journals of MaMa Mae and LeeLee&quot;. Keys gave birth to her second child, son Genesis Ali Dean, on December 27, 2014. In 2015 Keys performed at the BET Awards 2015 with The Weeknd. Keys played the character Skye Summers in the second season of &quot;Empire&quot;. She first appeared in the episode &quot;Sinned Against&quot;, which aired November 25, 2015.

=== 2016–2018: &quot;Here&quot; and &quot;The Voice&quot; ===

On March 25, 2016, Keys was announced as a new coach on Season 11 of &quot;The Voice&quot;. During &quot;The Voice&quot; finale, she came in third place with team member We&#x27; McDonald. In May 2016, Keys released &quot;In Common&quot; and performed the song in the opening ceremony of 2016 UEFA Champions League Final in San Siro, Milan. The song topped Billboard&#x27;s Dance Club Songs chart on October 15. On June 20, 2016, World Refugee Day, Keys released the short film &quot;Let Me In&quot;, which she executive produced in conjunction with her We Are Here organization. The film is a reimagining of the refugee crisis as taking place in the United States. In October 2016, she released a single from upcoming album &quot;Here&quot; called &quot;Blended Family (What You Do for Love)&quot; featuring A$AP Rocky. On November 1, 2016, Keys unveiled her short film, &quot;The Gospel&quot;, to accompany the LP. Keys&#x27;s concert special &quot;Here in Times Square&quot; was aired on BET on November 3, and &quot;Here&quot; was released on November 4, peaking at number 2 of the &quot;Billboard 200&quot;, becoming her seventh top 10 album. It peaked at number-one on the R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums chart, becoming her seventh chart topper.

In January 2017, she released the track &quot;That&#x27;s What&#x27;s Up&quot; that re-imagines the spoken word segment on the Kanye West song &quot;Low Lights&quot;. Keys returned for Season 12 of &quot;The Voice&quot; and won the competition with her artist Chris Blue, on May 23, 2017. In May 2017, in an interview with Entertainment Tonight, Keys announced that she was working on her seventh studio album, therefore she did not return for the thirteenth series of &quot;The Voice&quot;. In August 2017, she attended WE Day, an event of Canadian WE Charity organization. On September 17, 2017, Keys performed at Rock in Rio, in a powerful and acclaimed performance. On October 18, 2017, NBC announced that Keys would be returning to the series for the show&#x27;s fourteenth season of &quot;The Voice&quot; alongside Adam Levine, Blake Shelton, and Kelly Clarkson. She placed in second place with her team member Britton Buchanan, with whom Keys released a cover version of Avicii&#x27;s &quot;Wake Me Up&quot; as a single. In December 2017, Keys appeared on Eminem&#x27;s album &quot;Revival&quot; on the song &quot;Like Home&quot;. Keys also featured on the song &quot;Morning Light&quot; from Justin Timberlake&#x27;s fifth studio album &quot;Man of the Woods&quot; (2018) and on &quot;Us&quot;, the third single from James Bay&#x27;s second studio album &quot;Electric Light&quot;.

On December 6, 2018, Keys spoke at the 13th Annual &quot;Billboard&quot; Women in Music event spotlighting her new non-profit named &quot;She Is the Music&quot;. As part of her address, Keys spoke briefly of the organization&#x27;s efforts in creating an inclusive database of women in music and a partnership with &quot;Billboard&quot; to mentor young women interested in the music industry. She created She is the Music upon learning that the number of women in popular music reached a six-year low in 2017, partnering with Jody Gerson, Sam Kirby and Ann Mincieli.

=== 2019–2022: &quot;Alicia&quot;, &quot;Keys&quot; and authorship ===

On January 15, 2019, Alicia Keys was announced as the host of the 61st Annual Grammy Awards. When Keys hosted the event on February 10, 2019, it became the first time a woman hosted the show in 14 years. Keys performed at Pride Live&#x27;s Stonewall Day Concert on June 28, 2019. Later Keys was announced as the buyer of the &quot;Razor House&quot; in the La Jolla community of San Diego, California. In September 2019, Keys released a new single, &quot;Show Me Love&quot;, with Miguel. The accompanying music video starred actors Michael B. Jordan and Zoe Saldana. The song was released on September 24, 2019, as the first single from Keys&#x27;s upcoming seventh studio album. The song was a commercial success on US Urban music charts and became Keys&#x27;s first song to reach the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 since &quot;Girl on Fire&quot; in 2012; peaking at number 90 on November 22, 2019. This success extended her record as the artist with the most number one singles on the Adult R&amp;B Songs chart; reigning for five consecutive weeks. It was followed by the release of the single &quot;Time Machine&quot; in November 2019. The music video for &quot;Time Machine&quot; was released the same month and noted for its retro roller rink setting and vibes. In December 2019, Keys was awarded the American Express Impact Award for her efforts to foster female artist growth and provide them with new opportunities through the non-profit she co-founded the year before and developed in 2019 named &quot;She Is the Music&quot;. Keys received the award at the 14th Annual Women in Music &quot;Billboard&quot; event on December 12, 2019.

On January 26, 2020, Alicia Keys hosted the 62nd Annual Grammy Awards for the second year in a row as announced on November 14, 2019. In addition to hosting the event, Keys performed multiple times, including a tribute with Boyz II Men to basketball star Kobe Bryant, who died in a helicopter crash earlier that same day. Keys also performed her new song &quot;Underdog&quot; with Brittany Howard backing the performance on acoustic guitar. Keys&#x27;s seventh studio album &quot;Alicia&quot; was originally scheduled to be released on May 15, 2020, but then got postponed to September 18, 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic. It debuted at number four on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 in its first week and became Keys&#x27;s eighth top-10 record in the US and won the Grammy Award for Best Immersive Audio Album at the 2022 Grammy Awards. On October 29, 2020, Keys released &quot;A Beautiful Noise&quot; with Brandi Carlile to encourage Americans to get out and vote. It was also included on the digital reissue of Keys&#x27;s seventh studio album &quot;Alicia&quot; that was released on December 18, 2020.

Keys released her memoir &quot;More Myself: A Journey&quot; on March 31, 2020. In September 2020, Keys launched her lifestyle brand Keys Soulcare. Keys and Brandi performed &quot;A Beautiful Noise&quot; on &quot;Every Vote Counts: A Celebration of Democracy&quot; on CBS. In May 2021, Keys was featured on DMX&#x27;s album &quot;Exodus&quot; in the song &quot;Hold Me Down&quot;. To commemorate the 20th anniversary of her debut album, &quot;Songs in A Minor&quot;, Keys performed a three-song medley of singles from the album at the 2021 &quot;Billboard&quot; Music Awards. In June 2021, a 20th-anniversary edition of &quot;Songs in A Minor&quot; was released.

On September 9, 2021, Keys released the single &quot;Lala (Unlocked)&quot; featuring US rapper and singer Swae Lee of the hip hop duo Rae Sremmurd. The song was performed at the 2021 MTV Video Music Awards. The music video was released on September 23, 2021. The single preceded the release of Keys&#x27;s eighth studio album and follow-up companion to 2020&#x27;s &quot;Alicia&quot;, entitled &quot;Keys&quot; as final release under RCA Records. First previewed via Alicia&#x27;s 2021 &quot;Noted&quot; YouTube docu-series, the album was released on December 10, 2021, as a double album featuring both fully produced and broken down versions of new material. On April 7, 2022, Keys released &quot;City of Gods (Part II)&quot; through her own label AKW Records. It was written and produced by Keys and is a sequel to the single &quot;City of Gods&quot; by Fivio Foreign, Kanye West and Keys. On July 14, 2022, Keys unveiled that &quot;Come for Me&quot; featuring Khalid and Lucky Daye would be released as the next and final single, ahead of a re-release of the album titled &quot;Keys II&quot; during the following month. The music video was released the same day. From June 9, 2022, the singer embarked on the global tour Alicia + Keys World Tour, extending it with eight dates in Latin America in May 2023.

=== 2022–present: &quot;Santa Baby&quot; and &quot;Hell&#x27;s Kitchen&quot; ===

After her contract with RCA Records ended, Keys released her ninth studio album and first Christmas album, &quot;Santa Baby&quot;, on November 4, 2022, exclusively on Apple Music. It was her first release as an independent artist under her own record label Alicia Keys Records. Also released as her label debut on Mom+Pop, it peaked at number 148 on the Billboard 200.

Between June and August 2023, Keys undertook the Keys to the Summer Tour in North America. Keys wrote, composed and produced with Kristoffer Diaz a musical entitled &quot;Hell&#x27;s Kitchen&quot;, which premiered at The Public Theater&#x27;s Newman Theater in New York City in November 2023 and transfer to the Shubert Theatre on Broadway in March 2024. On November 27, 2023 &quot;Lifeline&quot; was published as the second original song from the 2023 film &quot;The Color Purple&quot;, written and performed by Keys .

In February 2024, Keys performed in the Super Bowl LVIII halftime entertainment as a guest of headliner Usher; she performed &quot;If I Ain&#x27;t Got You&quot;, before joining Usher to sing their duet &quot;My Boo&quot;.

In March 2024, Keys released &quot;Kaleidoscope&quot; as the lead single from the soundtrack album of &quot;Hell&#x27;s Kitchen&quot;. &quot;Finally&quot;, Keys&#x27;s collaboration with Swedish House Mafia, was released in August 2024.

==Artistry ==


From the beginning of her career, Keys has been noted for being a multifaceted talent as a singer, songwriter, instrumentalist, arranger, and producer. She achieved acclaim for her unique style and maturity as a classical musician and singer-songwriter. &quot;The Times&quot; wrote that Keys&#x27;s debut album, &quot;Songs in A Minor&quot;, &quot;spoke from a soul that seemed way beyond its years&quot;, and her follow up, &quot;The Diary of Alicia Keys&quot;, &quot;confirmed her place in musical history&quot;. &quot;The Seattle Times&quot; assessed that with her third album, &quot;As I Am&quot;, Keys continued showing diversity in her music and her &quot;depth as a songwriter, singer and pianist.&quot; &quot;USA Today&quot;, in a review of &quot;Songs in A Minor&quot;, commended Keys&#x27;s &quot;musical, artistic and thematic maturity&quot; starting out her career. &quot;The Japan Times&quot; regarded Keys&#x27;s production of &quot;Songs in A Minor&quot; as displaying &quot;the kind of taste and restraint that is rare in current mainstream R&amp;B&quot;. &quot;Billboard&quot; wrote that her debut &quot;introduced a different kind of pop singer. Not only was she mean on the ivories, but she showed true musicianship, writing and performing her material&quot;, and Keys continued developing her artistry with subsequent albums. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; remarked that Keys broke into the music world as a singer &quot;with hip-hop swagger, an old-school soul sound and older school (as in Chopin) piano chops&quot;, her appeal &quot;bridging the generation gap&quot;. On MSN&#x27;s list of &quot;Contemporary R&amp;B, hip hop and rap icons&quot;, it was stated that Keys achieved prominence by &quot;drawing from her classical technique as a pianist, enhanced by her ease as a multi-instrumentalist ... and songwriting steeped in her formal studies.&quot;

Keys is also distinguished for being in control of her artistic output and image and having fought for creative independence since getting signed at 15 years old. &quot;PopMatters&quot; called Keys an artist who &quot;clearly has a fine sense of her creative talents and has struggled to make sure they are represented in the best way.&quot; &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; wrote that, with her classical training, Keys &quot;reintroduced the idea of a self-reliant (but still pop-friendly) R&amp;B singer-songwriter – a type that stretches back to Stevie Wonder&quot;, crossing generational lines in the process. &quot;Blender&quot; magazine expressed that Keys emerged as a &quot;singer-songwriter-instrumentalist-producer with genuine urban swagger&quot;, and her largely self-produced second album showcased her growing &quot;deftness and explorative verve&quot;. In 2016, NPR stated that Keys &quot;stood apart from pop trends while forging a remarkable career&quot; and &quot;sustained her focus on artistry&quot;. MOBO described Keys as an accomplished pianist, singer, songwriter and producer who &quot;has made a consistent and indelible contribution&quot; to the music industry, her &quot;unique approach&quot; making classical music more accessible and &quot;diffusing barriers between traditional and contemporary&quot; while &quot;keeping musical excellence at the core of her art&quot;. In 2003, &quot;The Guardian&quot; wrote that Keys&#x27;s largely self-created work is an &quot;indication of how much power she wields&quot;, and described her as &quot;an uncompromising artist&quot; who &quot;bears little resemblance&quot; to contemporary stars.

Keys has been praised for her expressive vocals and emotive delivery. In a review of &quot;Songs in A Minor&quot;, Jam! complimented her &quot;crooning&quot; and &quot;warm&quot; vocals as well as her belting &quot;gospel-style&quot;. &quot;CMJ New Music Monthly&quot; commended her &quot;deep soulful voice and heartfelt delivery&quot; of her songs. &quot;Q&quot; magazine compared her vocal talent to Mary J Blige&#x27;s and acknowledged her &quot;sincerity&quot; as &quot;another plus&quot; to her musical instincts. &quot;PopMatters&quot; noted her &quot;deep purple vocals&quot; and considered that Keys is &quot;less concerned about technical proficiency&quot; and more interested in &quot;rendering musical moments as authentic and visceral as possible&quot;. &quot;The Guardian&quot; wrote that Keys &quot;sings with devastating allure&quot;. Reviewing a live performance, the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; wrote that Keys has a &quot;commanding voice&quot; and the &quot;style and vision to convey the character and detail of the songs&quot;, and praised &quot;the range and taste of her musical instincts&quot;. NPR described her voice as &quot;yearning and ready to break, even as it remains in control&quot;, considering it one of the elements integral to her music. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; wrote that her &quot;dynamic&quot; vocal tone extends &quot;from a soft croon to a raspy, full-throated roar&quot;. Keys has a three octave contralto vocal range. In 2023, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; ranked Keys at number 185 on its list of the 200 Greatest Singers of All Time.

Keys has cited influences including Whitney Houston, John Lennon, Sade, Aretha Franklin, Bob Marley, Carole King, Prince, Nina Simone, Marvin Gaye, Quincy Jones, Donny Hathaway, Curtis Mayfield, Barbra Streisand, Radiohead, and Stevie Wonder. An accomplished classical pianist, Keys incorporates piano into a majority of her songs. Keys was described by the &quot;New York Daily News&quot; as &quot;one of the most versatile musicians of her generation&quot;. Keys&#x27;s music is influenced by vintage soul music rooted in gospel, while she heavily incorporates classical piano with R&amp;B, jazz, blues and hip hop into her music. &quot;The Guardian&quot; noted that Keys is skilled at fusing the &quot;ruff hip-hop rhythms she absorbed during her New York youth&quot; into her &quot;heartfelt, soulful R&amp;B stylings&quot;. The Songwriters Hall of Fame stated that Keys broke onto the music scene with &quot;her unmistakable blend of soul, hip-hop, jazz and classical music&quot;. She began experimenting with other genres, including pop and rock, in her third studio album, &quot;As I Am&quot;, transitioning from neo soul to a 1980s and 1990s R&amp;B sound with her fourth album, &quot;The Element of Freedom&quot;. In 2005, &quot;The Independent&quot; described her musical style as consisting of &quot;crawling blues coupled with a hip-hop backbeat, and soul melodies enhanced with her raw vocals&quot;. The &quot;New York Daily News&quot; stated that her incorporation of classical piano riffs contributed to her breakout success. &quot;Jet&quot; magazine stated she &quot;thrives&quot; by touching fans with &quot;piano mastery, words and melodious voice&quot;. In 2002, &quot;The New York Times&quot; wrote that on stage Keys &quot;invariably starts with a little Beethoven&quot; and &quot;moves into rhythm-and-blues that&#x27;s accessorized with hip-hop scratching, jazz scat-singing and glimmers of gospel.&quot; Keys&#x27;s debut album, &quot;PopMatters&quot; wrote, reflects her sensibilities as young woman and as a &quot;musical, cultural, and racial hybrid.&quot; NPR stated in 2016 that Keys&#x27;s overall work consists of notable &quot;diversity to style and form&quot;. &quot;Salon&quot; wrote that the diversity of Keys&#x27;s music is &quot;representative of her own border-breaking background and also emblematic of the variety responsible for the excitement and energy of American culture.&quot;

Keys&#x27;s lyrical content has included themes of love, heartbreak, female empowerment, hope, her philosophy of life and struggles, inner city life experiences, and social and political commentary. John Pareles of &quot;The New York Times&quot; noted that Keys presents herself as a musician first, and lyrically, her songs &quot;plunge into the unsettled domain of female identity in the hip-hop era, determined to work their way through conflicting imperatives&quot;, while she plays multiple roles in her songs, expressing loyalty, jealousy, rejection, sadness, desire, fear, uncertainty, and tenacity. Pareles considered in 2007 that Keys did not &quot;offer private details in her songs&quot; and that her musical compositions make up for a lack of lyrical refinement. Gregory Stephen Tate of &quot;The Village Voice&quot; compared Keys&#x27;s writing and production to 1970s music. NPR described a few foundational elements in Key&#x27;s music: &quot;heartache or infatuation&quot;, a &quot;tenderness and emotion made heavy with wisdom&quot;, a &quot;patiently unfurling melody&quot;, and her &quot;yearning&quot; voice. In 2016, referencing her sixth album, &quot;Here&quot;, &quot;Salon&quot; noted a &quot;hypnotic tension&quot; in Keys&#x27;s lyrical expression and complimented her &quot;sense of rhythmic timing&quot; and socio-political consciousness.

==Legacy==

Keys has been referred to as the &quot;Queen of R&amp;B&quot; by various media outlets. &quot;Time&quot; has listed her in its list of 100 most influential people twice. Journalist Christopher John Farley wrote: &quot;Her musicianship raises her above her peers. She doesn&#x27;t have to sample music&#x27;s past like a DJ scratching his way through a record collection; she has the chops to examine it, take it apart and create something new and personal with what she has found&quot; in 2005. In 2017, Kerry Washington also wrote &quot;&quot;Songs in A Minor&quot; infused the landscape of hip-hop with a classical sensibility and unfolded the complexity of being young, gifted, female and black for a new generation. Alicia became an avatar for millions of people, always remaining true to herself&quot; in 2017. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; named &quot;Songs in A Minor&quot; as one of the &quot;100 Greatest Albums&quot;, and its single &quot;Fallin in their &quot;100 greatest songs&quot; of the 2000s decade.

VH1 have listed Keys in their &quot;100 Greatest Artists of All Time&quot;, 14th on &quot;100 Greatest Women&quot;, 33rd on &quot;50 Greatest Women of the Video Era&quot; lists and at number 10 on their 100 Sexiest Artist list. Considered a music icon, Keys was placed at number 27 on &quot;Billboard&quot;″s &quot;35 Greatest R&amp;B Artists of All Time&quot; list in 2015. In January 2023, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; ranked Keys at number 185 on their list of The 200 Best Singers of All Time. The BET Honors honored Keys for her contributions to music with the Entertainment Award in 2008. In 2009, ASCAP honored Keys with its Golden Note Award, presented &quot;to songwriters, composers, and artists who have achieved extraordinary career milestones.&quot;

In 2015, The Recording Academy honored Keys with the Recording Artists&#x27; Coalition Award for &quot;her artistry, philanthropy and her passion for creators&#x27; rights as a founding member of the Academy&#x27;s brand-new GRAMMY Creators Alliance&quot;. In 2018, she was honored by The Recording Academy&#x27;s Producers &amp; Engineers Wing for her &quot;outstanding artistic contributions&quot; and accomplishments. In 2018, The National Music Publishers Association honored Keys with the Songwriter Icon award for her &quot;credits as a music creator&quot; and her &quot;role as an inspirational figure to millions&quot;.

&quot;Rolling Stone&quot; wrote that Keys was &quot;something new&quot; in contemporary popular music, &quot;bridging the generation gap&quot; with &quot;hip-hop swagger, an old-school soul sound and older school (as in Chopin) piano chops.&quot; Key&#x27;s debut, &quot;Billboard&quot; stated, &quot;introduced a different kind of pop singer. Not only was she mean on the ivories, but she showed true musicianship, writing and performing her material&quot;. Barry Walters of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; wrote that Keys &quot;reintroduced the idea of a self-reliant (but still pop-friendly) R&amp;B singer-songwriter – a type that stretches back to Stevie Wonder&quot;, crossing generational lines in the process. On MSN&#x27;s list of &quot;Contemporary R&amp;B, hip hop and rap icons&quot;, it was stated that Keys &quot;set a high bar&quot; from the outset of her career, &quot;drawing from her classical technique as a pianist, enhanced by her ease as a multi-instrumentalist...and songwriting steeped in her formal studies.&quot; AllMusic wrote that her debut &quot;kicked off a wave of ambitious new neo-soul songsters&quot; and &quot;fit neatly into the movement of ambitious yet classicist new female singer/songwriters that ranged from the worldbeat-inflected pop of Nelly Furtado to the jazzy Norah Jones, whose success may not have been possible if Keys hadn&#x27;t laid the groundwork&quot;.

Keys transcends genres, The Recording Academy also stated, incorporating her &quot;classical background into her music and including gospel, jazz, blues and vintage soul, rock, and pop influences&quot;, and she is &quot;one of the most respected musicians of today.&quot; &quot;Jet&quot; said that in 2001, Keys &quot;ushered in a marriage between classical and soul music.&quot; BBC&#x27;s Babita Sharma stated in 2016 that Keys has had a significant impact &quot;on the R&amp;B-soul-jazz sound of the last two decades&quot;. MOBO described Keys as an accomplished pianist, singer, songwriter and producer who is &quot;responsible for the emergence of vintage R&amp;B imbibed with a post-modernist twist where genres divinely melt&quot; and &quot;has made a consistent and indelible contribution&quot; to the music industry, her &quot;unique approach&quot; making classical music more accessible and &quot;diffusing barriers between traditional and contemporary&quot;. ASCAP stated that Keys&#x27;s &quot;innovative and enduring contributions to rhythm &amp; soul music have earned her an Extraordinary Place in American Popular Music.&quot;

Keys has been credited with inspiring and influencing many artists, including a younger generation of artists like Adele, Rihanna, Janelle Monáe, H.E.R., Jessie Ware, James Bay, Ella Mai, Wyvern Lingo, Anuhea Jenkins, Jorja Smith, Lauren Jauregui, Normani, Alessia Cara, Ruth-Anne Cunningham, Lianne La Havas, Heather Russell, Grimes, and Sophie Delila.

==Achievements==

Keys is one of the world&#x27;s best-selling music artists and is also listed on the Recording Industry Association of America&#x27;s best-selling artists in the United States, selling over 17.8 million albums and 21.9 million digital songs. She has sold over 30 million albums worldwide, while her singles &quot;No One&quot; and &quot;Empire State of Mind&quot; are also amongst the list of best-selling singles worldwide. &quot;Billboard&quot; ranked Keys as the fifth-most successful artist of the 2000s decade, top R&amp;B artist of the 2000s decade, and placed her at number 10 in their list of Top 50 R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Artists of the Past 25 Years. Keys was the best-selling new artist and best-selling R&amp;B artist of 2001. She has attained 4 &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 number-one singles from 9 top-ten singles. She has also attained 8 Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs and Airplay number-one singles, and set a &quot;Guinness World Record&quot; on the former in 2008, when she became the first artist to replace herself at number one with &quot;No One&quot; and &quot;Like You&#x27;ll Never See Me Again&quot;. Keys is one of three female artists included on &quot;Billboard&quot; magazine&#x27;s list of the &quot;Top 20 Hot 100 Songwriters, 2000–2011&quot; for writing songs that topped the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 chart.

Keys has earned numerous awards including 16 Grammy Awards, 17 NAACP Image Awards, 9 Billboard Music Awards and 7 BET Awards. Keys received 5 Grammy Awards in 2002, becoming the second female artist to win as many in one night. In 2005, Keys was awarded the Songwriters Hall of Fame Hal David Starlight Award, which honors &quot;gifted songwriters who are at an apex in their careers and are making a significant impact in the music industry via their original songs&quot;. That year, ASCAP awarded Keys Songwriter of the Year at its Rhythm &amp; Soul Music Awards. In 2007, she was a recipient of The Recording Academy Honors, which &quot;celebrate outstanding individuals whose work embodies excellence and integrity and who have improved the environment for the creative community.&quot; In 2014, &quot;Fuse&quot; ranked her as the thirteenth-most awarded musician of all time. In 2020, &quot;Pollstar&quot; listed Keys among top female artists of the 21st century in the concert industry; according to the publication, she sold more than 1.7 million tickets, with an earning exceeding $111.5 million.

==Philanthropy and activism==

Keys performed Donny Hathaway&#x27;s 1973 song &quot;Someday We&#x27;ll All Be Free&quot; at the &quot;&quot; televised benefit concert following the September 11 attacks. Keys protested at the New York City Hall against proposed budget cuts for students&#x27; education in June 2002. Keys has also donated to Frum tha Ground Up, a non-profit organization that aids children and teenagers with scholarships.

Keys is the co-founder and Global Ambassador of Keep a Child Alive, a non-profit organization that provides medicine, orphan care, and social support to families with HIV and AIDS in Africa and India. She discovered first-hand the extensive impact of the AIDS epidemic on a visit to South Africa, a trip that was the impetus to cofounding Keep a Child Alive. Keys had befriended AIDS activist Leigh Blake, who had reached out to her and helped raise her awareness to the global impact of HIV/AIDS. Keys and Leigh visited South African clinics with HIV-infected mothers and children, where Keys encountered the lack of resources and education on the disease present in the communities. Keys visited other African countries such as Uganda and Kenya to promote care for children affected by AIDS. Keys hosted and acted as the musical director of Keep a Child Alive&#x27;s annual fundraising gala The Black Ball. In 2005, Keys and Bono released a cover version of Peter Gabriel and Kate Bush&#x27;s &quot;Don&#x27;t Give Up&quot; to raise funds for the organization. Her work in Africa was recorded in the documentary &quot;Alicia in Africa: Journey to the Motherland&quot; which was released in April 2008.

In 2005, Keys performed in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, as part of the worldwide Live 8 concerts to raise awareness of the poverty in Africa and to pressure the G8 leaders to take action. In the same year, Keys performed on &quot;ReAct Now: Music &amp; Relief&quot; and &quot;Shelter from the Storm: A Concert for the Gulf Coast&quot;, two benefit programs that raised money for those affected by Hurricane Katrina.
In July 2007, Keys and Keith Urban performed The Rolling Stones&#x27; 1969 song &quot;Gimme Shelter&quot; at Giants Stadium in East Rutherford, New Jersey at the American leg of the Live Earth concerts. She participated in the Nobel Peace Prize Concert which took place at the Oslo Spektrum in Oslo, Norway, on December 11, 2007, along with other artists. Keys performed the song &quot;Prelude to a Kiss&quot;, retitled &quot;Send Me an Angel&quot;, from her 2007 album &quot;As I Am&quot; for the &quot;Hope for Haiti Now: A Global Benefit for Earthquake Relief&quot; telethon in response to the 2010 Haiti earthquake. In 2009, the BET Awards honored Keys with the Humanitarian Award.

In June 2011, Keys spoke alongside Annie Lennox at the United Nations AIDS conference in New York. She participated in a panel titled &quot;HIV Priorities for Positive Change: In Women&#x27;s Words&quot;, in which she calls on supporting organizations that provide treatment and care for families affected by AIDS.

In September 2012, she was featured in a campaign called &quot;30 Songs / 30 Days&quot; to support &quot;Half the Sky: Turning Oppression into Opportunity for Women Worldwide&quot;, a multi-platform media project inspired by Nicholas Kristof and Sheryl WuDunn&#x27;s book.
In March 2013, Keys teamed up with Greater Than AIDS to launch EMPOWERED, a new public information campaign to reach women in the United States about HIV/AIDS. Appearing in a public service announcement for EMPOWERED, Keys spoke with five women whose lives have been affected by HIV/AIDS. In December 2012, Keys performed alongside many other artists in &quot;12-12-12: The Concert for Sandy Relief&quot; to benefit victims of Hurricane Sandy.

In July 2016, Keys participated in a video on taking action against systemic racism in the United States titled, &quot;23 Ways You Could Be Killed if You are Black in America&quot;. After the inauguration of Donald Trump as the 45th President of the United States in 2017, Keys protested during the Women&#x27;s March on Washington and was one of the key speakers. In 2017, Keys received and shared the award for the Ambassador of Conscience from Amnesty International alongside Canadian Indigenous rights activists. In 2018, Keys was honored at &quot;Variety&quot; Power of Women luncheon for her work with Keep a Child Alive.

Keys and her husband Swizz Beatz are also avid art collectors. On July 26, 2019, &quot;Bloomberg News&quot; reported Keys and Beatz were avidly purchasing works by artist Tschabalala Self and that they decided to keep two of the pieces they bought and donate one to the Brooklyn Museum. Through the Dean Collection, they also collect notable artists such as Henry Taylor, Jordan Casteel, Kehinde Wiley, Toyin Ojih Odutola, Arthur Jafa, and Cy Gavin. Keys and Dean are co-chairs of the Gordon Parks Foundation, which permanently preserves the work of Gordon Parks, the pioneering photographer, filmmaker, musician and activist. The couple acquired what is now the largest private holding of Gordon Parks&#x27;s images, part of the Dean Collection, the couple&#x27;s philanthropic organization and family collection of international contemporary art. In the summer of 2018, Keys and Dean were featured on the cover of the magazine &quot;Cultured&quot; where they delved into Gordon Parks&#x27;s works and The Dean Collection.

==Personal life==

For over a decade until 2008, Keys was in a low-profile romantic relationship with her long-time good friend and collaborator Kerry Brothers Jr.. Keys later dated hip hop artist-producer Swizz Beatz, whom she married on July 31, 2010. They have two sons together.

==Discography==

Studio albums
* &quot;Songs in A Minor&quot; (2001)
* &quot;The Diary of Alicia Keys&quot; (2003)
* &quot;As I Am&quot; (2007)
* &quot;The Element of Freedom&quot; (2009)
* &quot;Girl on Fire&quot; (2012)
* &quot;Here&quot; (2016)
* &quot;Alicia&quot; (2020)
* &quot;Keys&quot; (2021)
* &quot;Santa Baby&quot; (2022)

==Filmography==

Films starred
* &quot;Smokin&#x27; Aces&quot; (2006)
* &quot;The Nanny Diaries&quot; (2007)
* &quot;The Secret Life of Bees&quot; (2008)

==Theatre==
===Music and lyrics===
* &quot;Hell&#x27;s Kitchen&quot; (2023–2024)

==Concert tours==
Headlining tours
* Songs in A Minor Tour (2002)
* Diary Tour (2005)
* As I Am Tour (2008)
* Freedom Tour (2010)
* Set the World on Fire Tour (2013)
* Alicia + Keys World Tour (2022–2023)
* Keys to the Summer Tour (2023)
Co-headlining tours
* The Verizon Ladies First Tour (2004)

Concerts
* Piano &amp; I: A One Night Only Event with Alicia Keys (2011)
==Bibliography==
Books
* 
* 
*

Published articles
*Keys, Alicia (2008): &quot;AIDS Not Killing Hope in Africa&quot;. CNN.
*Keys, Alicia (2015): &quot;Don&#x27;t Fail the Children in Africa&quot;. CNN.
*Keys, Alicia (2016): &quot;Time to Uncover&quot;. &quot;Lenny Letter&quot;.

Other contributions
*Keys, Alicia (2014): Introduction. in &quot;Spirit Rising: My Life, My Music&quot; by Angelique Kidjo and Rachel Wenrick. Harper Design. 
*Keys, Alicia (2018): Foreword. in &quot;Blend: The Secret to Co-Parenting and Creating a Balanced Family&quot; by Mashonda Tifrere. TarcherPerigee. .

==See also==
* List of artists who reached number one in the United States
* Honorific nicknames in popular music
* List of songs written by Alicia Keys

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 

==External links==
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q121507" start="0" end="19" title="Alicia Keys" label="Alicia Augello Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q121507" start="69" end="80" title="Alicia Keys" label="Alicia Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="213" end="229" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q121698" start="284" end="293" title="J Records" label="J Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q900686" start="335" end="351" title="Songs in A Minor" label="Songs in A Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q637650" start="491" end="516" title="44th Annual Grammy Awards" label="44th Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="535" end="564" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q995862" start="589" end="595" title="Fallin&amp;#x27; (Alicia Keys song)" label="Fallin"/>
<link wikidata="Q261724" start="621" end="645" title="The Diary of Alicia Keys" label="The Diary of Alicia Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q926004" start="761" end="788" title="You Don&amp;#x27;t Know My Name" label="You Don&amp;#x27;t Know My Name"/>
<link wikidata="Q256085" start="802" end="825" title="If I Ain&amp;#x27;t Got You" label="If I Ain&amp;#x27;t Got You"/>
<link wikidata="Q901472" start="843" end="848" title="Diary (Alicia Keys song)" label="Diary"/>
<link wikidata="Q420023" start="866" end="883" title="Tony! Toni! Toné!" label="Tony! Toni! Toné!"/>
<link wikidata="Q165911" start="959" end="964" title="Usher (musician)" label="Usher"/>
<link wikidata="Q935373" start="972" end="978" title="My Boo (Usher and Alicia Keys song)" label="My Boo"/>
<link wikidata="Q659406" start="1069" end="1078" title="Unplugged (Alicia Keys album)" label="Unplugged"/>
<link wikidata="Q670115" start="1118" end="1129" title="Unbreakable (Alicia Keys song)" label="Unbreakable"/>
<link wikidata="Q10913761" start="1190" end="1203" title="MTV Unplugged" label="MTV Unplugged"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="1233" end="1258" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q719929" start="1283" end="1290" title="As I Am (Alicia Keys album)" label="As I Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287387" start="1417" end="1423" title="No One (Alicia Keys song)" label="No One"/>
<link wikidata="Q605453" start="1494" end="1511" title="Smokin&amp;#x27; Aces" label="Smokin&amp;#x27; Aces"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="1555" end="1565" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q181540" start="1577" end="1594" title="Quantum of Solace" label="Quantum of Solace"/>
<link wikidata="Q568105" start="1623" end="1641" title="Another Way to Die" label="Another Way to Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q272031" start="1654" end="1664" title="Jack White" label="Jack White"/>
<link wikidata="Q999993" start="1710" end="1732" title="The Element of Freedom" label="The Element of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="1763" end="1778" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394987" start="1855" end="1881" title="Doesn&amp;#x27;t Mean Anything" label="Doesn&amp;#x27;t Mean Anything"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577556" start="1895" end="1927" title="Try Sleeping with a Broken Heart" label="Try Sleeping with a Broken Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184787" start="1945" end="1974" title="Un-Thinkable (I&amp;#x27;m Ready)" label="Un-Thinkable (I&amp;#x27;m Ready)"/>
<link wikidata="Q62766" start="2006" end="2011" title="Jay-Z" label="Jay-Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q21123" start="2037" end="2057" title="Empire State of Mind" label="Empire State of Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q64089" start="2138" end="2150" title="Girl on Fire (album)" label="Girl on Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q376611" start="2266" end="2294" title="Girl on Fire (song)" label="lead single of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q27137569" start="2319" end="2323" title="Here (Alicia Keys album)" label="Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q83855781" start="2417" end="2423" title="Alicia (album)" label="Alicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q109545636" start="2447" end="2451" title="Keys (album)" label="Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q82573084" start="2492" end="2504" title="Show Me Love (Alicia Keys and Miguel song)" label="Show Me Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q73463" start="2522" end="2528" title="Miguel (singer)" label="Miguel"/>
<link wikidata="Q84841106" start="2537" end="2545" title="Underdog (Alicia Keys song)" label="Underdog"/>
<link wikidata="Q108672880" start="2559" end="2563" title="Lala (Unlocked)" label="Lala"/>
<link wikidata="Q109335668" start="2580" end="2590" title="Best of Me (Alicia Keys song)" label="Best of Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q114944256" start="2615" end="2625" title="Santa Baby (album)" label="Santa Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q107033384" start="2646" end="2653" title="holiday music" label="holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q42201" start="2674" end="2685" title="independent music" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q122955931" start="2760" end="2771" title="77th Tony Awards" label="Tony Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="2785" end="2793" title="Broadway theater" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="2794" end="2801" title="Musical theatre" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q123808021" start="2803" end="2834" title="Hell&amp;#x27;s Kitchen (musical)" label="&amp;quot;Hell&amp;#x27;s Kitchen&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q859266" start="2908" end="2947" title="List of best-selling music artists" label="world&amp;#x27;s best-selling music artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="2972" end="2981" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2995" end="3018" title="Billboard Decade-End#2000s" label="Top Artist of the 2000s"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="3093" end="3100" title="Rhythm and blues" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254197" start="3156" end="3174" title="list of awards and nominations received by Alicia Keys" label="numerous accolades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153257" start="3221" end="3238" title="NAACP Image Award" label="NAACP Image Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q373087" start="3244" end="3256" title="American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers" label="ASCAP Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q861660" start="3280" end="3304" title="Songwriters Hall of Fame" label="Songwriters Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091299" start="3309" end="3346" title="National Music Publishers Association" label="National Music Publishers Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="3451" end="3492" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="3494" end="3497" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="3604" end="3608" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q604370" start="3638" end="3673" title="Time 100" label="100 list of most influential people"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="3799" end="3802" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="3803" end="3807" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383117" start="3830" end="3848" title="Keep a Child Alive" label="Keep a Child Alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q840133" start="3996" end="4015" title="Hell&amp;#x27;s Kitchen" label="Hell&amp;#x27;s Kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="4032" end="4041" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q620413" start="4109" end="4118" title="paralegal" label="paralegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q101539" start="4193" end="4209" title="flight attendant" label="flight attendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q432681" start="4383" end="4390" title="Sciacca" label="Sciacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="4392" end="4398" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q53643" start="4404" end="4417" title="Lamezia Terme" label="Lamezia Terme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458" start="4422" end="4430" title="Calabria" label="Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q893594" start="4448" end="4460" title="Puerto Ricans" label="Puerto Rican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378555" start="4520" end="4531" title="multiracial" label="multiracial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749290" start="4740" end="4755" title="Manhattan Plaza" label="Manhattan Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q837322" start="5821" end="5830" title="sex trade" label="sex trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134267" start="6401" end="6409" title="cornrows" label="cornrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="7077" end="7081" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q109612" start="7109" end="7124" title="Thelonious Monk" label="Thelonious Monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q104358" start="7126" end="7140" title="Billie Holiday" label="Billie Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768" start="7142" end="7157" title="Ella Fitzgerald" label="Ella Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779" start="7163" end="7178" title="Louis Armstrong" label="Louis Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076052" start="7313" end="7322" title="preschool" label="preschool"/>
<link wikidata="Q337097" start="7387" end="7391" title="Cats (musical)" label="Cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583524" start="7414" end="7426" title="Dorothy Gale" label="Dorothy Gale"/>
<link wikidata="Q130295" start="7452" end="7468" title="The Wonderful Wizard of Oz" label="The Wizard of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="7899" end="7908" title="Classical music" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q675475" start="7978" end="7991" title="Suzuki method" label="Suzuki method"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="8022" end="8031" title="Beethoven" label="Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="8033" end="8039" title="Mozart" label="Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268" start="8041" end="8047" title="Chopin" label="Chopin"/>
<link wikidata="Q187192" start="8053" end="8058" title="Satie" label="Satie"/>
<link wikidata="Q204057" start="8260" end="8272" title="Philadelphia (film)" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263" start="8392" end="8401" title="Tom Hanks" label="Tom Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="8430" end="8435" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248009" start="9534" end="9569" title="Professional Performing Arts School" label="Professional Performing Arts School"/>
<link wikidata="Q131272" start="10283" end="10293" title="soul music" label="soul music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="10295" end="10302" title="hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="10304" end="10311" title="Rhythm and blues" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q189758" start="10348" end="10359" title="Marvin Gaye" label="Marvin Gaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q310170" start="10364" end="10379" title="Curtis Mayfield" label="Curtis Mayfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q189074" start="10584" end="10590" title="Harlem" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394474" start="11113" end="11131" title="Kerry Brothers Jr." label="Kerry Brothers Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q463999" start="11247" end="11261" title="The Cosby Show" label="The Cosby Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q189074" start="11518" end="11524" title="Harlem" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="11752" end="11757" title="Bronx" label="Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209421" start="11897" end="11919" title="Police Athletic League of New York City" label="Police Athletic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="12011" end="12026" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q610225" start="12903" end="12910" title="A&amp;amp;R" label="A&amp;amp;R"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173812" start="12921" end="12931" title="Peter Edge" label="Peter Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q67030918" start="13279" end="13299" title="Warner Bros. Records" label="Warner Bros. Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101938" start="13312" end="13323" title="Clive Davis" label="Clive Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q664167" start="13330" end="13344" title="Arista Records" label="Arista Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="13366" end="13382" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="13743" end="13762" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416417" start="13817" end="13830" title="valedictorian" label="valedictorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="14301" end="14317" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075485" start="15665" end="15674" title="So So Def" label="So So Def"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548736" start="15682" end="15703" title="12 Soulful Nights of Christmas" label="Christmas compilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q51416" start="15792" end="15804" title="Men in Black (1997 film)" label="Men in Black"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15818" end="15833" title="Men in Black: The Album" label="film soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394474" start="17744" end="17778" title="Kerry Brothers, Jr." label="Kerry &amp;quot;Krucial&amp;quot; Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18041" end="18048" title="Apartment#United States" label="walk-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="18441" end="18447" title="Queens" label="Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q917312" start="22185" end="22190" title="Shaft (2000 film)" label="Shaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253887" start="22214" end="22228" title="Dr. Dolittle 2" label="Dr. Dolittle 2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22263" end="22281" title="Arista Records#Reconstructing Arista" label="ousted from Arista"/>
<link wikidata="Q121698" start="22367" end="22376" title="J Records" label="J Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338655" start="23314" end="23330" title="The Tonight Show" label="The Tonight Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q55800" start="23398" end="23403" title="Oprah" label="Oprah"/>
<link wikidata="Q232592" start="23429" end="23439" title="Jill Scott (singer)" label="Jill Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q258750" start="23445" end="23455" title="India.Arie" label="India.Arie"/>
<link wikidata="Q995862" start="23552" end="23564" title="Fallin&amp;#x27; (Alicia Keys song)" label="&amp;quot;Fallin"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="23745" end="23774" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280017" start="23835" end="23840" title="Ebony (magazine)" label="Ebony"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="23944" end="23947" title="rap music" label="rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q900686" start="24481" end="24497" title="Songs in A Minor" label="Songs in A Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076989" start="24707" end="24711" title="Jam!" label="Jam!"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="24862" end="24871" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="25146" end="25158" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322364" start="25172" end="25182" title="PopMatters" label="PopMatters"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="25468" end="25493" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="25838" end="25846" title="music recording sales certification" label="Platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="25854" end="25895" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q300623" start="26122" end="26142" title="A Woman&amp;#x27;s Worth" label="A Woman&amp;#x27;s Worth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26361" end="26392" title="How Come U Don&amp;#x27;t Call Me Anymore?#Alicia Keys version" label="How Come You Don&amp;#x27;t Call Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542" start="26421" end="26427" title="Prince (musician)" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q576398" start="26549" end="26559" title="Girlfriend (Alicia Keys song)" label="Girlfriend"/>
<link wikidata="Q214272" start="26739" end="26744" title="remix" label="remix"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="26851" end="26863" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q843219" start="26887" end="26905" title="Grammy Award for Record of the Year" label="Record of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q637650" start="26931" end="26949" title="2002 Grammy Awards" label="2002 Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027904" start="26973" end="26989" title="Grammy Award for Song of the Year" label="Song of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26991" end="27027" title="Grammy Award for Best Woman R&amp;amp;B Vocal Performance" label="Best Woman R&amp;amp;B Vocal Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459443" start="27033" end="27050" title="Grammy Award for Best R&amp;amp;B Song" label="Best R&amp;amp;B Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453643" start="27069" end="27084" title="Grammy Award for Best New Artist" label="Best New Artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542163" start="27090" end="27108" title="Grammy Award for Best R&amp;amp;B Album" label="Best R&amp;amp;B Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q214226" start="27120" end="27131" title="Lauryn Hill" label="Lauryn Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q41594" start="27277" end="27295" title="Christina Aguilera" label="Christina Aguilera"/>
<link wikidata="Q331202" start="27315" end="27323" title="Stripped (Christina Aguilera album)" label="Stripped"/>
<link wikidata="Q162371" start="27461" end="27468" title="Charmed" label="Charmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610772" start="27485" end="27500" title="American Dreams" label="American Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q261724" start="27628" end="27652" title="The Diary of Alicia Keys" label="The Diary of Alicia Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="27736" end="27761" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="27962" end="27970" title="music recording sales certification" label="Platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="27978" end="27982" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="RIAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q926004" start="28185" end="28212" title="You Don&amp;#x27;t Know My Name" label="You Don&amp;#x27;t Know My Name"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="28250" end="28279" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q300623" start="28426" end="28446" title="A Woman&amp;#x27;s Worth" label="A Woman&amp;#x27;s Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q256085" start="28492" end="28515" title="If I Ain&amp;#x27;t Got You" label="If I Ain&amp;#x27;t Got You"/>
<link wikidata="Q901472" start="28713" end="28718" title="Diary (Alicia Keys song)" label="Diary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059091" start="28945" end="28950" title="Karma (Alicia Keys song)" label="Karma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639748" start="29251" end="29276" title="Hot R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs" label="Hot R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q165911" start="29345" end="29350" title="Usher (entertainer)" label="Usher"/>
<link wikidata="Q935373" start="29369" end="29375" title="My Boo (Usher and Alicia Keys song)" label="My Boo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125266" start="29409" end="29438" title="Confessions (Usher album)" label="Confessions (Special Edition)"/>
<link wikidata="Q995862" start="29631" end="29643" title="Fallin&amp;#x27; (Alicia Keys song)" label="Fallin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q821479" start="29660" end="29678" title="MTV Video Music Award for Best R&amp;amp;B Video" label="Best R&amp;amp;B Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q223703" start="29731" end="29753" title="MTV Video Music Awards" label="MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290055" start="29788" end="29801" title="Higher Ground (Stevie Wonder song)" label="Higher Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q180224" start="29813" end="29826" title="Lenny Kravitz" label="Lenny Kravitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q714" start="29831" end="29844" title="Stevie Wonder" label="Stevie Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="29867" end="29887" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q529582" start="30001" end="30018" title="Philippa Schuyler" label="Philippa Schuyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033016" start="30054" end="30065" title="Halle Berry" label="Halle Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6755521" start="30070" end="30080" title="Marc Platt (producer)" label="Marc Platt"/>
<link wikidata="Q124881763" start="30118" end="30140" title="The Great Wall Concert" label="The Great Wall Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330063" start="30206" end="30216" title="Juyong Pass" label="Juyongguan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="30232" end="30251" title="Great Wall of China" label="Great Wall of China"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30421" end="30466" title="Tears for Water: Songbook of Poems and Lyrics" label="Tears for Water: Songbook of Poems and Lyrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="30921" end="30939" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q171905" start="31179" end="31189" title="Jamie Foxx" label="Jamie Foxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q193645" start="31194" end="31206" title="Quincy Jones" label="Quincy Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420007" start="31231" end="31249" title="Georgia on My Mind" label="Georgia on My Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q460662" start="31261" end="31277" title="Hoagy Carmichael" label="Hoagy Carmichael"/>
<link wikidata="Q544387" start="31298" end="31309" title="Ray Charles" label="Ray Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542327" start="31325" end="31343" title="2005 Grammy Awards" label="2005 Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113378" start="31594" end="31648" title="Grammy Award for Best R&amp;amp;B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals" label="Best R&amp;amp;B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q935373" start="31665" end="31671" title="My Boo (Usher and Alicia Keys song)" label="My Boo"/>
<link wikidata="Q165911" start="31683" end="31688" title="Usher (entertainer)" label="Usher"/>
<link wikidata="Q10913761" start="31745" end="31758" title="MTV Unplugged" label="MTV Unplugged"/>
<link wikidata="Q72912" start="31792" end="31817" title="Brooklyn Academy of Music" label="Brooklyn Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="31917" end="31923" title="cover version" label="covers"/>
<link wikidata="Q659406" start="32001" end="32010" title="Unplugged (Alicia Keys album)" label="Unplugged"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="32391" end="32398" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q212326" start="32417" end="32442" title="MTV Unplugged in New York" label="MTV Unplugged in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q670115" start="32565" end="32576" title="Unbreakable (Alicia Keys song)" label="Unbreakable"/>
<link wikidata="Q39087026" start="32746" end="32771" title="Adult R&amp;amp;B Airplay" label="Hot Adult R&amp;amp;B Airplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q993734" start="32834" end="32856" title="Every Little Bit Hurts" label="Every Little Bit Hurts"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="32965" end="32976" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394474" start="33075" end="33109" title="Kerry Brothers, Jr." label="Kerry &amp;quot;Krucial&amp;quot; Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981513" start="33164" end="33175" title="John Storyk" label="John Storyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928" start="33197" end="33209" title="Jimi Hendrix" label="Jimi Hendrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325913" start="33216" end="33237" title="Electric Lady Studios" label="Electric Lady Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153257" start="33508" end="33526" title="NAACP Image Awards" label="NAACP Image Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351190" start="33538" end="33563" title="NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Female Artist" label="Outstanding Female Artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659596" start="33568" end="33584" title="NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Song" label="Outstanding Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q861660" start="33661" end="33685" title="Songwriters Hall of Fame" label="Songwriters Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33755" end="33770" title="List of The Backyardigans episodes#Mission To Mars" label="Mission to Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q798576" start="33852" end="33869" title="The Backyardigans" label="The Backyardigans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="33993" end="34009" title="mental breakdown" label="mental breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="34135" end="34140" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="34529" end="34540" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q605453" start="34693" end="34710" title="Smokin&amp;#x27; Aces" label="Smokin&amp;#x27; Aces"/>
<link wikidata="Q483118" start="34774" end="34785" title="Ben Affleck" label="Ben Affleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q189415" start="34790" end="34801" title="Andy García" label="Andy García"/>
<link wikidata="Q192682" start="34860" end="34873" title="Ryan Reynolds" label="Ryan Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346729" start="35157" end="35174" title="The Nanny Diaries (film)" label="The Nanny Diaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q12177515" start="35200" end="35222" title="The Nanny Diaries" label="novel of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q34436" start="35258" end="35276" title="Scarlett Johansson" label="Scarlett Johansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q178348" start="35281" end="35292" title="Chris Evans (actor)" label="Chris Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q279881" start="35483" end="35503" title="List of Cane (TV Series) Episodes" label="One Man Is an Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q279881" start="35544" end="35548" title="Cane (TV series)" label="Cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q719929" start="35601" end="35608" title="As I Am (Alicia Keys album)" label="As I Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="35666" end="35691" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q11975" start="35860" end="35874" title="Britney Spears" label="Britney Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q549981" start="36090" end="36101" title="Norah Jones" label="Norah Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q19391" start="36120" end="36135" title="Feels Like Home (Norah Jones album)" label="Feels like Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="36247" end="36255" title="music recording sales certification" label="Platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="36263" end="36267" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="RIAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q207601" start="36379" end="36399" title="American Music Award" label="American Music Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287387" start="36460" end="36466" title="No One (Alicia Keys song)" label="No One"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="36502" end="36531" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639748" start="36563" end="36588" title="Hot R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs" label="Hot R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2682875" start="36829" end="36864" title="Like You&amp;#x27;ll Never See Me Again" label="Like You&amp;#x27;ll Never See Me Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857605" start="37370" end="37389" title="Teenage Love Affair" label="Teenage Love Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732464" start="37559" end="37569" title="Superwoman (Alicia Keys song)" label="Superwoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="37610" end="37639" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934625" start="37734" end="37771" title="Grammy Award for Best Female R&amp;amp;B Vocal Performance" label="Best Female R&amp;amp;B Vocal Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459443" start="37776" end="37793" title="Grammy Award for Best R&amp;amp;B Song" label="Best R&amp;amp;B Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518357" start="37801" end="37819" title="2008 Grammy Awards" label="2008 Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="37854" end="37867" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510088" start="37892" end="37915" title="Learnin&amp;#x27; the Blues" label="Learnin&amp;#x27; the Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q215215" start="38014" end="38024" title="John Mayer" label="John Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q962709" start="38179" end="38183" title="Dove (toiletries)" label="Dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347219" start="38223" end="38232" title="The Hills (TV series)" label="The Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094880" start="38373" end="38400" title="Energy Brands" label="Glacéau&amp;#x27;s VitaminWater"/>
<link wikidata="Q194360" start="38439" end="38455" title="American Express" label="American Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q268160" start="38536" end="38553" title="The White Stripes" label="The White Stripes"/>
<link wikidata="Q272031" start="38588" end="38598" title="Jack White (musician)" label="Jack White"/>
<link wikidata="Q568105" start="38613" end="38626" title="Another Way to Die" label="theme song to"/>
<link wikidata="Q181540" start="38633" end="38650" title="Quantum of Solace" label="Quantum of Solace"/>
<link wikidata="Q940387" start="38836" end="38859" title="The Secret Life of Bees (film)" label="The Secret Life of Bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153257" start="38962" end="38980" title="NAACP Image Awards" label="NAACP Image Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481140" start="39025" end="39043" title="2009 Grammy Awards" label="2009 Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934625" start="39052" end="39089" title="Grammy Award for Best Female R&amp;amp;B Vocal Performance" label="Best Female R&amp;amp;B Vocal Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q804471" start="39146" end="39153" title="Blender (magazine)" label="Blender"/>
<link wikidata="Q753679" start="39202" end="39213" title="Gangsta rap" label="Gangsta rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107" start="39434" end="39446" title="Tupac Shakur" label="Tupac Shakur"/>
<link wikidata="Q179157" start="39451" end="39471" title="The Notorious B.I.G." label="The Notorious B.I.G."/>
<link wikidata="Q1852556" start="39914" end="39927" title="Philip Morris International" label="Philip Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q34389" start="40253" end="40268" title="Whitney Houston" label="Whitney Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q576934" start="40301" end="40314" title="I Look to You" label="I Look to You"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393502" start="40378" end="40397" title="Million Dollar Bill" label="Million Dollar Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q240523" start="40425" end="40436" title="Swizz Beatz" label="Swizz Beatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q62766" start="40479" end="40484" title="Jay-Z" label="Jay-Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q21123" start="40503" end="40523" title="Empire State of Mind" label="Empire State of Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110592" start="40593" end="40608" title="The Blueprint 3" label="The Blueprint 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542172" start="40803" end="40830" title="Grammy Award for Best Rap/Sung Collaboration" label="Best Rap/Sung Collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123766" start="40841" end="40854" title="Grammy Award for Best Rap Song" label="Best Rap Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q373087" start="40941" end="40994" title="American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers" label="American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q276170" start="41172" end="41186" title="Alejandro Sanz" label="Alejandro Sanz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296874" start="41197" end="41217" title="Looking for Paradise" label="Looking for Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q19336" start="41264" end="41279" title="Hot Latin Songs" label="Hot Latin Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q999993" start="41517" end="41539" title="The Element of Freedom" label="The Element of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="41597" end="41622" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394987" start="41722" end="41748" title="Doesn&amp;#x27;t Mean Anything" label="Doesn&amp;#x27;t Mean Anything"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="41945" end="41954" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="42219" end="42234" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577556" start="42274" end="42306" title="Try Sleeping with a Broken Heart" label="Try Sleeping with a Broken Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316503" start="42479" end="42500" title="Put It in a Love Song" label="Put It in a Love Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="42533" end="42540" title="Beyoncé" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713322" start="42599" end="42641" title="Empire State of Mind (Part II) Broken Down" label="Empire State of Mind (Part II) Broken Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184787" start="42754" end="42783" title="Un-Thinkable (I&amp;#x27;m Ready)" label="Un-Thinkable (I&amp;#x27;m Ready)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010" start="42800" end="42806" title="rapper" label="rapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q33240" start="42807" end="42812" title="Drake (entertainer)" label="Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960391" start="43194" end="43219" title="Wait Til You See My Smile" label="Wait Til You See My Smile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="43451" end="43468" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q239464" start="43596" end="43599" title="Eve (entertainer)" label="Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575414" start="43613" end="43623" title="Speechless (Alicia Keys song)" label="Speechless"/>
<link wikidata="" start="43873" end="43927" title="Piano &amp;amp; I: A One Night Only Event With Alicia Keys" label="Piano &amp;amp; I: A One Night Only Event With Alicia Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q96406539" start="44017" end="44026" title="Stick Fly" label="Stick Fly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055622" start="44091" end="44101" title="wax sculpture" label="wax figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q186309" start="44126" end="44141" title="Madame Tussauds" label="Madame Tussauds"/>
<link wikidata="Q32522" start="44480" end="44496" title="Jennifer Aniston" label="Jennifer Aniston"/>
<link wikidata="Q43044" start="44498" end="44508" title="Demi Moore" label="Demi Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q456910" start="44527" end="44540" title="Patty Jenkins" label="Patty Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q56760250" start="44562" end="44572" title="Sony Music" label="Sony Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276056" start="44580" end="44595" title="RCA Music Group" label="RCA Music Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q664167" start="44683" end="44689" title="Arista Records" label="Arista"/>
<link wikidata="Q27184" start="44694" end="44706" title="Jive Records" label="Jive Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="44842" end="44853" title="RCA Records" label="RCA Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q64089" start="44941" end="44953" title="Girl on Fire (album)" label="Girl on Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q376611" start="45114" end="45142" title="Girl on Fire (song)" label="The album&amp;#x27;s title track"/>
<link wikidata="Q577600" start="45431" end="45458" title="2012 MTV Video Music Awards" label="2012 MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643638" start="45528" end="45540" title="Brand New Me (Alicia Keys song)" label="Brand New Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q7006810" start="45796" end="45803" title="New Day (Alicia Keys song)" label="New Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060" start="45865" end="45872" title="50 Cent" label="50 Cent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6078" start="45902" end="45909" title="Dr. Dre" label="Dr. Dre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062078" start="45940" end="45957" title="Not Even the King" label="Not Even the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q473873" start="45980" end="45984" title="VEVO" label="VEVO"/>
<link wikidata="Q470429" start="46049" end="46060" title="Emeli Sandé" label="Emeli Sandé"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890515" start="46371" end="46394" title="Bento Box Entertainment" label="Bento Box Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q620615" start="46447" end="46457" title="mobile app" label="mobile app"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="46525" end="46528" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q502121" start="46751" end="46761" title="BlackBerry Ltd" label="BlackBerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q105330" start="46766" end="46780" title="Thorsten Heins" label="Thorsten Heins"/>
<link wikidata="Q16798682" start="47060" end="47076" title="VH1 Storytellers (Alicia Keys album)" label="VH1 Storytellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16335801" start="47158" end="47180" title="I Will Pray (Pregherò)" label="I Will Pray (Pregherò)"/>
<link wikidata="Q260947" start="47228" end="47235" title="Giorgia (singer)" label="Giorgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16601577" start="47262" end="47273" title="Senza paura" label="Senza paura"/>
<link wikidata="Q130798" start="47313" end="47327" title="Kendrick Lamar" label="Kendrick Lamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16262721" start="47346" end="47364" title="It&amp;#x27;s On Again" label="It&amp;#x27;s On Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q4254026" start="47381" end="47405" title="The Amazing Spider-Man 2" label="The Amazing Spider-Man 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="47520" end="47531" title="Will Botwin" label="Will Botwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5622519" start="47552" end="47562" title="Guy Oseary" label="Guy Oseary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794165" start="47566" end="47574" title="Maverick (company)" label="Maverick"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164743" start="47656" end="47667" title="We Are Here (Alicia Keys song)" label="We Are Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q266786" start="47971" end="47975" title="Vibe (magazine)" label="Vibe"/>
<link wikidata="Q759210" start="48298" end="48306" title="Givenchy" label="Givenchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q20012169" start="48656" end="48671" title="BET Awards 2015" label="BET Awards 2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121062" start="48677" end="48687" title="The Weeknd" label="The Weeknd"/>
<link wikidata="Q20639649" start="48735" end="48748" title="Empire (season 2)" label="second season"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992512" start="48758" end="48764" title="Empire (2015 TV series)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q490743" start="49004" end="49013" title="The Voice (U.S. TV series)" label="The Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q24034636" start="49151" end="49160" title="In Common" label="In Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010369" start="49197" end="49213" title="opening ceremony" label="opening ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q18084793" start="49217" end="49249" title="2016 UEFA Champions League Final" label="2016 UEFA Champions League Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q133566" start="49253" end="49261" title="San Siro" label="San Siro"/>
<link wikidata="Q757285" start="49359" end="49376" title="World Refugee Day" label="World Refugee Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q27137569" start="49660" end="49664" title="Here (Alicia Keys album)" label="Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q27238010" start="49684" end="49721" title="Blended Family (What You Do for Love)" label="Blended Family (What You Do for Love)"/>
<link wikidata="Q129910" start="49738" end="49748" title="A$AP Rocky" label="A$AP Rocky"/>
<link wikidata="Q48838101" start="49880" end="49900" title="Here in Times Square" label="Here in Times Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="50021" end="50034" title="Billboard 200" label="Billboard 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001897" start="50108" end="50130" title="R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums" label="R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q15935" start="50301" end="50311" title="Kanye West" label="Kanye West"/>
<link wikidata="Q21996865" start="50323" end="50333" title="The Life of Pablo" label="Low Lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q28777137" start="50359" end="50368" title="The Voice (American season 12)" label="Season 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q30033727" start="50434" end="50444" title="Chris Blue" label="Chris Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7977517" start="50695" end="50701" title="WE Day" label="WE Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q495642" start="50724" end="50734" title="WE Charity" label="WE Charity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133749" start="50790" end="50801" title="Rock in Rio" label="Rock in Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q483507" start="51027" end="51041" title="Kelly Clarkson" label="Kelly Clarkson"/>
<link wikidata="Q47206335" start="51091" end="51107" title="Britton Buchanan" label="Britton Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q505476" start="51152" end="51158" title="Avicii" label="Avicii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51172" end="51182" title="Wake Me Up (Avicii song)#Britton Buchanan and Alicia Keys version" label="Wake Me Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608" start="51237" end="51243" title="Eminem" label="Eminem"/>
<link wikidata="Q42565390" start="51263" end="51270" title="Revival (Eminem album)" label="Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q43432" start="51374" end="51391" title="Justin Timberlake" label="Justin Timberlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q46855607" start="51424" end="51440" title="Man of the Woods" label="Man of the Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q55517047" start="51467" end="51469" title="Us (James Bay song)" label="Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q17811637" start="51499" end="51508" title="James Bay (singer)" label="James Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q55610700" start="51542" end="51556" title="Electric Light (album)" label="Electric Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q18712130" start="51616" end="51652" title="Billboard Women in Music" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Women in Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="51886" end="51895" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q18921782" start="52091" end="52102" title="Jody Gerson" label="Jody Gerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q104525013" start="52118" end="52130" title="Ann Mincieli" label="Ann Mincieli"/>
<link wikidata="Q55602853" start="52271" end="52296" title="61st Annual Grammy Awards" label="61st Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q840668" start="52561" end="52569" title="La Jolla" label="La Jolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="52583" end="52592" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="52594" end="52604" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q82573084" start="52659" end="52671" title="Show Me Love (Alicia Keys and Miguel song)" label="Show Me Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q73463" start="52684" end="52690" title="Miguel (singer)" label="Miguel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308007" start="52736" end="52753" title="Michael B. Jordan" label="Michael B. Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q190162" start="52758" end="52769" title="Zoe Saldana" label="Zoe Saldana"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="52990" end="53019" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q376611" start="53032" end="53044" title="Girl on Fire (song)" label="Girl on Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q39087026" start="53190" end="53209" title="Adult R&amp;amp;B Songs" label="Adult R&amp;amp;B Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q85877761" start="53305" end="53317" title="Time Machine (Alicia Keys song)" label="Time Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18712130" start="53781" end="53817" title="Billboard Women in Music" label="Women in Music &amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q65077171" start="53891" end="53916" title="62nd Annual Grammy Awards" label="62nd Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q651231" start="54071" end="54082" title="Boyz II Men" label="Boyz II Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q25369" start="54102" end="54113" title="Kobe Bryant" label="Kobe Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q84841106" start="54208" end="54216" title="Underdog (Alicia Keys song)" label="Underdog"/>
<link wikidata="Q19572136" start="54228" end="54243" title="Brittany Howard" label="Brittany Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q83855781" start="54327" end="54333" title="Alicia (album)" label="Alicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="54454" end="54471" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="54506" end="54531" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593892" start="54616" end="54659" title="Grammy Award for Best Immersive Audio Album" label="Grammy Award for Best Immersive Audio Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q108084271" start="54667" end="54685" title="64th Annual Grammy Awards" label="2022 Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q104439984" start="54728" end="54745" title="A Beautiful Noise" label="A Beautiful Noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q164060" start="54757" end="54771" title="Brandi Carlile" label="Brandi Carlile"/>
<link wikidata="Q96393900" start="54987" end="55009" title="More Myself" label="More Myself: A Journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q117305625" start="55088" end="55101" title="Keys Soulcare" label="Keys Soulcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q104439984" start="55135" end="55152" title="A Beautiful Noise" label="A Beautiful Noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="55223" end="55226" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q223769" start="55262" end="55265" title="DMX" label="DMX"/>
<link wikidata="Q106921209" start="55285" end="55291" title="Exodus (DMX album)" label="Exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q900686" start="55398" end="55414" title="Songs in A Minor" label="Songs in A Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q106641280" start="55490" end="55529" title="2021 Billboard Music Awards" label="2021 &amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q108672880" start="55672" end="55687" title="Lala (Unlocked)" label="Lala (Unlocked)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30103025" start="55725" end="55733" title="Swae Lee" label="Swae Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q18123226" start="55753" end="55765" title="Rae Sremmurd" label="Rae Sremmurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q107208135" start="55797" end="55824" title="2021 MTV Video Music Awards" label="2021 MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q83855781" start="55990" end="55996" title="Alicia (album)" label="Alicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q109545636" start="56019" end="56023" title="Keys (album)" label="Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="56053" end="56064" title="RCA Records" label="RCA Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q111169080" start="56453" end="56465" title="City of Gods" label="City of Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q95698148" start="56475" end="56488" title="Fivio Foreign" label="Fivio Foreign"/>
<link wikidata="Q15935" start="56490" end="56500" title="Kanye West" label="Kanye West"/>
<link wikidata="Q60687448" start="56593" end="56603" title="Lucky Daye" label="Lucky Daye"/>
<link wikidata="Q109545636" start="56700" end="56707" title="Keys II" label="Keys II"/>
<link wikidata="Q85740756" start="56843" end="56867" title="Alicia + Keys World Tour" label="Alicia + Keys World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="56902" end="56915" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="57036" end="57047" title="RCA Records" label="RCA Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q114944256" start="57125" end="57135" title="Santa Baby (album)" label="Santa Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q20056642" start="57179" end="57190" title="Apple Music" label="Apple Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897006" start="57326" end="57333" title="Mom + Pop Music" label="Mom+Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="57366" end="57379" title="Billboard 200" label="Billboard 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q120355631" start="57431" end="57454" title="Keys to the Summer Tour" label="Keys to the Summer Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q19663468" start="57512" end="57527" title="Kristoffer Diaz" label="Kristoffer Diaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q123808021" start="57547" end="57578" title="Hell&amp;#x27;s Kitchen (musical)" label="&amp;quot;Hell&amp;#x27;s Kitchen&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048768" start="57599" end="57617" title="The Public Theater" label="The Public Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797756" start="57694" end="57709" title="Shubert Theatre (Broadway)" label="Shubert Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="57713" end="57721" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q123956712" start="57764" end="57772" title="Lifeline (Alicia Keys song)" label="Lifeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q111270010" start="57840" end="57868" title="The Color Purple (2023 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Color Purple&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q54196525" start="57943" end="57959" title="Super Bowl LVIII" label="Super Bowl LVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q935373" start="58111" end="58117" title="My Boo (Usher and Alicia Keys song)" label="My Boo"/>
<link wikidata="Q125398642" start="58161" end="58173" title="Kaleidoscope (Alicia Keys song)" label="Kaleidoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q114414384" start="58267" end="58274" title="Finally (Kings of Tomorrow song)" label="Finally"/>
<link wikidata="Q20709" start="58313" end="58332" title="Swedish House Mafia" label="Swedish House Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="58640" end="58649" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q221718" start="58901" end="58918" title="The Seattle Times" label="The Seattle Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="59097" end="59106" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190886" start="59264" end="59279" title="The Japan Times" label="The Japan Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="59458" end="59467" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="59732" end="59745" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59969" end="59972" title="MSN#MSN.com" label="MSN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322364" start="60424" end="60434" title="PopMatters" label="PopMatters"/>
<link wikidata="Q714" start="60798" end="60811" title="Stevie Wonder" label="Stevie Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q804471" start="60869" end="60876" title="Blender (magazine)" label="Blender"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="61126" end="61129" title="NPR" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670259" start="61270" end="61274" title="MOBO" label="MOBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076989" start="62030" end="62034" title="Jam!" label="Jam!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012897" start="62156" end="62177" title="CMJ New Music Monthly" label="CMJ New Music Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q217629" start="62272" end="62273" title="Q (magazine)" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q228909" start="62318" end="62330" title="Mary J Blige" label="Mary J Blige"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="62688" end="62700" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="62806" end="62823" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q37137" start="63360" end="63369" title="contralto" label="contralto"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="63398" end="63411" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q34389" start="63534" end="63549" title="Whitney Houston" label="Whitney Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="63551" end="63562" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q194187" start="63564" end="63568" title="Sade (singer)" label="Sade"/>
<link wikidata="Q125121" start="63570" end="63585" title="Aretha Franklin" label="Aretha Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q409" start="63587" end="63597" title="Bob Marley" label="Bob Marley"/>
<link wikidata="Q217787" start="63599" end="63610" title="Carole King" label="Carole King"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542" start="63612" end="63618" title="Prince (musician)" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q174957" start="63620" end="63631" title="Nina Simone" label="Nina Simone"/>
<link wikidata="Q189758" start="63633" end="63644" title="Marvin Gaye" label="Marvin Gaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q193645" start="63646" end="63658" title="Quincy Jones" label="Quincy Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q507864" start="63660" end="63674" title="Donny Hathaway" label="Donny Hathaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q310170" start="63676" end="63691" title="Curtis Mayfield" label="Curtis Mayfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636" start="63693" end="63709" title="Barbra Streisand" label="Barbra Streisand"/>
<link wikidata="Q44190" start="63711" end="63720" title="Radiohead" label="Radiohead"/>
<link wikidata="Q714" start="63726" end="63739" title="Stevie Wonder" label="Stevie Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q627827" start="63862" end="63881" title="New York Daily News" label="New York Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="64082" end="64089" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="64091" end="64095" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="64097" end="64102" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="64107" end="64114" title="hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q861660" start="64331" end="64355" title="Songwriters Hall of Fame" label="Songwriters Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q268253" start="64618" end="64626" title="neo soul" label="neo soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="64736" end="64751" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q627827" start="64921" end="64940" title="New York Daily News" label="New York Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q460730" start="64996" end="65000" title="riff" label="riff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177768" start="65045" end="65048" title="Jet (magazine)" label="Jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150423" start="65698" end="65703" title="Salon (website)" label="Salon"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="66728" end="66745" title="The Village Voice" label="The Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150423" start="67114" end="67119" title="Salon (website)" label="Salon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67342" end="67358" title="Honorific nicknames in popular music#K" label="Queen of R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="67376" end="67389" title="media outlets" label="media outlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="67397" end="67401" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q604370" start="67430" end="67465" title="Time 100" label="list of 100 most influential people"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112643" start="67484" end="67507" title="Christopher John Farley" label="Christopher John Farley"/>
<link wikidata="Q232104" start="67807" end="67823" title="Kerry Washington" label="Kerry Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="67895" end="67902" title="hip hop music" label="hip-hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="68125" end="68138" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q995862" start="68248" end="68254" title="Fallin&amp;#x27; (Alicia Keys song)" label="Fallin"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="68317" end="68320" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738021" start="68407" end="68425" title="The Greatest (TV series)" label="100 Greatest Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="68608" end="68617" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="68715" end="68728" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715147" start="68812" end="68826" title="The BET Honors" label="The BET Honors"/>
<link wikidata="Q373087" start="68918" end="68923" title="ASCAP" label="ASCAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351100" start="69087" end="69108" title="The Recording Academy" label="The Recording Academy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69392" end="69422" title="The Recording Academy#Producers and Engineers Wing" label="Producers &amp;amp; Engineers Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091299" start="69512" end="69549" title="National Music Publishers Association" label="National Music Publishers Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268" start="69927" end="69933" title="Chopin" label="Chopin"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="69978" end="69987" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q714" start="70354" end="70367" title="Stevie Wonder" label="Stevie Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70422" end="70425" title="MSN#MSN.com" label="MSN"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="70740" end="70748" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80424" start="70981" end="70994" title="Nelly Furtado" label="Nelly Furtado"/>
<link wikidata="Q549981" start="71008" end="71019" title="Norah Jones" label="Norah Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177768" start="71388" end="71391" title="Jet (magazine)" label="Jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="71490" end="71493" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670259" start="71637" end="71641" title="MOBO" label="MOBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q23215" start="72369" end="72374" title="Adele" label="Adele"/>
<link wikidata="Q36844" start="72376" end="72383" title="Rihanna" label="Rihanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q234356" start="72385" end="72398" title="Janelle Monáe" label="Janelle Monáe"/>
<link wikidata="Q30639849" start="72400" end="72406" title="H.E.R." label="H.E.R."/>
<link wikidata="Q218042" start="72408" end="72419" title="Jessie Ware" label="Jessie Ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q17811637" start="72421" end="72430" title="James Bay (singer)" label="James Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q29033458" start="72432" end="72440" title="Ella Mai" label="Ella Mai"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637970" start="72442" end="72454" title="Wyvern Lingo" label="Wyvern Lingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550478" start="72456" end="72470" title="Anuhea Jenkins" label="Anuhea Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q29452199" start="72472" end="72483" title="Jorja Smith" label="Jorja Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q18921974" start="72485" end="72500" title="Lauren Jauregui" label="Lauren Jauregui"/>
<link wikidata="Q28148022" start="72502" end="72509" title="Normani" label="Normani"/>
<link wikidata="Q20090091" start="72511" end="72523" title="Alessia Cara" label="Alessia Cara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382837" start="72525" end="72545" title="Ruth-Anne Cunningham" label="Ruth-Anne Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q451812" start="72547" end="72562" title="Lianne La Havas" label="Lianne La Havas"/>
<link wikidata="Q20973743" start="72564" end="72579" title="Heather Russell" label="Heather Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q117970" start="72581" end="72587" title="Grimes (musician)" label="Grimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490903" start="72593" end="72606" title="Sophie Delila" label="Sophie Delila"/>
<link wikidata="Q859266" start="72642" end="72685" title="List of best-selling music artists" label="the world&amp;#x27;s best-selling music artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="72712" end="72753" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607495" start="72761" end="72773" title="list of best-selling music artists in the United States" label="best-selling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472550" start="73011" end="73039" title="list of best-selling singles" label="list of best-selling singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="73057" end="73066" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639748" start="73474" end="73499" title="Hot R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs" label="Hot R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975917" start="73504" end="73511" title="R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Airplay" label="Airplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="73548" end="73569" title="Guinness World Record" label="Guinness World Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287387" start="73676" end="73682" title="No One (Alicia Keys song)" label="No One"/>
<link wikidata="Q2682875" start="73699" end="73734" title="Like You&amp;#x27;ll Never See Me Again" label="Like You&amp;#x27;ll Never See Me Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="73796" end="73805" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="74007" end="74020" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153257" start="74025" end="74043" title="NAACP Image Awards" label="NAACP Image Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q392565" start="74047" end="74068" title="Billboard Music Award" label="Billboard Music Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q795848" start="74076" end="74085" title="BET Award" label="BET Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q861660" start="74220" end="74244" title="Songwriters Hall of Fame" label="Songwriters Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q373087" start="74447" end="74452" title="American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers" label="ASCAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351100" start="74560" end="74581" title="The Recording Academy" label="The Recording Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142959" start="74768" end="74772" title="Fuse (TV channel)" label="Fuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q774443" start="74858" end="74866" title="Pollstar" label="Pollstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q182832" start="74937" end="74953" title="concert" label="concert industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q507864" start="75114" end="75128" title="Donny Hathaway" label="Donny Hathaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559629" start="75152" end="75182" title="Someday We&amp;#x27;ll All Be Free" label="Someday We&amp;#x27;ll All Be Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="75249" end="75269" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065206" start="75293" end="75311" title="New York City Hall" label="New York City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383117" start="75556" end="75574" title="Keep a Child Alive" label="Keep a Child Alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="76238" end="76244" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718238" start="76401" end="76415" title="The Black Ball" label="The Black Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q834621" start="76435" end="76439" title="Bono" label="Bono"/>
<link wikidata="Q175195" start="76468" end="76481" title="Peter Gabriel" label="Peter Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q636" start="76486" end="76495" title="Kate Bush" label="Kate Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629301" start="76509" end="76527" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Give Up (Peter Gabriel and Kate Bush song)" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Give Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="76740" end="76752" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193892" start="76793" end="76799" title="Live 8" label="Live 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622676" start="76835" end="76852" title="poverty in Africa" label="poverty in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q37143" start="76873" end="76875" title="G8" label="G8"/>
<link wikidata="" start="76942" end="76971" title="ReAct Now: Music &amp;amp; Relief" label="ReAct Now: Music &amp;amp; Relief"/>
<link wikidata="" start="76988" end="77040" title="Shelter from the Storm: A Concert for the Gulf Coast" label="Shelter from the Storm: A Concert for the Gulf Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="77109" end="77126" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q315547" start="77151" end="77162" title="Keith Urban" label="Keith Urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="77173" end="77191" title="The Rolling Stones" label="The Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q253783" start="77214" end="77227" title="Gimme Shelter" label="Gimme Shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q375365" start="77237" end="77251" title="Giants Stadium" label="Giants Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q746830" start="77255" end="77282" title="East Rutherford, New Jersey" label="East Rutherford, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133770" start="77290" end="77302" title="Live Earth concert, New York City" label="American leg"/>
<link wikidata="Q233398" start="77310" end="77320" title="Live Earth" label="Live Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632696" start="77355" end="77380" title="Nobel Peace Prize Concert" label="Nobel Peace Prize Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508325" start="77405" end="77418" title="Oslo Spektrum" label="Oslo Spektrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543513" start="77632" end="77690" title="Hope for Haiti Now" label="Hope for Haiti Now: A Global Benefit for Earthquake Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q43777" start="77725" end="77746" title="2010 Haiti earthquake" label="2010 Haiti earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q795848" start="77761" end="77771" title="BET Awards" label="BET Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q151231" start="77850" end="77862" title="Annie Lennox" label="Annie Lennox"/>
<link wikidata="" start="78236" end="78305" title="Half the Sky: Turning Oppression into Opportunity for Women Worldwide" label="Half the Sky: Turning Oppression into Opportunity for Women Worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="" start="78764" end="78802" title="12-12-12: The Concert for Sandy Relief" label="12-12-12: The Concert for Sandy Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q264" start="78831" end="78846" title="Hurricane Sandy" label="Hurricane Sandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27824398" start="79041" end="79069" title="First inauguration of Donald Trump" label="inauguration of Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="79077" end="79112" title="45th President of the United States" label="45th President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q28100410" start="79148" end="79180" title="2017 Women&amp;#x27;s March" label="Women&amp;#x27;s March on Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="79296" end="79317" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="79401" end="79408" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q14270642" start="79565" end="79579" title="Bloomberg News" label="Bloomberg News"/>
<link wikidata="Q32638964" start="79649" end="79665" title="Tschabalala Self" label="Tschabalala Self"/>
<link wikidata="Q632682" start="79748" end="79763" title="Brooklyn Museum" label="Brooklyn Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q365682" start="80028" end="80040" title="Gordon Parks" label="Gordon Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q125688837" start="80413" end="80421" title="Cultured (magazine)" label="Cultured"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394474" start="80648" end="80666" title="Kerry Brothers Jr." label="Kerry Brothers Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q240523" start="80709" end="80720" title="Swizz Beatz" label="Swizz Beatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q900686" start="80826" end="80842" title="Songs in A Minor" label="Songs in A Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q261724" start="80864" end="80888" title="The Diary of Alicia Keys" label="The Diary of Alicia Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q719929" start="80910" end="80917" title="As I Am" label="As I Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q999993" start="80939" end="80961" title="The Element of Freedom" label="The Element of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q64089" start="80983" end="80995" title="Girl on Fire (album)" label="Girl on Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q27137569" start="81017" end="81021" title="Here (Alicia Keys album)" label="Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q83855781" start="81043" end="81049" title="Alicia (album)" label="Alicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q109545636" start="81071" end="81075" title="Keys (album)" label="Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q114944256" start="81097" end="81107" title="Santa Baby (album)" label="Santa Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q605453" start="81161" end="81178" title="Smokin&amp;#x27; Aces" label="Smokin&amp;#x27; Aces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346729" start="81200" end="81217" title="The Nanny Diaries (film)" label="The Nanny Diaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q940387" start="81239" end="81262" title="The Secret Life of Bees (film)" label="The Secret Life of Bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q123808021" start="81320" end="81339" title="Hell&amp;#x27;s Kitchen (musical)" label="Hell&amp;#x27;s Kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561509" start="81396" end="81417" title="Songs in A Minor Tour" label="Songs in A Minor Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271997" start="81427" end="81437" title="Diary Tour" label="Diary Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4802883" start="81447" end="81459" title="As I Am Tour" label="As I Am Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500642" start="81469" end="81481" title="Freedom Tour" label="Freedom Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806859" start="81491" end="81517" title="Set the World on Fire Tour" label="Set the World on Fire Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q85740756" start="81527" end="81551" title="Alicia + Keys World Tour" label="Alicia + Keys World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q120355631" start="81566" end="81589" title="Keys to the Summer Tour" label="Keys to the Summer Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q604771" start="81619" end="81648" title="The Verizon Ladies First Tour" label="The Verizon Ladies First Tour"/>
<link wikidata="" start="81668" end="81722" title="Piano &amp;amp; I: A One Night Only Event with Alicia Keys" label="Piano &amp;amp; I: A One Night Only Event with Alicia Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="81848" end="81851" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="81927" end="81930" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q24908088" start="81989" end="82001" title="Lenny Letter" label="Lenny Letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q231276" start="82117" end="82132" title="Angelique Kidjo" label="Angelique Kidjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="82153" end="82166" title="HarperCollins" label="Harper Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988020" start="82302" end="82316" title="TarcherPerigee" label="TarcherPerigee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845766" start="82336" end="82395" title="List of artists who reached number one in the United States" label="List of artists who reached number one in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375931" start="82398" end="82434" title="Honorific nicknames in popular music" label="Honorific nicknames in popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q13453715" start="82437" end="82473" title="List of songs written by Alicia Keys" label="List of songs written by Alicia Keys"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59722" wikidata="Q854852" url="?curid=59722" title="Drum brake">
<text>A drum brake is a brake that uses friction caused by a set of shoes or pads that press outward against a rotating bowl-shaped part called a brake drum.

The term &quot;drum brake&quot; usually means a brake in which shoes press on the inner surface of the drum. When shoes press on the outside of the drum, it is usually called a &quot;clasp brake&quot;. Where the drum is pinched between two shoes, similar to a conventional disc brake, it is sometimes called a &quot;pinch drum brake&quot;, though such brakes are relatively rare. A related type called a band brake uses a flexible belt or &quot;band&quot; wrapping around the outside of a drum.

==History==

The modern automobile drum brake was first used in a car made by Maybach in 1900, although the principle was only later patented in 1902 by Louis Renault. He used woven asbestos lining for the drum brake lining, as no alternative material dissipated heat more effectively, though Maybach had used a less sophisticated drum brake. In the first drum brakes, levers and rods or cables operated the shoes mechanically. From the mid-1930s, oil pressure in a small wheel cylinder and pistons (as in the picture) operated the brakes, though some vehicles continued with purely mechanical systems for decades. Some designs have two wheel cylinders.

As the shoes in drum brakes wear, brakes required regular manual adjustment until the introduction of self-adjusting drum brakes in the 1950s. Drum brakes are also prone to brake fade with repeated use.

Jaguar Cars fielded three cars equipped with disc brakes at Le Mans in 1953, where they won, in large part due to their superior braking over drum-equipped rivals. This spelled the beginning of the end for drum brakes in passenger cars. From the 1960s to the 1980s, disc brakes gradually replaced drum brakes on the front wheels of cars (which receive the majority of braking force). Now practically all cars use disc brakes on the front wheels, and many use disc brakes on all four wheels.

In the United States, the Jeep CJ-5 (manufactured by AM General) was the final automobile (produced for the United States Postal Service) to use front drum brakes when it was phased out in 1986. However, drum brakes are still often used on the rear wheels, and for parking brakes. Some vehicles utilize a &quot;drum-in-hat&quot; parking brake, where the brake shoes are arranged inside the center portion (hat) of a disc brake rotor, which acts as the drum.

Early brake shoes contained asbestos. When working on brake systems of older cars, care must be taken not to inhale any dust present in the brake assembly. After the United States Federal Government began to regulate asbestos production, brake manufacturers had to switch to non-asbestos linings. Owners initially complained of poor braking with the replacements, but brake technology eventually advanced to compensate. A majority of daily-driven older vehicles have been fitted with asbestos-free linings. Many other countries have also prohibited the use of asbestos in brakes.

==Components==
Drum brake components include the backing plate, brake drum, shoe, wheel cylinder, and various springs and pins.

===Backing plate===
The backing plate provides a base for the other components. The back plate also increases the rigidity of whole set-up, supports the housing, and protects it from foreign materials like dust and other road debris. It absorbs the torque from the braking action, and that is why back plate is also called the &quot;Torque Plate&quot;. Since all braking operations exert pressure on the backing plate, it must be strong and wear-resistant. Levers for emergency or parking brakes, and automatic brake-shoe adjuster were also added in recent years. 
===Brake drum===
The brake drum is generally made of a special type of cast iron that is heat-conductive and wear-resistant. It rotates with the wheel and axle. When a driver applies the brakes, the lining pushes radially against the inner surface of the drum, and the ensuing friction slows or stops rotation of the wheel and axle, and thus the vehicle. This friction generates substantial heat.

===Wheel cylinder===

One wheel cylinder operates the brake on each wheel. Two pistons operate the shoes, one at each end of the wheel cylinder. The leading shoe (closest to the front of the vehicle) is known as the primary shoe. The trailing shoe is known as the secondary shoe. Hydraulic pressure from the master cylinder acts on the piston cup, pushing the pistons toward the shoes, forcing them against the drum. When the driver releases the brakes, the brake shoe springs restore the shoes to their original (disengaged) position. The parts of the wheel cylinder are shown to the right.

===Brake shoe===

Brake shoes are typically made of two pieces of steel welded together. The friction material is either riveted to the lining table or attached with adhesive. The crescent-shaped piece is called the Web and contains holes and slots in different shapes for return springs, hold-down hardware, parking brake linkage and self-adjusting components. 
All the application force of the wheel cylinder is applied through the web to the lining table and brake lining. The edge of the lining table generally has three V-shaped notches or tabs on each side called nibs. The nibs rest against the support pads of the backing plate to which the shoes are installed.
Each brake assembly has two shoes, a primary and secondary. The primary shoe is located toward the front of the vehicle and has the lining positioned differently from the secondary shoe. Quite often, the two shoes are interchangeable, so close inspection for any variation is important. 

Linings must be resistant to heat and wear and have a high friction coefficient unaffected by fluctuations in temperature and humidity.
Materials that make up the brake shoe lining include, friction modifiers (which can include graphite and cashew nut shells), powdered metal such as lead, zinc, brass, aluminium and other metals that resist heat fade, binders, curing agents and fillers such as rubber chips to reduce brake noise.

In the UK two common grades of brake shoe material used to be available. DON 202 was a high friction material that did not require a brake power servo. The disadvantage was that the lining was prone to fading on steep hills. A harder lining, the famous VG95 was produced but this required a brake servo. The other snag was that the parking brake would often fail the annual MOT test unless the high friction linings were installed just for the test.

==In operation==

===Normal braking===
When the brakes are applied, brake fluid is forced under pressure from the master cylinder into the wheel cylinder, which in turn pushes the brake shoes into contact with the machined surface on the inside of the drum. This rubbing action reduces the rotation of the brake drum, which is coupled to the wheel. Hence the speed of the vehicle is reduced. When the pressure is released, return springs pull the shoes back to their rest position.

===Automatic self-adjustment===
As the brake linings wear, the shoes must travel a greater distance to reach the drum. In systems fitted with automatic adjusters, when the distance reaches a certain point, a self-adjusting mechanism automatically reacts by adjusting the rest position of the shoes so that they are closer to the drum. Here, the adjusting lever rocks enough to advance the adjuster gear by one tooth. The adjuster has threads on it, like a bolt, so that it unscrews a little bit when it turns, lengthening to fill in the gap. When the brake shoes wear a little more, the adjuster can advance again, so it always keeps the shoes close to the drum. Typically the adjusters only operate when the vehicle is going in reverse and the brakes are engaged.

On vehicles without automatic adjusters, it is required to periodically manually adjust the brakes to take up any excess gap between the shoes and the drum.

===Parking/emergency brake===

The parking (or emergency) brake system controls the brakes through a series of steel cables that are connected to either a hand lever or a foot pedal. The idea is that the system is fully mechanical and completely bypasses the hydraulic system so that the vehicle can be brought to a stop even if there is a total brake failure. Here the cable pulls on a lever mounted in the brake and is directly connected to the brake shoes. This has the effect of bypassing the wheel cylinder and controlling the brakes directly.

==Self-applying characteristic==
Drum brakes have a natural &quot;self-applying&quot; characteristic, better known as &quot;self-energizing.&quot; The rotation of the drum can drag either one or both of the shoes into the friction surface, causing the brakes to bite harder, which increases the force holding them together. This increases the stopping power without any additional effort being expended by the driver, but it does make it harder for the driver to modulate the brake&#x27;s sensitivity. It also makes the brake more sensitive to brake fade, as a decrease in brake friction also reduces the amount of brake assist.

Disc brakes exhibit no self-applying effect because the hydraulic pressure acting on the pads is perpendicular to the direction of rotation of the disc. Disc brake systems usually have
servo assistance (&quot;Brake Booster&quot;) to lessen the driver&#x27;s pedal effort, but some disc braked cars (notably race cars) and smaller brakes for motorcycles, etc., do not need to use servos.

==Drum brake designs==

Drum brakes are typically described as either leading/trailing (also called &quot;single leading&quot;) or twin leading.

Rear drum brakes are typically of a leading/trailing design (for non-servo systems), or primary/secondary (for duo servo systems), the shoes being moved by a single double-acting hydraulic cylinder and hinged at the same point. In this design, one of the brake shoes always experiences the self-applying effect, irrespective of whether the vehicle is moving forwards or backwards. This is particularly useful on the rear brakes, where the parking brake (handbrake or footbrake) must exert enough force to stop the vehicle from traveling backwards and hold it on a slope. Provided the contact area of the brake shoes is large enough, which isn&#x27;t always the case, the self-applying effect can securely hold a vehicle when the weight is transferred to the rear brakes due to the incline of a slope or the reverse direction of motion. A further advantage of using a single hydraulic cylinder on the rear is that the opposite pivot may be made in the form of a double-lobed cam that is rotated by the action of the parking brake system.

Front drum brakes may be of either design in practice, but the twin leading design is more effective. This design uses two actuating cylinders arranged so that both shoes use the self-applying characteristic when the vehicle is moving forwards. The brake shoes pivot at opposite points to each other. This gives the maximum possible braking when moving forwards, but is not so effective when the vehicle is traveling in reverse.

The optimum arrangement of twin leading front brakes with leading/trailing brakes on the rear allows more braking force at the front of the vehicle when it is moving forwards, with less at the rear. This helps prevent the rear wheels from locking up, but still provides adequate braking at the rear.
Because aluminum wears more easily than iron, aluminum drums frequently have an iron or steel liner on the inner surface of the drum, bonded or riveted to the aluminum outer shell.

==Advantages==
Drum brakes are used in most heavy duty trucks, buses, some medium and light duty trucks, and a few cars, dirt bikes, ATVs, and a few smaller recreational vehicles like electric scooters. Drum brakes are often applied to the rear wheels since most of the stopping force is generated by the front brakes of the vehicle, and therefore, the heat generated in the rear is significantly less. Drum brakes allow simple incorporation of a parking brake.

Drum brakes are also occasionally fitted as the parking (and emergency) brake even when the rear wheels use disc brakes as the main brakes. Many rear disc braking systems use a parking brake in which the piston in the caliper is actuated by a cam or screw. This compresses the pads against the rotor. However, this type of system becomes &quot;much&quot; more complicated when the rear disc brakes use fixed, multi-piston calipers. In this situation, a small drum is usually fitted within or as part of the brake disc. This type of brake is also known as a banksia brake.

In hybrid and electric vehicle applications, wear on braking systems is greatly reduced by energy recovering motor–generators (see regenerative braking), so some hybrid vehicles such as the Toyota Prius (prior to the third generation) and Volkswagen ID.3 and ID.4 use drum brakes at the rear wheels.

Disc brakes rely on pliability of caliper seals and slight runout to release pads, leading to drag, fuel mileage loss, and disc scoring. Drum brake return springs give more positive action and, adjusted correctly, often have less drag when released. It is however possible to design special seals that retract the piston on a disc brake.

Drum brakes emit less particulate matter (PM) than disc brakes, as the wear-particles are mostly sealed in. They are not better in this regard than frictionless brakes though.

Certain heavier-duty drum brake systems compensate for load when determining wheel cylinder pressure; a feature which is rare when discs are employed (hydropneumatic suspension systems as employed on Citroën vehicles adjust brake pressure depending on load regardless of if drum or discs are used). One such vehicle is the Jeep Comanche. The Comanche can automatically send more pressure to the rear drums depending on the size of the load. Most other brands have used load sensing valves in the hydraulics to the rear axle for decades.

Due to the fact that a drum brake&#x27;s friction contact area is at the circumference of the brake, a drum brake can provide more braking force than an equal diameter disc brake. The increased friction contact area of drum brake shoes on the drum allows drum brake shoes to last longer than disc brake pads used in a brake system of similar dimensions and braking force. Drum brakes retain heat and are more complex than disc brakes, but are often the more economical and powerful brake type to use in rear brake applications due to the low heat generation of rear brakes, a drum brake&#x27;s self-applying nature, larger friction surface contact area, and long life wear characteristics (% life used / kW of braking power).

To list advantages of drum brakes:

*less expensive to produce.
*slightly lower frequency of maintenance due to better corrosion resistance compared to disks.
*built-in self energizing effect requires less input force (such as hydraulic pressure).
*wheel cylinders are somewhat simpler to recondition compared to calipers.
*minor weight savings, primarily from much smaller and lighter hydraulic cylinders vs. calipers.

==As a driveshaft parking/emergency brake==

Drum brakes have also been built onto the transmission&#x27;s driveshaft as parking brakes (e.g., Chryslers through 1962). This provides the advantage that it is completely independent of the service brakes—but suffers a severe disadvantage in that, when used with a bumper jack (common in that era) on the rear, and without proper wheel blocks, the differential&#x27;s action can allow the vehicle to roll off the jack.

Land Rover have used a drum brake on the gearbox output shaft for over fifty years. The advantage is that all four wheels can be braked with the parking brake.

==Disadvantages==
Drum brakes, like most other brakes, convert kinetic energy into heat by friction. This heat should dissipate into the surrounding air, but can just as easily transfer to other braking system components. Brake drums must be large to cope with the massive forces involved, and must be able to absorb and dissipate a lot of heat. Heat transfer to air can be aided by incorporating cooling fins onto the drum, or even drilling holes around the drum&#x27;s circumference. However, excessive heating can occur due to heavy or repeated braking, which can cause the drum to distort, leading to vibration under braking.

The other consequence of overheating is brake fade. This is due to one of several processes, or more usually an accumulation of all of them. 
# When internally-expanding brake drums are heated by hard braking, the diameter of the drum increases slightly due to thermal expansion, so the shoes must move farther and the driver must press the brake pedal farther.
# The properties of the friction material can change if heated, resulting in less friction. This can be a much larger problem with drum brakes than disc brakes, since the shoes are inside the drum and not exposed to cooling ambient air. The loss of friction is usually only temporary and the material regains its efficiency when cooled, but if the surface overheats to the point where it becomes glazed the reduction in braking efficiency will become more permanent. Surface glazing can be worn away with further use of the brakes, but that takes time.
# Excessive brake drum heating can cause the brake fluid to vaporize, which reduces the hydraulic pressure applied to the brake shoes. Therefore, the brakes provide less deceleration for a given amount of pressure on the pedal. The effect is worsened by poor maintenance. Brake fluid that is old and has absorbed moisture has a lower boiling point, so brake fade occurs sooner.

Brake fade is not always due to overheating. Water between the friction surfaces and the drum can act as a lubricant and reduce braking efficiency. The water tends to stay until heated sufficiently to vaporize, at which point braking efficiency returns. All friction braking systems have a maximum theoretical rate of energy conversion. Once that rate is reached, applying greater pedal pressure doesn&#x27;t change it—in fact, the effects mentioned can substantially reduce it. Ultimately, this is what brake fade is, regardless of the mechanisms of its causes. Disc brakes are not immune to any of these processes, but they deal with heat and water more effectively than drums.

Drum brakes can be grabby if the drum surface gets light rust or if the brake is cold and damp, giving the pad material greater friction. Grabbing can be so severe that the tires skid and continue to skid even when the pedal is released. Grab is the opposite of fade: when the pad friction goes up, the self-assisting nature of drum brakes causes application force to go up. If the pad friction and self-amplification are high enough, the brake stays engaged due to self-application, even when the external application force is released.

While disc brake rotors can be machined to clean the friction surface (i.e., &#x27;turning&#x27;), the same generally cannot be done with brake drums. Machining the friction surface of a brake drum increases the diameter, which might require oversized shoes to maintain proper contact with the drum. However, since oversized shoes are generally unavailable for most applications, worn or damaged drums generally must be replaced.

It is quite simple to machine brake drums if one has a slow running lathe (one rule of thumb is that cast iron should not be machined faster than fifty feet per minute). Usually it is only necessary to machine away the ridge that forms that makes brake drum removal difficult, especially if the brakes are self-adjusting. In severe cases the ridge can make the brake drum captive, however most drum brake designs provide a way to externally release the self-adjusting mechanism in order to ease drum removal and service.

Another disadvantage of drum brakes is their relative complexity. A person must have a general understanding of how drum brakes work and take several simple steps to ensure the brakes are reassembled correctly when doing work on drum brakes. And, as a result of this increased complexity (compared to disc brakes), maintenance of drum brakes is generally more time-consuming. Also, the greater number of parts results in a greater number of failure modes compared to disc brakes. Springs can break from fatigue if not replaced along with worn brake shoes. And the drum and shoes can become damaged from scoring if various components (such as broken springs or self-adjusters) break and become loose inside the drum.

Catastrophic failure of hardware such as springs and adjusters can also cause unintended brake application or even wheel lockup. If springs break, the shoes will be free to fall against the rotating drum, essentially causing the brakes to be applied. Because of the self-energizing qualities of drum brakes, the unrestrained shoes can even potentially cause the brakes to grab to the point of locking up the wheel. Also, broken pieces of springs and other hardware (like adjusters) can become lodged between the shoes and drum, resulting in unintended application of the brakes (and, as stated above, damage to brake components). For these reasons, brake hardware (such as springs and clips) should always be replaced with brake shoes.

Also, drum brakes do not apply immediately when the wheel cylinders are pressurized, because the force of the return springs must be overcome before the shoes start to move towards the drum. This means that the very common hybrid disc/drum systems only brake with the (nearly always front) discs on light pedal pressure unless extra hardware is added. In practice, a metering valve prevents hydraulic pressure from reaching the front calipers until pressure rises enough to overcome the return springs in the drum brakes. If the metering valve were left out, the vehicle would stop only with the front discs unless the driver used enough brake pedal pressure to overcome the return spring pressure on the rear shoes.

== Safety ==
When asbestos was common in drum brakes, there was a danger workers repairing or replacing them would breathe asbestos fibers, which can cause mesothelioma. Asbestos fibers would break off or become separated over time and with the high temperatures induced by braking. Wet brushes and aerosol sprays were commonly used to reduce dust. Safety regulators sometimes recommended using vacuum hoses to suck away the dust, or enclosures with interior lighting and space to use tools inside them, but these were rare and cumbersome. Distinctive shoes designed to protect against asbestos were also recommended. There is evidence that auto mechanics had disproportionate levels of mesothelioma.

Those who do maintenance work on brakes can also be exposed to the solvents 1,1,1-trichloroethane and 2-butoxyethanol (a main ingredient in Greasoff No. 19). Exposure to these solvents can cause irritation, including to the eyes and mucous membranes. Exposure to 1-1-1-trichloroethane vapors can cause central nervous system damage, dizziness, incoordination, drowsiness, and increased reaction time.

==Re-arcing==
Before 1984, it was common to re-arc brake shoes to match the arc within brake drums. This practice was controversial however, as it removed friction material from the brakes, reduced the life of the shoes and created hazardous asbestos dust. After 1984, the current design theory was altered, to use shoes for the proper diameter drum, and to simply replace the brake drum when necessary, rather than re-arc the shoes.

== Use in music ==
The brake drum has found popular use as a percussion instrument. This was likely first implemented in a 1939 composition &quot;First Construction (in Metal)&quot; by American avant-garde musician John Cage. In more recent times the brake drum has become associated with the front ensemble as used in the marching arts.

==See also==

*Balancing machine
*Bicycle drum brakes
*Brake bleeding
*Brake lining
*Electric friction brake
*Hydraulic disc brakes
*List of auto parts
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q854852" start="2" end="12" title="Drum brake" label="drum brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534839" start="18" end="23" title="brake" label="brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q82580" start="34" end="42" title="friction" label="friction"/>
<link wikidata="Q908295" start="62" end="67" title="Brake shoe" label="shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q908233" start="71" end="75" title="Brake pad" label="pads"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860119" start="235" end="248" title="Brake lining" label="inner surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q908295" start="336" end="347" title="Railway brake" label="clasp brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q755174" start="426" end="436" title="disc brake" label="disc brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q806268" start="557" end="567" title="band brake" label="band brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="673" end="683" title="automobile" label="automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q77125" start="727" end="734" title="Wilhelm Maybach" label="Maybach"/>
<link wikidata="Q298766" start="802" end="815" title="Louis Renault (industrialist)" label="Louis Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q35989" start="942" end="949" title="Maybach" label="Maybach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992009" start="1121" end="1135" title="wheel cylinder" label="wheel cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q45227" start="1140" end="1146" title="piston" label="piston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391904" start="1477" end="1487" title="brake fade" label="brake fade"/>
<link wikidata="Q30055" start="1508" end="1519" title="Jaguar Cars" label="Jaguar Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q755174" start="1553" end="1563" title="disc brake" label="disc brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q216407" start="1568" end="1575" title="1953 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512553" start="2026" end="2035" title="Jeep CJ-5" label="Jeep CJ-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q295481" start="2053" end="2063" title="AM General" label="AM General"/>
<link wikidata="Q605816" start="2265" end="2278" title="parking brake" label="parking brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q104085" start="2487" end="2495" title="asbestos" label="asbestos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339481" start="3390" end="3401" title="road debris" label="road debris"/>
<link wikidata="Q605816" start="3650" end="3663" title="parking brake" label="parking brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q483269" start="3805" end="3814" title="cast iron" label="cast iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q82580" start="5743" end="5763" title="friction coefficient" label="friction coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503429" start="5874" end="5891" title="friction modifier" label="friction modifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309" start="5912" end="5920" title="graphite" label="graphite"/>
<link wikidata="Q34007" start="5925" end="5935" title="cashew nut" label="cashew nut"/>
<link wikidata="Q726605" start="5945" end="5959" title="powdered metal" label="powdered metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991861" start="6046" end="6058" title="curing agent" label="curing agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243730" start="6682" end="6697" title="master cylinder" label="master cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391904" start="9069" end="9079" title="brake fade" label="brake fade"/>
<link wikidata="Q908409" start="9340" end="9356" title="Vacuum servo" label="servo assistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318337" start="9868" end="9886" title="hydraulic cylinder" label="hydraulic cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q495933" start="10663" end="10666" title="Cam (mechanism)" label="cam"/>
<link wikidata="Q605816" start="10704" end="10717" title="parking brake" label="parking brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q193075" start="12678" end="12684" title="hybrid vehicle" label="hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629441" start="12689" end="12705" title="electric vehicle" label="electric vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q580078" start="12806" end="12826" title="regenerative braking" label="regenerative braking"/>
<link wikidata="Q213115" start="12865" end="12877" title="Toyota Prius" label="Toyota Prius"/>
<link wikidata="Q63636478" start="12914" end="12929" title="Volkswagen ID.3" label="Volkswagen ID.3"/>
<link wikidata="Q86668068" start="12934" end="12938" title="Volkswagen ID.4" label="ID.4"/>
<link wikidata="Q498957" start="13337" end="13360" title="Particulates" label="particulate matter (PM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585557" start="13463" end="13482" title="Eddy current brake" label="frictionless brakes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13643" end="13668" title="Hydropneumatic suspension#Advantages" label="hydropneumatic suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746" start="13692" end="13699" title="Citroën" label="Citroën"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138797" start="13815" end="13828" title="Jeep Comanche" label="Jeep Comanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142208" start="15256" end="15295" title="transmission brake" label="onto the transmission&amp;#x27;s driveshaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q46276" start="15869" end="15883" title="kinetic energy" label="kinetic energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44432" start="15889" end="15893" title="heat" label="heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q82580" start="15897" end="15905" title="friction" label="friction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796959" start="16203" end="16215" title="heat sink" label="cooling fins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391904" start="16477" end="16487" title="brake fade" label="brake fade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583695" start="16698" end="16715" title="thermal expansion" label="thermal expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q631359" start="17397" end="17408" title="brake fluid" label="brake fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452502" start="17412" end="17420" title="vaporize" label="vaporize"/>
<link wikidata="Q177784" start="17440" end="17458" title="hydraulic pressure" label="hydraulic pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003183" start="17686" end="17699" title="boiling point" label="boiling point"/>
<link wikidata="Q104085" start="22094" end="22102" title="asbestos" label="asbestos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077603" start="22232" end="22244" title="mesothelioma" label="mesothelioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q101674" start="22471" end="22483" title="Vacuum cleaner" label="vacuum hoses"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22510" end="22520" title="Vacuum enclosure" label="enclosures"/>
<link wikidata="Q161268" start="22854" end="22875" title="1,1,1-Trichloroethane" label="1,1,1-trichloroethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q421557" start="22880" end="22895" title="2-Butoxyethanol" label="2-butoxyethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164413" start="23761" end="23790" title="First Construction (in Metal)" label="First Construction (in Metal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q180727" start="23830" end="23839" title="John Cage" label="John Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505858" start="23908" end="23922" title="front ensemble" label="front ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q16866714" start="23938" end="23951" title="marching arts" label="marching arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643618" start="23969" end="23986" title="Balancing machine" label="Balancing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147317" start="23988" end="24006" title="Bicycle drum brake" label="Bicycle drum brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956030" start="24009" end="24023" title="Brake bleeding" label="Brake bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860119" start="24025" end="24037" title="Brake lining" label="Brake lining"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010153" start="24039" end="24062" title="Electric friction brake" label="Electric friction brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q755174" start="24064" end="24085" title="Hydraulic disc brakes" label="Hydraulic disc brakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6405028" start="24087" end="24105" title="List of auto parts" label="List of auto parts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59723" wikidata="Q511150" url="?curid=59723" title="Queen Anne's County, Maryland">
<text>Queen Anne&#x27;s County is a county located in the U.S. state of Maryland. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 49,874. Its county seat and most populous municipality is Centreville. The census-designated place of Stevensville is the county&#x27;s most populous place with a population of 7,442 as of 2020. The county is named for Queen Anne of Great Britain, who reigned when the county was established in 1706 during the colonial period. The county is part of the Mid-Eastern Shore region of the state.

Queen Anne&#x27;s County is included in the Baltimore-Columbia-Towson, MD Metropolitan Statistical Area, which is also included in the Washington-Baltimore-Arlington, DC-MD-VA-WV-PA Combined Statistical Area, and is the easternmost in both.

Chesapeake Bay Bridge connects Kent Island in Queen Anne&#x27;s County across Chesapeake Bay to Anne Arundel County. The American Discovery Trail runs through the county.

==History==
Queen Anne&#x27;s County has 265 miles of waterfront, much of that being the shores of Kent Island, which stands out from the eastern shore of the Chesapeake Bay. From the waters of this county, watermen have harvested oysters, crabs, and terrapin. Migrating waterfowl overwinter here, and hunting for geese and ducks has been an important part of the county&#x27;s history. The first Anglo-European settlement in Maryland was on Kent Island on August 21, 1631, and included twenty-five settlers in a manor house, a fort, and other buildings. The settlement was referred to as Winston&#x27;s Island. The first houses were built similar to log cabins. The county has a number of properties on the National Register of Historic Places, but nothing remains of this original settlement. Stevensville, earlier known as Broad Creek, is one of the oldest towns still existing.

Queen Anne&#x27;s County was organized under a sheriff in 1706, bounded by Talbot, Kent, and Dorchester counties. In 1713, Queen Anne&#x27;s County became an English postal district; the sheriff was also appointed as the postmaster and would travel to Annapolis, Maryland by boat across the Chesapeake Bay to obtain mail. In 1773 a part of Queen Anne&#x27;s County, together with a portion of Dorchester County, was taken to form Caroline County. The county now is enclosed by Talbot, Caroline, and Kent counties, as well as the Chesapeake Bay.

By the time of Independence, the county had several churches, a government, school, and a postal system. It was developed for agriculture, and enslaved African Americans worked the fields of plantations. Tobacco was an early commodity crop but it exhausted the soil. By the Revolution, some planters were converting to mixed agriculture, which was less labor-intensive. They sold excess slaves in the domestic trade to the developing cotton plantations of the Deep South.

In 1876, Queen Anne&#x27;s County had the first printed independent paper called the &quot;Maryland Citizen&quot;. A bank was located in Centreville; the Centreville National Bank is still operating. A railway was constructed here in 1868; it operated from Baltimore, passing around the top of the Chesapeake Bay down to Queenstown, and connected with other railroads that continued east into Delaware as far as Rehoboth, and southward to the Eastern Shore of Virginia.

In the 20th century, Queen Anne&#x27;s County was the home of Jimmie Foxx, who was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame. A statue and small park commemorate him in Sudlersville, where Foxx grew up.

==Politics and government==
Queen Anne&#x27;s was historically the most strongly secessionist county in Maryland, dominated by the Democratic Party of the planters. Following the American Civil War, the predominately conservative white voters voted for the Democratic presidential nominee in every election from 1868 to 1948, though Herbert Hoover came within a point of defeating Al Smith in 1928 amidst great Southern resentment to Smith&#x27;s Catholicism and opposition to Prohibition. Former general Dwight D. Eisenhower became the first Republican to carry the county in 1952.

Since the late 20th century, Queen Anne&#x27;s white voters have largely shifted to the Republican Party, in a realignment that has taken place among conservative whites across the South following the tumultuous 1960s and passage of national civil rights legislation. No Democratic presidential candidate has carried Queen Anne&#x27;s County since Texan Lyndon Johnson’s 1964 landslide. Democrat Jimmy Carter in 1980 remains the last Democrat to obtain even forty percent of the county’s vote, and he in 1976 was the last to come within ten points of winning the county.


















Queen Anne&#x27;s County was granted home rule in 1990 under a state code.

The county has a commission form of government. The commission consists of five commissioners: one at-large and four of whom must reside in the district they represent. All of the commissioners are elected by the general population. The at-large commissioner serves as president the first year following election. County code allows for rotation of the president position thereafter.

The current Board of Commissioners was elected in the 2022 election, and serves a four-year term. The current County Commissioners are J. Patrick McLaughlin (District 2), Christopher M. Corchiarino (District 4), Philip L. Dumenil (District 3), James J. Moran (at-large), and Jack N. Wilson, Jr. (District 1). The current form of five commissioners elected at large started in 2002. Prior to the 2002 election, Queen Anne&#x27;s County was run by three commissioners.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (27%) is water.

===Adjacent counties===
* Kent County (north)
* Kent County, Delaware (east)
* Talbot County (south)
* Caroline County (southeast)
* Anne Arundel County (west)

===Major roads and highways===
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==Demographics==
===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 40,563 people, 15,315 households, and 11,547 families living in the county. The population density was . There were 16,674 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 89.05% White, 8.78% Black or African American, 0.22% Native American, 0.57% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.43% from other races, and 0.93% from two or more races. 1.09% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 16.9% were of German, 15.1% American, 14.6% English, 14.2% Irish and 5.3% Italian ancestry.

There were 15,315 households, out of which 33.30% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 62.20% were married couples living together, 9.50% had a female householder with no husband present, and 24.60% were non-families. 19.60% of all households were made up of individuals, and 7.90% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.62 and the average family size was 2.99.

In the county, the population was spread out, with 25.40% under the age of 18, 5.80% from 18 to 24, 30.10% from 25 to 44, 25.90% from 45 to 64, and 12.90% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females, there were 99.20 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 96.80 males.

The median income for a household in the county was $57,037, and the median income for a family was $63,713. Males had a median income of $44,644 versus $30,144 for females. The per capita income for the county was $26,364. About 4.40% of families and 6.30% of the population were below the poverty line, including 7.20% of those under age 18 and 7.30% of those age 65 or over.

===2010 census===
As of the 2010 United States Census, there were 47,798 people, 18,016 households, and 13,314 families living in the county. The population density was . There were 20,140 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 88.7% white, 6.9% black or African American, 1.0% Asian, 0.3% American Indian, 1.4% from other races, and 1.7% from two or more races. Those of Hispanic or Latino origin made up 3.0% of the population. In terms of ancestry, 25.9% were German, 22.4% were Irish, 15.8% were English, 6.2% were Italian, and 6.1% were American.

Of the 18,016 households, 34.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 60.3% were married couples living together, 9.2% had a female householder with no husband present, 26.1% were non-families, and 20.6% of all households were made up of individuals. The average household size was 2.63 and the average family size was 3.04. The median age was 42.6 years.

The median income for a household in the county was $81,096 and the median income for a family was $89,188. Males had a median income of $57,218 versus $43,371 for females. The per capita income for the county was $35,964. About 3.8% of families and 5.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 7.0% of those under age 18 and 6.1% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==

===Public schools===
*Kent Island High School
*Queen Anne&#x27;s County High School
*Centreville Middle School
*Matapeake Middle School
*Stevensville Middle School
*Sudlersville Middle School
*Bayside Elementary School
*Centreville Elementary School
*Church Hill Elementary School
*Grasonville Elementary School
*Kennard Elementary School
*Kent Island Elementary School
*Matapeake Elementary School
*Sudlersville Elementary School
*Gunston Day School
*Wye River Upper School
===Colleges and universities===
*Chesapeake College

==Communities==

===Towns===

*Barclay
*Centreville (county seat)
*Church Hill
*Millington (partly in Kent County)
*Queen Anne (partly in Talbot County)
*Queenstown
*Sudlersville
*Templeville (partly in Caroline County)
===Census-designated places===
The Census Bureau recognizes the following census-designated places in the county:

*Chester
*Grasonville
*Kent Narrows
*Kingstown
*Stevensville

===Unincorporated communities===

*Crumpton
*Dominion
*Ingleside
*Love Point
*Matapeake
*Price
*Romancoke
*Ruthsburg
==See also==
*National Register of Historic Places listings in Queen Anne&#x27;s County, Maryland

==References==
==External links==

*Queen Anne&#x27;s County government
*Kent Island &amp; Queen Anne&#x27;s County News</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q511150" start="0" end="24" title="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s County, Maryland" label="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s County"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="30" end="36" title="County (United States)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="52" end="62" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="66" end="74" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="86" end="111" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="144" end="155" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="174" end="186" title="municipality" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q754606" start="190" end="201" title="Centreville, Maryland" label="Centreville"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="207" end="230" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q755246" start="234" end="246" title="Stevensville, Maryland" label="Stevensville"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="351" end="378" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Queen Anne of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q32486" start="486" end="503" title="Eastern Shore of Maryland" label="Mid-Eastern Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852987" start="570" end="629" title="Baltimore metropolitan area" label="Baltimore-Columbia-Towson, MD Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828301" start="661" end="733" title="Baltimore-Washington metropolitan area" label="Washington-Baltimore-Arlington, DC-MD-VA-WV-PA Combined Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319988" start="768" end="789" title="Chesapeake Bay Bridge" label="Chesapeake Bay Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391790" start="799" end="810" title="Kent Island (Maryland)" label="Kent Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="846" end="860" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q488701" start="864" end="883" title="Anne Arundel County, Maryland" label="Anne Arundel County"/>
<link wikidata="Q463893" start="889" end="913" title="American Discovery Trail" label="American Discovery Trail"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1147" end="1155" title="Waterman (occupation)#Watermen in the United States" label="watermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703292" start="1191" end="1199" title="terrapin" label="terrapin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26733" start="1254" end="1259" title="Canada goose" label="geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q25348" start="1264" end="1269" title="mallard" label="ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977280" start="1648" end="1684" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s County, Maryland" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q511084" start="1898" end="1904" title="Talbot County, Maryland" label="Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q494228" start="1906" end="1910" title="Kent County, Maryland" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q501263" start="1916" end="1926" title="Dorchester County, Maryland" label="Dorchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="2075" end="2094" title="Annapolis, Maryland" label="Annapolis, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q501242" start="2253" end="2268" title="Caroline County, Maryland" label="Caroline County"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="2384" end="2396" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329352" start="3375" end="3386" title="Jimmie Foxx" label="Jimmie Foxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="3845" end="3859" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q430714" start="3893" end="3901" title="Al Smith" label="Al Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="4017" end="4037" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="4450" end="4464" title="Lyndon Johnson" label="Lyndon Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="4492" end="4504" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191952" start="4722" end="4731" title="home rule" label="home rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q665826" start="4778" end="4788" title="county commission" label="commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="4860" end="4868" title="at-large" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="5645" end="5663" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q494228" start="5762" end="5773" title="Kent County, Maryland" label="Kent County"/>
<link wikidata="Q128137" start="5784" end="5805" title="Kent County, Delaware" label="Kent County, Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q511084" start="5815" end="5828" title="Talbot County, Maryland" label="Talbot County"/>
<link wikidata="Q501242" start="5839" end="5854" title="Caroline County, Maryland" label="Caroline County"/>
<link wikidata="Q488701" start="5869" end="5888" title="Anne Arundel County, Maryland" label="Anne Arundel County"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="5996" end="6002" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="6103" end="6121" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6230" end="6235" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6243" end="6248" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6252" end="6268" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6276" end="6291" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6299" end="6304" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6312" end="6328" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6341" end="6352" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6417" end="6425" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6429" end="6435" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="6463" end="6469" title="German people" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="6477" end="6485" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="6493" end="6500" title="English people" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="6508" end="6513" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="6523" end="6530" title="Italian people" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="6655" end="6670" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="7480" end="7497" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="7593" end="7605" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="7709" end="7734" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="8182" end="8188" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="8201" end="8206" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="8219" end="8226" title="English people" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="8238" end="8245" title="Italians" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q846570" start="8261" end="8269" title="Americans" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="8930" end="8942" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q14692094" start="9053" end="9076" title="Kent Island High School" label="Kent Island High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270198" start="9078" end="9114" title="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s County High School" label="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s County High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q39059315" start="9463" end="9481" title="Gunston Day School" label="Gunston Day School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092856" start="9539" end="9557" title="Chesapeake College" label="Chesapeake College"/>
<link wikidata="Q754191" start="9590" end="9597" title="Barclay, Maryland" label="Barclay"/>
<link wikidata="Q754606" start="9599" end="9610" title="Centreville, Maryland" label="Centreville"/>
<link wikidata="Q754906" start="9626" end="9637" title="Church Hill, Maryland" label="Church Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q753645" start="9639" end="9649" title="Millington, Maryland" label="Millington"/>
<link wikidata="Q494228" start="9661" end="9672" title="Kent County, Maryland" label="Kent County"/>
<link wikidata="Q753737" start="9675" end="9685" title="Queen Anne, Maryland" label="Queen Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q511084" start="9697" end="9710" title="Talbot County, Maryland" label="Talbot County"/>
<link wikidata="Q754219" start="9713" end="9723" title="Queenstown, Maryland" label="Queenstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q756521" start="9725" end="9737" title="Sudlersville, Maryland" label="Sudlersville"/>
<link wikidata="Q753820" start="9739" end="9750" title="Templeville, Maryland" label="Templeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q501242" start="9762" end="9777" title="Caroline County, Maryland" label="Caroline County"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="9853" end="9876" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q753806" start="9895" end="9902" title="Chester, Maryland" label="Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q754578" start="9904" end="9915" title="Grasonville, Maryland" label="Grasonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q754700" start="9917" end="9929" title="Kent Narrows, Maryland" label="Kent Narrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q754913" start="9931" end="9940" title="Kingstown, Maryland" label="Kingstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q755246" start="9942" end="9954" title="Stevensville, Maryland" label="Stevensville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190081" start="9991" end="9999" title="Crumpton, Maryland" label="Crumpton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291014" start="10001" end="10009" title="Dominion, Maryland" label="Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q14692018" start="10011" end="10020" title="Ingleside, Maryland" label="Ingleside"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691161" start="10022" end="10032" title="Love Point, Maryland" label="Love Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786097" start="10034" end="10043" title="Matapeake, Maryland" label="Matapeake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242548" start="10045" end="10050" title="Price, Maryland" label="Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362456" start="10052" end="10061" title="Romancoke, Maryland" label="Romancoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383412" start="10063" end="10072" title="Ruthsburg, Maryland" label="Ruthsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977280" start="10087" end="10170" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s County, Maryland" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s County, Maryland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59727" wikidata="Q12225" url="?curid=59727" title="Murcia">
<text>Murcia (, ; ) is a city in south-eastern Spain, the capital and most populous city of the autonomous community of the Region of Murcia, and the seventh largest city in the country. It had a population of 460,349 inhabitants in 2021 (about one-third of the total population of the Region). The total population of the metropolitan area was 672,773 in 2020, covering an urban area of 1,230.9 km2. It is located on the Segura River, in the southeast of the Iberian Peninsula. It has a climate with hot summers, mild winters, and relatively low precipitation.

Murcia was founded by Abd ar-Rahman II, Emir of Cordoba, in 825 with the name &quot;Mursiyah&quot; (). It is now mainly a services city and a university town. Highlights for visitors include the Cathedral of Murcia and a number of baroque buildings, renowned local cuisine, Holy Week procession, works of art by the famous Murcian sculptor Francisco Salzillo, and the &quot;Fiestas de Primavera&quot; (Spring Festival).

The city, as the capital of the comarca &quot;Huerta de Murcia&quot;, is called &quot;Europe&#x27;s orchard&quot; due to its long agricultural tradition and its fruit, vegetable, and flower production and exports.

==History==
The territory has been inhabited by humans since prehistory. People also lived in the current municipality during the Bronze and Iron Ages. During the late Chalcolithic and the Bronze Age, the occupancy of part of the current municipality was performed by the Argaric people. During the late Bronze Age and the Iron Age, the people who inhabited the current municipality were the Iberians. A remarkable site is a religious building, whose name is the De la Luz Iberian Sanctuary. There are traces of people presence during the Roman rule in the Iberian Peninsula era. A construction of the late Roman period in the Iberian Peninsula is a fortress, &quot;Castillo de los Garres&quot;, located in the south of the northern half of the municipality.
It is widely believed that Murcia&#x27;s name is derived from the Latin word &quot;myrtea&quot; or &quot;murtea&quot;, meaning land of the myrtle (the plant is known to grow in the general area), although it may also be a derivation of the word &quot;Murtia&quot;, which would mean Murtius Village (Murtius was a common Roman name). Other research suggests that it may owe its name to the Latin &quot;Murtae&quot; (Mulberry), which covered the regional landscape for many centuries. The Latin name eventually changed into the Arabic Mursiya, and then, Murcia.

The city in its present location was founded with the name Madinat Mursiyah ( &#x27;city of Murcia&#x27;) in AD 825 by Abd ar-Rahman II, who was then the emir of Córdoba. Umayyad planners, taking advantage of the course of the river Segura, created an imaginative and complex network of irrigation channels that made the town&#x27;s agricultural existence prosperous. In the 12th century the traveller and writer Muhammad al-Idrisi described the city of Murcia as populous and strongly fortified. After the fall of the Caliphate of Córdoba in 1031, Murcia passed under the successive rules of the powers seated variously at Almería and Toledo, but finally became capital of its own kingdom with Ibn Tahir (). After the fall of the Almoravide empire, Ibn Mardanis made Murcia the capital of a new independent kingdom. At this time, Murcia was a very prosperous city, famous for its ceramics, exported to Italian towns, as well as for silk and paper industries, the first in Europe. The coinage of Murcia was considered as model in all the continent. The mystic Ibn Arabi (1165–1240) and the poet Ibn al-Jinan (d.1214) were born in Murcia during this period.

In 1172 Murcia was conquered by the north African Almohades, the last Muslim empire to rule southern Spain, and as the forces of the Christian Reconquista gained the upper hand, was the capital of a small Muslim emirate from 1223 to 1243. By the treaty of Alcaraz, in 1243, the Christian king Ferdinand III of Castile made Murcia a protectorate, getting access to the Mediterranean sea while Murcia was protected against Granada and Aragon. The Christian population of the town became the majority as immigrants poured in from almost all parts of the Iberian Peninsula, with Muslims confined to the suburb of Arrixaca. Christian immigration was encouraged with the goal of establishing a loyal Christian base. These measures led to the Muslim popular revolt in 1264, which was quelled by James I of Aragon in 1266, conquering Murcia and bringing Aragonese and Catalan immigrants with him.

After this, during the reign of Alfonso X of Castile, Murcia was one of his capitals with Toledo and Seville.

The Murcian duality: Catalan population in a Castillian territory, brought the subsequent conquest of the city by James II of Aragon in 1296. In 1304, Murcia was finally incorporated into Castile under the Treaty of Torrellas.
Murcia&#x27;s prosperity declined as the Mediterranean lost trade to the ocean routes and from the wars between the Christians and the Ottoman Empire. The old prosperity of Murcia became crises during 14th century because of its border location with the neighbouring Muslim kingdom of Granada, but flourished after its conquest in 1492 and again in the 18th century, benefiting greatly from a boom in the silk industry. Most of the modern city&#x27;s landmark churches, monuments and old architecture date from this period. In this century, Murcia lived an important role in Bourbon victory in the War of the Spanish Succession, thanks to Cardinal Belluga. In 1810, Murcia was looted by Napoleonic troops; it then suffered a major earthquake in 1829. According to contemporaneous accounts, an estimated 6,000 people died from the disaster&#x27;s effects across the province. Plague and cholera followed.

The town and surrounding area suffered badly from floods in 1651, 1879, 1946 and 1948, though the construction of a levee helped to stave off the repeated floods from the Segura. A popular pedestrian walkway, the Malecon, runs along the top of the levee.

Murcia has been the capital of the province of Murcia since 1833 and, with its creation by the central government in 1982, capital of the autonomous community (which includes only the city and the province). Since then, it has become the seventh most populated municipality in Spain, and a thriving services city.

The 5.1 Lorca earthquake shook the Region of Murcia with a maximum Mercalli intensity of VII (&#x27;Very strong&#x27;) on 11 May 2011. Nine people were killed and over 400 were injured.

==Geography==
Murcia is located near the center of a low-lying fertile plain known as the &quot;huerta&quot; (orchard or vineyard) of Murcia. The Segura River and its right-hand tributary, the Guadalentín, run through the area. The city has an elevation of above sea level and its municipality covers approximately .

The best known and most dominant aspect of the municipal area&#x27;s landscape is the orchard. In addition to the orchard and urban zones, the great expanse of the municipal area is made up of different landscapes: badlands, groves of Carrasco pine trees in the precoastal mountain ranges and, towards the south, a semi-steppe region. A large natural park, the &quot;Parque Regional de Carrascoy y el Valle&quot;, lies just to the south of the city.

===Segura River===
The Segura River crosses an alluvial plain (&quot;Vega Media del Segura&quot;), part of a Mediterranean pluvial system. The river crosses the city from west to east. Its volumetric flow is mostly small but the river is known to produce occasional flooding, like the times when the capital was inundated, in 1946, 1948, 1973 and 1989.
===Mountains and hills===
The Segura river&#x27;s Valley is surrounded by two mountain ranges, the hills of Guadalupe, Espinardo, Cabezo de Torres, Esparragal and Monteagudo in the north and the Cordillera Sur in the south. The municipality itself is divided into southern and northern zones by a series of mountain ranges, the aforementioned &quot;Cordillera Sur&quot; (Carrascoy, El Puerto, Villares, Columbares, Altaona, and Escalona). These two zones are known as Field of Murcia (in the south of Cordillera Sur) and Orchard of Murcia (the Segura Valley in the north of Cordillera Sur). Near the plain&#x27;s center, the steep hill of Monteagudo protrudes dramatically.

===Districts===
The territory of Murcia&#x27;s municipality is made up of 54 &quot;pedanías&quot; (suburban districts) and 28 &quot;barrios&quot; (city neighbourhood districts). The barrios make up the the main urban portion of the city. The historic city center is approximately of the urbanised downtown portion of Murcia.

===Climate===
Murcia has a hot semi-arid climate (Köppen climate classification: &quot;BSh&quot;). It has mild winters and very hot summers because of its inland location. It averages more than 320 days with sun per year. Occasionally, Murcia has heavy, torrential rain.

In the coldest month, January, the average temperature range is a high of during the day and a low of at night. Night frost occurs in most winters, but snow is very rare. Snow fell and accumulated in Murcia during the 20th century eight times, in 1910, 1914, 1926, 1942, 1951, 1957, 1971 and 1983, and twice in the 21st century in 2017 and 2021. In the warmest month, August, the range goes from during the day to at night. Temperatures almost always reach or exceed on at least one or two days per year. The official record for Murcia stands at and at Alcantarilla airport in the western suburbs on 4 July 1994 with .

==Demographics==

Murcia has 460,349 inhabitants (INE 2021) making it the seventh-largest Spanish municipality by population. When adding in the municipalities of Alcantarilla, Alguazas, Beniel, Molina de Segura, Santomera, and Las Torres de Cotillas, the metropolitan area has 672,773 inhabitants making it the twelfth most populous metropolitan area in Spain. Nevertheless, due to Murcia&#x27;s large municipal territory, its population density (547 inhabitants/km2, 760 hab./sq.mi.) does not likewise rank among Spain&#x27;s highest.

According to the official population data of the INE, 12.52% of the population of the municipality reported belonging to a foreign nationality – 3.22% from other countries of Europe, 5.01% Africans, 3.68% Americans and 0.61% Asians .

The majority of the population identify as Christian. There is also a big atheist community.

Murcia is one of the communities with the largest Romani population in Spain.

The table below shows the population trends of the municipality from the late 19th century to the 21st century by the beginning of their decades.

==Main sights==

The Cathedral of Murcia was built between 1394 and 1465 in the Castilian Gothic style. Its tower was completed in 1792 and shows a blend of architectural styles. The first two stories were built in the Renaissance style (1521–1546), while the third is Baroque. The bell pavilion exhibits both Rococo and Neoclassical influences. The main façade (1736–1754) is considered a masterpiece of the Spanish Baroque style.


Other buildings in the square shared by the cathedral (Plaza Cardinal Belluga) are the colorful &#x27;Bishop&#x27;s Palace&#x27; (18th century) and a controversial extension to the town hall by Rafael Moneo (built in 1999).

The &quot;Glorieta&quot;, which lies on the banks of the Segura River, has traditionally been the center of the town. It is a landscaped city square that was constructed during the 18th century. The &quot;ayuntamiento&quot; (city hall) of Murcia is located in this square.

Pedestrian areas cover most of the old town of the city, which is centered around Platería and Trapería Streets. Trapería goes from the cathedral to the Plaza de Santo Domingo, formerly a bustling market square. Located in Trapería is the &quot;Casino&quot;, a social club erected in 1847, with a sumptuous interior that includes a Moorish-style patio inspired by the royal chambers of the Alhambra near Granada. The name &quot;Platería&quot; refers to &quot;plata&quot; (silver), as this street was the historical focus for the commerce of rare metals by Murcia&#x27;s Jewish community. The other street, &quot;Trapería&quot;, refers to &quot;trapos&quot;, or cloths, as this was once the focus for the Jewish community&#x27;s garment trade.

Several bridges of different styles span the river Segura, from the &quot;Puente de los Peligros&quot;, an 18th-century stone bridge with a Lady chapel on one of its sides; to modern bridges designed by Santiago Calatrava or Javier Manterola; through others such as the &quot;Puente Nuevo&quot; (new bridge), an iron bridge of the early 20th century.


Other places around Murcia include:
* &quot;Santa Clara&quot; monastery, a Gothic and Baroque monument where a museum with the Moorish palace&#x27;s remains from the 13th century is locared, called &quot;Alcázar Seguir&quot;.
* The &quot;Malecón&quot; boulevard, a former retaining wall for the Río Segura&#x27;s floods.
* &quot;Santuario de Nuestra Señora de la Fuensanta, Algezares&quot; (1694), 17th century sanctuary and adjacent &quot;El Valle&quot; regional park: The construction began in 1694 and its architectural style is baroque with Murcian regional features.
* &quot;Los Jerónimos&quot; monastery (18th century). It was built during the first half of the century and is located in Guadalupe district, in the northwest quadrant of Murcia.
* &quot;Romea&quot; theatre (19th century). It was opened up by the queen Isabella II of Spain in 1862. Its façade has three bodies or levels.
*&quot;Circo&quot; theatre.
* Almudí Palace (17th century), art gallery in a historic building with coats of arms on its façade. On its interior there are Tuscan columns, and since 1985 it hosts the city archives and periodic art exhibitions.
* Monteagudo Castle (11th century): in the district with the same name, in the north of the municipality.
* Salzillo Museum, showcases the art of 18th-century baroque sculptor and Murcia native Francisco Salzillo.
*&quot;Centro Párraga&quot;, contemporary arts centre located in one of the pavilions of the old Artillery Headquarters of Murcia. It houses multiple exhibitions, performances and concerts throughout the year.
* Archaeological Museum of Murcia (MAM). It covers the rich Prehistory and History of Murcia, from the Palaeolithic to the Christian and Visigoth Period.
* &quot;San Juan de Dios&quot; church-museum, Baroque and Rococo circular church with the remains of the Moorish palace mosque from the 12th century in the basement, called &quot;Alcázar Nasir&quot;.

In the metropolitan area are also the &quot;Azud de la Contraparada&quot; reservoir and the &quot;Noria de La Ñora&quot; water wheel.

==Festivals==
The Holy Week procession hosted by the city is among the most famous throughout Spain. This traditional festival portrays the events which lead up to and include the Crucifixion according to the New Testament. Life-sized, finely detailed sculptures by Francisco Salzillo (1707–1783) are removed from their museums and carried around the city in elegant processions amid flowers and, at night, candles, pausing at stations which are meant to re-enact the final moments before the crucifixion of Jesus.

The most colorful festival in Murcia may come one week after Holy Week, when locals dress up in traditional &quot;huertano&quot; clothing to celebrate the &#x27; (Orchard parade) on Tuesday and fill the streets for The Burial of the Sardine in Murcia. parade the following Saturday. This whole week receives the name of &#x27; (Spring Fest).

Murcia&#x27;s Three Cultures International Festival happens each May and was first organised with the intent of overcoming racism and xenophobia in the culture. The festival seeks to foster understanding and reconciliation between the three cultures that have cohabited the peninsula for centuries, if not millennia: Christians, Jews and Muslims. Each year, the festival celebrates these three cultures through music, exhibitions, symposiums and conferences.

=== Festivities in the districts ===
Sundry festivities are held throughout the municipality and districts and patron saint festivities are included each part. Month where some occur are June and September. An activity that is slightly frequent in these festivities is the &quot;Coronación de las reinas&quot;, which usually consists in awarding the symbolic status of queens to three female children and three female teenagers. Holy Week festivities are also held in some districts on their own. &quot;Pasacalles&quot; (similar to standard parades) are also performed and so the desfiles de carrozas, which are parades in which floats play an important role. Religious activity includes processions (festive religious marches) in which there are statues of the Patron Virgin on a platform that is carried on the shoulders.

==Economy==
Economically, Murcia predominantly acts as a centre for agriculture and tourism. 33.1% of the municipality is utilised with crops purposes. 35.3% of the agreements of 2019 were written for jobs in agriculture and fishing sectors and 9.84% workers had signed agreements for crop land labouring in the second half of 2016.

7.79% agreements corresponded to the industry sector in 2019 and 5.91% workers had signed agreements for industry labouring in the second half of 2016. 53.12% agreements corresponded to jobs of the service sector in 2019 and 14.26% workers had signed agreements for waiter jobs in the second half of 2016.

The economy of Murcia is supported by fairs and congresses, museums, theatres, cinema, music, aquariums, restaurants, hotels, shopping centres, campings, sports, foreign students, and tourism.

== Government ==
As generally in Spain, the governors are elected indirectly by voting for a political party in a day for municipal and autonomous community (the regions in Spain) elections every four years. The governors that are elected compose a government body named &quot;pleno&quot;, which has 30 members in Murcia. The &quot;alcalde&quot; (head governor in a municipality) chooses 10 members from the &quot;pleno&quot; in order to compose a governing cabinet named &quot;junta de gobierno&quot;, which has 10 members in Murcia. There are 7 partisans (including the &quot;alcalde&quot;) of Partido Popular party and 3 partisans of Ciudadanos in the &quot;junta de gobierno&quot;. The largest government body also includes 9 partisans of PSOE (Partido Socialista Obrero Español), 3 partisans of Vox and 2 partisans of Podemos and Equo.

==Transportation==
=== Roads ===
A national highway named A-30, which connects Cartagena and Albacete, traverses the municipality from south to north, A national motorway named A-7 also occurs in Murcia, specifically in its northwest. There is also a highway named MU-30, which connects Alcantarilla municipality and El Palmar district, so it occurs in the northwestern quarter of Murcia. 52 regional pavement lines also occur in the municipality. The RM-1 road, which is intended to connect Santomera and San Javier, takes place in the east and the RM-15 highway, which connects Alcantarilla and Cehegín, occupies part of the northwest.

=== By plane ===
Region of Murcia International Airport (RMU) is located 20 km south from the city centre, in the suburban district of Corvera. The airport operates several international and domestic routes. It was opened on 15 January 2019. Alicante–Elche International Airport is located 60 km north-east from the city centre. This is 5th busiest airport in Spain with 15 million annual passengers.

=== By bus ===
Bus service is provided by two companies: , an UTE (Joint Venture) formed by Ruiz, Marín &amp; Fernanbús, who operates the urban lines, and (TMP), who operates the interurban lines. Apart from the public transport, there is also a located at the city center.

=== By tram ===

The Murcia tram is managed by Tranvimur. , of line were available. Line 1 runs from the Espinardo Campus of the University of Murcia to the Estadio Nueva Condomina, with a central stop at Plaza Circular in the city center. An additional line, Line 1B, extends from the neighborhood of Espinardo to the Catholic University of Saint Anthony and the Los Jerónimos area.

=== By train ===
Train connections are provided by Renfe. Murcia has a railway station called Murcia del Carmen, located in the neighbourhood of the same name on the Chinchilla–Cartagena railway. Several long-distance lines link the city with Madrid, through Albacete, as well as Valencia, and Catalonia up to Montpellier in France. Murcia is also the center of a local network. The line C-1 connects the city to Alicante, and the line C-2 connects Murcia to Alcantarilla, Lorca and Águilas. It also has a regional line connecting it to Cartagena and a medium-range linea to Valencia and Zaragoza.

==Healthcare==
The hospitals and other public primary healthcare centers belong to the Murcian Healthcare Service. There are three public hospitals in Murcia:
* that includes obstetrics and paediatrics units.
* : it is located in the main city nexto to Segura river.
* Hospital Morales Meseguer: it is also placed in the main city.
Large part of the municipality belongs to the Health area I (Murcia/Oeste), which main place is the main town. Nevertheless, the districts that are located in the northeastern quarter are included in Health area VII (Murcia / Este) and the district Cabezo de Torres is included in Health area VI (Vega Media del Segura).

==Education==
Murcia has three universities:
* two public universities: the University of Murcia, founded in 1272 and the Universidad Politécnica de Cartagena.
* one private university: the Catholic University Saint Anthony, founded in 1996.
There are several high schools, elementary schools, and professional schools. Murcia has three types of schools for children: private schools such as El Limonar International School, Murcia (a British international school) and King&#x27;s College, Madrid, The American School of Murcia (an American international school), semi-private schools (&quot;concertado&quot;), which are private schools that receive government funding and sometimes offer religious instruction, and public schools such as Colegio Publico (CP) San Pablo, IES Licenciado Francisco Cascales or the centenary CP Cierva Peñafiel, one of the oldest ones. The French international school, Lycée Français André Malraux de Murcie, is in nearby Molina de Segura.

The private schools and &quot;concertados&quot; can be religious (Catholic mostly but any religion is acceptable) or secular, but the public schools are strictly secular. &quot;Concertado&quot; or semi-private or quasi-private schools fill a need by providing schools where the government isn&#x27;t able to or predate the national school system. The private schools in Murcia are not only English language schools. They also include Nelva, a religious school, and San Jorge, a secular bilingual Spanish school.

Murcia also offers Adult Education for people who want to return to complete high school and possibly continue on to the university.

==Notable people==
*Ibn al-Raqqam (1250-1315), astronomer, physician, mathematician and islamic scholar
* Jerónimo de Alcalá, (1571–1632), physician and author
*Muhyī al-Dīn Ibn al-&#x27;Arabī (1165–1240), Islam Sufi master and author, probably the most notable Sufi author of history with Al-Ghazali
* Nicolás Almagro (1985–), tennis player
* Carlos Alcaraz (2003–), tennis player
* Abul Abbas al-Mursi (1219–1286) Islam Sufi master
* Portu (1992–), professional football player
* Alberto Botía (1989–), professional football player
* Blas Cantó (1991–), singer
* Charo (1941–), musician, actress and entertainer
* Juan de la Cierva (1895–1936), inventor of the autogyro, a forerunner of the helicopter
* Luis Fajardo (c. 1556–1617), admiral and nobleman, conqueror of La Mamora
* Diego de Saavedra Fajardo (1584–1648), writer and diplomat
* Jorge Ruiz Flores (1975–), singer of Maldita Nerea Spanish band
* Ramón Gaya (1910–2005), painter and writer 
* Xuso Jones (1989–), singer
* Ruth Lorenzo (1982–), singer
* Vicente Medina (1866–1937), poet and writer
* José Moñino, conde de Floridablanca (1728–1808), statesman, minister of King Charles III of Spain
* Francisco &quot;Paco&quot; Rabal (1926–2001), actor
* Francisco Salzillo (1707–1783), Baroque sculptor
* Ibn Sidah (c. 1007–1066), Arabic philologist and lexicographer
* Francisco Antonio Marín del Valle, Governor and Captain General of New Mexico between 1754 and 1760.
* Alejandro Valverde (1980–), cyclist

==Sports teams==
Some of the sports teams of the municipality are listed below:
* Racing Murcia FC — a fifth-tier club
* Real Murcia – it was founded in 1908 and is a Primera Federación football team
* CF Atlético Ciudad – Spanish Third Division (Group 2) football (dissolved in 2010)
* UCAM Murcia – Segunda Federación football team
* CAP Ciudad de Murcia – Spanish Fourth Division (Group 13) football 
* CB Murcia – the team is owned by the UCAM private university and it has been in the Spanish Liga ACB basketball league, which is the first division basketball league in the country.
* ElPozo Murcia Turística FS – a futsal team which was founded in 1992 and plays in the first division.
* Hispania Racing F1 Team – Formula One racing
* CAV Murcia 2005 – a volleyball team, and its name is an acronym for Club Atlético de Voleibol. It won the Supercopa de España tournament in the 2005–2006 season. The team was the winner in the Superliga Femenina de Voleibol in 2008. It won the Copa de la Reina Spanish tournament in 2011. It obtained 13 titles and ended in 2011 due to its debts.
* Origen (esports) – the most well-known League of Legends team in Spain and was founded in December 2014. It was a finalist team in the 2015 summer playoffs. The team has also been in the League of Legends Challenge Series and in the League of Legends Championship series. The team relocated from Murcia to in Denmark in 2018.

==Twin towns – sister cities==

Murcia is twinned with:

*Genoa, Italy (2018)
*Lecce, Italy (2002)
*Grasse, France (1990)
*Irapuato, Mexico (2012)
*Murcia, Philippines (2002)
*Łódź, Poland (1999)
*Miami, United States (1994)
==See also==
*Kingdom of Murcia
* Christ of Monteagudo
* List of municipalities in the Region of Murcia

==References==

===Notes===
==Bibliography==
==External links==
* Official website 
* Postal Codes Murcia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12225" start="0" end="6" title="Murcia" label="Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="41" end="46" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="52" end="59" title="Capital (political)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q10742" start="90" end="110" title="autonomous community" label="autonomous community"/>
<link wikidata="Q5772" start="118" end="134" title="Region of Murcia" label="Region of Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="144" end="164" title="Ranked lists of Spanish municipalities#By population" label="seventh largest city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="317" end="334" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q18612" start="416" end="428" title="Segura River" label="Segura River"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="454" end="471" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q307412" start="579" end="595" title="Abd ar-Rahman II" label="Abd ar-Rahman II"/>
<link wikidata="Q166382" start="597" end="601" title="Emir" label="Emir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236345" start="699" end="714" title="University of Murcia" label="university town"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419290" start="752" end="771" title="Cathedral of Murcia" label="Cathedral of Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="788" end="795" title="baroque architecture" label="baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q16844499" start="831" end="851" title="Holy Week procession" label="Holy Week procession"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628789" start="897" end="915" title="Francisco Salzillo" label="Francisco Salzillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="1361" end="1373" title="Chalcolithic" label="Chalcolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="1382" end="1392" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="1516" end="1524" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="1820" end="1837" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="1843" end="1851" title="fortress" label="fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q165152" start="2091" end="2097" title="Myrtus" label="myrtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q307412" start="2632" end="2648" title="Abd ar-Rahman II" label="Abd ar-Rahman II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818" start="2675" end="2682" title="Córdoba, Spain" label="Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q173441" start="2926" end="2944" title="Muhammad al-Idrisi" label="Muhammad al-Idrisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337854" start="3032" end="3052" title="Caliphate of Córdoba" label="Caliphate of Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q10400" start="3137" end="3144" title="Almería" label="Almería"/>
<link wikidata="Q5836" start="3149" end="3155" title="Toledo, Spain" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q528564" start="3263" end="3275" title="Abu ʿAbd Allāh Muḥammad ibn Saʿd ibn Mardanīš" label="Ibn Mardanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q46420" start="3573" end="3582" title="Ibn Arabi" label="Ibn Arabi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3608" end="3620" title="Ibn al-Jinan" label="Ibn al-Jinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="3721" end="3730" title="Almohades" label="Almohades"/>
<link wikidata="Q79791" start="3814" end="3825" title="Reconquista" label="Reconquista"/>
<link wikidata="Q243122" start="3964" end="3988" title="Ferdinand III of Castile" label="Ferdinand III of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q132775515" start="4280" end="4288" title="Arrixaca" label="Arrixaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q47452670" start="4407" end="4428" title="Mudéjar revolt of 1264–1266" label="Muslim popular revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q212052" start="4459" end="4476" title="James I of Aragon" label="James I of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11915301" start="4486" end="4503" title="Conquest of Murcia (1265–66)" label="conquering Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47595" start="4593" end="4613" title="Alfonso X of Castile" label="Alfonso X of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q312735" start="4786" end="4804" title="James II of Aragon" label="James II of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469708" start="4878" end="4897" title="Treaty of Torrellas" label="Treaty of Torrellas"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="5497" end="5526" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q281528" start="5538" end="5554" title="Cardinal Belluga" label="Cardinal Belluga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="5630" end="5640" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="5920" end="5925" title="levee" label="levee"/>
<link wikidata="Q584613" start="6383" end="6399" title="2011 Lorca earthquake" label="Lorca earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5772" start="6410" end="6426" title="Region of Murcia" label="Region of Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170350" start="6442" end="6460" title="Modified Mercalli intensity scale" label="Mercalli intensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q16642483" start="6658" end="6664" title="huerta" label="huerta"/>
<link wikidata="Q18612" start="6708" end="6720" title="Segura River" label="Segura River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="6819" end="6834" title="Above mean sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q236371" start="6966" end="6973" title="orchard" label="orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q272921" start="7095" end="7103" title="badlands" label="badlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="7124" end="7128" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q123991" start="7200" end="7206" title="steppe" label="steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="8712" end="8733" title="hot semi-arid climate" label="hot semi-arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="8735" end="8764" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925" start="8939" end="8954" title="torrential rain" label="torrential rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590598" start="9075" end="9080" title="frost" label="frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561" start="9109" end="9113" title="snow" label="snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q845937" start="9627" end="9630" title="Instituto Nacional de Estadística (Spain)" label="INE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="9833" end="9850" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q845937" start="10164" end="10167" title="Instituto Nacional de Estadística (Spain)" label="INE"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="10494" end="10500" title="Romani people" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419290" start="10691" end="10710" title="Cathedral of Murcia" label="Cathedral of Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="10760" end="10766" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="10889" end="10900" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="10939" end="10946" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q122960" start="10980" end="10986" title="Rococo" label="Rococo"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="10991" end="11003" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="Neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573157" start="11079" end="11094" title="Spanish Baroque architecture" label="Spanish Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q281528" start="11165" end="11181" title="Cardinal Belluga" label="Cardinal Belluga"/>
<link wikidata="Q311692" start="11298" end="11310" title="Rafael Moneo" label="Rafael Moneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q25550691" start="11554" end="11563" title="city hall" label="city hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q47476" start="11993" end="12001" title="Alhambra" label="Alhambra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4441204" start="12421" end="12443" title="Puente de los Peligros" label="Puente de los Peligros"/>
<link wikidata="Q168482" start="12550" end="12568" title="Santiago Calatrava" label="Santiago Calatrava"/>
<link wikidata="Q118501" start="12572" end="12588" title="Javier Manterola" label="Javier Manterola"/>
<link wikidata="Q4326915" start="12623" end="12635" title="Puente Nuevo (Murcia)" label="Puente Nuevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18612" start="12995" end="13005" title="Segura (river)" label="Río Segura"/>
<link wikidata="Q6121531" start="13029" end="13083" title="Santuario de Nuestra Señora de la Fuensanta, Algezares" label="Santuario de Nuestra Señora de la Fuensanta, Algezares"/>
<link wikidata="Q183061" start="13715" end="13721" title="façade" label="façade"/>
<link wikidata="Q654057" start="13749" end="13755" title="Tuscan order" label="Tuscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628789" start="13945" end="13953" title="Francisco Salzillo" label="Salzillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329444" start="14263" end="14294" title="Archaeological Museum of Murcia" label="Archaeological Museum of Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5655851" start="14423" end="14439" title="San Juan de Dios Museum" label="San Juan de Dios"/>
<link wikidata="Q16844499" start="14769" end="14789" title="Holy Week procession" label="Holy Week procession"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="14931" end="14942" title="Resurrection of Jesus" label="Crucifixion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628789" start="15017" end="15035" title="Francisco Salzillo" label="Francisco Salzillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q131080" start="15328" end="15337" title="Holy Week" label="Holy Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q236371" start="15430" end="15437" title="Orchard" label="Orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q657449" start="15438" end="15444" title="parade" label="parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886090" start="15482" end="15517" title="The Burial of the Sardine in Murcia" label="The Burial of the Sardine in Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312" start="15595" end="15601" title="Spring (season)" label="Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q30279382" start="17750" end="17768" title="2019 Spanish local elections" label="generally in Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5663900" start="18062" end="18069" title="alcalde" label="alcalde"/>
<link wikidata="Q185088" start="18326" end="18341" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (Spain)" label="Partido Popular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393123" start="18367" end="18377" title="Citizens (Spanish political party)" label="Ciudadanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q138198" start="18473" end="18477" title="Spanish Socialist Worker&amp;#x27;s Party" label="PSOE"/>
<link wikidata="Q15630787" start="18530" end="18533" title="Vox (political party)" label="Vox"/>
<link wikidata="Q16059622" start="18553" end="18560" title="Podemos (Spanish political party)" label="Podemos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320917" start="18565" end="18569" title="Equo" label="Equo"/>
<link wikidata="Q162615" start="18651" end="18660" title="Cartagena, Spain" label="Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q15095" start="18665" end="18673" title="Albacete" label="Albacete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324420" start="18889" end="18898" title="El Palmar, Murcia" label="El Palmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765918" start="19064" end="19073" title="Santomera" label="Santomera"/>
<link wikidata="Q987453" start="19078" end="19088" title="San Javier, Murcia" label="San Javier"/>
<link wikidata="Q954542" start="19152" end="19164" title="Alcantarilla" label="Alcantarilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757489" start="19169" end="19176" title="Cehegín" label="Cehegín"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015351" start="19228" end="19272" title="Región de Murcia International Airport" label="Region of Murcia International Airport (RMU)"/>
<link wikidata="Q849314" start="19453" end="19489" title="Alicante–Elche Miguel Hernández Airport" label="Alicante–Elche International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643045" start="19548" end="19576" title="List of the busiest airports in Spain" label="5th busiest airport in Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854587" start="19909" end="19920" title="Murcia tram" label="Murcia tram"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19935" end="19944" title="Tranvimur" label="Tranvimur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236345" start="20017" end="20037" title="University of Murcia" label="University of Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q770946" start="20045" end="20068" title="Estadio Nueva Condomina" label="Estadio Nueva Condomina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422685" start="20207" end="20243" title="Catholic University of Saint Anthony" label="Catholic University of Saint Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476154" start="20324" end="20329" title="Renfe" label="Renfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325607" start="20367" end="20384" title="Murcia del Carmen railway station" label="Murcia del Carmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9026067" start="20439" end="20467" title="Chinchilla–Cartagena railway" label="Chinchilla–Cartagena railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="20516" end="20522" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q15095" start="20532" end="20540" title="Albacete" label="Albacete"/>
<link wikidata="Q8818" start="20553" end="20561" title="Valencia" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="20567" end="20576" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6441" start="20583" end="20594" title="Montpellier" label="Montpellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q954542" start="20732" end="20744" title="Alcantarilla" label="Alcantarilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q47571" start="20746" end="20751" title="Lorca, Spain" label="Lorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q249941" start="20756" end="20763" title="Águilas" label="Águilas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5772" start="20959" end="20985" title="Murcian Healthcare Service" label="Murcian Healthcare Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284418" start="21047" end="21057" title="obstetrics" label="obstetrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q123028" start="21062" end="21073" title="paediatrics" label="paediatrics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21141" end="21166" title="Hospital Morales Meseguer" label="Hospital Morales Meseguer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236345" start="21602" end="21622" title="University of Murcia" label="University of Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6156635" start="21648" end="21684" title="Universidad Politécnica de Cartagena" label="Universidad Politécnica de Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422685" start="21716" end="21749" title="Universidad Católica San Antonio de Murcia" label="Catholic University Saint Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351515" start="21918" end="21957" title="El Limonar International School, Murcia" label="El Limonar International School, Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21995" end="22022" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, Madrid#King´s College" label="King&amp;#x27;s College, Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22297" end="22330" title="IES Licenciado Francisco Cascales" label="IES Licenciado Francisco Cascales"/>
<link wikidata="Q25094522" start="22425" end="22463" title="Lycée Français André Malraux de Murcie" label="Lycée Français André Malraux de Murcie"/>
<link wikidata="Q917883" start="22478" end="22494" title="Molina de Segura" label="Molina de Segura"/>
<link wikidata="Q50805156" start="23164" end="23177" title="Ibn al-Raqqam" label="Ibn al-Raqqam"/>
<link wikidata="Q972342" start="23250" end="23268" title="Jerónimo de Alcalá" label="Jerónimo de Alcalá"/>
<link wikidata="Q46420" start="23305" end="23336" title="Ibn Arabi" label="Muhyī al-Dīn Ibn al-&amp;#x27;Arabī"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="23350" end="23360" title="Sufism" label="Islam Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9546" start="23434" end="23444" title="Al-Ghazali" label="Al-Ghazali"/>
<link wikidata="Q244983" start="23447" end="23462" title="Nicolás Almagro" label="Nicolás Almagro"/>
<link wikidata="Q85518537" start="23488" end="23502" title="Carlos Alcaraz" label="Carlos Alcaraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479109" start="23528" end="23547" title="Abul Abbas al-Mursi" label="Abul Abbas al-Mursi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="23560" end="23570" title="Sufism" label="Islam Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15917247" start="23580" end="23585" title="Portu" label="Portu"/>
<link wikidata="Q470415" start="23626" end="23639" title="Alberto Botía" label="Alberto Botía"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925264" start="23680" end="23690" title="Blas Cantó" label="Blas Cantó"/>
<link wikidata="Q453949" start="23709" end="23714" title="Charo" label="Charo"/>
<link wikidata="Q354646" start="23760" end="23777" title="Juan de la Cierva" label="Juan de la Cierva"/>
<link wikidata="Q208708" start="23807" end="23815" title="autogyro" label="autogyro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840352" start="23850" end="23862" title="Luis Fajardo (Spanish Navy officer)" label="Luis Fajardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q132851" start="23879" end="23886" title="admiral" label="admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="23891" end="23899" title="Nobility" label="nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q598684" start="23914" end="23923" title="La Mamora" label="La Mamora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715411" start="23926" end="23951" title="Diego de Saavedra Fajardo" label="Diego de Saavedra Fajardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q966066" start="24024" end="24037" title="Maldita Nerea" label="Maldita Nerea"/>
<link wikidata="Q707877" start="24053" end="24063" title="Ramón Gaya" label="Ramón Gaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q15921532" start="24099" end="24109" title="Xuso Jones" label="Xuso Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723363" start="24128" end="24140" title="Ruth Lorenzo" label="Ruth Lorenzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892054" start="24159" end="24173" title="Vicente Medina" label="Vicente Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287910" start="24205" end="24240" title="José Moñino, conde de Floridablanca" label="José Moñino, conde de Floridablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q36234" start="24282" end="24302" title="Charles III of Spain" label="Charles III of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q343299" start="24305" end="24337" title="Francisco Rabal" label="Francisco &amp;quot;Paco&amp;quot; Rabal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628789" start="24359" end="24377" title="Francisco Salzillo" label="Francisco Salzillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778265" start="24410" end="24419" title="Ibn Sidah" label="Ibn Sidah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5483116" start="24475" end="24508" title="Francisco Antonio Marín del Valle" label="Francisco Antonio Marín del Valle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="24542" end="24552" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q286183" start="24578" end="24596" title="Alejandro Valverde" label="Alejandro Valverde"/>
<link wikidata="Q97169822" start="24697" end="24713" title="Racing Murcia FC" label="Racing Murcia FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q12230" start="24736" end="24747" title="Real Murcia" label="Real Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q100146559" start="24782" end="24800" title="Primera Federación" label="Primera Federación"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487562" start="24817" end="24835" title="CF Atlético Ciudad" label="CF Atlético Ciudad"/>
<link wikidata="Q751826" start="24838" end="24860" title="Segunda División B" label="Spanish Third Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="24871" end="24879" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q32444" start="24902" end="24913" title="UCAM Murcia CF" label="UCAM Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q100486747" start="24916" end="24934" title="Segunda Federación" label="Segunda Federación"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774926" start="24951" end="24971" title="CAP Ciudad de Murcia" label="CAP Ciudad de Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q749736" start="24974" end="24997" title="Tercera División" label="Spanish Fourth Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="25009" end="25017" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q54915" start="25021" end="25030" title="CB Murcia" label="CB Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126104" start="25113" end="25121" title="Liga ACB" label="Liga ACB"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="25122" end="25132" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323854" start="25205" end="25231" title="ElPozo Murcia Turística FS" label="ElPozo Murcia Turística FS"/>
<link wikidata="Q171401" start="25236" end="25242" title="futsal" label="futsal"/>
<link wikidata="Q171420" start="25309" end="25332" title="Hispania Racing F1 Team" label="Hispania Racing F1 Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705092" start="25335" end="25353" title="Formula One racing" label="Formula One racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561419" start="25356" end="25371" title="CAV Murcia 2005" label="CAV Murcia 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="25376" end="25386" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763910" start="25462" end="25481" title="Supercopa de España de Voleibol Femenino" label="Supercopa de España"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561875" start="25549" end="25579" title="Superliga Femenina de Voleibol" label="Superliga Femenina de Voleibol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999621" start="25600" end="25616" title="Copa de la Reina de Voleibol" label="Copa de la Reina"/>
<link wikidata="Q21187769" start="25705" end="25721" title="Origen (esports)" label="Origen (esports)"/>
<link wikidata="Q223341" start="25744" end="25761" title="League of Legends" label="League of Legends"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="26074" end="26081" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="26090" end="26095" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13386" start="26111" end="26116" title="Lecce" label="Lecce"/>
<link wikidata="Q173705" start="26132" end="26138" title="Grasse" label="Grasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q816845" start="26155" end="26163" title="Irapuato" label="Irapuato"/>
<link wikidata="Q195459" start="26180" end="26186" title="Murcia, Negros Occidental" label="Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q580" start="26208" end="26212" title="Łódź" label="Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="26229" end="26234" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164500" start="26271" end="26288" title="Kingdom of Murcia" label="Kingdom of Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q97667273" start="26291" end="26311" title="Christ of Monteagudo" label="Christ of Monteagudo"/>
<link wikidata="Q93261" start="26314" end="26360" title="List of municipalities in the Region of Murcia" label="List of municipalities in the Region of Murcia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59729" wikidata="Q1477177" url="?curid=59729" title="1934 FIFA World Cup">
<text>The 1934 FIFA World Cup was the 2nd edition of the FIFA World Cup, the quadrennial international football championship for senior men&#x27;s national teams. It took place in Italy from 27 May to 10 June 1934.

The 1934 World Cup was the first in which teams had to qualify to take part. Thirty-two nations entered the competition; 16 teams would qualify for the final tournament. Reigning champions Uruguay boycotted the tournament as only four European teams had accepted their invitation to the 1930 tournament. Italy beat Czechoslovakia 2–1 to become the second World Cup champions and the first European winners.

The 1934 World Cup was marred by being a high-profile instance of a sporting event being used for overt political gain. In particular, Benito Mussolini was keen to use this World Cup as a means of promoting fascism. Although some historians and sports journalists have made accusations of corruption and meddling by Mussolini to influence the competition to the benefit of Italy, Italy has always claimed that it deserved victory in the competition and the successful national team, considered one of the best in the country&#x27;s history, emerged victorious also in the Olympic football tournament of 1936 hosted by Germany and in the 1938 World Cup hosted by France.

The Federale 102 ball, which was manufactured in Italy, was the match ball provided for the 1934 World Cup.

==Host selection==

After a lengthy decision-making process in which FIFA&#x27;s executive committee met eight times, Italy was chosen as the host nation at a meeting in Stockholm on 9 October 1932. The decision was taken by the executive committee without a ballot of members. The Italian bid was chosen in preference to one from Sweden; the Italian government assigned a budget of Lire3.5 million to the tournament.

==Qualification and participants==
36 countries applied to enter the tournament, so qualifying matches were required to thin the field to 16. Even so, there were several notable absentees. Reigning World Cup holders Uruguay declined to participate, in protest at the refusal of several European countries to travel to South America for the previous World Cup, which Uruguay had hosted in 1930. As a result, the 1934 World Cup is the only one in which the reigning champions did not participate. The British Home Nations, in a period of self-imposed exile from FIFA, also refused to participate, even though FIFA had offered England and Scotland direct entry to the tournament without qualification. Football Association committee member Charles Sutcliffe called the tournament &quot;a joke&quot; and claimed that &quot;the national associations of England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland have quite enough to do in their own International Championship which seems to me a far better World Championship than the one to be staged in Rome&quot;.

Despite their role as hosts, Italy were still required to qualify, the only time the host needed to do so. The qualifying matches were arranged on a geographical basis. Withdrawals by Chile and Peru meant Argentina and Brazil qualified without playing a single match.

Twelve of the 16 places were allocated to Europe, three to the Americas, and one to Africa or Asia (including Turkey). Only 10 of the 32 entrants, and four of the 16 qualified teams (Brazil, Argentina, United States and Egypt, the first African team to qualify for a World Cup finals tournament), were from outside Europe. The last place in the finals was contested between the United States and Mexico only three days before the start of the tournament in a one-off match in Rome, which the United States won.

===List of qualified teams===

The following 16 teams qualified for the final tournament.
Asia (0)
* None qualified
Africa (1)
* (debut)

North, Central America and Caribbean (1)
South America (2)
*

Europe (12)
* (debut)
* (debut)
* (debut)
* (debut)
* (hosts, debut)
* (debut)
* (debut)
* (debut)
* (debut)

10 of these teams made their first World Cup appearance. This included 9 of the 12 European teams (Italy, Germany, Spain, the Netherlands, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Sweden, Austria, and Switzerland) as well as Egypt. Egypt was the first team from Africa in the finals and would not qualify again until the next time the competition was held in Italy, in 1990.

==Venues==
The number of supporters travelling from other countries was higher than at any previous football tournament, including 7,000 from the Netherlands and 10,000 each from Austria and Switzerland.

==Format==
The group stage used in the first World Cup was discarded in favour of a straight knockout tournament. If a match was tied after ninety minutes, then thirty minutes of extra time were played. If the score was still tied after extra time, the match was replayed the next day.

The eight seeded teams – Argentina, Brazil, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Austria, Czechoslovakia and Hungary – were kept apart in the first round.

==Summary==

All eight first-round matches kicked off at the same time. Hosts and favourites Italy won handsomely, defeating the USA 7–1; &quot;The New York Times&quot; correspondent wrote that &quot;only the fine goal-tending of Julius Hjulian of Chicago kept the score as low as it was&quot;.
Internal disputes meant Argentina&#x27;s squad for the tournament did not contain a single member of the team which had reached the final in 1930. In the end, &quot;La Albiceleste&quot; would partake with an amateur squad. Against Sweden in Bologna, Argentina twice took the lead, but two goals by Sven Jonasson and a winner by Knut Kroon gave Sweden a 3–2 victory. Fellow South Americans Brazil also suffered an early exit. Spain beat them comfortably, with 3–1 as the final score.

For the only time in World Cup history, the last eight consisted entirely of European teams – Austria, Czechoslovakia, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland. All four non-European teams who made the journey to Italy were eliminated after one match.

In the quarter-finals, the first replayed match in World Cup history took place, when Italy and Spain drew 1–1 after extra time. The match was played in a highly aggressive manner with several players of both sides injured: rough play injured the Spanish goalkeeper Ricardo Zamora in the first match, leaving him unable to participate in the replay, while on the other side rough play by Spaniards broke the leg of the Italian Mario Pizziolo who would not play in the national team again. Italy won the replay 1–0; their play so physical that at least three Spaniards had to depart the field with injuries. Italy then went on to beat Austria in the semi-finals by the same score. Meanwhile, Czechoslovakia secured their place in the final by beating Germany 3–1.

The Stadium of the National Fascist Party was the venue for the final. With 80 minutes played, the Czechoslovaks led 1–0. The Italians managed to score before the final whistle and then added another goal in extra time to be crowned World Cup winners.

Throughout the years, several sources have reported that the tournament was marred by bribery and corruption, and could have been influenced by Italian dictator Benito Mussolini, who used the tournament as a propaganda tool for fascism. According to these accusations, Mussolini personally selected referees for the matches where the Italy national team were playing, while the Italian government meddled in FIFA&#x27;s organisation of events, re-organizing the logistics of the matches to further promote fascism. Nonetheless, Italy also won the following edition of the World Cup (held in France) as well as the Olympic football tournament in 1936.

==Squads==
For a list of all squads that appeared in the final tournament, see &quot;1934 FIFA World Cup squads&quot;.
==Final tournament==
===Bracket===
===Round of 16===








===Quarter-finals===




====Replay====
===Semi-finals===


===Third place play-off===
===Final===


==Goalscorers==

With five goals, Oldřich Nejedlý was the top scorer in the tournament. In total, 70 goals were scored by 45 players, with none of them credited as an own goal.

;5 goals

* Oldřich Nejedlý
;4 goals

* Edmund Conen
* Angelo Schiavio
;3 goals

* Raimundo Orsi
* Leopold Kielholz
;2 goals

* Johann Horvath
* Bernard Voorhoof
* Antonín Puč
* Abdulrahman Fawzi
* Karl Hohmann
* Ernst Lehner
* Géza Toldi
* Giovanni Ferrari
* Giuseppe Meazza
* José Iraragorri
* Sven Jonasson
;1 goal

* Ernesto Belis
* Alberto Galateo
* Josef Bican
* Anton Schall
* Karl Sesta
* Matthias Sindelar
* Karl Zischek
* Leônidas
* Jiří Sobotka
* František Svoboda
* Jean Nicolas
* Georges Verriest
* Stanislaus Kobierski
* Rudolf Noack
* Otto Siffling
* György Sárosi
* Pál Teleki
* Jenő Vincze
* Enrique Guaita
* Kick Smit
* Leen Vente
* Ștefan Dobay
* Isidro Lángara
* Luis Regueiro
* Gösta Dunker
* Knut Kroon
* André Abegglen
* Willy Jäggi
* Aldo Donelli
== FIFA retrospective ranking ==
In 1986, FIFA published a report that ranked all teams in each World Cup up to and including 1986, based on progress in the competition, overall results and quality of the opposition (not counting replay results). The rankings for the 1934 tournament were as follows:

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* 1934 FIFA World Cup at FIFA.com
* 1934 FIFA World Cup at RSSSF.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1477177" start="4" end="23" title="1934 FIFA World Cup" label="1934 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="51" end="65" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="97" end="105" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q831533" start="123" end="149" title="List of men&amp;#x27;s national association football teams" label="senior men&amp;#x27;s national"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="174" end="179" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q565657" start="265" end="272" title="FIFA World Cup qualification" label="qualify"/>
<link wikidata="Q134916" start="399" end="406" title="Uruguay national football team" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q48432" start="497" end="512" title="1930 FIFA World Cup" label="1930 tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q676899" start="514" end="519" title="Italy national football team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q182072" start="525" end="539" title="Czechoslovakia national football team" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="753" end="769" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114877" start="1101" end="1157" title="History of the Italy national football team" label="considered one of the best in the country&amp;#x27;s history"/>
<link wikidata="Q8150" start="1190" end="1225" title="1936 Summer Olympics" label="Olympic football tournament of 1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q131591" start="1255" end="1269" title="1938 World Cup" label="1938 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="1568" end="1577" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q204992" start="1781" end="1785" title="italian lira" label="Lire"/>
<link wikidata="Q134916" start="2033" end="2040" title="Uruguay national football team" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q48432" start="2157" end="2175" title="1930 FIFA World Cup" label="previous World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040745" start="2324" end="2336" title="Home Nations" label="Home Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q9500" start="2516" end="2536" title="The Football Association" label="Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082773" start="2554" end="2571" title="Charles Sutcliffe" label="Charles Sutcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q919472" start="2735" end="2765" title="British Home Championship" label="own International Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q676899" start="2887" end="2892" title="Italy national football team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172025" start="3042" end="3047" title="Chile national football team" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q212166" start="3052" end="3056" title="Peru national football team" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q79800" start="3063" end="3072" title="Argentina national football team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q83459" start="3077" end="3083" title="Brazil national football team" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q164134" start="3505" end="3518" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national soccer team" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q164089" start="3523" end="3529" title="Mexico national football team" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="3603" end="3607" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q132529" start="4302" end="4306" title="1990 FIFA World Cup" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="5097" end="5115" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q977369" start="5183" end="5197" title="Julius Hjulian" label="Julius Hjulian"/>
<link wikidata="Q945220" start="5546" end="5559" title="Sven Jonasson" label="Sven Jonasson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377955" start="5576" end="5586" title="Knut Kroon" label="Knut Kroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q163534" start="5826" end="5833" title="Austria national football team" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q182072" start="5835" end="5849" title="Czechoslovakia national football team" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43310" start="5851" end="5858" title="Germany national football team" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q170561" start="5860" end="5867" title="Hungary national football team" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q676899" start="5869" end="5874" title="Italy national football team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42267" start="5876" end="5881" title="Spain men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q160826" start="5883" end="5889" title="Sweden men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q165141" start="5895" end="5906" title="Switzerland national football team" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q296337" start="6266" end="6280" title="Ricardo Zamora" label="Ricardo Zamora"/>
<link wikidata="Q277395" start="6427" end="6441" title="Mario Pizziolo" label="Mario Pizziolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q642958" start="6768" end="6805" title="Stadio Nazionale PNF" label="Stadium of the National Fascist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="7178" end="7194" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="7245" end="7252" title="fascism" label="fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131591" start="7564" end="7581" title="1938 FIFA World Cup" label="following edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="7608" end="7614" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q313356" start="7631" end="7666" title="Football at the 1936 Summer Olympics" label="Olympic football tournament in 1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q905569" start="7754" end="7780" title="1934 FIFA World Cup squads" label="1934 FIFA World Cup squads"/>
<link wikidata="Q266489" start="8140" end="8155" title="Oldřich Nejedlý" label="Oldřich Nejedlý"/>
<link wikidata="Q258251" start="8168" end="8180" title="Edmund Conen" label="Edmund Conen"/>
<link wikidata="Q315817" start="8183" end="8198" title="Angelo Schiavio" label="Angelo Schiavio"/>
<link wikidata="Q265697" start="8211" end="8224" title="Raimundo Orsi" label="Raimundo Orsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q672727" start="8227" end="8243" title="Leopold Kielholz" label="Leopold Kielholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q699501" start="8256" end="8270" title="Johann Horvath" label="Johann Horvath"/>
<link wikidata="Q523206" start="8273" end="8289" title="Bernard Voorhoof" label="Bernard Voorhoof"/>
<link wikidata="Q531382" start="8292" end="8303" title="Antonín Puč" label="Antonín Puč"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704062" start="8306" end="8323" title="Abdulrahman Fawzi" label="Abdulrahman Fawzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q674977" start="8326" end="8338" title="Karl Hohmann" label="Karl Hohmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q282401" start="8341" end="8353" title="Ernst Lehner" label="Ernst Lehner"/>
<link wikidata="Q634583" start="8356" end="8366" title="Géza Toldi" label="Géza Toldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q382987" start="8369" end="8385" title="Giovanni Ferrari" label="Giovanni Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q192131" start="8388" end="8403" title="Giuseppe Meazza" label="Giuseppe Meazza"/>
<link wikidata="Q554923" start="8406" end="8421" title="José Iraragorri" label="José Iraragorri"/>
<link wikidata="Q945220" start="8424" end="8437" title="Sven Jonasson" label="Sven Jonasson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703796" start="8449" end="8462" title="Ernesto Belis" label="Ernesto Belis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703782" start="8465" end="8480" title="Alberto Galateo" label="Alberto Galateo"/>
<link wikidata="Q352017" start="8483" end="8494" title="Josef Bican" label="Josef Bican"/>
<link wikidata="Q593752" start="8497" end="8509" title="Anton Schall" label="Anton Schall"/>
<link wikidata="Q657275" start="8512" end="8522" title="Karl Sesta" label="Karl Sesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q312865" start="8525" end="8542" title="Matthias Sindelar" label="Matthias Sindelar"/>
<link wikidata="Q695462" start="8545" end="8557" title="Karl Zischek" label="Karl Zischek"/>
<link wikidata="Q311739" start="8560" end="8568" title="Leônidas da Silva" label="Leônidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q383293" start="8571" end="8583" title="Jiří Sobotka" label="Jiří Sobotka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336868" start="8586" end="8603" title="František Svoboda" label="František Svoboda"/>
<link wikidata="Q533283" start="8606" end="8618" title="Jean Nicolas" label="Jean Nicolas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334346" start="8621" end="8637" title="Georges Verriest" label="Georges Verriest"/>
<link wikidata="Q677171" start="8640" end="8660" title="Stanislaus Kobierski" label="Stanislaus Kobierski"/>
<link wikidata="Q674656" start="8663" end="8675" title="Rudolf Noack" label="Rudolf Noack"/>
<link wikidata="Q701770" start="8678" end="8691" title="Otto Siffling" label="Otto Siffling"/>
<link wikidata="Q502942" start="8694" end="8707" title="György Sárosi" label="György Sárosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q762252" start="8710" end="8720" title="Pál Teleki (footballer)" label="Pál Teleki"/>
<link wikidata="Q749268" start="8723" end="8734" title="Jenő Vincze" label="Jenő Vincze"/>
<link wikidata="Q722007" start="8737" end="8751" title="Enrique Guaita" label="Enrique Guaita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375222" start="8754" end="8763" title="Kick Smit" label="Kick Smit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812124" start="8766" end="8776" title="Leen Vente" label="Leen Vente"/>
<link wikidata="Q397086" start="8779" end="8791" title="Ștefan Dobay" label="Ștefan Dobay"/>
<link wikidata="Q470448" start="8794" end="8808" title="Isidro Lángara" label="Isidro Lángara"/>
<link wikidata="Q704337" start="8811" end="8824" title="Luis Regueiro" label="Luis Regueiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337494" start="8827" end="8839" title="Gösta Dunker" label="Gösta Dunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377955" start="8842" end="8852" title="Knut Kroon" label="Knut Kroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q465468" start="8855" end="8869" title="André Abegglen" label="André Abegglen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635094" start="8872" end="8883" title="Willy Jäggi" label="Willy Jäggi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633193" start="8886" end="8898" title="Aldo Donelli" label="Aldo Donelli"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59731" wikidata="Q4018" url="?curid=59731" title="Navarre">
<text>Navarre ( ; ), officially the Chartered Community of Navarre, is a landlocked foral autonomous community and province in northern Spain, bordering the Basque Autonomous Community, La Rioja, and Aragon in Spain and New Aquitaine in France. The capital city is Pamplona (). The present-day province makes up the majority of the territory of the medieval Kingdom of Navarre, a long-standing Pyrenean kingdom that occupied lands on both sides of the western Pyrenees, with its northernmost part, Lower Navarre, located in the southwest corner of France.

Navarre is in the transition zone between the green Cantabrian Coast and semi-arid interior areas and thus its landscapes vary widely across the region. Being in a transition zone also produces a highly variable climate, with summers that are a mix of cooler spells and heat waves, and winters that are mild for the latitude. Navarre is one of the historic Basque provinces: its Basque features are conspicuous in the north, but virtually absent on the southern fringes. The best-known event in Navarre is the annual festival of San Fermín held in Pamplona in July.

== Toponymy ==

The first documented use of a name resembling &quot;Navarra&quot;, &quot;Nafarroa&quot;, or &quot;Naparroa&quot; is a reference to &quot;navarros&quot;, in Eginhard&#x27;s early-9th-century chronicle of the feats of the Holy Roman Emperor Charlemagne, describing his intrusion to the Ebro river. Other Royal Frankish Annals feature . There are two proposed etymologies for the name.

* Basque &quot;nabar&quot; (declined absolute singular &quot;nabarra&quot;): &quot;brownish&quot;, &quot;multicolour&quot; (i. e. in contrast to the green mountainous lands north of the original County of Navarre).
* Basque &quot;naba&quot; (or Spanish &quot;nava&quot;): &quot;valley&quot;, &quot;plain&quot; + Basque &quot;herri&quot; (&quot;people&quot;, &quot;land&quot;).

The linguist Joan Coromines considers &quot;naba&quot; to be linguistically part of a wider Vasconic or Aquitanian language substrate, rather than Basque &quot;per se&quot;.

The official name in Basque is &quot;&quot;, but the form &quot; &quot;Upper Navarre&quot;&quot; is also often seen, to distinguish the province from neighboring Lower Navarre.

== History ==


=== Antiquity ===

Before and during the Roman Empire, the Vascones populated the southern slopes of the Pyrenees, including the area which would ultimately become Navarre. In the mountainous north, the Vascones escaped large-scale Roman settlement, except for some coastal areas—for example Oiasso (in what is now Gipuzkoa)—and the flatter areas to the south, Calagurris (in what is now La Rioja), which were amenable to large-scale Roman farming—vineyards, olives, and wheat crops. There is no evidence of battles fought or general hostility between Romans and Basques, as they had the same enemies.

=== Kingdom of Navarre ===
Neither the Visigoths nor the Franks ever completely subjugated the area. The Vascones (to become the Basques) assimilated neighbouring tribes as of the 7th century AD. In the year 778, the Basques defeated a Frankish army at the Battle of Roncevaux Pass.

Following the Battle of Roncevaux Pass (824), the Basque chieftain Iñigo Arista was elected King of Pamplona supported by the muwallad Banu Qasi of Tudela, establishing a Basque kingdom that was later called Navarre. That kingdom reached its zenith during the reign of Sancho III, comprising most of the Christian realms to the south of the Pyrenees, and even a short overlordship of Gascony (in the early 11th century).

When Sancho III died in 1035, the kingdom was divided between his sons. It never fully recovered its political power, while its commercial importance increased as traders and pilgrims (the &quot;Francs&quot;) poured into the kingdom via the Way of Saint James. In 1200, Navarre lost the key western Basque districts to Alphonse VIII of Castile, leaving the kingdom landlocked. Navarre then contributed with a small but symbolic force of 200 knights to the decisive Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa in 1212 against the Almohads.

The native line of kings came to an end in 1234; their heirs intermarried with French dynasties. However, the Navarrese kept most of their strong laws and institutions. The death of Queen Blanche I (1441) inaugurated a civil war period between the Beaumont and Agramont confederacies with the intervention of the Castilian-Aragonese House of Trastámara in Navarre&#x27;s internal affairs. In 1512, Navarre was invaded by Ferdinand the Catholic&#x27;s troops, with Queen Catherine and King John III withdrawing to the north of the Pyrenees, and establishing a Kingdom of Navarre-Béarn, led by Queen Joan III as of 1555.

To the south of the Pyrenees, Navarre was annexed to the Crown of Castile in 1515, but kept a separate ambiguous status, and a shaky balance up to 1610—King Henry IV was ready to march over Spanish Navarre. A Chartered Government was established (the &quot;Diputación&quot;), and the kingdom managed to keep home rule. Tensions with the Spanish government came to a head as of 1794, when Spanish premier Manuel Godoy attempted to suppress Navarrese and Basque self-government altogether, with the end of the First Carlist War (1839 – 1841) definitely bringing the kingdom and its home rule (&quot;fueros&quot;) to an end.

=== Province of Spain ===


==== Loss of home rule ====

After the 1839 Convention of Bergara, a reduced version of home rule (&quot;fueros&quot;) was passed in 1839. However, the 1841 Act for the Modification of Fueros (later called the &quot;Compromise Act&quot;, &quot;Ley Paccionada&quot;) definitely made the kingdom into a province after a compromise was reached by the Spanish government with officials of the Provincial Council of Navarre. The relocation of customs from the Ebro river to the Pyrenees in 1841 prompted the collapse of Navarre&#x27;s customary cross-Pyrenean trade and the rise of smuggling.

Amid instability in Spain, Carlists took over in Navarre and the rest of the Basque provinces. An actual Basque state was established during the Third Carlist War with Estella as its capital (1872 – 1876), but King Alfonso XII&#x27;s restoration in the throne of Spain and a counter-attack prompted the Carlist defeat. The end of the Third Carlist War saw a renewed wave of Spanish centralisation directly affecting Navarre.

In 1893 – 1894 the &quot;Gamazada&quot; popular uprising took place centred in Pamplona against Madrid&#x27;s governmental decisions breaching the 1841 chartered provisions. Except for a small faction (the so-called &quot;Alfonsinos&quot;), all parties in Navarre agreed on the need for a new political framework based on home rule within the &quot;Laurak Bat&quot;, the Basque districts in Spain. Among these, the Carlists stood out, who politically dominated the province, and resented an increased string of rulings and laws passed by Madrid, as well as left leaning influences. Unlike Biscay or Gipuzkoa, Navarre did not develop manufacturing during this period, remaining a basically rural economy.

==== Republic and military uprising ====

In 1932, a Basque Country&#x27;s separate statute failed to take off over disagreements on the centrality of Catholicism, a scene of political radicalisation ensued dividing the leftist and rightist forces during the 2nd Spanish Republic (1931 – 1939). Thousands of landless labourers occupied properties of wealthy landowners in October 1933, leaving the latter eager for revenge. The most reactionary and clerical Carlists came to prominence, ideologues such as Víctor Pradera, and an understanding with General Mola paved the way to the Spanish Nationalist uprising in Pamplona (18 July 1936).

The triumphant military revolt was followed by a terror campaign in the rearguard against blacklisted individuals considered to be progressive (&quot;reds&quot;), mildly republican, or just inconvenient. The purge especially affected southern Navarre along the Ebro banks, and counted on the active complicity of the clergy, who adopted the fascist salute and even involved in murderous tasks. The killing took a death toll of at least 2,857, plus a further 305 dying in prisons (ill-treatment, malnutrition).

The dead were buried in mass graves or discarded into chasms abounding on the central hilly areas (Urbasa, etc.). Basque nationalists were also chased to a lesser extent, e.g. Fortunato Aguirre, a Basque nationalist and mayor of Estella (and co-founder of Osasuna Football Club), was executed in September 1936. Humiliation and silence ensued for the survivors. Pamplona became the rebel launching point against the Republic during the War in the North.

==== Post-war scene ====

As a reward for its support in the Spanish Civil War (Navarre sided for the most part with the military uprising), Franco allowed Navarre, as it happened with Álava, to maintain during his dictatorship a number of prerogatives reminiscent of the ancient Navarrese liberties. The bleak post-war years were shaken by shortage, famine, and smuggling, with the economy relying on agriculture (wheat, vineyards, olive, barley), and a negative migration balance. The victors came to cluster around two main factions, Carlists and Falangists, while the totalitarian ultra-Catholic environment provided fertile grounds for another religious group, the Opus Dei, to found their University of Navarre (1952), ever more influential in Pamplona.

The coming of the society of consumption and incipient economic liberalisation saw also the establishment of factories and workshops during the early 1960s (automobile manufacturing and accessories, etc.), especially around the overgrown capital. It was followed by labour and political unrest.

==== Tension during the Spanish transition ====

Officials and figures with good connections to the Navarrese regional government went on to join Adolfo Suárez&#x27;s UCD, later splitting into the party UPN led by Jesús Aizpún Tuero (1979), refusing to join a democratic constitutional process on the grounds that Navarre&#x27;s charters (or &quot;fueros&quot;) remained in place. They also refused to join the Basque process to become an autonomous community, where recently legalised Basque nationalist and leftist parties held a majority.

A continuation of the institutional framework inherited from the dictatorship and its accommodation into the Spanish democracy was guaranteed by the Betterment (&quot;Amejoramiento&quot;), a Navarre-only solution considered &#x27;an upgrade&#x27; of its former status issued from the (remains of the) charters. In a three-year span, the Spanish Socialists in Navarre veered in their position, quit the Basque process, and joined the arrangement adopted for Navarre (Chartered Community of Navarre, 1982). The reform was not ratified by referendum, as demanded by Basque nationalist and minority leftist forces.

== Politics ==

=== Institutions and status ===

After the end of Franco&#x27;s dictatorship, Navarre became one of the 17 Autonomous Communities in Spain. The community ceremonies, education, and social services, together with housing, urban development, and environment protection policies are under the responsibility of Navarre&#x27;s political institutions. As in the rest of the communities, Navarre has a Parliament elected every four years, and the majority in this Parliament determines the president of the Community, who is in charge of Navarre&#x27;s government. Unlike most other autonomous communities of Spain (but like the Basque Autonomous Community), Navarre has almost full responsibility for collecting and administering taxes which must follow the overall guidelines established by the Spanish government but may have some minor differences.

The first 3 presidents of the community belonged to the extinct Union of the Democratic Centre (UCD) party. After 1984 the government was ruled by either the Socialist Party of Navarre (PSN – PSOE, one of the federative components of the Spanish Socialist Workers&#x27; Party, main centre-left wing party in Spain) or the Navarrese People&#x27;s Union (UPN) (a Navarrese party that had a long alliance with the People&#x27;s Party (PP), main right-wing party in Spain). However, in 2015 Uxue Barkos (Geroa Bai) became president with the support of EH Bildu, Podemos and Izquierda-Ezkerra. She is the first Basque nationalist president in Navarre.

Basque nationalist parties also represent a sizeable part of the vote (around 31% in the 2015 elections), and a majority in most of the northern areas. Basque nationalist parties have as a key point in their agendas to merge Navarre into the Basque Autonomous Community by referendum (as predicted in the Spanish constitution). All Spain-based parties, as well as UPN and PSN, oppose this move.

=== Present-day political dynamics ===
Politics in Navarre have been marked by fierce rivalry between two blocs representing different national identities that are part of Navarre society: the pro-Basque EH Bildu and the Basque nationalist Geroa Bai parties, on the one side, and the institutional pro-Spanish parties, UPN, PP and PSN on the other. Parties on the pro-Basque spectrum demand further sovereignty in internal affairs of Navarre and closer relationship with the districts of the Basque Autonomous Community. Another 2013–2014 controversy refers to the alleged ideological profiling of public school Basque language teachers, billed as &quot;ETA supporting teachers&quot;.

Since the establishment of Navarre&#x27;s present status (the &quot;Amejoramiento&quot;, the &#x27;Betterment&#x27;) in 1982, the successive regional governments ruled by UPN and PSN have been shaken by frequent political instability and corruption scandals, with UPN&#x27;s Miguel Sanz&#x27;s term being the most stable and longest, extending from 2001 to 2011. Between 2012 and 2014, a series of corruption scandals broke out involving regional president Yolanda Barcina and other regional government officials that included influence peddling, embezzlement, misappropriation of funds and mismanagement leading to the bankruptcy of Caja Navarra. By November 2012, the PSN—UPN&#x27;s standing ally in Navarre up to that point—backed down on its support of UPN, but refused to impeach Yolanda Barcina or search new political alliances, leaving a deadlocked government. The regional president, widely questioned in Navarre as of 2012 and relying only on the PP central government&#x27;s backup, went on to urge the Constitutional Court to challenge several decisions made by the Parliament of Navarre.

After the latest scandal and corruption allegations affecting a secretary of her cabinet (Lourdes Goicoechea, regional public finance secretary) in February 2014, the Spanish home office secretary Jorge Fernández Díaz stepped in warning leading members of PSN that &quot;Navarre is strategic for Spain&quot;, and asserting that any other political alliance means &quot;supporting ETA&quot;. The Justice secretary in Madrid Alberto Ruiz Gallardón in turn stated that &quot;the worst political error is not corruption&quot; but getting along with Bildu (a Basque pro-independence coalition). In May 2015, the elections for Navarre Parliament left a better result for pro-Basque parties, which managed to establish an alliance, Uxue Barkos from Geroa Bai being elected president of Navarre for the period 2015 – 2019. June 2019 elections, however, turned the tide, when rightist forces reunited in the platform Navarra Suma, made up of UPN, PP and Ciudadanos, and garnered 20 MPs, 40% of the seats in the Parliament of Navarre, although both Geroa Bai and EH Bildu increased their vote share. Following the election results, PSN&#x27;s María Chivite was elected president with the support provided by progressive forces, handing over Pamplona&#x27;s council to Navarra Suma and explicitly excluding EH Bildu from any talks or alliances, but relying on its abstention for her inauguration.

In December 2017, the Navarrese parliament passed a law splitting teachers aspiring to work in the state-run education network into two different professional categories, one for those qualified in Basque and Spanish, and another for Spanish monolinguals, so thwarting with the vote of Izquierda-Ezkerra (integrated in the regional government) the new progressive government&#x27;s plan to have just one; the latter echoes a long-running demand of education unions. In July 2018, the Constitutional Court of Spain suspended the Far Right&#x27;s and Civil Servants&#x27; Victims Act passed by the Parliament of Navarre in 2015. Three months later, the chief executive officer of the National Police in Navarre stepped down for the disclosure of a fake Twitter account he owned that praised Antonio Tejero, as well as Vox leader Santiago Abascal as a new Jose Antonio, also insulting a number of Catalan and Basque nationalist and leftist figures. In October 2019, the High Court of Navarre ruled against the public use of bilingual signalling and institutional announcements in Mixed-Speaking and Non-Basque Speaking areas, also proscribing the consideration of Basque as a merit in job positions, unless strictly needed; the judgement sparked an uproar among some parties in the coalition government of Navarre, as well as EH Bildu, but was saluted by the PSN and Navarra Suma.

== Geography and climate ==

Navarre consists of 272 municipalities and has a total population of 601,874 (2006), of whom approximately one-third live in the capital, Pamplona (195,769 pop.), and one-half in the capital&#x27;s metropolitan area (315,988 pop.). There are no other large municipalities in the region. The next largest are Tudela (32,802), Barañain (22,401), Burlada/Burlata (18,388), Estella-Lizarra (13,892), Zizur Mayor (13,197), Tafalla (11,040), Villava/Atarrabia (10,295), and Ansoáin/Antsoain (9,952).

Despite its relatively small size, Navarre features stark contrasts in geography, from the Pyrenees mountain range that dominates the territory to the plains of the Ebro river valley in the south. The highest point in Navarre is Mesa de los Tres Reyes, with an elevation of .

Other important mountains are Txamantxoia, Kartxela, the Larra-Belagua Massif, Sierra de Alaiz, Untzueko Harria, Sierra de Leyre, Sierra del Perdón, Montejurra, Ezkaba, Monte Ori, Sierra de Codés, Urbasa, Andia, and the Aralar Range.

In the north, climate is affected by the Atlantic Ocean leading an Oceanic west coast climate (Köppen: Cfb). Since the northernmost part of Navarre is less than from the Bay of Biscay, the northern fringes resemble San Sebastián. At central Navarre the summer precipitations start to lower, leading to a Mediterranean climate (Köppen: Csa and Csb) At the southernmost part of Navarre the climate is cool semi-arid (Köppen: Bsk). This is also at a comparatively low elevation compared to most of the north, further pontentiating the hot summers in comparison to Pamplona and even more so the northern hilly and mountainous region.

The sole official weather station of Navarre is located in Pamplona in its north-western corner and has summer highs of and lows of , while winter highs are and lows with moderate precipitation year-round.

==Cultural heritage==
Navarre is a mixture of its Basque tradition, the Trans-Pyrenean influx of people and ideas and Mediterranean influences coming from the Ebro. The Ebro valley is amenable to wheat, vegetables, wine, and even olive trees as in Aragon and La Rioja. It was a part of the Roman Empire, inhabited by the Vascones, later controlled on its southern fringes by the Muslim Banu Qasi, whose authority was taken over by the taifa kingdom of Tudela in the 11th century.

During the Reconquista, Navarre gained little ground at the expense of the Muslims, since its southern boundary had already been established by the time of the Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa in 1212. Starting in the 11th century, the Way of Saint James grew in importance. It brought pilgrims, traders and Christian soldiers from the north. Gascons and Occitans from beyond the Pyrenees (called &quot;Franks&quot;) received self-government and other privileges to foster settlement in Navarrese towns, and they brought their crafts, culture and Romance languages.

Jews and Muslims were persecuted both north and south of Navarre, expelled for the most part during the late 15th century to the early 16th century. The kingdom struggled to maintain its separate identity in 14th and 15th centuries, and after King Ferdinand V forcibly conquered Navarre after the death of his wife Queen Isabella, he extended the Castilian expulsion and forcible integration orders applicable to and of 1492 to the former kingdom. Therefore, Tudela in particular could no longer serve as a refuge after the Inquisitors were allowed.

== Economy ==
Navarre is one of the wealthiest regions in Spain per capita, with a diversified economy primarily focused on the energy sector, healthcare services and manufacturing. The gross domestic product (GDP) of the autonomous community was 20.3 billion euros as of 2018, accounting for 1.7% of Spanish economic output. GDP per capita adjusted for purchasing power was 33,700 euros or 112% of the EU27 average in the same year. The GDP per employee was 109% of the EU average.

The unemployment rate stood at 10.2% in 2017 and was the lowest in the country.

== Energy policy ==


Navarre leads Europe in its use of renewable energy technology and was planning to reach 100% renewable electricity generation by 2010. By 2004, 61% of the region&#x27;s electricity was generated by renewable sources consisting of 43.6% from 28 wind farms, 12% from over 100 small-scale water turbines, and 5.3% from 2 biomass and 2 biogas plants. In addition, the region had what was then Spain&#x27;s largest photovoltaic power plant at Montes de Cierzo de Tudela (1.2 MWp capacity) plus several hundred smaller photovoltaic installations.

Developments since 2004 have included further photovoltaic plants at Larrión (0.25 MWp) and another at Castejón (2.44 MWp), also once the largest in Spain.

== Demography ==
In 2018, the Foral Community of Navarra ranked 15th as the most populous Autonomous Community in Spain with a population of 647,554 inhabitants, which at the time was a population density of 62.32 inhabitants/km2.

The data of the population pyramid of 2010 can be summarized as follows:

* The population under 20 years of age is 19.84% of the total.
* The population between 20 and 40 years is 29.39%.
* The population between 40 and 60 years is 27.98%.
* The population older than 60 years is 22.78%.


== Languages ==
Presently, Spanish is predominantly spoken in most of the autonomous community, except for north-eastern areas, where Basque continues to be the prevailing language. According to official statistics, Spanish is the mother tongue of 81.9% of the population, Basque is 5.7% of the population&#x27;s mother tongue, and 3.8% of the population has both languages as their mother tongue while 6.1% of the population have another language as their mother tongue.

===Language shift===
The number of people that can speak Basque has increased in Navarre lately, after a steady historic retreat. In 2011, 13.6% of the population in Navarre considered themselves to be speakers of Basque and another 14.5% considered themselves semi-speakers of Basque. Historically, Basque is the &quot;lingua navarrorum&quot;, as it appears in documents of the Middle Ages, such as a document by the king Sancho the Wise. The kingdom cemented its roots in the predominantly Basque-speaking domain of Pamplona and surrounding areas. In the midst of contemporary scholarly debates on the existence of Navarre and its laws prior to the king&#x27;s authority, the Navarrese author Garcia de Gongora states as follows in 1626:

José Moret, chronicler of the kingdom, called Navarre and its bordering provinces &quot;the lands of Basque&quot;, claiming also that Tubal founded the Kingdom of Navarre. However, Basque underwent a gradual erosion, accelerated following the conquest of the kingdom in the early 16th century due to the homogenizing push of the new Castilian authorities and the neglect of its own elites, among other reasons. By 1778, 121,000 inhabitants out of 227,000 were Basque speakers, 53% of its population, still the largest amount of Basque speakers across all Basque territories. However, the number of speakers dropped sharply in the 19th century. In 1936, Basque speakers accounted for a 17% of the total Navarrese population.

Other languages have been spoken, but have disappeared, such as Navarro-Aragonese, a Romance language that was spoken in the Middle Ages around the central part of the Ebro basin. Starting in the late 11th century, the influx of pilgrims and colonizers from Toulouse and surrounding areas (&quot;Francs&quot;) who settled in separate boroughs along the Way of Saint James rendered Occitan the status language of the kingdom up to early 14th century. Navarro-Aragonese became the written language in court and royal administration by 1329, when it reached official status. However, from the 15th century onwards the language grew closer to Castilian (Spanish) and eventually merged with it. Other languages which at some point held a status or were spoken in certain communities and periods are Erromintxela, French, Hebrew, and Arabic.

=== Linguistic division of the territory and legal consequences ===
According to the 1978 Spanish constitution and the Amejoramiento del Fuero, a Navarrese law establishing the basic institutional make-up of the chartered community of Navarre, Spanish is the official language of Navarre, while the Basque language is also the official language in Basque-Speaking areas. Unlike any other statutes in the Spanish autonomous communities owning a regional language, the Amejoramiento omits citing Basque as a specific language of its people or its consideration as part of the Navarrese heritage.

The Statutory Law of Basque of 1986 defined the above areas, creating the &quot;Basque-speaking zone&quot;, an area north-east of Navarre in which Basque is the co-official language along with Spanish. This law recognizes Spanish and Basque as Navarre&#x27;s &quot;lenguas propias&quot; (a Spanish legal term meaning that a language in an autonomous community in Spain has co-official status along with Spanish), according to the Foral Law 18/1986 of Basque. This law divides Navarre into three linguistically distinct areas, a &quot;Basque-speaking zone&quot;, where Basque is the dominant language, a &quot;Mixed-speaking zone&quot;, where Basque and Spanish are both dominant, and a &quot;Non-Basque speaking zone&quot;, where Spanish is the dominant language. In the latter, the public entities of Navarre are required to use only Spanish, but in the mixed area the use of Basque is also confined to certain position. The area of the municipalities belonging to the Basque-speaking and Mixed Basque and Spanish-speaking zones are the following:

* Basque-speaking zone: Abaurrea Alta, Abaurrea Baja, Alsasua, Anué, Araiz, Aranaz, Arano, Araquil, Arbizu, Areso, Aria, Arive, Arruazu, Bacáicoa, Basaburúa Mayor, Baztán, Beinza-Labayen, Bertiz-Arana, Betelu, Burguete, Ciordia, Donamaría, Echalar, Echarri Aranaz, Elgorriaga, Erasun, Ergoyena, Erro, Esteríbar, Ezcurra, Garayoa, Garralda, Goizueta, Huarte-Araquil, Imoz, Irañeta, Ituren, Iturmendi, Lacunza, Lantz, Larráun, Leiza, Lesaca, Oiz, Olazagutía, Orbaiceta, Orbara, Roncesvalles, Saldías, Santesteban, Sumbilla, Ulzama, Urdax, Urdiáin, Urroz de Santesteban, Valcarlos, Vera de Bidasoa, Villanueva de Aézcoa, Yanci, Zubieta and Zugarramurdi.

Later, two more municipalities would be added that came from the Basque-speaking zone: Lecumberri and Irurzun.

* Mixed-speaking zone: Abárzuza, Ansoáin, Aoiz, Arce, Atez, Barañáin, Burgui, Burlada, Ciriza, Cendea de Cizur, Echarri, Echauri, Valle de Egüés, Ezcároz, Esparza de Salazar, Estella, Ezcabarte, Garde, Goñi, Güesa, Guesálaz, Huarte, Isaba, Iza, Izalzu, Jaurrieta, Juslapeña, Lezáu, Lizoáin, Ochagavía, Odieta, Oláibar, Olza, Ollo, Oronz, Oroz-Betelu, Pamplona, Puente la Reina, Roncal, Salinas de Oro, Sarriés, Urzainqui, Uztárroz, Vidángoz, Vidaurreta, Villava, Yerri, Zabalza and Zizur Mayor.

As a consequence of the constitution of new municipalities, other municipalities would be added: Berrioplano, Berriozar, Orcoyen and Zizur Mayor. Moreover, in 2010 a legal modification granted four municipalities of Cuenca de Pamplona the power of incorporating into the &quot;Mixed-speaking zone&quot; if the absolute majority decided to be incorporated into the &quot;Mixed-speaking zone&quot;. Aranguren, Belascoáin and Galar decided to be incorporated into the &quot;Mixed-speaking zone&quot; while Noáin decided to remain in the &quot;Basque-speaking zone&quot;.

One modification to the law implemented in June 2017 allowed municipalities from the &quot;Non-Basque speaking zone&quot; to become a part of the &quot;mixed zone 44&quot; (Abáigar, Adiós, Aibar, Allín, Améscoa Baja, Ancín, Añorbe, Aranarache, Arellano, Artazu, Bargota, Beriáin, Biurrun-Olcoz, Cabredo, Dicastillo, Enériz, Eulate, Gallués, Garínoain, Izagaondoa, Larraona, Leoz, Lerga, Lónguida, Mendigorría, Metauten, Mirafuentes, Murieta, Nazar, Obanos, Olite, Oteiza, Pueyo, Sangüesa, Tafalla, Tiebas, Tirapu, Unzué, Ujué, Urraúl Bajo, Urroz-Villa, Villatuerta, Cirauqui and Zúñiga) and for Atez to pass from the &quot;Mixed-speaking zone&quot; to the &quot;Basque-speaking zone.&quot;

* Non-Basque-speaking zone: This zone is composed of the remaining municipalities that are located predominantly towards the Southeast of the foral community where the Basque language is not commonly spoken by the population. However, more people have been speaking Basque in these communities and in present day, there are municipalities in which 10% of their inhabitants are bilingual or semi-bilingual in Basque and Spanish such as in Tafalla, Sangüesa and Lumbier. In comparison, in Tafalla or Sanguesa&#x27;s population those that speak or understand Basque well are 5% of the population or 10% en Lumbier. In other localities with ikastolas such as in Fontellas, Lodosa and Viana the bilingual population is around 2% and 8%, while those that speak or understand Basque well are 1% in Fontellas, 2% in Lodosa and 5% in Viana. Since 2006-2007 the schools that teach Basque in the &quot;Non-Basque speaking zone&quot; are assisted by the Department of Education of the government of Navarre.

=== Denomination of local entities ===

The official denomination of Navarran municipalities and villages are regulated according to the &quot;Foral Basque Law.&quot; It distinguishes three different types of formulas:

* Unique denominations: the use of Basque in legal documents is the same when compared with Spanish independently. Examples: Lantz or Beintza-Labaien.
* Compounded denominations: They have a unique denomination formula formed from the Spanish and Basque toponyms in Spanish or Basque and are united by the symbol &quot;-&quot; or &quot;/&quot;. Its use (the compounded denomination) is the same in Spanish as in Basque. Examples: Doneztebe/Santesteban, Orreaga/Roncesvalles, Estella-Lizarra.
* Double denominations: The toponym, in Basque or Spanish is dependent on the language and how it is used in the text. Examples: Pamplona &lt;&gt; Iruña, Villava &lt;&gt; Atarrabia, Aibar &lt;&gt; Oibar.

=== Basque dialects in Navarre ===

Basque in Navarre has various dialects (there are nine according to the classification of the General Basque Dictionary or the Royal Academy of the Basque Language). According to the most recent classification of Koldo Zuazo, the most widespread dialect is Upper Navarrese, spoken in the northern part of Navarre. In localities such as Basaburua Mayor, Imoz and other localities bordering Gipuzkoa, the dialect of Central Basque is spoken and in the central part of the Pyrenees in Navarre a variety of Navarro-Lapurdian is spoken.

On the east of the Pyrenees in Navarre, the Roncalese and Salazarese dialects of Basque used to be spoken in the valleys of Roncal and Salazar, but they disappeared near the end of the twentieth century; the last person who spoke the Roncalese dialect died in 1991 and in Salazar the language also disappeared because the last person who spoke it fluently died during the first years of the twenty-first century. Apart from dialects, sub-dialects from Basque also exist and there are also differences in vocabulary in local linguistic communities.

=== Linguistic traits of the Spanish spoken in Navarre ===

There are a number of features of Spanish as spoken in Navarre that are either exclusive to the area or shared only with neighbouring areas (mainly Aragón and La Rioja), such as the predominance of the diminutive with &quot;-ico&quot; or the use of the conditional verb tense in place of the preterite of the subjunctive (for example, using &quot;podría&quot; instead of &quot;pudiera&quot;). There are also differences in the vocabulary of Spanish speakers from Navarre, including the presence of words of Basque origin, which is in some cases due to a Basque substrate, or long-standing contact and commercial exchanges with areas of Navarre in which Basque is spoken.

== See also ==
* Basque Country (greater region)
* Basque language
* Basque Country
* Caja Navarra
* Kingdom of Navarre
* Kings of Navarre
* Lower Navarre
* Navarrese nationalism
* History of Pamplona
* Nueva Navarra
* Parliament of Navarre
* Renewable energy in the European Union

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==
* Official website (in Basque/English/French/Spanish)
* History of Navarre
* (LAS BARDENAS, CAVERN, GROTTE VALTIERRA, CUEVAS DE VALTIERRA)
* Bardenas Reales desert (Navarra)
* Northern Spanish region leads way on renewable energy
* Euskara Kultur Elkargoa-&quot;Basque Cultural Foundation&quot;
* Guide to the Navarra Pyrenees mountains.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4018" start="0" end="7" title="Navarre" label="Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018" start="30" end="60" title="Navarre" label="Chartered Community of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q123550" start="78" end="83" title="fuero" label="foral"/>
<link wikidata="Q10742" start="84" end="104" title="autonomous communities of Spain" label="autonomous community"/>
<link wikidata="Q162620" start="109" end="117" title="provinces of Spain" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="130" end="135" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3995" start="151" end="178" title="Basque Country (autonomous community)" label="Basque Autonomous Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q5727" start="180" end="188" title="La Rioja" label="La Rioja"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040" start="194" end="200" title="Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18678082" start="214" end="227" title="New Aquitaine" label="New Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="231" end="237" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q10282" start="259" end="267" title="Pamplona" label="Pamplona"/>
<link wikidata="Q200262" start="352" end="370" title="Kingdom of Navarre" label="Kingdom of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="388" end="396" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenean"/>
<link wikidata="Q638503" start="492" end="505" title="Lower Navarre" label="Lower Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136392" start="603" end="619" title="Cantabrian Coast" label="Cantabrian Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="624" end="633" title="semi-arid climate" label="semi-arid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151943" start="899" end="924" title="Southern Basque Country" label="historic Basque provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q829919" start="1068" end="1090" title="festival of San Fermín" label="festival of San Fermín"/>
<link wikidata="Q154526" start="1290" end="1298" title="Eginhard" label="Eginhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="1354" end="1372" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="1373" end="1384" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q564409" start="1436" end="1457" title="Royal Frankish Annals" label="Royal Frankish Annals"/>
<link wikidata="Q332734" start="1555" end="1563" title="Absolutive case" label="absolute"/>
<link wikidata="Q104083" start="1564" end="1572" title="Grammatical number" label="singular"/>
<link wikidata="Q137659" start="1909" end="1923" title="Joan Coromines" label="Joan Coromines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669240" start="1988" end="1996" title="Vasconic" label="Vasconic"/>
<link wikidata="Q500522" start="2000" end="2019" title="Aquitanian language" label="Aquitanian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q638503" start="2233" end="2246" title="Lower Navarre" label="Lower Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="2306" end="2318" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246837" start="2324" end="2332" title="Vascones" label="Vascones"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="2370" end="2378" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q653443" start="2557" end="2563" title="Oiasso" label="Oiasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q95010" start="2580" end="2588" title="Gipuzkoa" label="Gipuzkoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q642046" start="2626" end="2636" title="Calahorra" label="Calagurris"/>
<link wikidata="Q428382" start="2687" end="2712" title="Latifundium" label="large-scale Roman farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="2907" end="2916" title="Visigoths" label="Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="2925" end="2931" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233475" start="3125" end="3149" title="Battle of Roncevaux Pass" label="Battle of Roncevaux Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872202" start="3166" end="3196" title="Battle of Roncevaux Pass (824)" label="Battle of Roncevaux Pass (824)"/>
<link wikidata="Q291877" start="3219" end="3231" title="Íñigo Arista of Pamplona" label="Iñigo Arista"/>
<link wikidata="Q200262" start="3244" end="3260" title="King of Pamplona" label="King of Pamplona"/>
<link wikidata="Q963251" start="3278" end="3286" title="muwallad" label="muwallad"/>
<link wikidata="Q659457" start="3287" end="3296" title="Banu Qasi" label="Banu Qasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q244747" start="3300" end="3306" title="Tudela, Navarre" label="Tudela"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3421" end="3431" title="Sancho III of Navarre" label="Sancho III"/>
<link wikidata="Q191085" start="3536" end="3543" title="Gascony" label="Gascony"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3759" end="3781" title="Occitan language#Occitan in Spain" label="the &amp;quot;Francs&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q41150" start="3815" end="3833" title="Way of Saint James" label="Way of Saint James"/>
<link wikidata="Q3995" start="3865" end="3889" title="Basque Autonomous Community" label="western Basque districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q295268" start="3893" end="3917" title="Alphonse VIII of Castile" label="Alphonse VIII of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q219697" start="4039" end="4068" title="Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa" label="Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="4089" end="4097" title="Almohad Caliphate" label="Almohads"/>
<link wikidata="Q938786" start="4104" end="4124" title="Jiménez dynasty" label="native line of kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870496" start="4246" end="4267" title="Fueros of Navarre" label="laws and institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q233865" start="4282" end="4297" title="Blanche I of Navarre" label="Queen Blanche I"/>
<link wikidata="Q269876" start="4433" end="4452" title="House of Trastámara" label="House of Trastámara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312328" start="4489" end="4517" title="Spanish conquest of Iberian Navarre" label="In 1512, Navarre was invaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="4521" end="4543" title="Ferdinand the Catholic" label="Ferdinand the Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q236896" start="4564" end="4579" title="Catherine of Navarre" label="Queen Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q371100" start="4584" end="4597" title="John III of Navarre" label="King John III"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4610" end="4638" title="Kingdom of Navarre#Independent Navarre north of the Pyrenees" label="to the north of the Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137677" start="4678" end="4683" title="Viscounty of Béarn" label="Béarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q229286" start="4692" end="4706" title="Jeanne d&amp;#x27;Albret" label="Queen Joan III"/>
<link wikidata="Q217196" start="4777" end="4793" title="Crown of Castile" label="Crown of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q936976" start="4872" end="4885" title="Henry IV of France" label="King Henry IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q316110" start="5124" end="5136" title="Manuel Godoy" label="Manuel Godoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341073" start="5228" end="5245" title="First Carlist War" label="First Carlist War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996259" start="5415" end="5436" title="Convention of Vergara" label="Convention of Bergara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151943" start="6009" end="6053" title="Southern Basque Country" label="Navarre and the rest of the Basque provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q957532" start="6105" end="6122" title="Third Carlist War" label="Third Carlist War"/>
<link wikidata="Q646620" start="6128" end="6135" title="Estella-Lizarra" label="Estella"/>
<link wikidata="Q32347" start="6175" end="6186" title="Alfonso XII of Spain" label="Alfonso XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q957532" start="6294" end="6311" title="Third Carlist War" label="Third Carlist War"/>
<link wikidata="Q22936310" start="6316" end="6356" title="End of Basque home rule in Spain" label="a renewed wave of Spanish centralisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322785" start="6411" end="6419" title="Gamazada" label="Gamazada"/>
<link wikidata="Q174944" start="6735" end="6745" title="Laurak Bat" label="Laurak Bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q18128591" start="6801" end="6819" title="Navarrese electoral Carlism (Restoration)" label="Carlists stood out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151943" start="7144" end="7158" title="Southern Basque Country" label="Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q178038" start="7350" end="7370" title="2nd Spanish Republic" label="2nd Spanish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742748" start="7597" end="7611" title="Víctor Pradera Larumbe" label="Víctor Pradera"/>
<link wikidata="Q352918" start="7639" end="7651" title="General Mola" label="General Mola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393799" start="8125" end="8136" title="Victims of Civil War in Navarra" label="The killing"/>
<link wikidata="Q43093" start="8439" end="8457" title="Basque Nationalist Party" label="Basque nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q10286" start="8498" end="8505" title="Osasuna" label="Osasuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q966525" start="8678" end="8694" title="War in the North" label="War in the North"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="8758" end="8775" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="8838" end="8844" title="Francisco Franco" label="Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q81801" start="8882" end="8887" title="Álava" label="Álava"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870496" start="8965" end="8996" title="Fueros of Navarre" label="the ancient Navarrese liberties"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9234" end="9242" title="Carlism#Spanish Civil War and Franco regime (1936–1975)" label="Carlists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249339" start="9247" end="9257" title="FET y de las JONS" label="Falangists"/>
<link wikidata="Q160918" start="9367" end="9375" title="Opus Dei" label="Opus Dei"/>
<link wikidata="Q926068" start="9392" end="9413" title="University of Navarra" label="University of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q214367" start="9900" end="9913" title="Adolfo Suarez" label="Adolfo Suárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q549209" start="9921" end="9924" title="Union of the Democratic Centre (Spain)" label="UCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432791" start="9957" end="9960" title="Unión del Pueblo Navarro" label="UPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063615" start="9968" end="9986" title="Jesús Aizpún Tuero" label="Jesús Aizpún Tuero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110999" start="10165" end="10179" title="Statute of Autonomy of the Basque Country" label="Basque process"/>
<link wikidata="Q280906" start="10634" end="10663" title="Socialist Party of Navarre" label="Spanish Socialists in Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="10975" end="11001" title="Francoist Spain" label="Franco&amp;#x27;s dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q10742" start="11032" end="11054" title="Autonomous communities of Spain" label="Autonomous Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742602" start="11321" end="11331" title="Parliament of Navarre" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3995" start="11548" end="11575" title="Basque Country (autonomous community)" label="Basque Autonomous Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q549209" start="11837" end="11867" title="Union of the Democratic Centre (Spain)" label="Union of the Democratic Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q280906" start="11931" end="11957" title="Socialist Party of Navarre" label="Socialist Party of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q138198" start="12011" end="12048" title="Spanish Socialist Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Spanish Socialist Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432791" start="12095" end="12124" title="Navarrese People&amp;#x27;s Union" label="Navarrese People&amp;#x27;s Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q185088" start="12184" end="12203" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (Spain)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q961601" start="12260" end="12271" title="Uxue Barkos" label="Uxue Barkos"/>
<link wikidata="Q620781" start="12273" end="12282" title="Geroa Bai" label="Geroa Bai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029761" start="12321" end="12329" title="EH Bildu" label="EH Bildu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16059622" start="12331" end="12338" title="Podemos (Spanish political party)" label="Podemos"/>
<link wikidata="Q281122" start="12343" end="12360" title="Izquierda-Ezkerra" label="Izquierda-Ezkerra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336983" start="12379" end="12397" title="Basque nationalism" label="Basque nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336983" start="12421" end="12439" title="Basque nationalism" label="Basque nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082080" start="12510" end="12524" title="Navarrese regional election, 2015" label="2015 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151943" start="12640" end="12690" title="Southern Basque Country" label="merge Navarre into the Basque Autonomous Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q3995" start="13309" end="13336" title="Basque Autonomous Community" label="Basque Autonomous Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q42814" start="13471" end="13474" title="ETA (separatist group)" label="ETA"/>
<link wikidata="Q20020278" start="13741" end="13760" title="Corruption in Navarre" label="corruption scandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133336" start="13960" end="13975" title="Yolanda Barcina" label="Yolanda Barcina"/>
<link wikidata="Q16518436" start="14123" end="14149" title="Caja Navarra scandal" label="bankruptcy of Caja Navarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566394" start="14517" end="14537" title="Constitutional Court of Spain" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742602" start="14581" end="14602" title="Parliament of Navarre" label="Parliament of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297890" start="14802" end="14822" title="Jorge Fernández Díaz" label="Jorge Fernández Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q467829" start="15028" end="15050" title="Alberto Ruiz Gallardón" label="Alberto Ruiz Gallardón"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029761" start="15150" end="15155" title="Bildu" label="Bildu"/>
<link wikidata="Q961601" start="15330" end="15341" title="Uxue Barkos" label="Uxue Barkos"/>
<link wikidata="Q62060692" start="15513" end="15525" title="Navarra Suma" label="Navarra Suma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393123" start="15550" end="15560" title="Citizens (Spanish political party)" label="Ciudadanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q12263205" start="15738" end="15751" title="María Chivite" label="María Chivite"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="16190" end="16196" title="Basque language" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="16201" end="16208" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q281122" start="16278" end="16295" title="Izquierda-Ezkerra" label="Izquierda-Ezkerra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566394" start="16476" end="16505" title="Constitutional Court of Spain" label="Constitutional Court of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742602" start="16588" end="16609" title="Parliament of Navarre" label="Parliament of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143194" start="16674" end="16689" title="National Police Corps" label="National Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="16743" end="16750" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q312749" start="16781" end="16795" title="Antonio Tejero" label="Antonio Tejero"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703587" start="16819" end="16835" title="Santiago Abascal" label="Santiago Abascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q57681" start="16845" end="16857" title="José Antonio Primo de Rivera" label="Jose Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q93262" start="17424" end="17438" title="List of municipalities in Navarre" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q10282" start="17538" end="17546" title="Pamplona" label="Pamplona"/>
<link wikidata="Q244747" start="17708" end="17714" title="Tudela, Navarre" label="Tudela"/>
<link wikidata="Q768691" start="17725" end="17733" title="Barañain" label="Barañain"/>
<link wikidata="Q732730" start="17744" end="17759" title="Burlada – Burlata" label="Burlada/Burlata"/>
<link wikidata="Q646620" start="17770" end="17785" title="Estella-Lizarra" label="Estella-Lizarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228466" start="17796" end="17807" title="Zizur Mayor" label="Zizur Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q820224" start="17818" end="17825" title="Tafalla" label="Tafalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q600671" start="17836" end="17853" title="Villava – Atarrabia" label="Villava/Atarrabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q656781" start="17868" end="17884" title="Ansoáin – Antsoain" label="Ansoáin/Antsoain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="17986" end="17994" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q546180" start="18124" end="18146" title="Mesa de los Tres Reyes" label="Mesa de los Tres Reyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573794" start="18202" end="18213" title="Txamantxoia" label="Txamantxoia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18215" end="18223" title="Kartxela" label="Kartxela"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18229" end="18249" title="Larra-Belagua Massif" label="Larra-Belagua Massif"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18251" end="18266" title="Sierra de Alaiz" label="Sierra de Alaiz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18268" end="18283" title="Untzueko Harria" label="Untzueko Harria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483462" start="18285" end="18300" title="Sierra de Leyre" label="Sierra de Leyre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18302" end="18319" title="Sierra del Perdón" label="Sierra del Perdón"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178771" start="18321" end="18331" title="Montejurra" label="Montejurra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324672" start="18333" end="18339" title="Fort San Cristóbal (Spain)" label="Ezkaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030404" start="18341" end="18350" title="Monte Ori" label="Monte Ori"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127713" start="18352" end="18367" title="Sierra de Codés" label="Sierra de Codés"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025531" start="18369" end="18375" title="Urbasa" label="Urbasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307550" start="18377" end="18382" title="Andia" label="Andia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111010" start="18392" end="18404" title="Aralar Range" label="Aralar Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q41573" start="18577" end="18590" title="Bay of Biscay" label="Bay of Biscay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18622" end="18635" title="San Sebastián#Climate" label="San Sebastián"/>
<link wikidata="Q126756" start="19295" end="19301" title="Basque people" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="19363" end="19376" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q10965" start="19404" end="19408" title="Ebro" label="Ebro"/>
<link wikidata="Q10965" start="19414" end="19418" title="Ebro" label="Ebro"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="19441" end="19446" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="19448" end="19457" title="vegetable" label="vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="19460" end="19464" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="19475" end="19485" title="olive tree" label="olive tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040" start="19493" end="19499" title="Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5727" start="19504" end="19512" title="La Rioja (Spain)" label="La Rioja"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="19535" end="19547" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246837" start="19566" end="19574" title="Vascones" label="Vascones"/>
<link wikidata="Q659457" start="19631" end="19640" title="Banu Qasi" label="Banu Qasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q217177" start="19680" end="19685" title="taifa" label="taifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q244747" start="19697" end="19703" title="Tudela, Navarre" label="Tudela"/>
<link wikidata="Q79791" start="19737" end="19748" title="Reconquista" label="Reconquista"/>
<link wikidata="Q219697" start="19886" end="19915" title="Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa" label="Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41150" start="19959" end="19977" title="Way of Saint James" label="Way of Saint James"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20066" end="20086" title="Occitan language#Occitan in Spain" label="Gascons and Occitans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="20103" end="20111" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="20270" end="20287" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="20533" end="20549" title="Ferdinand II of Aragon" label="King Ferdinand V"/>
<link wikidata="Q244747" start="20749" end="20755" title="Tudela, Navarre" label="Tudela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151621" start="20969" end="20982" title="energy sector" label="energy sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q31207" start="20984" end="20994" title="healthcare" label="healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="21008" end="21021" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="21027" end="21049" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="21463" end="21479" title="renewable energy" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q194356" start="21673" end="21682" title="wind farm" label="wind farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q644997" start="21715" end="21728" title="water turbine" label="water turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18537" start="21747" end="21754" title="biomass" label="biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q171076" start="21761" end="21767" title="biogas" label="biogas"/>
<link wikidata="Q192127" start="21839" end="21851" title="photovoltaic" label="photovoltaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q244747" start="21887" end="21893" title="Tudela, Navarre" label="Tudela"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22040" end="22047" title="Larrión" label="Larrión"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648779" start="22074" end="22082" title="Castejón, Navarre" label="Castejón"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="23108" end="23121" title="Mother-tongue" label="mother tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q318258" start="23547" end="23562" title="Sancho the Wise" label="Sancho the Wise"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23865" end="23875" title="José Moret" label="José Moret"/>
<link wikidata="Q47588" start="24416" end="24438" title="Basque Country (greater region)" label="all Basque territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736184" start="24654" end="24671" title="Navarro-Aragonese" label="Navarro-Aragonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q10965" start="24758" end="24762" title="Ebro" label="Ebro"/>
<link wikidata="Q14185" start="24971" end="24978" title="Occitan language" label="Occitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736184" start="25040" end="25057" title="Navarro-Aragonese" label="Navarro-Aragonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="25240" end="25247" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122188" start="25384" end="25396" title="Erromintxela language" label="Erromintxela"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="25398" end="25404" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="25406" end="25412" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="25418" end="25424" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25546" end="25569" title=":es:Amejoramiento de Navarra" label="Amejoramiento del Fuero"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="25726" end="25741" title="Basque language" label="Basque language"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26022" end="26057" title=":es:Ley Foral del Euskera" label="The Statutory Law of Basque of 1986"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26096" end="26128" title=":es:Ley Foral del Euskera#Zona vascófona" label="&amp;quot;Basque-speaking zone&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26556" end="26576" title=":es:Ley Foral del Euskera#Zona vascófona" label="Basque-speaking zone"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26631" end="26650" title=":es:Ley Foral del Euskera#Zona vascófona" label="Mixed-speaking zone"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26714" end="26738" title=":es:Ley Foral del Euskera#Zona vascófona" label="Non-Basque speaking zone"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27096" end="27109" title=":es:Abaurrea Alta" label="Abaurrea Alta"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27111" end="27124" title=":es:Abaurrea Baja" label="Abaurrea Baja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635681" start="27126" end="27133" title="Alsasua" label="Alsasua"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27135" end="27139" title=":es:Anué" label="Anué"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27141" end="27146" title=":es:Araiz" label="Araiz"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27148" end="27154" title=":es:Aranaz" label="Aranaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q768954" start="27156" end="27161" title="Arano, Navarre" label="Arano"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27163" end="27170" title=":es:Araquil" label="Araquil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645754" start="27172" end="27178" title="Arbizu" label="Arbizu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645791" start="27180" end="27185" title="Areso" label="Areso"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27187" end="27191" title=":es:Aria (Navarra)" label="Aria"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27193" end="27198" title=":es:Arive" label="Arive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645811" start="27200" end="27207" title="Arruazu" label="Arruazu"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27209" end="27217" title=":es:Bacáicoa" label="Bacáicoa"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27219" end="27234" title=":es:Basaburúa Mayor" label="Basaburúa Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q641755" start="27236" end="27242" title="Baztan, Navarre" label="Baztán"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27244" end="27258" title=":es:Beinza-Labayen" label="Beinza-Labayen"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27260" end="27272" title=":es:Bértiz-Arana" label="Bertiz-Arana"/>
<link wikidata="Q610479" start="27274" end="27280" title="Betelu" label="Betelu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431" start="27282" end="27290" title="Burguete" label="Burguete"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27292" end="27299" title=":es:Ciordia" label="Ciordia"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27301" end="27310" title=":es:Areso" label="Donamaría"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27312" end="27319" title=":es:Echalar" label="Echalar"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27321" end="27335" title=":es:Echarri-Aranaz" label="Echarri Aranaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641834" start="27337" end="27347" title="Elgorriaga" label="Elgorriaga"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27349" end="27355" title=":es:Erasun" label="Erasun"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27357" end="27365" title=":es:Ergoyena" label="Ergoyena"/>
<link wikidata="Q674983" start="27367" end="27371" title="Erro, Navarre" label="Erro"/>
<link wikidata="Q617571" start="27373" end="27382" title="Esteríbar" label="Esteríbar"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27384" end="27391" title=":es:Ezcurra" label="Ezcurra"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27393" end="27400" title=":es:Garayoa" label="Garayoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753012" start="27402" end="27410" title="Garralda" label="Garralda"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27412" end="27420" title=":es:Goizueta (Navarra)" label="Goizueta"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27422" end="27436" title=":es:Huarte-Araquil" label="Huarte-Araquil"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27438" end="27442" title=":es:Imoz" label="Imoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q784935" start="27444" end="27451" title="Irañeta" label="Irañeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647956" start="27453" end="27459" title="Ituren" label="Ituren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647946" start="27461" end="27470" title="Iturmendi" label="Iturmendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295548" start="27472" end="27479" title="Lacunza" label="Lacunza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647913" start="27481" end="27486" title="Lantz, Navarre" label="Lantz"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27488" end="27495" title=":es:Larráun" label="Larráun"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27497" end="27502" title=":es:Leiza" label="Leiza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647457" start="27504" end="27510" title="Lesaca" label="Lesaca"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27512" end="27515" title=":es:Oiz (Navarra)" label="Oiz"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27517" end="27527" title=":es:Olazagutía" label="Olazagutía"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27529" end="27538" title=":es:Orbaiceta" label="Orbaiceta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647403" start="27540" end="27546" title="Orbara" label="Orbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q917891" start="27548" end="27560" title="Roncesvalles" label="Roncesvalles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648100" start="27562" end="27569" title="Saldías, Navarre" label="Saldías"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27571" end="27582" title=":es:Santesteban" label="Santesteban"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27584" end="27592" title=":es:Sumbilla" label="Sumbilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q735232" start="27594" end="27600" title="Ulzama" label="Ulzama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647365" start="27602" end="27607" title="Urdax" label="Urdax"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27609" end="27616" title=":es:Urdiáin" label="Urdiáin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27618" end="27638" title=":es:Urroz de Santesteban" label="Urroz de Santesteban"/>
<link wikidata="Q524479" start="27640" end="27649" title="Valcarlos" label="Valcarlos"/>
<link wikidata="Q818675" start="27651" end="27666" title="Vera de Bidasoa" label="Vera de Bidasoa"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27668" end="27688" title=":es:Villanueva de Aézcoa" label="Villanueva de Aézcoa"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27690" end="27695" title=":es:Yanci" label="Yanci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643571" start="27697" end="27704" title="Zubieta" label="Zubieta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643583" start="27709" end="27721" title="Zugarramurdi" label="Zugarramurdi"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27811" end="27821" title=":es:Lecumberri" label="Lecumberri"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27826" end="27833" title=":es:Irurzun" label="Irurzun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636186" start="27859" end="27867" title="Abárzuza" label="Abárzuza"/>
<link wikidata="Q656781" start="27869" end="27876" title="Ansoáin" label="Ansoáin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142215" start="27878" end="27882" title="Aoiz" label="Aoiz"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27884" end="27888" title=":es:Arce (Navarra)" label="Arce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645800" start="27890" end="27894" title="Atez" label="Atez"/>
<link wikidata="Q768691" start="27896" end="27904" title="Barañáin" label="Barañáin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13592539" start="27906" end="27912" title="Burgui" label="Burgui"/>
<link wikidata="Q732730" start="27914" end="27921" title="Burlada" label="Burlada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641813" start="27923" end="27929" title="Ciriza" label="Ciriza"/>
<link wikidata="Q978259" start="27931" end="27946" title="Cendea de Cizur" label="Cendea de Cizur"/>
<link wikidata="Q943700" start="27948" end="27955" title="Echarri" label="Echarri"/>
<link wikidata="Q984884" start="27957" end="27964" title="Echauri" label="Echauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627534" start="27966" end="27980" title="Valle de Egüés" label="Valle de Egüés"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646562" start="27982" end="27989" title="Ezcároz" label="Ezcároz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764633" start="27991" end="28009" title="Esparza de Salazar" label="Esparza de Salazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q646620" start="28011" end="28018" title="Estella-Lizarra" label="Estella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641808" start="28020" end="28029" title="Ezcabarte" label="Ezcabarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770960" start="28031" end="28036" title="Garde, Spain" label="Garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773019" start="28038" end="28042" title="Goñi, Navarre" label="Goñi"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28044" end="28049" title=":es:Güesa" label="Güesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q959913" start="28051" end="28059" title="Guesálaz" label="Guesálaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641785" start="28061" end="28067" title="Huarte" label="Huarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q545577" start="28069" end="28074" title="Isaba" label="Isaba"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28076" end="28079" title=":es:Iza (Navarra)" label="Iza"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28081" end="28087" title=":es:Izalzu" label="Izalzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192349" start="28089" end="28098" title="Jaurrieta" label="Jaurrieta"/>
<link wikidata="Q17709" start="28100" end="28109" title="Juslapeña" label="Juslapeña"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773001" start="28111" end="28116" title="Lezáun" label="Lezáu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776948" start="28118" end="28125" title="Lizoáin" label="Lizoáin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780242" start="28127" end="28136" title="Ochagavía" label="Ochagavía"/>
<link wikidata="Q635755" start="28138" end="28144" title="Odieta" label="Odieta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647477" start="28146" end="28153" title="Oláibar" label="Oláibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020550" start="28155" end="28159" title="Olza, Spain" label="Olza"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28161" end="28165" title=":es:Ollo (Navarra)" label="Ollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329544" start="28167" end="28172" title="Oronz" label="Oronz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647421" start="28174" end="28185" title="Oroz-Betelu" label="Oroz-Betelu"/>
<link wikidata="Q10282" start="28187" end="28195" title="Pamplona" label="Pamplona"/>
<link wikidata="Q372556" start="28197" end="28212" title="Puente la Reina" label="Puente la Reina"/>
<link wikidata="Q578795" start="28214" end="28220" title="Roncal – Erronkari" label="Roncal"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28222" end="28236" title=":es:Salinas de Oro" label="Salinas de Oro"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28238" end="28245" title=":es:Sarriés" label="Sarriés"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648019" start="28247" end="28256" title="Urzainqui" label="Urzainqui"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28258" end="28266" title=":es:Uztárroz" label="Uztárroz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645687" start="28268" end="28276" title="Vidángoz" label="Vidángoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753024" start="28278" end="28288" title="Vidaurreta" label="Vidaurreta"/>
<link wikidata="Q600671" start="28290" end="28297" title="Villava" label="Villava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133148" start="28299" end="28304" title="Yerri" label="Yerri"/>
<link wikidata="Q609420" start="28306" end="28313" title="Zabalza" label="Zabalza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228466" start="28318" end="28329" title="Zizur Mayor" label="Zizur Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763760" start="28429" end="28440" title="Berrioplano" label="Berrioplano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645776" start="28442" end="28451" title="Berriozar" label="Berriozar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767914" start="28453" end="28460" title="Orcoyen" label="Orcoyen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228466" start="28465" end="28476" title="Zizur Mayor" label="Zizur Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598724" start="28548" end="28566" title="Cuenca de Pamplona" label="Cuenca de Pamplona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636195" start="28729" end="28738" title="Aranguren" label="Aranguren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645846" start="28740" end="28750" title="Belascoáin" label="Belascoáin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752994" start="28755" end="28760" title="Galar, Spain" label="Galar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648807" start="28835" end="28840" title="Noáin" label="Noáin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635742" start="29074" end="29081" title="Abáigar" label="Abáigar"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29083" end="29088" title=":es:Adiós (Navarra)" label="Adiós"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645830" start="29090" end="29095" title="Aibar" label="Aibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635693" start="29097" end="29102" title="Allín" label="Allín"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636180" start="29104" end="29116" title="Améscoa Baja" label="Améscoa Baja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645748" start="29118" end="29123" title="Ancín" label="Ancín"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763701" start="29125" end="29131" title="Añorbe" label="Añorbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645785" start="29133" end="29143" title="Aranarache" label="Aranarache"/>
<link wikidata="Q641084" start="29145" end="29153" title="Arellano" label="Arellano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763735" start="29155" end="29161" title="Artazu" label="Artazu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757471" start="29163" end="29170" title="Bargota" label="Bargota"/>
<link wikidata="Q820748" start="29172" end="29179" title="Beriáin" label="Beriáin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757477" start="29181" end="29194" title="Biurrun-Olcoz" label="Biurrun-Olcoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637015" start="29196" end="29203" title="Cabredo" label="Cabredo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627528" start="29205" end="29215" title="Dicastillo" label="Dicastillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q956576" start="29217" end="29223" title="Enériz" label="Enériz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641873" start="29225" end="29231" title="Eulate" label="Eulate"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29233" end="29240" title=":es:Gallués" label="Gallués"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753016" start="29242" end="29251" title="Garínoain" label="Garínoain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676138" start="29253" end="29263" title="Izagaondoa" label="Izagaondoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647950" start="29265" end="29273" title="Larraona" label="Larraona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773034" start="29275" end="29279" title="Leoz" label="Leoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q931985" start="29281" end="29286" title="Lerga" label="Lerga"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29288" end="29296" title=":es:Lónguida" label="Lónguida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648110" start="29298" end="29309" title="Mendigorría" label="Mendigorría"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647918" start="29311" end="29319" title="Metauten" label="Metauten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648015" start="29321" end="29332" title="Mirafuentes" label="Mirafuentes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648105" start="29334" end="29341" title="Murieta" label="Murieta"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29343" end="29348" title=":es:Nazar (Navarra)" label="Nazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q984867" start="29350" end="29356" title="Obanos" label="Obanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q837062" start="29358" end="29363" title="Olite" label="Olite"/>
<link wikidata="Q682821" start="29365" end="29371" title="Oteiza" label="Oteiza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647418" start="29373" end="29378" title="Pueyo, Navarre" label="Pueyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q842228" start="29380" end="29388" title="Sangüesa" label="Sangüesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q820224" start="29390" end="29397" title="Tafalla" label="Tafalla"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29399" end="29405" title=":es:Tiebas" label="Tiebas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647412" start="29407" end="29413" title="Tirapu" label="Tirapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647468" start="29415" end="29420" title="Unzué" label="Unzué"/>
<link wikidata="Q943072" start="29422" end="29426" title="Ujué" label="Ujué"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648094" start="29428" end="29439" title="Urraúl Bajo" label="Urraúl Bajo"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29441" end="29452" title=":es:Urroz-Villa" label="Urroz-Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q984886" start="29454" end="29465" title="Villatuerta" label="Villatuerta"/>
<link wikidata="Q206308" start="29467" end="29475" title="Cirauqui" label="Cirauqui"/>
<link wikidata="Q615462" start="29480" end="29486" title="Zúñiga, Navarre" label="Zúñiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645800" start="29496" end="29500" title="Atez" label="Atez"/>
<link wikidata="Q820224" start="30030" end="30037" title="Tafalla" label="Tafalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q842228" start="30039" end="30047" title="Sangüesa" label="Sangüesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q584132" start="30052" end="30059" title="Lumbier" label="Lumbier"/>
<link wikidata="Q584132" start="30195" end="30202" title="Lumbier" label="Lumbier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740933" start="30229" end="30237" title="ikastola" label="ikastola"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30250" end="30259" title=":es:Fontellas (Navarra)" label="Fontellas"/>
<link wikidata="Q984882" start="30261" end="30267" title="Lodosa" label="Lodosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q907241" start="30272" end="30277" title="Viana, Spain" label="Viana"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30383" end="30392" title=":es:Fontellas (Navarra)" label="Fontellas"/>
<link wikidata="Q984882" start="30400" end="30406" title="Lodosa" label="Lodosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q907241" start="30417" end="30422" title="Viana, Spain" label="Viana"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31669" end="31705" title=":es:Real Academia de la Lengua Vasca" label="Royal Academy of the Basque Language"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31755" end="31766" title=":es:Koldo Zuazo" label="Koldo Zuazo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125314" start="31799" end="31814" title="Upper Navarrese dialect" label="Upper Navarrese"/>
<link wikidata="Q12953386" start="32045" end="32062" title="Navarro-Lapurdian dialect" label="Navarro-Lapurdian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47494" start="32119" end="32128" title="Roncalese dialect" label="Roncalese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5844445" start="32133" end="32151" title="Salazarese dialect" label="Salazarese dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165565" start="32199" end="32205" title="Roncal Valley" label="Roncal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054587" start="32210" end="32217" title="Salazar Valley" label="Salazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040" start="32832" end="32838" title="Aragón" label="Aragón"/>
<link wikidata="Q5727" start="32843" end="32851" title="La Rioja (Spain)" label="La Rioja"/>
<link wikidata="Q108709" start="32886" end="32896" title="diminutive" label="diminutive"/>
<link wikidata="" start="33238" end="33254" title=":es:Sustrato vasco en lenguas romances" label="Basque substrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q47588" start="33373" end="33404" title="Basque Country (greater region)" label="Basque Country (greater region)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="33407" end="33422" title="Basque language" label="Basque language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3995" start="33425" end="33439" title="Basque Country (autonomous community)" label="Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752280" start="33442" end="33454" title="Caja Navarra" label="Caja Navarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q200262" start="33457" end="33475" title="Kingdom of Navarre" label="Kingdom of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q275045" start="33478" end="33494" title="Kings of Navarre" label="Kings of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q638503" start="33497" end="33510" title="Lower Navarre" label="Lower Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q10947277" start="33513" end="33534" title="Navarrese nationalism" label="Navarrese nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927111" start="33537" end="33556" title="History of Pamplona" label="History of Pamplona"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010587" start="33559" end="33572" title="Nueva Navarra" label="Nueva Navarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742602" start="33575" end="33596" title="Parliament of Navarre" label="Parliament of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520404" start="33599" end="33637" title="Renewable energy in the European Union" label="Renewable energy in the European Union"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59732" wikidata="Q10282" url="?curid=59732" title="Pamplona">
<text>Pamplona (; ), historically also known as Pampeluna in English, is the capital city of the Chartered Community of Navarre, in Spain.

Lying at near above sea level, the city (and the wider Cuenca de Pamplona) is located on the flood plain of the Arga river, a second-order tributary of the Ebro. Precipitation-wise, it is located in a transitional location between the rainy Atlantic northern façade of the Iberian Peninsula and its drier inland. Early population in the settlement traces back to the late Bronze to early Iron Age, even if the traditional inception date refers to the foundation of by Pompey during the Sertorian Wars circa 75 BC. During Visigothic rule Pamplona became an episcopal see, serving as a staging ground for the Christianization of the area. It later became one of the capitals of the Kingdom of Pamplona/Navarre.

The city is famous worldwide for the running of the bulls during the San Fermín festival, which is held annually from 6 July to 14 July. This festival was brought to literary renown with the 1926 publication of Ernest Hemingway&#x27;s novel &quot;The Sun Also Rises&quot;. It is also home to Osasuna, the only Navarrese football club to have ever played in the Spanish top division.

==History==


===Foundation and Roman times===
In the winter of 75–74 BC, the area served as a camp for the Roman general Pompey in the war against Sertorius. He is considered to be the founder of Pompaelo, &quot;as if &quot;Pompeiopolis&quot;&quot; in Strabo&#x27;s words, which became Pamplona, in modern Spanish. However, in later times, it has been discovered to be the chief town of the Vascones. They called it Iruña, translating to &#x27;the city&#x27;. Roman Pompaelo was located in the province of Hispania Tarraconensis, on the Ab Asturica Burdigalam, the road from Burdigala (modern Bordeaux) to Asturica (modern Astorga); it was a &quot;civitas stipendiaria&quot; in the jurisdiction of the &quot;conventus&quot; of Caesaraugusta (modern Zaragoza).

===Early Middle Ages===

During the Germanic invasions of 409 and later as a result of Rechiar&#x27;s ravaging, Pamplona went through much disruption and destruction, starting a cycle of general decline along with other towns across the Basque territory, but managing to keep some sort of urban life. During the Visigothic period (fifth to eighth centuries), Pamplona alternated between self-rule, Visigoth domination or Frankish suzerainty in the Duchy of Vasconia (Councils of Toledo unattended by several Pamplonese bishops between 589 and 684). In 466 to 472, Pamplona was conquered by the Visigoth count Gauteric, but they seemed to abandon the restless position soon, struggling as the Visigoth kingdom was to survive and rearrange its lands after their defeats in Gaul. During the beginning of the sixth century, Pamplona probably stuck to an unstable self-rule, but in 541, Pamplona, along with other northern Iberian cities, was raided by the Franks.

Around 581, the Visigoth king Liuvigild overcame the Basques, seized Pamplona, and founded in the town of Victoriacum. Despite the legend citing Saint Fermin as the first bishop of Pamplona and his baptising of 40,000 pagan inhabitants in just three days, the first reliable accounts of a bishop date from 589, when bishop Liliolus attended the Third Council of Toledo. After 684 and 693, a bishop called Opilano is mentioned again in 829, followed by Wiliesind and a certain Jimenez from 880 to 890. Even in the 10th century, important gaps are found in bishop succession, which is recorded unbroken only after 1005.

At the time of the Umayyad invasion in 711, the Visigothic king Roderic was fighting the Basques in Pamplona and had to turn his attention to the new enemy coming from the south. By 714–16, the Umayyad troops had reached the Basque-held Pamplona, with the town submitting apparently after a treaty was brokered between the inhabitants and the Arab military commanders. The position was then garrisoned by Berbers, who were stationed on the outside of the actual fortress, and established the cemetery unearthed not long ago at the Castle Square (&quot;Plaza del Castillo&quot;). During the following years, the Basques south of the Pyrenees do not seem to have shown much resistance to the Moorish thrust, and Pamplona may even have flourished as a launching point and centre of assembly for their expeditions into Gascony. In 740, the Wali (governor) Uqba ibn al-Hajjaj imposed direct central Cordovan discipline on the city. In 755, though, the last governor of Al-Andalus, Yusuf al Fihri, sent an expedition north to quash Basque unrest near Pamplona, resulting in the defeat of the Arab army.

From 755 until 781, Pamplona remained autonomous, probably relying on regional alliances. Although sources are not clear, it seems apparent that in 778, the town was in hands of a Basque local or a Muslim rebel faction loyal to the Franks at the moment of Charlemagne&#x27;s crossing of the Pyrenees to the south. However, on his way back from the failed expedition to Saragossa in August, the walls and probably the town were destroyed by Charlemagne (ahead of the Frankish defeat in the famous Battle of Roncevaux), out of fear that the anti-Frankish party strong in the town might use the position against him. After Abd al-Rahman I&#x27;s conquest, Pamplona and its hinterland remained in a state of shaky balance between Franks, regional Andalusian lords and central Cordovan rule, all of whom proved unable to permanently secure dominance over the Basque region. To a considerable extent, that alternation reflected the internal struggles of the Basque warrior nobility.

After the Frankish defeat at Roncevaux (778), Pamplona switched again to Cordovan rule, after Abd-al-Rahman&#x27;s expedition captured the stronghold in 781. A &quot;wali&quot; or governor was imposed, Mutarrif ibn-Musa (a Banu-Qasi) up to the 799 rebellion. In that year, the Pamplonese—possibly led by a certain Velasko—stirred against their governor, but later the inhabitants provided some support for the Banu Qasi Fortun ibn-Musa&#x27;s uprising. This regional revolt was shortly after suppressed by the Cordovan emir Hisham I, who re-established order, but failed to retain his grip on the town, since the Pamplonese returned to Frankish suzerainty in 806. A Muslim cemetery containing about 200 human remains mingled with Christian tombs was unearthed in 2003 at the Castle Square, bearing witness to an important Muslim presence in the city during this period, but further research was stopped by the destruction of this and other historic evidence as decided by the city council, headed by mayor Yolanda Barcina.

Following a failed expedition to the town led by Louis the Pious around 812, allegiance to the Franks collapsed after Enecco Arista rose to prominence. Moreover, he was crowned as king of Pamplona in 824, when the Banu Qasi and he gained momentum in the wake of their victorious second battle of Roncevaux. The new kingdom, inextricably linked to the Banu Qasi of Tudela, strengthened its independence from the weakened Frankish empire and Cordoban emirate.

During this period, Pamplona was not properly a town, but just a kind of fortress. In 924, Cordovan sources describe Pamplona as &quot;not being especially gifted by nature&quot;, with its inhabitants being poor, not eating enough, and dedicated to banditry. They are reported to speak Basque for the most part, which &quot;makes them incomprehensible&quot;. On the 24 July, after Christian troops and citizens fled, troops from Cordova sacked Pamplona, destroying houses and buildings including its celebrated church.

The town only regained its urban and human shape after the end of raids by Vikings and Andalusians on the province. Especially after 1083, traffic on the Way of St James brought prosperity and new cultures via travelers from north of the Pyrenees.

===Three boroughs and one city===

From the 11th century, reviving economic development allowed Pamplona to recover its urban life. The bishops of Pamplona recovered their ecclesiastical leading role; during the previous centuries, isolated monasteries, especially Leyre, had actually held the religious authority. The pilgrimages to Santiago de Compostela contributed to the revival of the commercial and cultural exchanges with Christian Europe beyond the Pyrenees. In the 12th century, the city enlarged with two new separate &quot;burgos&quot; (independent boroughs): San Cernín (Saint Saturnin) and San Nicolás; the population of local Navarrese mainly confined to the original urban nucleus, the Navarrería, was swelled by Occitan merchants and artisans.

The boroughs showed very distinct features both socially and culturally, and were almost always engaged in quarrels among themselves. The most dramatic episode was the burning of the borough San Nicolás in 1258 and the destruction of the Navarrería by the other two boroughs and the massacre of its population in 1276. The site was abandoned for nearly 50 years. With regards to the outer defence walls of the city, the southern side was the weakest flank of the city, and the Navarrese king Louis I built a castle in the early 14th century in the site known today as Plaza del Castillo (Castle Square).

Eventually, King Charles III decreed the unification of the boroughs in a single city in 1423. The feuds between boroughs had been partly ignited by disputes over the use of the gulf dividing the three boroughs, so after Charles III&#x27;s unification, the gulf was filled and on its site a common space laid out on the present-day city hall. The walls dividing the boroughs were demolished.

During the late 15th century, Pamplona bore witness to power struggles between the Beaumont and Agramont confederacies and external military interventions. Several times, the stronghold was taken over by different factions and foreign forces, like the ones sent by Ferdinand II of Aragon. Queen Catherine I was a minor and often absent from Pamplona, but eventually she married John III in 1494, an event celebrated with joy in the city. However, Navarre continued divided.

Historically, a Jewish community existed in Pamplona. The first documentation of Jews in Pamplona dates to 958, when Hasdai Ibn Shaprut visited Pamplona on a diplomatic mission to meet with Sancho I. The Jews of Pamplona had an independent court system which enforced the Jewish system of halacha, or religious laws. In 1498, the Jewish population was either expelled or forced to convert to Christianity.
===A fortress-city===
After the 1512 conquest and annexation of Navarre to Spain, Pamplona remained as capital of the semiautonomous kingdom of Navarre, which preserved its own (reformed) institutions and laws. Pamplona became a Castilian-Spanish outpost at the foot of the western Pyrenees. After the Castilian conquest, king Ferdinand V ordered in 1513 the demolition and removal of the medieval castle and the city&#x27;s monasteries, as well as the building of a new castle in a very close place. In 1530, with Navarre under Spanish military occupation, the Castilian viceroy was still expecting a &quot;French invasion&quot;, and in fear of a possible revolt of the city dwellers, he requested an additional 1,000-strong force from what he called &quot;healthy land&quot;, i.e. Castile, besides the 1,000 stationed already in Navarre.

The progress of artillery demanded a complete renewal of the fortified system. Starting in 1569, King Philip II built the fortifications at Pamplona, to designs by Giovan Giacomo Paleari and Vespasiano Gonzaga. The citadel in the south of the town is a pentagonal star fort. Phillip had the city bounded by walls that made it almost a regular pentagon. The modernization of the walls was intended mainly to keep locals in check and strengthen the outpost Pamplona had become on the border with independent Navarre, a close ally of France. The walls that exist today date from the late 16th to 18th centuries.

During the 18th century, Pamplona was considerably beautified and its urban services improved. A continuous water supply was established and the streets were paved, among many other enhancements. Rich aristocrats and businessmen also built their mansions. In the 19th century, this fortress-city played a key role in several wars in which Spain was involved.

During the Peninsular War of the Napoleonic Wars, French troops occupied the city - by launching a &quot;coup de main&quot; (surprise attack) and seized the city in 1808, and remained in it until the French forces were compelled to surrender on 31 October 1813 due to starvation, having been blockaded in the town for four months by the Spanish army under Enrique José O&#x27;Donnell.

During the Carlist Wars (1833–1839 and 1872–1876) Pamplona was each time controlled by the liberals, not just because the few liberals that lived in Navarre were mainly Pamplonese, but also because of the governmental control over the fortified city. Although Carlist rebels easily ruled the countryside, the government army had no problem in dominating the walled capital of Navarre. Nevertheless, during the last Carlist war, modern artillery operated by Carlists from surrounding mountains showed that the old walls would not be enough in the face of a stronger enemy. Thus, the government decided to build a fort on the top of mount San Cristóbal, just north of Pamplona.

Due to its military role, the city could not grow outside its walled belt. Furthermore, building in the closest area to the walls was banned to avoid any advantage for a besieger; thus the city could only grow by increasing its housing density. Higher and narrower houses were built and courtyards gradually disappeared. During the 19th century, road transportation improved, and the railway came in 1860. Nevertheless, industry in Pamplona and Navarre as a whole was weak during the century of the Industrial Revolution. Basically, no industrial development was feasible in such a constrained fortress-city.

After a slight modification of the star fort allowed an expansion of just six blocks in 1888, the First World War demonstrated that the fortified system of Pamplona was already obsolete. In 1915, the Army allowed the destruction of the walls and abolished the building ban in the city&#x27;s surroundings. The southern side of the walls was destroyed and the other three remained as they did not hinder urban growth. The star fort continued to serve as a military facility until 1964, but just as a garrison.

Pamplona has in recent years taken great care to integrate and preserve its fortifications for modern use. In October 2014, working with the city of Bayonne, Pamplona hosts an international conference &#x27;Fortified Heritage: Management and Sustainable Development&#x27;, the website is in English, French, and Spanish.

Available on a growing website are two free e-books, with copious colour photographs, on Pamplona&#x27;s fortifications. Published in 2011 is &#x27;Five living centuries of an impregnable fortress&#x27; about the city citadel and &#x27;A walk round the Pamplona fortifications&#x27;.

===Industrialization and modernization===
Freed from its military function, Pamplona could lead the process of industrialization and modernization in which Navarre was involved during the 20th century, especially during its second half. The urban growth has been accompanied by the development of industry and services. Population growth has been the effect of an intense immigration process during the 1960s and 1970s: from the Navarrese countryside and from other less developed regions of Spain, mainly Castile and León and Andalusia. Since the 1990s the immigration is coming mainly from abroad.

Pamplona is listed as a city with one of the highest standards of living and quality of life in Spain. Its industry rate is higher than the national average, although it is threatened by delocalization. Crime statistics are lower than the national average but cost of living, especially housing, is considerably higher. Thanks to its small size and an acceptable public transport service, there are no major transport problems.

==Geography==
Pamplona is located in the middle of Navarre in a rounded valley, known as the Basin of Pamplona, that links the mountainous north with the Ebro valley. It is from the city of San Sebastián, from Bilbao, from Paris, and from Madrid. The climate and landscape of the basin is a transition between those two main Navarrese geographical regions. Its central position at crossroads has served as a commercial link between those very different natural parts of Navarre. The historical centre of the city is on the left bank of the Arga River, a tributary of the Ebro. The city has developed on both sides of the river.

==Climate==
The climate of Pamplona is classified as an oceanic climate (Köppen climate classification: &quot;Cfb&quot;) with influences of a Mediterranean climate (&quot;Csb&quot;). Due to global warming and stronger summer heat waves in the 21st century, it is also on the boundary with a humid subtropical climate (&quot;Cfa&quot;). Precipitation patterns do not vary much over the course of the year, as is typical of marine climates, but both classifications are possible due to the Mediterranean patterns of somewhat drier summer months. Sunshine hours are typical for a location in Northern Spain, thus more similar to the oceanic coastal climate in nearby Basque locations than typical Spanish Mediterranean areas are, but rainfall is significantly lower than in Bilbao and especially San Sebastián, as well as the climate is harsher than in the northern coastal areas (colder winter lows, warmer summer highs) because of the altitude of and its inland location.

==Urbanism==
Like many other European cities, it is very easy to distinguish what is so called the &quot;old city&quot; and the new neighborhoods. The oldest part of the old city is Navarrería, which corresponds with the Roman city. During the 12th century, the boroughs of Saint Sernin (San Saturnino or San Cernin) and Saint Nicholas (San Nicolás) were established. Charles III decreed the unification of the three places under a single municipality in 1423.
The city did not expand until the late 19th century. In 1888, a modest modification of the star fort was allowed, but it just permitted the building of six blocks. It was called the I Ensanche (literally, &quot;first widening&quot;). The southern walls were destroyed in 1915 and the II Ensanche (&quot;second widening&quot;) was planned. Its plan followed the grid pattern model designed by Ildefons Cerdà for Barcelona. Its blocks were built between the 1920s and the 1950s. The prevailing housing model is apartment buildings of five to eight floors.

After the Civil War, three new zones of Pamplona began to grow: Rochapea, Milagrosa, and Chantrea. Only the last one was a planned neighborhood, the other two being disorderly growths. In 1957, the municipality designed the first general ordination plan for the city, which established the guidelines for further urban development. According to this, during the 1960s and 1970s saw the creation of new neighborhoods like San Juan, Iturrama, San Jorge, Etxabakoitz, and Orvina.

The urban expansion of Pamplona exceeded the administrative limits of the city and involved municipalities like Barañáin, Burlada, Villava, Ansoain, Berriozar, Noain or Huarte in a larger metropolitan area. During the 1980s and 1990s, new neighborhoods were born: Azpilagaña, Mendebaldea, and Mendillorri. Rochapea was profoundly renewed. The urban development of those new neighborhoods is very similar to other Spanish provincial capitals that experienced a similar aggressive economic development during the sixties and seventies. The urbanization of Pamplona, being from anterior designs, is not constrained by the grid plan. The apartment buildings are taller: never less than five floors and many taller than ten. Industry, which previously coexisted with housing, was moved to industrial parks (the oldest and the only one within municipal limits of Pamplona is Landaben).

In recent years, single-family house-predominant neighborhoods have grown in the metropolitan area: Zizur Mayor, Cizur Menor, Mutilva Alta, Mutilva Baja, Olaz, Esquíroz, , Alzuza, Artiberri and Sarriguren. And new districts emerged like Buztintxuri, Lezkairu and Ripagaina, the latter two being still under construction. These new suburbs have more room for green areas and recreative parks.

==Economy==
Pamplona has shifted in a few decades from a little administrative and even rural town to a medium-size city of industry and services. The industry sector is diversified although the most important activity is related to automobile industry. Volkswagen manufactures Polo model in its factory of Landaben and there are many auxiliary industries that work for Volkswagen and other companies. Other remarkable industries are building materials, metalworking and food processing. Renewable energy technologies are also an increasing economic sector (wind turbine manufacturing and generation) and neighboring Sarriguren is the seat of the Siemens Gamesa Renewable Energy, National Centre for Renewable Energies (CENER) and of Acciona Energía.

Pamplona is the main commercial and services centre of Navarre. Its area of influence is not beyond the province, except for the University of Navarre and its teaching hospital, which provide private educational and health services nationwide.

==Education and culture==
The city is home to two universities: the above-mentioned University of Navarre, a corporate work of Opus Dei founded in 1952, which is ranked as the best private university in Spain, and the Public University of Navarre, established by the Government of Navarre in 1987. There is also a local branch of the UNED (Universidad Nacional de Educación a Distancia).

The two most important museums in Pamplona are the Museo de Navarra, devoted to the archaeological and artistic heritage of Navarre, and the Museo Diocesano of religious art, located in the cathedral. Pamplona is the first Spanish city in the French way of the Way of Saint James.

Pamplona has hosted the Sarasate Violin International Competition biennially since 1991, and the annual Punto de Vista International Documentary Film Festival, the most important Spanish documentary film festival, since 2004.

One of the more popular cultural expressions include the &quot;Gigantes&quot;, which come out during festivals many times during the year. These are approximately 30-foot wooden statues that have a person inside that make them dance around the city. They represent each of the main continents of the world, including Europe, the Americas, Africa, and Asia.

==Politics==
Following the 2023 municipal election, the mayor of the city is Joseba Asiron (EH Bildu), also supported by the Socialist Party of Navarre, Geroa Bai, and Contigo Zurekin.

==Transportation==

Pamplona is linked by motorways with neighbouring Zaragoza (1978), San Sebastián, Vitoria (1995) and Logroño (2006). Since 2007 buses use a new bus station in the city centre that replaces the old one (1934). 

The airport (1972), operated by Aena and located in Noain, schedules several flights daily to Madrid and Barcelona. There are railway (1861) links with Madrid, Zaragoza and northern Spain, operated by Renfe. High speed train link with Zaragoza, Madrid, and Barcelona was not expected until 2014. A new railway station will be built in the southern part of the city. 

Within the city and surroundings there are also 23 daytime lines and 10 night lines of public buses, operated by TCC, the chartered company of the Mancomunidad de la Comarca de Pamplona.

==Main sights==
Several notable churches, most of its 16th- to 18th-century fortified system and other civil architecture buildings belong to the historic-artistic heritage of Pamplona.

===Religious architecture===
The most important religious building is the fourteenth century Gothic Cathedral, with an outstanding cloister and a Neoclassical façade. There are another two main Gothic churches in the old city: Saint Sernin and Saint Nicholas, both built during the thirteenth century. Two other Gothic churches were built during the sixteenth century: Saint Dominic and Saint Augustine. During the seventeenth and eighteenth century were built the Baroque chapels of Saint Fermin, in the church of Saint Lawrence, and of the Virgin of the Road (Virgen del Camino), in the church of Saint Sernin, the convents of the Augustinian Recollect nuns and the Carmelite friars, and the Saint Ignatius basilica in the place where he was injured in the battle and during the subsequent convalescence he decided to be a priest. The most remarkable twentieth century religious buildings are probably the new diocesan seminary (1931) and the classical-revival style memorial church (1942) to the Navarrese dead in the Nationalist side of the Civil War and that is used today as temporary exhibitions room.

===Military and civil architecture===

From the prominent military past of Pamplona remain three of the four sides of the city walls and, with little modifications, the citadel or star fort. All the mediaeval structures were replaced and improved during 16th, 17th and 18th centuries in order to resist artillery sieges. Completely obsolete for modern warfare, they are used today as parks.

The oldest civil building today existing is a fourteenth-century house that was used as Cámara de Comptos (the court of auditors of the early modern autonomous kingdom of Navarre) from the sixteenth to the nineteenth century. There are also several medieval bridges on the Arga: Santa Engracia, Miluce, Magdalena, and San Pedro. The medieval palace of Saint Peter, which was alternatively used by Navarrese kings and Pamplonese bishops, was used during the early modern age as the Viceroy&#x27;s palace and later was the seat of the military governor of Navarre; from the time of the Civil War it was in ruins but was recently rebuilt to be used as the General Archive of Navarre.

The most outstanding Baroque civil architecture is from the eighteenth century: town hall, episcopal palace, Saint John the Baptist seminary, and the Rozalejo&#x27;s, Ezpeleta&#x27;s (today music school), Navarro-Tafalla&#x27;s (today, the local office of PNV), and Guenduláin&#x27;s (today, a hotel) mansions. The provincial government built its own Neoclassical palace, the so-called Palace of Navarre, during the nineteenth century.

Late nineteenth and early twentieth century Pamplonese architecture shows the tendencies that are fully developed in other more important Spanish cities: La Agrícola building (1912), several apartment buildings with some timid modernist ornamentation, etc. The most notable architect in twentieth century Pamplona was Víctor Eusa (1894–1990), whose designs were influenced by the European expressionism and other avant-garde movements.

===Parks===
Pamplona has many parks and green areas. The oldest is the Taconera park, whose early designs are from the seventeenth century. Taconera is today a romantic park, with wide pedestrian paths, parterres, and sculptures.

The Media Luna park was built as part of the II Ensanche and is intended to allow relaxing strolling and sightseeing over the northern part of the town. 

After its demilitarization, the citadel (Ciudadela) and its surrounding area (Vuelta del Castillo) shifted into a park area with large lawns and modern sculptures.

The most remarkable parks of the new neighborhoods include the Yamaguchi park, between Iturrama and Ermitagaña, which includes a little Japanese garden as well as the Planetarium of Pamplona; the campus of the University of Navarre; the Parque del Mundo in Chantrea; and the Arga park.

==Sports==

Pamplona&#x27;s bull ring, the Plaza de Toros de Pamplona, was rebuilt in 1923. It seats 19,529 and is the third largest in the world, after the bull rings of Mexico City and Madrid.

There are two football teams in Pamplona. CA Osasuna (Club Atlético &quot;Osasuna&quot; (Basque for &quot;Health&quot;)) who play professionally in La Liga, and CD Pamplona who play in Tercera Federación. Osasuna play their home games at El Sadar Stadium.

Other notable sports teams in Pamplona include MRA Xota (futsal), water polo and fencing (Campo de Deportes Larraina).

The Movistar Team, the direct descendant of Indurain&#x27;s Banesto team, is based in Egüés, a municipality in the metropolitan area of Pamplona.

Pamplona is also home to the headquarters of the International Federation of Basque Pelota (FIPV). Basque pelota is principally practiced in France, Spain, and North and South America, but also in other countries like Italy and Philippines.

=== Notable Athletes ===
Five time Tour de France winner Miguel Indurain is arguably Pamplona&#x27;s most famous athlete in any sport.

Former Arsenal goalkeeper Manuel Almunia was born in Pamplona and started his career at CA Osasuna.

==Notable citizens==

* Fermin (* 272; † 303)
* Martín de Rada, (1533–1578)
* Pablo de Sarasate (1844–1908), internationally renowned composer and violin player
* José Sanjurjo (1872–1936), army general
* Joaquín Beunza Redín (1872-1936), Carlist politician
* Víctor Pradera Larumbe (1873–1936), Carlist politician
* Ignacio Baleztena Ascárate (1887–1972), Carlist politician
* Luis Arellano Dihinx (1906–1969), Carlist politician
* Sabicas (1912–1990)
* Jaime del Burgo Torres (1912–2005), Carlist politician
* Alfredo Landa (1933–2013)
* Marysa Navarro (born 1934)
* Carlos Garaikoetxea (born 1938)
* Javier Rojo (born 1949)
* Serafín Zubiri (born 1964), singer
* Jon Andoni Goikoetxea (born 1965), Spain footballer
* Alberto Urroz (born 1965), classical pianist
* Cesar Palacios Chocarro (born 1974), Spain footballer
* Javier López Vallejo (born 1975), Spain footballer
* Francisco Puñal (born 1975), Spain footballer
* Tiko (born 1976), Spain footballer
* Manuel Almunia (born 1977), Spain footballer
* Jesús María Lacruz (born 1978), Spain footballer
* Gorka Iraizoz (born 1981), Spain footballer
* Miguel Flaño (born 1984), Spain footballer
* Javier Flaño (born 1984), Spain footballer
* Fernando Llorente (born 1985), Spain footballer
* María Hernández (born 1986), Spanish professional golfer
* Raúl García (born 1986), Spain footballer
* Nacho Monreal (born 1986), Spain footballer
* Abel Azcona (born 1988), Contemporary artist
* César Azpilicueta (born 1989), Spain footballer
* Carlota Ciganda (born 1990), Spanish professional golfer
* Iker Muniain (born 1992), Spain footballer
* Mikel Merino (born 1996), Spain U21 footballer
* Amaia Romero (born 1999), singer
* Nico Williams (Born 2002), Spain footballer
* Oihan Sancet (Born 2000), Spain footballer
* Javier Garro Barrio (1933 - 2003)
&lt;/div col&gt;

==Twin towns and sister cities==

Pamplona is twinned with the following cities:

==Notes==
==References==
* 
==Bibliography==
==External links==
** </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q10282" start="0" end="8" title="Pamplona" label="Pamplona"/>
<link wikidata="Q10282" start="42" end="51" title="Pamplona" label="Pampeluna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018" start="91" end="121" title="Navarre" label="Chartered Community of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="126" end="131" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598724" start="189" end="207" title="Cuenca de Pamplona" label="Cuenca de Pamplona"/>
<link wikidata="Q20360" start="246" end="256" title="Arga river" label="Arga river"/>
<link wikidata="Q10965" start="290" end="294" title="Ebro" label="Ebro"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="407" end="424" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="522" end="530" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="602" end="608" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778726" start="620" end="633" title="Sertorian War" label="Sertorian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q126936" start="655" end="670" title="Visigothic Kingdom" label="Visigothic rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q59532" start="741" end="757" title="Christianization" label="Christianization"/>
<link wikidata="Q200262" start="814" end="841" title="Kingdom of Navarre" label="Kingdom of Pamplona/Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160214" start="881" end="901" title="Running of the Bulls" label="running of the bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q829919" start="913" end="932" title="festival of San Fermín" label="San Fermín festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="1055" end="1071" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Ernest Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q501351" start="1091" end="1109" title="The Sun Also Rises" label="The Sun Also Rises"/>
<link wikidata="Q10286" start="1136" end="1143" title="Club Atlético Osasuna" label="Osasuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q324867" start="1205" end="1225" title="La Liga" label="Spanish top division"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="1336" end="1341" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="1350" end="1356" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q296238" start="1376" end="1385" title="Sertorius" label="Sertorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="1535" end="1542" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246837" start="1620" end="1628" title="Vascones" label="Vascones"/>
<link wikidata="Q216791" start="1735" end="1757" title="Hispania Tarraconensis" label="Hispania Tarraconensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227129" start="1766" end="1788" title="Ab Asturica Burdigalam" label="Ab Asturica Burdigalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="1822" end="1830" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q465078" start="1852" end="1859" title="Astorga, Spain" label="Astorga"/>
<link wikidata="Q26198154" start="1877" end="1897" title="civitas stipendiaria" label="civitas stipendiaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q429699" start="1937" end="1946" title="conventus iuridicus" label="conventus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932882" start="1956" end="1969" title="Caesaraugusta" label="Caesaraugusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q10305" start="1978" end="1986" title="Zaragoza" label="Zaragoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q131192" start="2026" end="2044" title="Germanic invasions" label="Germanic invasions"/>
<link wikidata="Q364260" start="2077" end="2084" title="Rechiar" label="Rechiar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2302" end="2319" title="History of spain#Visigothic Hispania (5th–8th centuries)" label="Visigothic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295939" start="2438" end="2455" title="Duchy of Vasconia" label="Duchy of Vasconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="2509" end="2515" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q468206" start="3096" end="3108" title="Saint Fermin" label="Saint Fermin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236473" start="3296" end="3319" title="Third Council of Toledo" label="Third Council of Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577277" start="3403" end="3412" title="Wiliesind" label="Wiliesind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455917" start="3589" end="3605" title="Umayyad conquest of Hispania" label="Umayyad invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q243573" start="3634" end="3641" title="Roderic" label="Roderic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3659" end="3666" title="History of the Basque people#Early Middle Ages" label="Basques"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295939" start="4385" end="4392" title="Duchy of Vasconia" label="Gascony"/>
<link wikidata="Q4006280" start="4422" end="4440" title="Uqba ibn al-Hajjaj" label="Uqba ibn al-Hajjaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="4534" end="4544" title="Al-Andalus" label="Al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q958303" start="4546" end="4560" title="Yusuf al Fihri" label="Yusuf al Fihri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="4924" end="4935" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233475" start="5164" end="5183" title="Battle of Roncevaux" label="Battle of Roncevaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q29000" start="5288" end="5303" title="Abd al-Rahman I" label="Abd al-Rahman I"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="5411" end="5421" title="Al-Andalus" label="Andalusian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5719" end="5732" title="Al-Andalus#Umayyad Caliphate of Córdoba" label="Cordovan rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q659457" start="6056" end="6065" title="Banu Qasi" label="Banu Qasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q348593" start="6170" end="6178" title="Hisham I of Córdoba" label="Hisham I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133336" start="6652" end="6667" title="Yolanda Barcina" label="Yolanda Barcina"/>
<link wikidata="Q43974" start="6719" end="6734" title="Louis the Pious" label="Louis the Pious"/>
<link wikidata="Q291877" start="6788" end="6801" title="Iñigo Arista" label="Enecco Arista"/>
<link wikidata="Q275045" start="6850" end="6866" title="List of Navarrese monarchs" label="king of Pamplona"/>
<link wikidata="Q659457" start="6884" end="6893" title="Banu Qasi" label="Banu Qasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872202" start="6949" end="6975" title="Battle of Roncevaux Pass (824)" label="second battle of Roncevaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337854" start="7110" end="7126" title="Caliphate of Córdoba" label="Cordoban emirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337854" start="7220" end="7228" title="Caliphate of Cordoba" label="Cordovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41150" start="7803" end="7818" title="Way of St James" label="Way of St James"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="8139" end="8150" title="monasteries" label="monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q669194" start="8163" end="8168" title="Monastery of Leyre" label="Leyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q41150" start="8217" end="8254" title="Way of Saint James" label="pilgrimages to Santiago de Compostela"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="8356" end="8364" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415009" start="8502" end="8513" title="San Nicolas (Pamplona burg)" label="San Nicolás"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8627" end="8634" title="Occitan language#Occitan in Spain" label="Occitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8384" start="9152" end="9159" title="Louis X of France" label="Louis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q358365" start="9282" end="9293" title="Charles III of Navarre" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q13406551" start="9306" end="9333" title="Privilege of the Union" label="unification of the boroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="9923" end="9945" title="Ferdinand II of Aragon" label="Ferdinand II of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q236896" start="9953" end="9964" title="Catherine I of Navarre" label="Catherine I"/>
<link wikidata="Q371100" start="10036" end="10044" title="John III of Navarre" label="John III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="10149" end="10155" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q182498" start="10250" end="10268" title="Hasdai Ibn Shaprut" label="Hasdai Ibn Shaprut"/>
<link wikidata="Q914160" start="10323" end="10331" title="Sancho I of Pamplona" label="Sancho I"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="10422" end="10429" title="halacha" label="halacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312328" start="10571" end="10599" title="Spanish conquest of Iberian Navarre" label="1512 conquest and annexation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10672" end="10690" title="Kingdom of Navarre#Later history and the end of the fueros" label="kingdom of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="10866" end="10877" title="Ferdinand the Catholic" label="Ferdinand V"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="11396" end="11405" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="11482" end="11491" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II"/>
<link wikidata="Q122808" start="11544" end="11566" title="Giovan Giacomo Paleari" label="Giovan Giacomo Paleari"/>
<link wikidata="Q299378" start="11571" end="11589" title="Vespasiano Gonzaga" label="Vespasiano Gonzaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q12797" start="11644" end="11653" title="Bastion fort" label="star fort"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11874" end="11893" title="Kingdom of Navarre#Independent Navarre north of the Pyrenees" label="independent Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061108" start="12098" end="12110" title="water supply" label="water supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="12361" end="12375" title="Peninsular War" label="Peninsular War"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="12383" end="12398" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418066" start="12455" end="12467" title="coup de main" label="coup de main"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344051" start="12706" end="12733" title="Henry O&amp;#x27;Donnell, 1st Count of la Bisbal" label="Enrique José O&amp;#x27;Donnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178424" start="12747" end="12759" title="Carlist Wars" label="Carlist Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324672" start="13348" end="13386" title="Fort San Cristóbal (Spain)" label="fort on the top of mount San Cristóbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q516739" start="13759" end="13778" title="road transportation" label="road transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="13797" end="13804" title="railway" label="railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="13912" end="13933" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="14121" end="14136" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="15251" end="15268" title="industrialization" label="industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="15381" end="15393" title="Urbanization" label="urban growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5739" start="15646" end="15662" title="Castile and León" label="Castile and León"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="15667" end="15676" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q592732" start="15698" end="15738" title="Immigration to Spain" label="immigration is coming mainly from abroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q175850" start="15794" end="15813" title="Standard of living" label="standards of living"/>
<link wikidata="Q13100823" start="15818" end="15833" title="quality of life" label="quality of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q330344" start="15944" end="15960" title="Crime statistics" label="Crime statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q575619" start="16001" end="16015" title="cost of living" label="cost of living"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="16104" end="16120" title="public transport" label="public transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598724" start="16263" end="16280" title="Cuenca de Pamplona" label="Basin of Pamplona"/>
<link wikidata="Q10965" start="16324" end="16328" title="Ebro" label="Ebro"/>
<link wikidata="Q20360" start="16710" end="16720" title="Arga River" label="Arga River"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="16855" end="16870" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="16872" end="16901" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="16941" end="16962" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="16989" end="17003" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q215864" start="17024" end="17033" title="heat wave" label="heat wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="17090" end="17115" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q207461" start="17388" end="17402" title="Northern Spain" label="Northern Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8692" start="17570" end="17576" title="Bilbao" label="Bilbao"/>
<link wikidata="Q10313" start="17592" end="17605" title="San Sebastián" label="San Sebastián"/>
<link wikidata="Q358365" start="18139" end="18150" title="Charles III of Navarre" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256511" start="18593" end="18605" title="Grid plan" label="grid pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q547440" start="18624" end="18638" title="Ildefons Cerdà" label="Ildefons Cerdà"/>
<link wikidata="Q64124" start="18643" end="18652" title="Eixample" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q188507" start="18741" end="18760" title="apartment buildings" label="apartment buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="18797" end="18806" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q768691" start="19377" end="19385" title="Barañáin" label="Barañáin"/>
<link wikidata="Q732730" start="19387" end="19394" title="Burlada" label="Burlada"/>
<link wikidata="Q600671" start="19396" end="19403" title="Villava" label="Villava"/>
<link wikidata="Q656781" start="19405" end="19412" title="Ansoain" label="Ansoain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645776" start="19414" end="19423" title="Berriozar" label="Berriozar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648807" start="19425" end="19430" title="Noain (Valle de Elorz) - Noain (Elortzibar)" label="Noain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641785" start="19434" end="19440" title="Huarte - Uharte" label="Huarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307276" start="20163" end="20182" title="single-family house" label="single-family house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228466" start="20246" end="20257" title="Zizur Mayor" label="Zizur Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q978259" start="20259" end="20270" title="Cizur" label="Cizur Menor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636195" start="20272" end="20284" title="Aranguren" label="Mutilva Alta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636195" start="20286" end="20298" title="Aranguren" label="Mutilva Baja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627534" start="20300" end="20304" title="Egüés" label="Olaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752994" start="20306" end="20314" title="Galar, Spain" label="Esquíroz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763760" start="20316" end="20316" title="Berrioplano" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q1627534" start="20318" end="20324" title="Egüés" label="Alzuza"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="20690" end="20698" title="Industrial sector" label="industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q190117" start="20772" end="20791" title="automobile industry" label="automobile industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="20793" end="20803" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q247819" start="20817" end="20827" title="Volkswagen Polo" label="Polo model"/>
<link wikidata="Q206615" start="20973" end="20991" title="building materials" label="building materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q953045" start="20993" end="21005" title="metalworking" label="metalworking"/>
<link wikidata="Q627371" start="21010" end="21025" title="food processing" label="food processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q49833" start="21097" end="21109" title="wind turbine" label="wind turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q43302" start="21128" end="21138" title="Wind power" label="generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627534" start="21156" end="21166" title="Egüés" label="Sarriguren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493131" start="21186" end="21217" title="Siemens Gamesa" label="Siemens Gamesa Renewable Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11919256" start="21273" end="21288" title="Acciona Energy" label="Acciona Energía"/>
<link wikidata="Q926068" start="21420" end="21441" title="University of Navarre" label="University of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q926068" start="21620" end="21641" title="University of Navarra" label="University of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q160918" start="21663" end="21671" title="Opus Dei" label="Opus Dei"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179598" start="21754" end="21782" title="Universidad Pública de Navarra" label="Public University of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q421739" start="21876" end="21921" title="Universidad Nacional de Educación a Distancia" label="Universidad Nacional de Educación a Distancia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887569" start="21976" end="21992" title="Museum of Navarre, Pamplona" label="Museo de Navarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029584" start="22164" end="22178" title="The French Way" label="the French way"/>
<link wikidata="Q41150" start="22186" end="22204" title="Way of Saint James" label="Way of Saint James"/>
<link wikidata="Q204503" start="22231" end="22239" title="Pablo de Sarasate" label="Sarasate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281127" start="22311" end="22365" title="Punto de Vista International Documentary Film Festival" label="Punto de Vista International Documentary Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="22394" end="22410" title="documentary film" label="documentary film"/>
<link wikidata="Q340069" start="22497" end="22505" title="Gigantes y cabezudos" label="Gigantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q66124811" start="22819" end="22842" title="2023 Spanish local elections" label="2023 municipal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029761" start="22884" end="22892" title="EH Bildu" label="EH Bildu"/>
<link wikidata="Q280906" start="22917" end="22943" title="Socialist Party of Navarre" label="Socialist Party of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q620781" start="22945" end="22954" title="Geroa Bai" label="Geroa Bai"/>
<link wikidata="Q113138142" start="22960" end="22975" title="Contigo Navarra" label="Contigo Zurekin"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="23020" end="23029" title="motorways" label="motorways"/>
<link wikidata="Q789254" start="23048" end="23056" title="Autovía A-15" label="Zaragoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q789254" start="23065" end="23078" title="Autovía A-15" label="San Sebastián"/>
<link wikidata="Q253303" start="23080" end="23087" title="Autovía A-10" label="Vitoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q789250" start="23099" end="23106" title="Autovía A-12" label="Logroño"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638" start="23126" end="23131" title="buses" label="buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q494829" start="23142" end="23153" title="bus station" label="bus station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314151" start="23213" end="23220" title="Pamplona Airport" label="airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q291464" start="23241" end="23245" title="Aena" label="Aena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648807" start="23261" end="23266" title="Noáin (Valle de Elorz) - Noain (Elortzibar)" label="Noain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="23303" end="23309" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="23314" end="23323" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="23335" end="23342" title="railway" label="railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="23361" end="23367" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q10305" start="23369" end="23377" title="Zaragoza" label="Zaragoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476154" start="23410" end="23415" title="Renfe" label="Renfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q211382" start="23417" end="23433" title="High speed train" label="High speed train"/>
<link wikidata="Q55488" start="23511" end="23526" title="railway station" label="railway station"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23690" end="23693" title="Transports Ciutat Comtal" label="TCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297794" start="23724" end="23762" title="Mancomunidad de la Comarca de Pamplona" label="Mancomunidad de la Comarca de Pamplona"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="24045" end="24051" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q389210" start="24052" end="24061" title="Cathedral of Pamplona" label="Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430154" start="24083" end="24091" title="cloister" label="cloister"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="24098" end="24110" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="Neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q183061" start="24111" end="24117" title="façade" label="façade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111473" start="24196" end="24210" title="Church of Saint Nicholas (Pamplona)" label="Saint Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="24417" end="24424" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q214528" start="24585" end="24606" title="Augustinians" label="Augustinian Recollect"/>
<link wikidata="Q186277" start="24620" end="24629" title="Carmelite" label="Carmelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q44281" start="24646" end="24660" title="Saint Ignatius of Loyola" label="Saint Ignatius"/>
<link wikidata="Q44281" start="24689" end="24691" title="Saint Ignatius of Loyola" label="he"/>
<link wikidata="Q233324" start="24873" end="24881" title="seminary" label="seminary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24897" end="24920" title="Neoclassical architecture#Neoclassicism today" label="classical-revival style"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="24997" end="25006" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q206258" start="25231" end="25238" title="Citadel of Pamplona" label="citadel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25365" end="25381" title="Siege#Sieges in the age of gunpowder" label="artillery sieges"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25407" end="25421" title="Siege#Modern warfare" label="modern warfare"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25565" end="25582" title="Financial audit#Audit of government expenditure" label="court of auditors"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="25935" end="25942" title="Viceroy" label="Viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43093" start="26392" end="26395" title="Partido Nacionalista Vasco" label="PNV"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095271" start="26891" end="26902" title="Víctor Eusa Razquin" label="Víctor Eusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067316" start="27213" end="27222" title="parterres" label="parterres"/>
<link wikidata="Q15835" start="27697" end="27712" title="Japanese garden" label="Japanese garden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27728" end="27751" title="Planetarium of Pamplona" label="Planetarium of Pamplona"/>
<link wikidata="Q926068" start="27771" end="27792" title="University of Navarre" label="University of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033759" start="27891" end="27917" title="Plaza de Toros de Pamplona" label="Plaza de Toros de Pamplona"/>
<link wikidata="Q10286" start="28086" end="28096" title="CA Osasuna" label="CA Osasuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q324867" start="28192" end="28199" title="La Liga" label="La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q956779" start="28205" end="28216" title="CD Pamplona" label="CD Pamplona"/>
<link wikidata="Q100486967" start="28229" end="28247" title="Tercera Federación" label="Tercera Federación"/>
<link wikidata="Q735783" start="28282" end="28298" title="El Sadar Stadium" label="El Sadar Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247534" start="28348" end="28356" title="CD Xota FS" label="MRA Xota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247534" start="28358" end="28364" title="CD Xota FS" label="futsal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707" start="28367" end="28377" title="water polo" label="water polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12100" start="28382" end="28389" title="fencing" label="fencing"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28391" end="28417" title=":es:Campo_de_Deportes_Larraina" label="Campo de Deportes Larraina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175" start="28425" end="28438" title="Movistar Team (men&amp;#x27;s team)" label="Movistar Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627534" start="28507" end="28512" title="Egüés" label="Egüés"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="28516" end="28528" title="municipality" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="28536" end="28553" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040552" start="28617" end="28658" title="International Federation of Basque Pelota" label="International Federation of Basque Pelota"/>
<link wikidata="Q212845" start="28667" end="28680" title="Basque pelota" label="Basque pelota"/>
<link wikidata="Q33881" start="28845" end="28859" title="Tour de France" label="Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q105542" start="28867" end="28882" title="Miguel Indurain" label="Miguel Indurain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="28953" end="28960" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q201330" start="28961" end="28971" title="Goalkeeper (association football)" label="goalkeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q10711" start="28972" end="28986" title="Manuel Almunia" label="Manuel Almunia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10286" start="29034" end="29044" title="CA Osasuna" label="CA Osasuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q468206" start="29071" end="29077" title="Fermin" label="Fermin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777860" start="29095" end="29109" title="Martín de Rada" label="Martín de Rada"/>
<link wikidata="Q204503" start="29125" end="29142" title="Pablo de Sarasate" label="Pablo de Sarasate"/>
<link wikidata="Q436763" start="29210" end="29223" title="José Sanjurjo" label="José Sanjurjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754258" start="29252" end="29272" title="Joaquín Beunza Redín" label="Joaquín Beunza Redín"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742748" start="29307" end="29329" title="Víctor Pradera Larumbe" label="Víctor Pradera Larumbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9007772" start="29364" end="29390" title="Ignacio Baleztena Ascárate" label="Ignacio Baleztena Ascárate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753695" start="29425" end="29445" title="Luis Arellano Dihinx" label="Luis Arellano Dihinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q729933" start="29480" end="29487" title="Sabicas" label="Sabicas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754046" start="29502" end="29524" title="Jaime del Burgo Torres" label="Jaime del Burgo Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q960063" start="29559" end="29572" title="Alfredo Landa" label="Alfredo Landa"/>
<link wikidata="Q104765715" start="29587" end="29601" title="Marysa Navarro" label="Marysa Navarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q541562" start="29616" end="29635" title="Carlos Garaikoetxea" label="Carlos Garaikoetxea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068742" start="29650" end="29661" title="Javier Rojo" label="Javier Rojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q939357" start="29676" end="29690" title="Serafín Zubiri" label="Serafín Zubiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q358222" start="29713" end="29734" title="Jon Andoni Goikoetxea" label="Jon Andoni Goikoetxea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712224" start="29767" end="29780" title="Alberto Urroz" label="Alberto Urroz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780249" start="29814" end="29828" title="Cesar Palacios" label="Cesar Palacios"/>
<link wikidata="Q727388" start="29870" end="29890" title="Javier López Vallejo" label="Javier López Vallejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q439792" start="29923" end="29938" title="Francisco Puñal" label="Francisco Puñal"/>
<link wikidata="Q443597" start="29971" end="29975" title="Tiko (footballer)" label="Tiko"/>
<link wikidata="Q10711" start="30008" end="30022" title="Manuel Almunia" label="Manuel Almunia"/>
<link wikidata="Q735967" start="30055" end="30073" title="Jesús María Lacruz" label="Jesús María Lacruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q266021" start="30106" end="30119" title="Gorka Iraizoz" label="Gorka Iraizoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q459738" start="30152" end="30164" title="Miguel Flaño" label="Miguel Flaño"/>
<link wikidata="Q651989" start="30197" end="30209" title="Javier Flaño" label="Javier Flaño"/>
<link wikidata="Q187891" start="30242" end="30259" title="Fernando Llorente" label="Fernando Llorente"/>
<link wikidata="Q18654704" start="30292" end="30307" title="María Hernández (golfer)" label="María Hernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q490253" start="30329" end="30348" title="professional golfer" label="professional golfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q316772" start="30351" end="30362" title="Raúl García (footballer, born 1986)" label="Raúl García"/>
<link wikidata="Q342219" start="30395" end="30408" title="Nacho Monreal" label="Nacho Monreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q23907909" start="30441" end="30452" title="Abel Azcona" label="Abel Azcona"/>
<link wikidata="Q294806" start="30488" end="30505" title="César Azpilicueta" label="César Azpilicueta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867208" start="30538" end="30553" title="Carlota Ciganda" label="Carlota Ciganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q490253" start="30575" end="30594" title="professional golfer" label="professional golfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q314259" start="30597" end="30609" title="Iker Muniain" label="Iker Muniain"/>
<link wikidata="Q17612631" start="30642" end="30654" title="Mikel Merino" label="Mikel Merino"/>
<link wikidata="Q45212227" start="30691" end="30703" title="Amaia Romero" label="Amaia Romero"/>
<link wikidata="Q104414736" start="30726" end="30739" title="Nico Williams" label="Nico Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q66466886" start="30772" end="30784" title="Oihan Sancet" label="Oihan Sancet"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="30915" end="30922" title="twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="59733" wikidata="Q83043" url="?curid=59733" title="Hexagon">
<text>In geometry, a hexagon (from Greek , , meaning &quot;six&quot;, and , , meaning &quot;corner, angle&quot;) is a six-sided polygon. The total of the internal angles of any simple (non-self-intersecting) hexagon is 720°.

==Regular hexagon==
A &quot;regular hexagon&quot; has Schläfli symbol {6} and can also be constructed as a truncated equilateral triangle, t{3}, which alternates two types of edges.

A regular hexagon is defined as a hexagon that is both equilateral and equiangular. It is bicentric, meaning that it is both cyclic (has a circumscribed circle) and tangential (has an inscribed circle).

The common length of the sides equals the radius of the circumscribed circle or circumcircle, which equals formula_1 times the apothem (radius of the inscribed circle). All internal angles are 120 degrees. A regular hexagon has six rotational symmetries (&quot;rotational symmetry of order six&quot;) and six reflection symmetries (&quot;six lines of symmetry&quot;), making up the dihedral group D6. The longest diagonals of a regular hexagon, connecting diametrically opposite vertices, are twice the length of one side. From this it can be seen that a triangle with a vertex at the center of the regular hexagon and sharing one side with the hexagon is equilateral, and that the regular hexagon can be partitioned into six equilateral triangles.

Like squares and equilateral triangles, regular hexagons fit together without any gaps to &quot;tile the plane&quot; (three hexagons meeting at every vertex), and so are useful for constructing tessellations. The cells of a beehive honeycomb are hexagonal for this reason and because the shape makes efficient use of space and building materials. The Voronoi diagram of a regular triangular lattice is the honeycomb tessellation of hexagons.

== Parameters ==
The maximal diameter (which corresponds to the long diagonal of the hexagon), &quot;D&quot;, is twice the maximal radius or circumradius, &quot;R&quot;, which equals the side length, &quot;t&quot;. The minimal diameter or the diameter of the inscribed circle (separation of parallel sides, flat-to-flat distance, short diagonal or height when resting on a flat base), &quot;d&quot;, is twice the minimal radius or inradius, &quot;r&quot;. The maxima and minima are related by the same factor:
:formula_2   and, similarly, formula_3

The area of a regular hexagon
:formula_4

For any regular polygon, the area can also be expressed in terms of the apothem &quot;a&quot; and the perimeter &quot;p&quot;. For the regular hexagon these are given by &quot;a&quot; = &quot;r&quot;, and &quot;p&quot;formula_5, so
:formula_6

The regular hexagon fills the fraction formula_7 of its circumscribed circle.

If a regular hexagon has successive vertices A, B, C, D, E, F and if P is any point on the circumcircle between B and C, then .

It follows from the ratio of circumradius to inradius that the height-to-width ratio of a regular hexagon is 1:1.1547005; that is, a hexagon with a long diagonal of 1.0000000 will have a distance of 0.8660254 or cos(30°) between parallel sides.

== Point in plane ==
For an arbitrary point in the plane of a regular hexagon with circumradius formula_8, whose distances to the centroid of the regular hexagon and its six vertices are formula_9 and formula_10 
respectively, we have

:formula_11
:formula_12
:formula_13

If formula_10 are the distances from the vertices of a regular hexagon to any point on its circumcircle, then 

:formula_15

== Symmetry==

The &quot;regular hexagon&quot; has D6 symmetry. There are 16 subgroups. There are 8 up to isomorphism: itself (D6), 2 dihedral: (D3, D2), 4 cyclic: (Z6, Z3, Z2, Z1) and the trivial (e)

These symmetries express nine distinct symmetries of a regular hexagon. John Conway labels these by a letter and group order. r12 is full symmetry, and a1 is no symmetry. p6, an isogonal hexagon constructed by three mirrors can alternate long and short edges, and d6, an isotoxal hexagon constructed with equal edge lengths, but vertices alternating two different internal angles. These two forms are duals of each other and have half the symmetry order of the regular hexagon. The i4 forms are regular hexagons flattened or stretched along one symmetry direction. It can be seen as an elongated rhombus, while d2 and p2 can be seen as horizontally and vertically elongated kites. g2 hexagons, with opposite sides parallel are also called hexagonal parallelogons.

Each subgroup symmetry allows one or more degrees of freedom for irregular forms. Only the g6 subgroup has no degrees of freedom but can be seen as directed edges.

Hexagons of symmetry g2, i4, and r12, as parallelogons can tessellate the Euclidean plane by translation. Other hexagon shapes can tile the plane with different orientations.
&#x27;

=== A2 and G2 groups ===

The 6 roots of the simple Lie group A2, represented by a Dynkin diagram , are in a regular hexagonal pattern. The two simple roots have a 120° angle between them.

The 12 roots of the Exceptional Lie group G2, represented by a Dynkin diagram are also in a hexagonal pattern. The two simple roots of two lengths have a 150° angle between them.

== Dissection==

Coxeter states that every zonogon (a 2&quot;m&quot;-gon whose opposite sides are parallel and of equal length) can be dissected into parallelograms. In particular this is true for regular polygons with evenly many sides, in which case the parallelograms are all rhombi. This decomposition of a regular hexagon is based on a Petrie polygon projection of a cube, with 3 of 6 square faces. Other parallelogons and projective directions of the cube are dissected within rectangular cuboids.
== Related polygons and tilings ==

A regular hexagon has Schläfli symbol {6}. A regular hexagon is a part of the regular hexagonal tiling, {6,3}, with three hexagonal faces around each vertex.

A regular hexagon can also be created as a truncated equilateral triangle, with Schläfli symbol t{3}. Seen with two types (colors) of edges, this form only has D3 symmetry.

A truncated hexagon, t{6}, is a dodecagon, {12}, alternating two types (colors) of edges. An alternated hexagon, h{6}, is an equilateral triangle, {3}. A regular hexagon can be stellated with equilateral triangles on its edges, creating a hexagram. A regular hexagon can be dissected into six equilateral triangles by adding a center point. This pattern repeats within the regular triangular tiling.

A regular hexagon can be extended into a regular dodecagon by adding alternating squares and equilateral triangles around it. This pattern repeats within the rhombitrihexagonal tiling.

=== Self-crossing hexagons===
There are six self-crossing hexagons with the vertex arrangement of the regular hexagon:
==Hexagonal structures==

From bees&#x27; honeycombs to the Giant&#x27;s Causeway, hexagonal patterns are prevalent in nature due to their efficiency. In a hexagonal grid each line is as short as it can possibly be if a large area is to be filled with the fewest hexagons. This means that honeycombs require less wax to construct and gain much strength under compression.

Irregular hexagons with parallel opposite edges are called parallelogons and can also tile the plane by translation. In three dimensions, hexagonal prisms with parallel opposite faces are called parallelohedrons and these can tessellate 3-space by translation.
==Tesselations by hexagons==

In addition to the regular hexagon, which determines a unique tessellation of the plane, any irregular hexagon which satisfies the Conway criterion will tile the plane.

==Hexagon inscribed in a conic section==
Pascal&#x27;s theorem (also known as the &quot;Hexagrammum Mysticum Theorem&quot;) states that if an arbitrary hexagon is inscribed in any conic section, and pairs of opposite sides are extended until they meet, the three intersection points will lie on a straight line, the &quot;Pascal line&quot; of that configuration.

===Cyclic hexagon===

The Lemoine hexagon is a cyclic hexagon (one inscribed in a circle) with vertices given by the six intersections of the edges of a triangle and the three lines that are parallel to the edges that pass through its symmedian point.

If the successive sides of a cyclic hexagon are &quot;a&quot;, &quot;b&quot;, &quot;c&quot;, &quot;d&quot;, &quot;e&quot;, &quot;f&quot;, then the three main diagonals intersect in a single point if and only if .

If, for each side of a cyclic hexagon, the adjacent sides are extended to their intersection, forming a triangle exterior to the given side, then the segments connecting the circumcenters of opposite triangles are concurrent.

If a hexagon has vertices on the circumcircle of an acute triangle at the six points (including three triangle vertices) where the extended altitudes of the triangle meet the circumcircle, then the area of the hexagon is twice the area of the triangle.

==Hexagon tangential to a conic section==
Let ABCDEF be a hexagon formed by six tangent lines of a conic section. Then Brianchon&#x27;s theorem states that the three main diagonals AD, BE, and CF intersect at a single point.

In a hexagon that is tangential to a circle and that has consecutive sides &quot;a&quot;, &quot;b&quot;, &quot;c&quot;, &quot;d&quot;, &quot;e&quot;, and &quot;f&quot;,

:formula_16

==Equilateral triangles on the sides of an arbitrary hexagon==

If an equilateral triangle is constructed externally on each side of any hexagon, then the midpoints of the segments connecting the centroids of opposite triangles form another equilateral triangle.

== Skew hexagon==

A skew hexagon is a skew polygon with six vertices and edges but not existing on the same plane. The interior of such a hexagon is not generally defined. A &quot;skew zig-zag hexagon&quot; has vertices alternating between two parallel planes.

A regular skew hexagon is vertex-transitive with equal edge lengths. In three dimensions it will be a zig-zag skew hexagon and can be seen in the vertices and side edges of a triangular antiprism with the same D3d, [2+,6] symmetry, order 12.

The cube and octahedron (same as triangular antiprism) have regular skew hexagons as petrie polygons.
===Petrie polygons===
The regular skew hexagon is the Petrie polygon for these higher dimensional regular, uniform and dual polyhedra and polytopes, shown in these skew orthogonal projections:

==Convex equilateral hexagon==

A &quot;principal diagonal&quot; of a hexagon is a diagonal which divides the hexagon into quadrilaterals. In any convex equilateral hexagon (one with all sides equal) with common side &quot;a&quot;, there exists a principal diagonal &quot;d&quot;1 such that

:formula_17

and a principal diagonal &quot;d&quot;2 such that

:formula_18

===Polyhedra with hexagons===
There is no Platonic solid made of only regular hexagons, because the hexagons tessellate, not allowing the result to &quot;fold up&quot;. The Archimedean solids with some hexagonal faces are the truncated tetrahedron, truncated octahedron, truncated icosahedron (of soccer ball and fullerene fame), truncated cuboctahedron and the truncated icosidodecahedron. These hexagons can be considered truncated triangles, with Coxeter diagrams of the form and .

There are other symmetry polyhedra with stretched or flattened hexagons, like these Goldberg polyhedron G(2,0):
There are also 9 Johnson solids with regular hexagons:


==Hexagon versus Sexagon==
The debate over whether hexagons should be referred to as &quot;sexagons&quot; has its roots in the etymology of the term. The prefix &quot;hex-&quot; originates from the Greek word &quot;hex,&quot; meaning six, while &quot;sex-&quot; comes from the Latin &quot;sex,&quot; also signifying six. Some linguists and mathematicians argue that since many English mathematical terms derive from Latin, the use of &quot;sexagon&quot; would align with this tradition. Historical discussions date back to the 19th century, when mathematicians began to standardize terminology in geometry. However, the term &quot;hexagon&quot; has prevailed in common usage and academic literature, solidifying its place in mathematical terminology despite the historical argument for &quot;sexagon.&quot; The consensus remains that &quot;hexagon&quot; is the appropriate term, reflecting its Greek origins and established usage in mathematics. (see Numeral_prefix#Occurrences).

==Gallery of natural and artificial hexagons==
==See also==
* 24-cell: a four-dimensional figure which, like the hexagon, has orthoplex facets, is self-dual and tessellates Euclidean space
* Hexagonal crystal system
* Hexagonal number
* Hexagonal tiling: a regular tiling of hexagons in a plane
* Hexagram: six-sided star within a regular hexagon
* Unicursal hexagram: single path, six-sided star, within a hexagon
* Honeycomb conjecture
* Havannah: abstract board game played on a six-sided hexagonal grid
* Central place theory

==References==
==External links==

*Definition and properties of a hexagon with interactive animation and construction with compass and straightedge.
*An Introduction to Hexagonal Geometry on Hexnet a website devoted to hexagon mathematics.
* – an animated internet video about hexagons by CGP Grey.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="3" end="11" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q83043" start="15" end="22" title="Hexagon" label="hexagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="29" end="34" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q37555" start="122" end="129" title="polygon" label="polygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q782746" start="171" end="177" title="simple polygon" label="simple"/>
<link wikidata="Q714886" start="248" end="255" title="regular polygon" label="regular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347011" start="274" end="289" title="Schläfli symbol" label="Schläfli symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847476" start="327" end="336" title="Truncation (geometry)" label="truncated"/>
<link wikidata="Q157002" start="337" end="357" title="equilateral triangle" label="equilateral triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q428388" start="458" end="469" title="equilateral polygon" label="equilateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543717" start="474" end="485" title="equiangular polygon" label="equiangular"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903575" start="493" end="502" title="bicentric polygon" label="bicentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783746" start="528" end="534" title="cyclic polygon" label="cyclic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682882" start="568" end="578" title="tangential polygon" label="tangential"/>
<link wikidata="Q120096770" start="663" end="683" title="circumscribed circle" label="circumscribed circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q110176" start="687" end="699" title="circumcircle" label="circumcircle"/>
<link wikidata="Q508490" start="734" end="741" title="apothem" label="apothem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066790" start="757" end="773" title="inscribed figure" label="inscribed circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11352" start="789" end="794" title="angle" label="angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q28390" start="804" end="811" title="degree (angle)" label="degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q593950" start="839" end="860" title="rotational symmetries" label="rotational symmetries"/>
<link wikidata="Q15955882" start="916" end="937" title="reflection symmetries" label="reflection symmetries"/>
<link wikidata="Q558339" start="989" end="1003" title="dihedral group" label="dihedral group"/>
<link wikidata="Q19821" start="1162" end="1170" title="triangle" label="triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q157002" start="1263" end="1274" title="equilateral triangle" label="equilateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q164" start="1362" end="1368" title="square (geometry)" label="square"/>
<link wikidata="Q157002" start="1374" end="1385" title="equilateral" label="equilateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q19821" start="1386" end="1394" title="triangle" label="triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q214856" start="1551" end="1563" title="tessellation" label="tessellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q165107" start="1581" end="1588" title="beehive (beekeeping)" label="beehive"/>
<link wikidata="Q123339" start="1589" end="1598" title="honeycomb" label="honeycomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q757267" start="1708" end="1723" title="Voronoi diagram" label="Voronoi diagram"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1829" end="1837" title="diameter#Polygons" label="diameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q189791" start="1869" end="1877" title="diagonal" label="diagonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q110176" start="1941" end="1953" title="circumradius" label="circumradius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066790" start="2059" end="2068" title="inscribed" label="inscribed"/>
<link wikidata="Q10615255" start="2231" end="2239" title="inradius" label="inradius"/>
<link wikidata="Q37555" start="2408" end="2415" title="polygon" label="polygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q508490" start="2464" end="2471" title="apothem" label="apothem"/>
<link wikidata="Q120096770" start="2692" end="2712" title="circumscribed circle" label="circumscribed circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q110176" start="2873" end="2885" title="circumradius" label="circumradius"/>
<link wikidata="Q10615255" start="2889" end="2897" title="inradius" label="inradius"/>
<link wikidata="Q189791" start="2997" end="3005" title="diagonal" label="diagonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q245462" start="3644" end="3650" title="cyclic group" label="cyclic"/>
<link wikidata="Q268961" start="3762" end="3773" title="John Horton Conway" label="John Conway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071715" start="3868" end="3876" title="isogonal figure" label="isogonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847026" start="3961" end="3969" title="isotoxal figure" label="isotoxal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310230" start="4091" end="4096" title="dual polygon" label="duals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059659" start="4276" end="4285" title="Elongation (geometry)" label="elongated"/>
<link wikidata="Q41159" start="4286" end="4293" title="rhombus" label="rhombus"/>
<link wikidata="Q107061" start="4364" end="4369" title="Kite (geometry)" label="kites"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135025" start="4439" end="4451" title="parallelogon" label="parallelogon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137726" start="4603" end="4616" title="directed edge" label="directed edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135025" start="4661" end="4673" title="parallelogon" label="parallelogon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4732" end="4765" title="Hexagonal tiling#Topologically equivalent tilings" label="hexagon shapes can tile the plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003162" start="4848" end="4864" title="simple Lie group" label="simple Lie group"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4865" end="4867" title="Dynkin diagram#Example: A2" label="A2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319218" start="4886" end="4900" title="Dynkin diagram" label="Dynkin diagram"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5013" end="5034" title="Exceptional Lie group#Exceptional cases" label="Exceptional Lie group"/>
<link wikidata="Q869338" start="5035" end="5037" title="G2 (mathematics)" label="G2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319218" start="5056" end="5070" title="Dynkin diagram" label="Dynkin diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q129916" start="5190" end="5197" title="Coxeter" label="Coxeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q47008488" start="5216" end="5223" title="zonogon" label="zonogon"/>
<link wikidata="Q714886" start="5370" end="5385" title="regular polygon" label="regular polygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395593" start="5514" end="5528" title="Petrie polygon" label="Petrie polygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q812880" start="5545" end="5549" title="cube" label="cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135025" start="5583" end="5595" title="parallelogon" label="parallelogon"/>
<link wikidata="Q262959" start="5656" end="5674" title="rectangular cuboid" label="rectangular cuboid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347011" start="5735" end="5750" title="Schläfli symbol" label="Schläfli symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063631" start="5799" end="5815" title="hexagonal tiling" label="hexagonal tiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847476" start="5915" end="5924" title="Truncation (geometry)" label="truncated"/>
<link wikidata="Q157002" start="5925" end="5945" title="equilateral triangle" label="equilateral triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847476" start="6048" end="6057" title="truncation (geometry)" label="truncated"/>
<link wikidata="Q212074" start="6078" end="6087" title="dodecagon" label="dodecagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3849911" start="6139" end="6149" title="Alternation (geometry)" label="alternated"/>
<link wikidata="Q157002" start="6171" end="6191" title="equilateral triangle" label="equilateral triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276802" start="6223" end="6232" title="stellation" label="stellated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164668" start="6285" end="6293" title="hexagram" label="hexagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q157002" start="6339" end="6359" title="equilateral triangle" label="equilateral triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063292" start="6427" end="6444" title="triangular tiling" label="triangular tiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q212074" start="6496" end="6505" title="dodecagon" label="dodecagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q164" start="6528" end="6534" title="square" label="square"/>
<link wikidata="Q157002" start="6540" end="6560" title="equilateral triangle" label="equilateral triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063640" start="6605" end="6630" title="rhombitrihexagonal tiling" label="rhombitrihexagonal tiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q836708" start="6677" end="6699" title="Star polygon" label="self-crossing hexagons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3893244" start="6709" end="6727" title="vertex arrangement" label="vertex arrangement"/>
<link wikidata="Q123339" start="6794" end="6803" title="honeycomb" label="honeycomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q106187" start="6812" end="6833" title="Giant&amp;#x27;s Causeway" label="Giant&amp;#x27;s Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063631" start="6908" end="6922" title="hexagonal grid" label="hexagonal grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q124695" start="7065" end="7068" title="wax" label="wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712821" start="7111" end="7122" title="compression (physics)" label="compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135025" start="7184" end="7196" title="parallelogon" label="parallelogon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225206" start="7263" end="7278" title="hexagonal prism" label="hexagonal prism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23823961" start="7320" end="7335" title="parallelohedron" label="parallelohedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005818" start="7547" end="7563" title="Conway criterion" label="Conway criterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q899002" start="7627" end="7648" title="Pascal&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Pascal&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q124255" start="7766" end="7779" title="conic section" label="conic section"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206960" start="7803" end="7821" title="extended side" label="sides are extended"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521264" start="7976" end="7991" title="Lemoine hexagon" label="Lemoine hexagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783746" start="7997" end="8003" title="cyclic polygon" label="cyclic"/>
<link wikidata="Q940537" start="8185" end="8200" title="symmedian point" label="symmedian point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191117" start="8631" end="8641" title="concurrent lines" label="concurrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q110176" start="8677" end="8689" title="circumcircle" label="circumcircle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350116" start="8696" end="8710" title="acute triangle" label="acute triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q131251" start="8978" end="8990" title="tangent line" label="tangent line"/>
<link wikidata="Q119450" start="9017" end="9041" title="Brianchon&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Brianchon&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682882" start="9145" end="9167" title="tangential polygon" label="tangential to a circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q157002" start="9377" end="9397" title="equilateral triangle" label="equilateral triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q511093" start="9503" end="9511" title="centroid" label="centroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3893499" start="9610" end="9622" title="skew polygon" label="skew polygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071715" start="9860" end="9877" title="vertex-transitive" label="vertex-transitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q188884" start="10009" end="10029" title="triangular antiprism" label="triangular antiprism"/>
<link wikidata="Q812880" start="10081" end="10085" title="cube" label="cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q188884" start="10090" end="10100" title="octahedron" label="octahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395593" start="10233" end="10247" title="Petrie polygon" label="Petrie polygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745944" start="10277" end="10284" title="regular polytope" label="regular"/>
<link wikidata="Q519967" start="10348" end="10369" title="orthogonal projection" label="orthogonal projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q428388" start="10526" end="10537" title="equilateral polygon" label="equilateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q188745" start="10784" end="10798" title="Platonic solid" label="Platonic solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q214856" start="10851" end="10861" title="tessellation" label="tessellate"/>
<link wikidata="Q213486" start="10915" end="10932" title="Archimedean solid" label="Archimedean solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q864472" start="10968" end="10989" title="truncated tetrahedron" label="truncated tetrahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q864998" start="10991" end="11011" title="truncated octahedron" label="truncated octahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q499980" start="11013" end="11034" title="truncated icosahedron" label="truncated icosahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q12252328" start="11039" end="11050" title="soccer ball" label="soccer ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q178026" start="11055" end="11064" title="fullerene" label="fullerene"/>
<link wikidata="Q877784" start="11072" end="11095" title="truncated cuboctahedron" label="truncated cuboctahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q592806" start="11104" end="11131" title="truncated icosidodecahedron" label="truncated icosidodecahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847476" start="11166" end="11175" title="truncation (geometry)" label="truncated"/>
<link wikidata="Q169451" start="11192" end="11207" title="Coxeter diagram" label="Coxeter diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q15735747" start="11312" end="11331" title="Goldberg polyhedron" label="Goldberg polyhedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059659" start="11357" end="11370" title="Johnson solid" label="Johnson solid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12348" end="12374" title="Numeral_prefix#Occurrences" label="Numeral_prefix#Occurrences"/>
<link wikidata="Q539008" start="12440" end="12447" title="24-cell" label="24-cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q238125" start="12451" end="12467" title="four-dimensional space" label="four-dimensional"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187914" start="12504" end="12513" title="orthoplex" label="orthoplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755512" start="12525" end="12534" title="self-dual" label="self-dual"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="12551" end="12566" title="Euclidean space" label="Euclidean space"/>
<link wikidata="Q663314" start="12569" end="12593" title="Hexagonal crystal system" label="Hexagonal crystal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165838" start="12596" end="12612" title="Hexagonal number" label="Hexagonal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063631" start="12615" end="12631" title="Hexagonal tiling" label="Hexagonal tiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995026" start="12635" end="12649" title="regular tiling" label="regular tiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164668" start="12675" end="12683" title="Hexagram" label="Hexagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884806" start="12727" end="12745" title="Unicursal hexagram" label="Unicursal hexagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527261" start="12795" end="12815" title="Honeycomb conjecture" label="Honeycomb conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591462" start="12818" end="12826" title="Havannah (board game)" label="Havannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q76689" start="12887" end="12907" title="Central place theory" label="Central place theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="13157" end="13165" title="animation" label="animated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553613" start="13166" end="13180" title="internet video" label="internet video"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006102" start="13199" end="13207" title="CGP Grey" label="CGP Grey"/>
</links>
</doc>
