<doc id="58353" wikidata="Q559392" url="?curid=58353" title="Medicare (United States)">
<text>Medicare is a federal health insurance program in the United States for people age 65 or older and younger people with disabilities, including those with end stage renal disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS or Lou Gehrig&#x27;s disease). It started in 1965 under the Social Security Administration and is now administered by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS).

Medicare is divided into four parts: A, B, C and D. Part A covers hospital, skilled nursing, and hospice services. Part B covers outpatient services. Part D covers self-administered prescription drugs. Part C is an alternative that allows patients to choose private plans with different benefit structures that provide the same services as Parts A and B, usually with additional benefits.

In 2022, Medicare provided health insurance for 65.0 million individuals—more than 57 million people aged 65 and older and about 8 million younger people. According to annual Medicare Trustees reports and research by Congress&#x27; MedPAC group, Medicare covers about half of healthcare expenses of those enrolled. Enrollees cover most of the remaining costs by taking additional private insurance (medi-gap insurance), by enrolling in a Medicare Part D prescription drug plan, or by joining a private Medicare Part C (Medicare Advantage) plan. In 2022, spending by the Medicare Trustees topped $900 billion per the Trustees report Table II.B.1, of which $423 billion came from the U.S. Treasury and the rest primarily from the Part A Trust Fund (which is funded by payroll taxes) and premiums paid by beneficiaries. Households that retired in 2013 paid only 13 to 41 percent of the benefit dollars they are expected to receive.

Beneficiaries typically have other healthcare-related costs, including Medicare Part A, B and D deductibles and Part B and C co-pays; the costs of long-term custodial care (which are not covered by Medicare); and the costs resulting from Medicare&#x27;s lifetime and per-incident limits.

==History==
Originally, the name &quot;Medicare&quot; in the United States referred to a program providing medical care for families of people serving in the military as part of the Dependents&#x27; Medical Care Act, which was passed in 1956. President Dwight D. Eisenhower held the first White House Conference on Aging in January 1961, in which creating a health care program for social security beneficiaries was proposed.

Various attempts were made in Congress to pass a bill providing for healthcare for the elderly, all without success. In 1963, however, a bill providing for both Medicare and an increase in Social Security benefits passed the Senate by 68-20 votes. As noted by one study, this was the first time that either chamber “had passed a bill embodying the principle of federal financial responsibility for health coverage, however limited it may have been.” There was uncertainty over whether this bill would pass the House, however, as White House aide Henry Wilson&#x27;s tally of House members’ votes on a conference bill that included Medicare “disclosed 180 “reasonably certain votes for Medicare, 29 “probable/possible,” 222 “against,” and 4 seats vacant.” Following the 1964 elections however, pro-Medicare forces obtained 44 votes in the House and 4 in the Senate. In July 1965, under the leadership of President Lyndon Johnson, Congress enacted Medicare under Title XVIII of the Social Security Act to provide health insurance to people age 65 and older, regardless of income or medical history. Johnson signed the Social Security Amendments of 1965 into law on July 30, 1965, at the Harry S. Truman Presidential Library in Independence, Missouri. Former president Harry S. Truman and his wife, former First Lady Bess Truman became the first recipients of the program.

Before Medicare was created, approximately 60% of people over the age of 65 had health insurance (as opposed to about 70% of the population younger than that), with coverage often unavailable or unaffordable to many others, because older adults paid more than three times as much for health insurance as younger people. Many of this group (about 20% of the total in 2022, 75% of whom were eligible for all Medicaid benefits) became &quot;dual eligible&quot; for both Medicare and Medicaid (which was created by the same 1965 law). In 1966, Medicare spurred the racial integration of thousands of waiting rooms, hospital floors, and physician practices by making payments to health care providers conditional on desegregation.

Medicare has been operating for almost 60 years and, during that time, has undergone several major changes. Since 1965, the program&#x27;s provisions have expanded to include benefits for speech, physical, and chiropractic therapy in 1972. Medicare added the option of payments to health maintenance organizations (HMOs) in the 1970s. The government added hospice benefits to aid elderly people on a temporary basis in 1982, and made this permanent in 1984.

Congress further expanded Medicare in 2001 to cover younger people with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS, or Lou Gehrig&#x27;s disease). As the years progressed, Congress expanded Medicare eligibility to younger people with permanent disabilities who receive Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) payments and to those with end-stage renal disease (ESRD).

The association with HMOs that began in the 1970s was formalized and expanded under President Bill Clinton in 1997 as Medicare Part C (although not all Part C health plans sponsors have to be HMOs, about 75% are). In 2003, under President George W. Bush, a Medicare program for covering almost all self-administered prescription drugs was passed (and went into effect in 2006) as Medicare Part D.

==Administration==

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), administers Medicare, Medicaid, the Children&#x27;s Health Insurance Program (CHIP), the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA), and parts of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) (&quot;Obamacare&quot;). Along with the Departments of Labor and Treasury, the CMS also implements the insurance reform provisions of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) and most aspects of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 as amended. The Social Security Administration is responsible for determining Medicare eligibility, eligibility for and payment of Extra Help/Low Income Subsidy payments related to Parts C and D of Medicare, and collecting most premium payments for the Medicare program.

The Chief Actuary of the CMS must provide accounting information and cost-projections to the Medicare Board of Trustees to assist them in assessing the program&#x27;s financial health. The Trustees are required by law to issue annual reports on the financial status of the Medicare Trust Funds, and those reports are required to contain a statement of actuarial opinion by the Chief Actuary.

The Specialty Society Relative Value Scale Update Committee (or Relative Value Update Committee; RUC), composed of physicians associated with the American Medical Association, advises the government about pay standards for Medicare patient procedures performed by doctors and other professionals under Medicare Part B. A similar but different CMS process determines the rates paid for acute care and other hospitals—including skilled nursing facilities—under Medicare Part A. The rates paid for both Part A and Part B type services under Part C are whatever is agreed upon between the sponsor and the provider. The amounts paid for mostly self-administered drugs under Part D are whatever is agreed upon between the sponsor (almost always through a pharmacy benefit manager also used in commercial insurance) and pharmaceutical distributors and/or manufacturers.

==Financing==
Medicare has several sources of financing.

Part A&#x27;s inpatient admitted hospital and skilled nursing coverage is largely funded by revenue from a 2.9% payroll tax levied on employers and workers (each pays 1.45%). Until December 31, 1993, the law provided a maximum amount of compensation on which the Medicare tax could be imposed annually, in the same way that the Social Security payroll tax operates. Beginning on January 1, 1994, the compensation limit was removed. Self-employed individuals must calculate the entire 2.9% tax on self-employed net earnings (because they are both employee and employer), but they may deduct half of the tax from the income in calculating income tax. Beginning in 2013, the rate of Part A tax on earned income exceeding $200,000 for individuals ($250,000 for married couples filing jointly) rose to 3.8%, in order to pay part of the cost of the subsidies to people not on Medicare mandated by the Affordable Care Act.

In 2022, Medicare spending was over $900 billion, near 4% of U.S. gross domestic product according to the Trustees Figure 1.1 and over 15% of total US federal spending. Because of the two Trust funds and their differing revenue sources (one dedicated and one not), the Trustees analyze Medicare spending as a percent of GDP rather than versus the Federal budget.

The aging of the Baby Boom generation into Medicare is projected by 2030 (when the last of the baby boom turns 65) to increase enrollment to more than 80 million. In addition, the fact that the number of payroll tax payors per enrollee will decline over time and that overall health care costs in the nation are rising pose substantial financial challenges to the program. Medicare spending is projected to increase from near 4% of GDP in 2022 to almost 6% in 2046. Baby-boomers are projected to have longer life spans, which will add to the future Medicare spending. In response to these financial challenges, Congress made substantial cuts to future payouts to providers (primarily acute care hospitals and skilled nursing facilities) as part of PPACA in 2010 and the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015 (MACRA) and individual Congresspeople have offered many additional competing proposals to stabilize Medicare spending further. Many other factors have complicated the forecasting of Medicare Trust Fund health and spending trends including but not limited to the Covid pandemic, the overwhelming preference of people joining Medicare this century for Part C, and the increasing number of dual eligible (Medicaid and Medicare eligibility) beneficiaries.

In 2013 the Urban Institute published a report which analyzed the amounts that various households (single male, single female, married single-earner, married dual-earner, low income, average income, high income) contributed to the Medicare program over their lifetimes, and how much someone living to the statistically expected age would expect to receive in benefits. They found differing amounts for the different scenarios, but even the group with the &quot;worst&quot; return on their Medicare taxes would have concluded their working years with $158,000 in Medicare contributions and growth (assuming annual growth equal to inflation plus 2%) but would receive $385,000 in Medicare benefits (both numbers are in 2013 inflation adjusted dollars). Overall, the groups paid into the system 13 to 41 percent of what they were expected to receive.

Cost reduction is influenced by factors including reduction in inappropriate and unnecessary care by evaluating evidence-based practices as well as reducing the amount of unnecessary, duplicative, and inappropriate care. Cost reduction may also be effected by reducing medical errors, investment in healthcare information technology, improving transparency of cost and quality data, increasing administrative efficiency, and by developing both clinical/non-clinical guidelines and quality standards. Of course all of these factors relate to the entire United States health care delivery system and not just to Medicare.

==Eligibility==
U.S. citizens or permanent residents who have lived in the U.S. for at least five continuous years are eligible. Those who are 65 and older who choose to enroll in Part A Medicare must pay a monthly premium to remain enrolled in Medicare Part A if they or their spouse have not paid the qualifying Medicare payroll taxes. There are some instances where U.S. citizens might be able to enroll in Medicare earlier than age 65. For example, if you have a long term disability that would prevent you from working, End-Stage Renal Disease, or Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis then you may be eligible for Medicare at an earlier age. Individuals receiving Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) benefits for 24 months are automatically enrolled in Medicare Parts A and B in the 25th month. Individuals with permanent kidney failure requiring dialysis or a transplant may qualify for Medicare, regardless of age. Individuals diagnosed with ALS are automatically enrolled in Medicare Parts A and B the month their disability benefits begin.

==Benefits and parts==

Medicare has four parts: Part A, B, C, &amp; D. Coverage under the first two (Parts A and B), as opposed to Part C plans, is referred to as Original Medicare.

In April 2018, CMS began mailing out new Medicare cards with new ID numbers to all beneficiaries. Previous cards had ID numbers containing beneficiaries&#x27; Social Security numbers; the new ID numbers are randomly generated and not tied to any other personally identifying information.

===Part A: Hospital/hospice insurance===
Part A covers inpatient hospital stays. The maximum length of stay that Medicare Part A covers in a hospital admitted inpatient stay or series of stays is typically 90 days. The first 60 days would be paid by Medicare in full, except one copay (also and more commonly referred to as a &quot;deductible&quot;) at the beginning of the 60 days of $1632 as of 2024. Days 61–90 require a co-payment of $408 per day as of 2024. The beneficiary is also allocated &quot;lifetime reserve days&quot; that can be used after 90 days. These lifetime reserve days require a copayment of $816 per day as of 2024, and the beneficiary can use a total of only 60 of these days throughout their lifetime. A new pool of 90 hospital days, with new copays of $1632 in 2024 and $408 per day for days 61–90, starts only after the beneficiary has 60 days continuously with no payment from Medicare for hospital or Skilled Nursing Facility confinement.

Some &quot;hospital services&quot; are provided as inpatient services, which would be reimbursed under Part A; or as outpatient services, which would be reimbursed, not under Part A, but under Part B instead. The &quot;Two-Midnight Rule&quot; decides which is which. In August 2013, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services announced a final rule concerning eligibility for hospital inpatient services effective October 1, 2013. Under the new rule, if a physician admits a Medicare beneficiary as an inpatient with an expectation that the patient will require hospital care that &quot;crosses two midnights&quot;, Medicare Part A payment is &quot;generally appropriate&quot;. However, if it is anticipated that the patient will require hospital care for less than two midnights, Medicare Part A payment is generally not appropriate; payment such as is approved will be paid under Part B. The time a patient spends in the hospital before an inpatient admission is formally ordered is considered outpatient time. But, hospitals and physicians can take into consideration the pre-inpatient admission time when determining if a patient&#x27;s care will reasonably be expected to cross two midnights to be covered under Part A. In addition to deciding which trust fund is used to pay for these various outpatient versus inpatient charges, the number of days for which a person is formally considered an admitted patient affects eligibility for Part A skilled nursing services.

Medicare penalizes hospitals for readmissions. After making initial payments for hospital stays, Medicare will take back from the hospital these payments, plus a penalty of 4 to 18 times the initial payment, if an above-average number of patients from the hospital are readmitted within 30 days. These readmission penalties apply after some of the most common treatments: pneumonia, heart failure, heart attack, COPD, knee replacement, and hip replacement. A study of 18 states conducted by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) found that 1.8 million Medicare patients aged 65 and older were readmitted within 30 days of an initial hospital stay in 2011; the conditions with the highest readmission rates were congestive heart failure, sepsis, pneumonia, and COPD and bronchiectasis.

The highest penalties on hospitals are charged after knee or hip replacements, $265,000 per excess readmission. The goals are to encourage better post-hospital care and more referrals to hospice and end-of-life care in lieu of treatment, while the effect is also to reduce coverage in hospitals that treat poor and frail patients. The total penalties for above-average readmissions in 2013 are $280 million, for 7,000 excess readmissions, or $40,000 for each readmission above the US average rate.

Part A fully covers brief stays for rehabilitation or convalescence in a skilled nursing facility and up to 100 days per medical necessity with a co-pay if certain criteria are met:

# A preceding hospital stay must be at least three days as an inpatient, three midnights, not counting the discharge date.
# The skilled nursing facility stay must be for something diagnosed during the hospital stay or for the main cause of hospital stay.
# If the patient is not receiving rehabilitation but has some other ailment that requires skilled nursing supervision (e.g., wound management) then the nursing home stay would be covered.
# The care being rendered by the nursing home must be skilled. Medicare part A does not pay for stays that &quot;only&quot; provide custodial, non-skilled, or long-term care activities, including activities of daily living (ADL) such as personal hygiene, cooking, cleaning, etc.
# The care must be medically necessary and progress against some set plan must be made on some schedule determined by a doctor.

The first 20 days would be paid for in full by Medicare with the remaining 80 days requiring a co-payment of $204 per day as of 2024. Many insurance group retiree, Medigap and Part C insurance plans have a provision for additional coverage of skilled nursing care in the indemnity insurance policies they sell or health plans they sponsor. If a beneficiary uses some portion of their Part A benefit and then goes at least 60 days without receiving facility-based skilled services, the 90-day hospital clock and 100-day nursing home clock are reset and the person qualifies for new benefit periods.

Hospice benefits are also provided under Part A of Medicare for terminally ill persons with less than six months to live, as determined by the patient&#x27;s physician. The terminally ill person must sign a statement that hospice care has been chosen over other Medicare-covered benefits, (e.g. assisted living or hospital care). Treatment provided includes pharmaceutical products for symptom control and pain relief as well as other services not otherwise covered by Medicare such as grief counseling. Hospice is covered 100% with no co-pay or deductible by Medicare Part A except that patients are responsible for a copay for outpatient drugs and respite care, if needed.

===Part B: Medical insurance===
The Monthly Premium for Part B for 2024 is $174.70 per month.

Part B coverage begins once a patient meets his or her deductible ($240 for 2024), then typically Medicare covers 80% of the RUC-set rate for approved services, while the remaining 20% is the responsibility of the patient, either directly or indirectly by private group retiree or Medigap insurance. Part B coverage covers 100% for preventive services such as yearly mammogram screenings, osteoporosis screening, and many other preventive screenings.

Part B also helps with durable medical equipment (DME), including but not limited to canes, walkers, lift chairs, wheelchairs, and mobility scooters for those with mobility impairments. Prosthetic devices such as artificial limbs and breast prosthesis following mastectomy, as well as one pair of eyeglasses following cataract surgery, and oxygen for home use are also covered.

Medically necessary emergency ambulance transport is covered by Part B if transport by any other method is dangerous to health. Non-emergency ambulance transport, or transport when not suffering from a medical emergency, may be covered if a physician orders that ambulance transport is medically necessary. Transport by an air ambulance, either fixed-wing or helicopter, may also be covered if specialized services are required that are unable to be provided by ground services.

Anyone on Social Security (SS) in 2019 is &quot;held harmless&quot; from the 2019 amount if the increase in their SS monthly benefit does not cover the increase in their Part B premium from 2019 to 2020. This hold harmless provision is significant in years when SS does not increase but that is not the case for 2020. There are additional income-weighted surtaxes for those with incomes more than $85,000 per annum.

===Part C: Medicare Advantage plans===

Public Part C Medicare Advantage and other Part C health plans are required to offer coverage that meets or exceeds the standards set by Original Medicare but they do not have to cover every benefit in the same way (the plan must be actuarially equivalent to Original Medicare benefits). After approval by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, if a Part C plan chooses to cover less than Original Medicare for some benefits, such as Skilled Nursing Facility care, the savings may be passed along to consumers by offering even lower co-payments for doctor visits (or any other plus or minus aggregation approved by CMS).

Public Part C Medicare Advantage health plan members typically also pay a monthly premium in addition to the Medicare Part B premium to cover items not covered by Original Medicare (Parts A &amp; B), such as the out-of-pocket (OOP) limit, self-administered prescription drugs, dental care, vision care, annual physicals, coverage outside the United States, and even gym or health club memberships as well as—and probably most importantly—reduce the 20% co-pays and high deductibles associated with Original Medicare. But in some situations the benefits are more limited (but they can never be more limited than Original Medicare and must always include an OOP limit) and there is no premium. The OOP limit can be as low as $1500 and as high as but no higher than $9350 (as with all insurance, the lower the limit, the higher the premium). In some cases, the sponsor even rebates part or all of the Part B premium, though these types of Part C plans are becoming rare.

===Part D: Prescription drug plans===
Medicare Part D went into effect on January 1, 2006. Anyone with Part A or B is eligible for Part D, which covers mostly self-administered drugs. It was made possible by the passage of the Medicare Modernization Act of 2003. To receive this benefit, a person with Medicare must enroll in a stand-alone Prescription Drug Plan (PDP) or public Part C health plan with integrated prescription drug coverage (MA-PD). These plans are approved and regulated by the Medicare program, but are actually designed and administered by various sponsors including charities, integrated health delivery systems, unions and health insurance companies; almost all these sponsors in turn use pharmacy benefit managers in the same way as they are used by sponsors of health insurance for those not on Medicare. Unlike Original Medicare (Part A and B), Part D coverage is not standardized (though it is highly regulated by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services). Plans choose which drugs they wish to cover (but must cover at least two drugs in 148 different categories and cover all or &quot;substantially all&quot; drugs in the following protected classes of drugs: anti-cancer; anti-psychotic; anti-convulsant, anti-depressants, immuno-suppressant, and HIV and AIDS drugs). The plans can also specify, with CMS approval, at what level (or tier) they wish to cover it, and are encouraged to use step therapy. Some drugs are excluded from coverage altogether and Part D plans that cover excluded drugs are not allowed to pass those costs on to Medicare, and plans are required to repay CMS if they are found to have billed Medicare in these cases.

==Out-of-pocket costs==
No part of Medicare pays for all of a beneficiary&#x27;s covered medical costs and many costs and services are not covered at all. The program contains premiums, deductibles and coinsurance, which the covered individual must pay out-of-pocket. A study published by the Kaiser Family Foundation in 2008 found the Fee-for-Service Medicare benefit package was less generous than either the typical large employer preferred provider organization plan or the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program Standard Option. Some people may qualify to have other governmental programs (such as Medicaid) pay premiums and some or all of the costs associated with Medicare.

===Premiums===
Most Medicare enrollees do not pay a monthly Part A premium, because they (or a spouse) have had 40 or more 3-month quarters in which they paid Federal Insurance Contributions Act taxes. The benefit is the same no matter how much or how little the beneficiary paid as long as the minimum number of quarters is reached. Medicare-eligible persons who do not have 40 or more quarters of Medicare-covered employment may buy into Part A for an annual adjusted monthly premium of:

* $248.00 per month (as of 2012) for those with 30–39 quarters of Medicare-covered employment, or
* $451.00 per month (as of 2012) for those with fewer than 30 quarters of Medicare-covered employment and who are not otherwise eligible for premium-free Part A coverage.

Most Medicare Part B enrollees pay an insurance premium for this coverage; the standard Part B premium for 2019 is $135.50 a month. A new income-based premium surtax schema has been in effect since 2007, wherein Part B premiums are higher for beneficiaries with incomes exceeding $85,000 for individuals or $170,000 for married couples. Depending on the extent to which beneficiary earnings exceed the base income, these higher Part B premiums are from 30% to 70% higher with the highest premium paid by individuals earning more than $214,000, or married couples earning more than $428,000. This extra amount is called the Income Related Monthly Adjustment Amount (IRMAA).

===Deductible and coinsurance===
Part A—For each benefit period, a beneficiary pays an annually adjusted:

* A Part A deductible of $1,632 in 2024 for a hospital stay of 1–60 days.
* A $408 per day co-pay in 2024 for days 61–90 of a hospital stay.
* A $816 per day co-pay in 2024 for days 91–150 of a hospital stay, as part of their limited Lifetime Reserve Days.
* All costs for each day beyond 150 days
* Coinsurance for a Skilled Nursing Facility is $204 per day in 2024 for days 21100 for each benefit period (no co-pay for the first 20 days).
* A blood deductible of the first 3 pints of blood needed in a calendar year, unless replaced. There is a 3-pint blood deductible for both Part A and Part B, and these separate deductibles do not overlap.

Part B—After beneficiaries meet the yearly deductible of $240 for 2024, they will be required to pay a co-insurance of 20% of the Medicare-approved amount for all services covered by Part B with the exception of most lab services, which are covered at 100%. Previously, outpatient mental health services was covered at 50%, but under the Medicare Improvements for Patients and Providers Act of 2008, it gradually decreased over several years and now matches the 20% required for other services. They are also required to pay an excess charge of 15% for services rendered by physicians who do not accept assignment.

The deductibles, co-pays, and coinsurance charges for Part C and D plans vary from plan to plan. All Part C plans include an annual out-of-pocket (OOP) upper spend limit. Original Medicare does not include an OOP limit.

===Medicare supplement (Medigap) policies===
All insurance companies that sell Medigap policies are required to make Plan A available, and if they offer any other policies, they must also make either Plan C available as well. Plan F is no longer offered as of 2020, but anyone who has a Plan F may keep it. Many of the insurance companies that offer Medigap insurance policies also sponsor Part C health plans but most Part C health plans are sponsored by integrated health delivery systems and their spin-offs, charities, and unions as opposed to insurance companies.

==Payment for services==
Medicare contracts with regional insurance companies to process over one billion fee-for-service claims per year. In 2008, Medicare accounted for 13% ($386 billion) of the federal budget. In 2016 it was projected to account for close to 15% ($683 billion) of the total expenditures. For the decade 2010–2019 Medicare was projected to cost 6.4 trillion dollars.

===Reimbursement for Part A services===
For institutional care, such as hospital and nursing home care, Medicare uses prospective payment systems. In a prospective payment system, the health care institution receives a set amount of money for each episode of care provided to a patient, regardless of the actual amount of care. The actual allotment of funds is based on a list of diagnosis-related groups (DRG). The actual amount depends on the primary diagnosis that is actually made at the hospital. There are some issues surrounding Medicare&#x27;s use of DRGs because if the patient uses less care, the hospital gets to keep the remainder. This, in theory, should balance the costs for the hospital. However, if the patient uses more care, then the hospital has to cover its own losses. This results in the issue of &quot;upcoding&quot;, when a physician makes a more severe diagnosis to hedge against accidental costs.

===Reimbursement for Part B services===
Payment for physician services under Medicare has evolved since the program was created in 1965. Initially, Medicare compensated physicians based on the physician&#x27;s charges, and allowed physicians to bill Medicare beneficiaries the amount in excess of Medicare&#x27;s reimbursement. In 1975, annual increases in physician fees were limited by the Medicare Economic Index (MEI). The MEI was designed to measure changes in costs of physician&#x27;s time and operating expenses, adjusted for changes in physician productivity. From 1984 to 1991, the yearly change in fees was determined by legislation. This was done because physician fees were rising faster than projected.

The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1989 made several changes to physician payments under Medicare. Firstly, it introduced the Medicare Fee Schedule, which took effect in 1992. Secondly, it limited the amount Medicare non-providers could balance bill Medicare beneficiaries. Thirdly, it introduced the Medicare Volume Performance Standards (MVPS) as a way to control costs.

On January 1, 1992, Medicare introduced the Medicare Fee Schedule (MFS), a list of about 7,000 services that can be billed for. Each service is priced within the Resource-Based Relative Value Scale (RBRVS) with three Relative Value Units (RVUs) values largely determining the price. The three RVUs for a procedure are each geographically weighted and the weighted RVU value is multiplied by a global Conversion Factor (CF), yielding a price in dollars. The RVUs themselves are largely decided by a private group of 29 (mostly specialist) physicians—the American Medical Association&#x27;s Specialty Society Relative Value Scale Update Committee (RUC).

From 1992 to 1997, adjustments to physician payments were adjusted using the MEI and the MVPS, which essentially tried to compensate for the increasing volume of services provided by physicians by decreasing their reimbursement per service.

In 1998, Congress replaced the VPS with the Sustainable Growth Rate (SGR). This was done because of highly variable payment rates under the MVPS. The SGR attempts to control spending by setting yearly and cumulative spending targets. If actual spending for a given year exceeds the spending target for that year, reimbursement rates are adjusted downward by decreasing the Conversion Factor (CF) for RBRVS RVUs.

In 2002, payment rates were cut by 4.8%. In 2003, payment rates were scheduled to be reduced by 4.4%. However, Congress boosted the cumulative SGR target in the Consolidated Appropriation Resolution of 2003 (P.L. 108–7), allowing payments for physician services to rise 1.6%. In 2004 and 2005, payment rates were again scheduled to be reduced. The Medicare Modernization Act (P.L. 108–173) increased payments by 1.5% for those two years.

In 2006, the SGR mechanism was scheduled to decrease physician payments by 4.4%. (This number results from a 7% decrease in physician payments times a 2.8% inflation adjustment increase.) Congress overrode this decrease in the Deficit Reduction Act (P.L. 109–362), and held physician payments in 2006 at their 2005 levels. Similarly, another congressional act held 2007 payments at their 2006 levels, and HR 6331 held 2008 physician payments to their 2007 levels, and provided for a 1.1% increase in physician payments in 2009. Without further continuing congressional intervention, the SGR is expected to decrease physician payments from 25% to 35% over the next several years.

MFS has been criticized for not paying doctors enough because of the low conversion factor. By adjustments to the MFS conversion factor, it is possible to make global adjustments in payments to all doctors.

The SGR was the subject of possible reform legislation again in 2014. On March 14, 2014, the United States House of Representatives passed the SGR Repeal and Medicare Provider Payment Modernization Act of 2014 (H.R. 4015; 113th Congress), a bill that would have replaced the (SGR) formula with new systems for establishing those payment rates. However, the bill would pay for these changes by delaying the Affordable Care Act&#x27;s individual mandate requirement, a proposal that was very unpopular with Democrats. The SGR was expected to cause Medicare reimbursement cuts of 24 percent on April 1, 2014, if a solution to reform or delay the SGR was not found. This led to another bill, the Protecting Access to Medicare Act of 2014 (H.R. 4302; 113th Congress), which would delay those cuts until March 2015. This bill was also controversial. The American Medical Association and other medical groups opposed it, asking Congress to provide a permanent solution instead of just another delay.

The SGR process was replaced by new rules as of the passage of MACRA in 2015.

====Provider participation====
There are two ways for providers to be reimbursed in Medicare. &quot;Participating&quot; providers accept &quot;assignment&quot;, which means that they accept Medicare&#x27;s approved rate for their services as payment (typically 80% from Medicare and 20% from the beneficiary). Some non-participating doctors do not take assignment, but they also treat Medicare enrollees and are authorized to balance bills no more than a small fixed amount above Medicare&#x27;s approved rate. A minority of doctors are &quot;private contractors&quot; from a Medicare perspective, which means they opt out of Medicare and refuse to accept Medicare payments altogether. These doctors are required to inform patients that they will be liable for the full cost of their services out-of-pocket, often in advance of treatment.

While the majority of providers accept Medicare assignments, (97 percent for some specialties), and most physicians still accept at least some new Medicare patients, that number is in decline. While 80% of physicians in the Texas Medical Association accepted new Medicare patients in 2000, only 60% were doing so by 2012. A study published in 2012 concluded that the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) relies on the recommendations of an American Medical Association advisory panel. The study led by Miriam J. Laugesen, of Columbia Mailman School of Public Health, and colleagues at UCLA and the University of Illinois, shows that for services provided between 1994 and 2010, CMS agreed with 87.4% of the recommendations of the committee, known as RUC or the Relative Value Update Committee.

====Office medication reimbursement====
Chemotherapy and other medications dispensed in a physician&#x27;s office are reimbursed according to the Average Sales Price (ASP), a number computed by taking the total dollar sales of a drug as the numerator and the number of units sold nationwide as the denominator. The current reimbursement formula is known as &quot;ASP+6&quot; since it reimburses physicians at 106% of the ASP of drugs. Pharmaceutical company discounts and rebates are included in the calculation of ASP, and tend to reduce it. In addition, Medicare pays 80% of ASP+6, which is the equivalent of 84.8% of the actual average cost of the drug. Some patients have supplemental insurance or can afford the co-pay. Large numbers do not. This leaves the payment to physicians for most of the drugs in an &quot;underwater&quot; state. ASP+6 superseded Average Wholesale Price in 2005, after a 2003 front-page &quot;New York Times&quot; article drew attention to the inaccuracies of Average Wholesale Price calculations.

This procedure is scheduled to change dramatically in 2017 under a CMS proposal that will likely be finalized in October 2016.

====Medicare 10 percent incentive payments====
&quot;Physicians in geographic Health Professional Shortage Areas (HPSAs) and Physician Scarcity Areas (PSAs) can receive incentive payments from Medicare. Payments are made on a quarterly basis, rather than claim-by-claim, and are handled by each area&#x27;s Medicare carrier.&quot;

==Enrollment==

Generally, if an individual already receives Social Security payments, at age 65 the individual becomes automatically enrolled in Medicare Part A (Hospital Insurance) and Medicare Part B (Medical Insurance). If the individual chooses not to enroll in Part B (typically because the individual is still working and receiving employer insurance), then the individual must proactively opt out of it when receiving the automatic enrollment package. Delay in enrollment in Part B carries no penalty if the individual has other insurance (e.g., the employment situation noted above), but may be penalized under other circumstances. An individual who does not receive Social Security benefits upon turning 65 must sign up for Medicare if they want it. Penalties may apply if the individual chooses not to enroll at age 65 and does not have other insurance.

===Parts A &amp; B===
==== Part A Late Enrollment Penalty ====
If an individual is not eligible for premium-free Part A, and they do not buy a premium-based Part A when they are first eligible, the monthly premium may go up 10%. The individual must pay the higher premium for twice the number of years that they could have had Part A, but did not sign up. For example, if they were eligible for Part A for two years but did not sign up, they must pay the higher premium for four years. Usually, individuals do not have to pay a penalty if they meet certain conditions that allow them to sign up for Part A during a Special Enrollment Period.

==== Part B Late Enrollment Penalty ====
If an individual does not sign up for Part B when they are first eligible, they may have to pay a late enrollment penalty for as long as they have Medicare. Their monthly premium for Part B may go up 10% for each full 12-month period that they could have had Part B, but did not sign up for it. Usually, they do not pay a late enrollment penalty if they meet certain conditions that allow them to sign up for Part B during a special enrollment period.

==Comparison with private insurance==
Medicare differs from private insurance available to working Americans in that it is a social insurance program. Social insurance programs provide statutorily guaranteed benefits to the entire population (under certain circumstances, such as old age or unemployment). These benefits are financed in significant part through universal taxes. In effect, Medicare is a mechanism by which the state takes a portion of its citizens&#x27; resources to provide health and financial security to its citizens in old age or in case of disability, helping them cope with the cost of health care. In its universality, Medicare differs substantially from private insurers, which decide whom to cover and what benefits to offer to manage their risk pools and ensure that their costs do not exceed premiums.

Because the federal government is legally obligated to provide Medicare benefits to older and some disabled Americans, it cannot cut costs by restricting eligibility or benefits, except by going through a difficult legislative process, or by revising its interpretation of medical necessity. By statute, Medicare may only pay for items and services that are &quot;reasonable and necessary for the diagnosis or treatment of illness or injury or to improve the functioning of a malformed body member&quot;, unless there is another statutory authorization for payment. Cutting costs by cutting benefits is difficult, but the program can also achieve substantial economies of scale in the prices it pays for health care and administrative expenses—and, as a result, private insurers&#x27; costs have grown almost 60% more than Medicare&#x27;s since 1970. Medicare&#x27;s cost growth is now the same as GDP growth and expected to stay well below private insurance&#x27;s for the next decade.

Because Medicare offers statutorily determined benefits, its coverage policies and payment rates are publicly known, and all enrollees are entitled to the same coverage. In the private insurance market, plans can be tailored to offer different benefits to different customers, enabling individuals to reduce coverage costs while assuming risks for care that is not covered. Insurers, however, have far fewer disclosure requirements than Medicare, and studies show that customers in the private sector can find it difficult to know what their policy covers, and at what cost. Moreover, since Medicare collects data about utilization and costs for its enrollees—data that private insurers treat as trade secrets—it gives researchers key information about health care system performance.

Medicare also has an important role in driving changes in the entire health care system. Because Medicare pays for a huge share of health care in every region of the country, it has a great deal of power to set delivery and payment policies. For example, Medicare promoted the adaptation of prospective payments based on DRG&#x27;s, which prevents unscrupulous providers from setting their own exorbitant prices. Meanwhile, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act has given Medicare the mandate to promote cost-containment throughout the health care system, for example, by promoting the creation of accountable care organizations or by replacing fee-for-service payments with bundled payments.

==Costs and funding challenges==

Over the long-term, Medicare faces significant financial challenges because of rising overall health care costs, increasing enrollment as the population ages, and a decreasing ratio of workers to enrollees. Total Medicare spending was projected to increase from $523 billion in 2010 to around $900 billion by 2020. From 2010 to 2030, Medicare enrollment is projected to increase, from 47 million to 79 million, and the ratio of workers to enrollees is expected to decrease from 3.7 to 2.4. However, the ratio of workers to retirees has declined steadily for decades, and social insurance systems have remained sustainable due to rising worker productivity. There is some evidence that productivity gains will continue to offset demographic trends in the near future.

The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) wrote in 2008 that &quot;future growth in spending per beneficiary for Medicare and Medicaid—the federal government&#x27;s major health care programs—will be the most important determinant of long-term trends in federal spending. Changing those programs in ways that reduce the growth of costs—which will be difficult, in part because of the complexity of health policy choices—is ultimately the nation&#x27;s central long-term challenge in setting federal fiscal policy.&quot;

Overall health care costs were projected in 2011 to increase by 5.8 percent annually from 2010 to 2020, in part because of increased use of medical services, higher prices for services, and new technologies. Health care costs are rising faster than inflation across the board, but the cost of insurance has risen dramatically for families and employers as well as the federal government. Since 1970, the per-capita cost of private insurance coverage has grown roughly one percentage point faster each year than the per-capita cost of Medicare. Since the late 1990s, Medicare has performed especially well relative to private insurers. Over the next decade, Medicare&#x27;s per capita spending is projected to grow at a rate of 2.5 percent each year, compared to private insurance&#x27;s 4.8 percent. Nonetheless, most experts and policymakers agree containing health care costs is essential to the nation&#x27;s fiscal outlook. Much of the debate over the future of Medicare revolves around whether per capita costs should be reduced by limiting payments to providers or by shifting more costs to Medicare enrollees.

===Indicators===
Several measures serve as indicators of the long-term financial status of Medicare. These include total Medicare spending as a share of gross domestic product (GDP), the solvency of the Medicare HI trust fund, Medicare per-capita spending growth relative to inflation and per-capita GDP growth; general fund revenue as a share of total Medicare spending; and actuarial estimates of unfunded liability over the 75-year timeframe and the infinite horizon (netting expected premium/tax revenue against expected costs). The major issue these indicators is comparing any future projections against current law vs. what actuaries expect to happen. For example, current law specifies that Part A payments to hospitals and skilled nursing facilities will be cut substantially after 2028 and that doctors will get no raises after 2025. Actuaries expect that the law will change to keep these events from happening.

===Total Medicare spending as a share of GDP===
This measure, which examines Medicare spending in the context of the US economy as a whole, is projected to increase from 3.7 percent in 2017 to 6.2 percent by 2092 under current law and over 9 percent under what actuaries really expect will happen (called an &quot;illustrative example&quot; in recent-year Trustees Reports).

===The solvency of the Medicare HI trust fund===
This measure involves only Medicare Part A. The trust fund is considered insolvent when available revenue plus any existing balances will not cover 100 percent of annual projected costs. According to the 2018 estimate by the Medicare trustees, the trust fund was expected to become insolvent in 8 years (2026), at which time available revenue will cover around 85 percent of annual projected costs for Part A services. Since Medicare began, this solvency projection has ranged from two to 28 years, with an average of 11.3 years. This and other projections in Medicare Trustees reports are based on what its actuaries call the intermediate scenario but the reports also include worst-case and best-case projections that are quite different (other scenarios presume Congress will change present law).

===Medicare per-capita spending growth relative to inflation and per-capita GDP growth===
Per capita spending relative to inflation per-capita GDP growth was to be an important factor used by the PPACA-specified Independent Payment Advisory Board (IPAB), as a measure to determine whether it must recommend to Congress proposals to reduce Medicare costs. However, the IPAB never formed and was formally repealed by the Balanced Budget Act of 2018.

===General fund revenue as a share of total Medicare spending===
This measure, established under the Medicare Modernization Act (MMA), examines Medicare spending in the context of the federal budget. Each year, MMA requires the Medicare trustees to make a determination about whether general fund revenue is projected to exceed 45 percent of total program spending within a seven-year period. If the Medicare trustees make this determination in two consecutive years, a &quot;funding warning&quot; is issued. In response, the president must submit cost-saving legislation to Congress, which must consider this legislation on an expedited basis. This threshold was reached and a warning issued every year between 2006 and 2013 but it has not been reached since that time and was not expected to be reached in the 2016–2022 &quot;window&quot;. This is a reflection of the reduced spending growth mandated by the ACA according to the Trustees.

===Unfunded obligation===
Medicare&#x27;s unfunded obligation is the total amount of money that would have to be set aside today such that the principal and interest would cover the gap between projected revenues (mostly Part B premiums and Part A payroll taxes to be paid over the timeframe under current law) and spending over a given timeframe. By law the timeframe used is 75 years though the Medicare actuaries also give an infinite-horizon estimate because life expectancy consistently increases and other economic factors underlying the estimates change.

As of January 1, 2016, Medicare&#x27;s unfunded obligation over the 75-year time frame is $3.8 trillion for the Part A Trust Fund and $28.6 trillion for Part B. Over an infinite timeframe, the combined unfunded liability for both programs combined is over $50 trillion, with the difference primarily in the Part B estimate. These estimates assume that CMS will pay full benefits as currently specified over those periods though that would be contrary to current United States law. In addition, as discussed throughout each annual Trustees&#x27; report, &quot;the Medicare projections shown could be substantially understated as a result of other potentially unsustainable elements of current law.&quot; For example, current law effectively provides no raises for doctors after 2025; that is unlikely to happen. It is impossible for actuaries to estimate unfunded liability other than assuming current law is followed (except relative to benefits as noted), the Trustees state &quot;that actual long-range present values for (Part A) expenditures and (Part B/D) expenditures and revenues could exceed the amounts estimated by a substantial margin.&quot;

===Public opinion===
Popular opinion surveys show that the public views Medicare&#x27;s problems as serious, but not as urgent as other concerns. In January 2006, the Pew Research Center found 62 percent of the public said addressing Medicare&#x27;s financial problems should be a high priority for the government, but that still put it behind other priorities. Surveys suggest that there is no public consensus behind any specific strategy to keep the program solvent.

===Fraud and waste===

The Government Accountability Office lists Medicare as a &quot;high-risk&quot; government program in need of reform, in part because of its vulnerability to fraud and partly because of its long-term financial problems. Fewer than 5% of Medicare claims are audited.

==Criticism==
Robert M. Ball, a former commissioner of Social Security under President Kennedy in 1961 (and later under Johnson, and Nixon) defined the major obstacle to financing health insurance for the elderly: the high cost of care for the aged combined with the generally low incomes of retired people. Because retired older people use much more medical care than younger employed people, an insurance premium related to the risk for older people needed to be high, but if the high premium had to be paid after retirement, when incomes are low, it was an almost impossible burden for the average person. The only feasible approach, he said, was to finance health insurance in the same way as cash benefits for retirement, by contributions paid while at work, when the payments are least burdensome, with the protection furnished in retirement without further payment. In the early 1960s relatively few of the elderly had health insurance, and what they had was usually inadequate. Insurers such as Blue Cross, which had originally applied the principle of community rating, faced competition from other commercial insurers that did not community rate, and so were forced to raise their rates for the elderly.

Medicare is not generally an unearned entitlement. Entitlement is most commonly based on a record of contributions to the Medicare fund. As such it is a form of social insurance making it feasible for people to pay for insurance for sickness in old age when they are young and able to work and be assured of getting back benefits when they are older and no longer working. Some people will pay in more than they receive back and others will receive more benefits than they paid in. Unlike private insurance where some amount must be paid to attain coverage, all eligible persons can receive coverage regardless of how much or if they had ever paid in.

===Politicized payment===
Bruce Vladeck, director of the Health Care Financing Administration in the Clinton administration, has argued that lobbyists have changed the Medicare program &quot;from one that provides a legal entitlement to beneficiaries to one that provides a de facto political entitlement to providers.&quot;

===Quality of beneficiary services===
A 2001 study by the Government Accountability Office evaluated the quality of responses given by Medicare contractor customer service representatives to provider (physician) questions. The evaluators assembled a list of questions, which they asked during a random sampling of calls to Medicare contractors. The rate of complete, accurate information provided by Medicare customer service representatives was 15%. Since then, steps have been taken to improve the quality of customer service given by Medicare contractors, specifically the 1-800-MEDICARE contractor. As a result, 1-800-MEDICARE customer service representatives (CSR) have seen an increase in training, quality assurance monitoring has significantly increased, and a customer satisfaction survey is offered to random callers.

===Hospital accreditation===
In most states the Joint Commission, a private, non-profit organization for accrediting hospitals, decides whether or not a hospital is able to participate in Medicare, as currently there are no competitor organizations recognized by CMS.

Other organizations can also accredit hospitals for Medicare. These include the Community Health Accreditation Program, the Accreditation Commission for Health Care, the Compliance Team and the Healthcare Quality Association on Accreditation.

Accreditation is voluntary and an organization may choose to be evaluated by their State Survey Agency or by CMS directly.

===Graduate medical education===
Medicare funds the vast majority of residency training in the US. This tax-based financing covers resident salaries and benefits through payments called Direct Medical Education payments. Medicare also uses taxes for Indirect Medical Education, a subsidy paid to teaching hospitals in exchange for training resident physicians. For the 2008 fiscal year these payments were $2.7 billion and $5.7 billion, respectively. Overall funding levels have remained at the same level since 1996, so that the same number or fewer residents have been trained under this program. Meanwhile, the US population continues to grow both older and larger, which has led to greater demand for physicians, in part due to higher rates of illness and disease among the elderly compared to younger individuals. At the same time the cost of medical services continue rising rapidly and many geographic areas face physician shortages, both trends suggesting the supply of physicians remains too low.

Medicare thus finds itself in the odd position of having assumed control of the single largest funding source for graduate medical education, currently facing major budget constraints, and as a result, freezing funding for graduate medical education, as well as for physician reimbursement rates. This has forced hospitals to look for alternative sources of funding for residency slots. This halt in funding in turn exacerbates the exact problem Medicare sought to solve in the first place: improving the availability of medical care. However, some healthcare administration experts believe that the shortage of physicians may be an opportunity for providers to reorganize their delivery systems to become less costly and more efficient. Physician assistants and Advanced Registered Nurse Practitioners may begin assuming more responsibilities that traditionally fell to doctors, but do not necessarily require the advanced training and skill of a physician.

==Legislation and reform==
* 1960: PL 86-778 Social Security Amendments of 1960 (Kerr-Mills aid)
* 1965: PL 89-97 Social Security Act of 1965, Establishing Medicare Benefits
* 1980: Medicare Secondary Payer Act of 1980, prescription drugs coverage added
* 1988: PL 100-360 Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Act of 1988
* 1989: Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Repeal Act of 1989
* 1997: PL 105-33 Balanced Budget Act of 1997
* 2003: PL 108-173 Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act
* 2010: Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010
* 2013: Sequestration effects on Medicare due to Budget Control Act of 2011
* 2015: Extensive changes to Medicare, primarily to the SGR provisions of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 as part of the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act (MACRA)
* 2016: Changes to the Social Security &quot;hold harmless&quot; laws as they affect Part B premiums based on the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2015
* 2022: Inflation Reduction Act included Medicare negotiation provisions, allowing negotiation of prescription drug prices beginning in 2026

In 1977, the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) was established as a federal agency responsible for the administration of Medicare and Medicaid. This would be renamed to Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services (CMS) in 2001. By 1983, the diagnosis-related group (DRG) replaced pay for service reimbursements to hospitals for Medicare patients.

President Bill Clinton attempted an overhaul of Medicare through his health care reform plan in 1993–1994 but was unable to get the legislation passed by Congress.

In 2003, Congress passed the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act, which President George W. Bush signed into law on December 8, 2003. Part of this legislation included filling gaps in prescription-drug coverage left by the Medicare Secondary Payer Act that was enacted in 1980. The 2003 bill strengthened the Workers&#x27; Compensation Medicare Set-Aside Program (WCMSA) that is monitored and administered by CMS.

On August 1, 2007, the US House of Representatives voted to reduce payments to Medicare Advantage providers in order to pay for expanded coverage of children&#x27;s health under the SCHIP program. As of 2008, Medicare Advantage plans cost, on average, 13 percent more per person insured for like beneficiaries than direct payment plans. Many health economists have concluded that payments to Medicare Advantage providers have been excessive. The Senate, after heavy lobbying from the insurance industry, declined to agree to the cuts in Medicare Advantage proposed by the House. President Bush subsequently vetoed the SCHIP extension.

===Effects of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act===
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) of 2010 made a number of changes to the Medicare program. Several provisions of the law were designed to reduce the cost of Medicare. The most substantial provisions slowed the growth rate of payments to hospitals and skilled nursing facilities under Part A of Medicare, through a variety of methods (e.g., percentage cuts, penalties for readmissions).

Congress also attempted to reduce payments to public Part C Medicare health plans by aligning the rules that establish Part C plans&#x27; capitated fees more closely with the FFS paid for comparable care to &quot;similar beneficiaries&quot; under Parts A and B of Medicare. Primarily these reductions involved much discretion on the part of CMS. Examples of what CMS did included effectively ending a Part C program Congress had previously initiated to increase the use of Part C in rural areas (the so-called Part C PFFS plan) and reducing over time a program that encouraged employers and unions to create their own Part C plans not available to the general Medicare beneficiary base (so-called Part C EGWP plans) by providing higher reimbursement. These two types of Part C plans had been identified by MedPAC as the programs that most negatively affected parity between the cost of Medicare beneficiaries on Parts A/B/C and the costs of beneficiaries not on Parts A/B/C. These efforts to reach parity have been more than successful. As of 2015, all beneficiaries on A/B/C cost 4% less per person than all beneficiaries not on A/B/C. But whether that is because the cost of the former decreased or the cost of the latter increased is not known.

PPACA also slightly reduced annual increases in payments to physicians and to hospitals that serve a disproportionate share of low-income patients. Along with other minor adjustments, these changes reduced Medicare&#x27;s projected cost over the next decade by $455 billion.

Additionally, the PPACA created the Independent Payment Advisory Board (IPAB), which was empowered to submit legislative proposals to reduce the cost of Medicare if the program&#x27;s per-capita spending grows faster than per-capita GDP plus one percent. The IPAB was never formed and was formally repealed by the Balanced Budget Act of 2018.

The PPACA also made some changes to Medicare enrollees&#x27; benefits. By 2020, it &quot;closed&quot; the so-called &quot;donut hole&quot; between Part D plans&#x27; initial spend phase coverage limits and the catastrophic cap on out-of-pocket spending, reducing a Part D enrollee&#x27;s&#x27; exposure to the cost of prescription drugs by an average of $2,000 a year. That is, the template co-pay in the gap (which legally still exists) will be the same as the template co-pay in the initial spend phase, 25%. This lowered costs for about 5% of the people on Medicare. Limits were also placed on out-of-pocket costs for in-network care for public Part C health plan enrollees. Most of these plans had such a limit but ACA formalized the annual out of pocket spend limit. Beneficiaries on traditional Medicare do not get such a limit but can effectively arrange for one through private insurance.

Meanwhile, Medicare Part B and D premiums were restructured in ways that reduced costs for most people while raising contributions from the wealthiest people with Medicare. The law also expanded coverage of or eliminated co-pays for some preventive services.

The PPACA instituted a number of measures to control Medicare fraud and abuse, such as longer oversight periods, provider screenings, stronger standards for certain providers, the creation of databases to share data between federal and state agencies, and stiffer penalties for violators. The law also created mechanisms, such as the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation to fund experiments to identify new payment and delivery models that could conceivably be expanded to reduce the cost of health care while improving quality.

===Proposals for reforming Medicare===
As legislators continue to seek new ways to control the cost of Medicare, a number of new proposals to reform Medicare have been introduced in recent years.

==== Premium support ====
Since the mid-1990s, there have been a number of proposals to change Medicare from a publicly run social insurance program with a defined benefit, for which there is no limit to the government&#x27;s expenses, into a publicly run health plan program that offers &quot;premium support&quot; for enrollees. The basic concept behind the proposals is that the government would make a defined contribution, that is a premium support, to the health plan of a Medicare enrollee&#x27;s choice. Sponsors would compete to provide Medicare benefits and this competition would set the level of fixed contribution. Additionally, enrollees would be able to purchase greater coverage by paying more in addition to the fixed government contribution. Conversely, enrollees could choose lower cost coverage and keep the difference between their coverage costs and the fixed government contribution. The goal of premium Medicare plans is for greater cost-effectiveness; if such a proposal worked as planned, the financial incentive would be greatest for Medicare plans that offer the best care at the lowest cost.

This concept is basically how public Medicare Part C already works (but with a much more complicated competitive bidding process that drives up costs for the Trustees, but is advantageous to the beneficiaries). Given that only about 1% of people on Medicare got premium support when Aaron and Reischauer first wrote their proposal in 1995 and the percentage is now 35%, on the way to 50% by 2040 according to the Trustees, perhaps no further reform is needed.

There have been a number of criticisms of the premium support model. Some have raised concern about risk selection, where insurers find ways to avoid covering people expected to have high health care costs. Premium support proposals, such as the 2011 plan proposed by Senator Ron Wyden and Rep. Paul Ryan (R–Wis.), have aimed to avoid risk selection by including protection language mandating that plans participating in such coverage must provide insurance to all beneficiaries and are not able to avoid covering higher risk beneficiaries. Some critics are concerned that the Medicare population, which has particularly high rates of cognitive impairment and dementia, would have a hard time choosing between competing health plans. Robert Moffit, a senior fellow of The Heritage Foundation responded to this concern, stating that while there may be research indicating that individuals have difficulty making the correct choice of health care plan, there is no evidence to show that government officials can make better choices. Henry Aaron, one of the original proponents of premium supports, has since argued that the idea should not be implemented, given that Medicare Advantage plans have not successfully contained costs more effectively than traditional Medicare and because the political climate is hostile to the kinds of regulations that would be needed to make the idea workable.

Currently, public Part C Medicare health plans avoid this issue with an indexed risk formula that provides lower per capita payments to sponsors for relatively (remember all these people are over 65 years old) healthy plan members and higher per capita payments for less healthy members.

==== Changing the age of eligibility ====
A number of different plans have been introduced that would raise the age of Medicare eligibility. Some have argued that, as the population ages and the ratio of workers to retirees increases, programs for the elderly need to be reduced. Since the age at which Americans can retire with full Social Security benefits has risen from 65 to 67, it is argued that the age of eligibility for Medicare should rise with it (though people can begin receiving reduced Social Security benefits as early as age 62).

The CBO projected that raising the age of Medicare eligibility would save $113 billion over 10 years after accounting for the necessary expansion of Medicaid and state health insurance exchange subsidies under health care reform, which are needed to help those who could not afford insurance purchase it. The Kaiser Family Foundation found that raising the age of eligibility would save the federal government $5.7 billion a year, while raising costs for other payers. According to Kaiser, raising the age would cost $3.7 billion to 65- and 66-year-olds, $2.8 billion to other consumers whose premiums would rise as insurance pools absorbed more risk, $4.5 billion to employers offering insurance, and $0.7 billion to states expanding their Medicaid rolls. Ultimately Kaiser found that the plan would raise total social costs by more than twice the savings to the federal government.

During the 2020 presidential campaign, Joe Biden proposed lowering the age of Medicare eligibility to 60 years old. A Kaiser Family Foundation study found that lowering the age to 60 could reduce costs for employer health plans by up to 15% if all eligible employees shifted to Medicare.

==== Negotiating the prices of prescription drugs ====
Currently, people with Medicare can get prescription drug coverage through a public Medicare Part C plan or through the standalone Part D prescription drug plans (PDPs) program. Each plan sponsor establishes its own coverage policies and could, if desired, independently negotiate the prices it pays to drug manufacturers. But because each plan has a much smaller coverage pool than the entire Medicare program, many argue that this system of paying for prescription drugs undermines the government&#x27;s bargaining power and artificially raises the cost of drug coverage. Conversely, negotiating for the sponsors is almost always done by one of three or four companies typically tied to pharmacy retailers each of whom alone has much more buying power than the entire Medicare program. That pharmacy-centric versus government-centric approach appears to have worked given that Part D has cost 50% or more under original projected spending and has held average annual drug spending by seniors in absolute dollars fairly constant for over 10 years.

Many look to the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) as a model of lower cost prescription drug coverage. Since the VHA provides healthcare directly, it maintains its own formulary and negotiates prices with manufacturers. Studies show that the VHA pays substantially less for drugs than the PDP plans Medicare Part D subsidizes. One analysis found that adopting a formulary similar to the VHA&#x27;s would save Medicare $14 billion a year.

There are other proposals for savings on prescription drugs that do not require such fundamental changes to Medicare Part D&#x27;s payment and coverage policies. Manufacturers who supply drugs to Medicaid are required to offer a 15 percent rebate on the average manufacturer&#x27;s price. Low-income elderly individuals who qualify for both Medicare and Medicaid receive drug coverage through Medicare Part D, and no reimbursement is paid for the drugs the government purchases for them. Reinstating that rebate would yield savings of $112 billion, according to a recent CBO estimate. Some have questioned the ability of the federal government to achieve greater savings than the largest PDPs, since some of the larger plans have coverage pools comparable to Medicare&#x27;s, though the evidence from the VHA is promising. Some also worry that controlling the prices of prescription drugs would reduce incentives for manufacturers to invest in research and development, though the same could be said of anything that would reduce costs. However, the comparisons with the VHA point out that the VHA covers about half the drugs as Part D.

==== Reforming care for the &quot;dual-eligibles&quot; ====
Roughly nine million Americans—mostly older adults with low incomes—are eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid. These men and women tend to have particularly poor health—more than half are being treated for five or more chronic conditions—and high costs. Average annual per-capita spending for &quot;dual-eligibles&quot; is $20,000, compared to $10,900 for the Medicare population as a whole.

The dual-eligible population comprises roughly 20 percent of Medicare&#x27;s enrollees but accounts for 36 percent of its costs. There is substantial evidence that these individuals receive highly inefficient care because responsibility for their care is split between the Medicare and Medicaid programs—most see a number of different providers without any kind of mechanism to coordinate their care, and they face high rates of potentially preventable hospitalizations. Because Medicaid and Medicare cover different aspects of health care, both have a financial incentive to shunt patients into care the other program pays for.

Many experts have suggested that establishing mechanisms to coordinate care for the dual-eligibles could yield substantial savings in the Medicare program, mostly by reducing hospitalizations. Such programs would connect patients with primary care, create an individualized health plan, assist enrollees in receiving social and human services as well as medical care, reconcile medications prescribed by different doctors to ensure they do not undermine one another, and oversee behavior to improve health. The general ethos of these proposals is to &quot;treat the patient, not the condition,&quot; and maintain health while avoiding costly treatments.

There is some controversy over who exactly should take responsibility for coordinating the care of the dual-eligibles. There have been some proposals to transfer dual-eligibles into existing Medicaid managed care plans, which are controlled by individual states. But many states facing severe budget shortfalls might have some incentive to stint on necessary care or otherwise shift costs to enrollees and their families to capture some Medicaid savings. Medicare has more experience managing the care of older adults, and is already expanding coordinated care programs under the ACA, though there are some questions about private Medicare plans&#x27; capacity to manage care and achieve meaningful cost savings.

Estimated savings from more effective coordinated care for the dual eligibles range from $125 billion to over $200 billion, mostly by eliminating unnecessary, expensive hospital admissions.

==== Income-relating Medicare premiums ====
Both House Republicans and President Obama proposed increasing the additional premiums paid by the wealthiest people with Medicare, compounding several reforms in the ACA that would increase the number of wealthier individuals paying higher, income-related Part B and Part D premiums. Such proposals were projected to save $20 billion over the course of a decade, and would ultimately result in more than a quarter of Medicare enrollees paying between 35 and 90 percent of their Part B costs by 2035, rather than the typical 25 percent. If the brackets mandated for 2035 were implemented today, it would mean that anyone earning more than $47,000 (as an individual) or $94,000 (as a couple) would be affected. Under the Republican proposals, affected individuals would pay 40 percent of the total Part B and Part D premiums, which would be equivalent of $2,500.

More limited income-relation of premiums only raises limited revenue. Currently, 5 percent of Medicare enrollees pay an income-related premium, and most pay 35 percent of their total costs (on average), compared to the 25 percent most people pay. Only a negligible number of enrollees fall into the higher income brackets required to bear a more substantial share of their costs—roughly half a percent of individuals and less than three percent of married couples currently pay more than 35 percent of their total Part B costs.

There is some concern that tying premiums to income would weaken Medicare politically over the long run, since people tend to be more supportive of universal social programs than of means-tested ones.

==== Medigap restrictions ====
Some Medicare supplemental insurance (or &quot;Medigap&quot;) plans cover all of an enrollee&#x27;s cost-sharing, insulating them from any out-of-pocket costs and guaranteeing financial security to individuals with significant health care needs. Many policymakers believe that such plans raise the cost of Medicare by creating a perverse incentive that leads patients to seek unnecessary, costly treatments. Many argue that unnecessary treatments are a major cause of rising costs and propose that people with Medicare should feel more of the cost of their care to create incentives to seek the most efficient alternatives. Various restrictions and surcharges on Medigap coverage have appeared in some deficit reduction proposals. One of the furthest-reaching reforms proposed, which would prevent Medigap from covering any of the first $500 of coinsurance charges and limit it to covering 50 percent of all costs beyond that, could save $50 billion over 10 years. But it would also increase health care costs substantially for people with costly health care needs.

There is some evidence that claims of Medigap&#x27;s tendency to cause over-treatment may be exaggerated and that potential savings from restricting it might be smaller than expected. Meanwhile, there are some concerns about the potential effects on enrollees. Individuals who face high charges with every episode of care have been shown to delay or forgo needed care, jeopardizing their health and possibly increasing their health care costs over time. Given their lack of medical training, most patients tend to have difficulty distinguishing between necessary and unnecessary treatments. The problem could be exaggerated among the Medicare population, which has low levels of health literacy.

==== Vision Coverage ====
The Build Back Better legislation was passed in Congress in November 2021, and adds hearing services subject to Medicare Part B deductible and 20% coinsurance beginning in 2023. The initial proposal of this bill also aimed to address gaps in Medicare such as dental and vision coverage, however both services were removed following objections in the Senate. A study performed by Urban Institute showed that Medicare enrollees spend more on routine vision services ($8.4 billion) than routine hearing services ($5.7 billion), of which $5.4 billion and $4.7 billion were spent out of pocket respectively. In addition, nearly 1 in 3 Medicare beneficiaries used vision services annually, and averages a spending of $411 per person; as such, the impact of expanding Medicare to include vision services would benefit many people. There is an income gradient seen in those who use vision services and a severe unmet needs for these services in those with lower incomes. Enrollees below the federal poverty level spent $190, whereas those 400% above the level spent $465; and a likely trend that far fewer non-Hispanic Black and Hispanic beneficiaries use and spend on vision services—which is in keeping with the trend seen with hearing aids.

==Legislative oversight==
The following congressional committees provide oversight for Medicare programs:

; Senate
* Senate Committee on Appropriations
** Subcommittee on Labor, Health and Human Services, Education, and Related Agencies
* Senate Budget Committee
* Senate Committee on Finance
* Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
** Subcommittee on Oversight of Government Management, the Federal Workforce, and the District of Columbia
* Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions
** Subcommittee on Federal Financial Management, Government Information, and International Security
** Subcommittee on Primary Health and Aging
* Senate Special Committee on Aging

; House
* House Committee on Appropriations
** Subcommittee on Labor, Health and Human Services, Education, and Related Agencies
* House Budget Committee
* House Committee on Energy and Commerce
** Subcommittee on Health
** Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations
* House Small Business Committee
* House Committee on Ways and Means
** Subcommittee on Health

; Joint
* Joint Economic Committee

==See also==

* Administration on Aging
* Federal Insurance Contributions Act
* Health care in the United States
* Health care politics
* Health care reform in the United States
* Health insurance in the United States
* Maurice Mazel
* Medicaid
* Medicare (Australia)
* Medicare (Canada)
* Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015
* Medicare for All Act
* Medicare Physician Group Practice Demonstration
* Medicare Prompt Pay Correction Act
* Medicare Quality Cancer Care Demonstration Act
* Medicare Rights Center
* National Health Service (United Kingdom)
* National Quality Cancer Care Demonstration Project Act of 2009
* Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (Obamacare)
* Philosophy of healthcare
* Single-payer health care
* Stark Law
==References==
==External links==
===Governmental links—current===
* Medicare at cms.gov
* Medicare.gov—the official U.S. government site for Medicare
* Medicare Primer Congressional Research Service
* Finding Medicare Enrollment Statistics Congressional Research Service

===Governmental links—current law===
* Social Security Act – Title XVIII Health Insurance for The Aged and Disabled (PDF/details) as amended in the GPO Statute Compilations collection

===Governmental links—historical===
* Medicare Is Signed Into Law page from ssa.gov—material about the bill-signing ceremony
* Historical Background and Development of Social Security from ssa.gov—includes information about Medicare
* Detailed Chronology of SSA from ssa.gov—includes information about Medicare
* Early Medicare poster from ssa.gov

===Non-governmental links===
* Consumer Reports Managing Medicare
* Kaiser Family Foundation—Substantial research and analysis related to the Medicare program and the population of seniors and people with disabilities it covers.
** State-level data on Medicare beneficiaries, such as enrollment, demographics (such as age, gender, race/ethnicity), spending, other sources of health coverage, managed care participation, and use of services.
** History of Medicare in an interactive timeline of key developments.
* Medical Prices may be much higher with health insurance than without? (The New York Times, August 22, 2021).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q559392" start="0" end="8" title="Medicare (United States)" label="Medicare"/>
<link wikidata="Q334911" start="22" end="38" title="health insurance" label="health insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12131" start="119" end="131" title="disabilities" label="disabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375805" start="154" end="177" title="End Stage Renal Disease Program" label="end stage renal disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q206901" start="182" end="211" title="amyotrophic lateral sclerosis" label="amyotrophic lateral sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824618" start="277" end="307" title="Social Security Administration" label="Social Security Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060058" start="339" end="381" title="Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services" label="Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="2252" end="2272" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="3339" end="3353" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550826" start="3406" end="3425" title="Social Security Act of 1965" label="Social Security Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550826" start="3542" end="3576" title="Social Security Amendments of 1965" label="Social Security Amendments of 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q525981" start="3611" end="3647" title="Harry S. Truman Presidential Library and Museum" label="Harry S. Truman Presidential Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q24603" start="3651" end="3673" title="Independence, Missouri" label="Independence, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="3682" end="3691" title="President of the United States" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="3692" end="3707" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166256" start="3729" end="3739" title="First Lady of the United States" label="First Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q233652" start="3740" end="3751" title="Bess Truman" label="Bess Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772686" start="4358" end="4376" title="racial integration" label="racial integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q48532" start="4508" end="4521" title="Desegregation in the United States" label="desegregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q20035455" start="4805" end="4837" title="health maintenance organizations" label="health maintenance organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q608152" start="4880" end="4887" title="hospice" label="hospice"/>
<link wikidata="Q206901" start="5055" end="5084" title="amyotrophic lateral sclerosis" label="amyotrophic lateral sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550832" start="5244" end="5280" title="Social Security Disability Insurance" label="Social Security Disability Insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q736715" start="5315" end="5338" title="end-stage renal disease" label="end-stage renal disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="5442" end="5454" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="5587" end="5601" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951214" start="5605" end="5682" title="Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act" label="Medicare program for covering almost all self-administered prescription drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060058" start="5770" end="5812" title="Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services" label="Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q942326" start="5839" end="5883" title="United States Department of Health and Human Services" label="U.S. Department of Health and Human Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141363" start="5913" end="5921" title="Medicaid" label="Medicaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603105" start="5927" end="5967" title="Children&amp;#x27;s Health Insurance Program" label="Children&amp;#x27;s Health Insurance Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133770" start="5980" end="6022" title="Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments" label="Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414593" start="6048" end="6067" title="Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act" label="Affordable Care Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q628807" start="6114" end="6134" title="United States Department of Labor" label="Departments of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q648666" start="6139" end="6147" title="United States Department of the Treasury" label="Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q606563" start="6212" end="6263" title="Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act" label="Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824618" start="6371" end="6401" title="Social Security Administration" label="Social Security Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574939" start="7024" end="7079" title="Specialty Society Relative Value Scale Update Committee" label="Specialty Society Relative Value Scale Update Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="7135" end="7144" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q465697" start="7166" end="7194" title="American Medical Association" label="American Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431847" start="7956" end="7965" title="Inpatient care" label="inpatient"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156893" start="8054" end="8065" title="payroll tax" label="payroll tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722724" start="9240" end="9249" title="Post–World War II baby boom" label="Baby Boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690885" start="9499" end="9530" title="health care prices in the United States" label="health care costs in the nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865084" start="9993" end="10045" title="Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015" label="Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899935" start="10511" end="10526" title="Urban Institute" label="Urban Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416012" start="11449" end="11484" title="Managed care" label="evaluating evidence-based practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q10910281" start="11647" end="11680" title="healthcare information technology" label="healthcare information technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612679" start="13363" end="13385" title="Social Security number" label="Social Security number"/>
<link wikidata="Q3702971" start="13456" end="13490" title="personally identifying information" label="personally identifying information"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431847" start="13548" end="13557" title="Inpatient care" label="inpatient"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917" start="13558" end="13566" title="hospital" label="hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060058" start="14749" end="14791" title="Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services" label="Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324519" start="15974" end="15986" title="Hospital Readmission" label="readmissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="16313" end="16322" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="16324" end="16337" title="heart failure" label="heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="16339" end="16351" title="heart attack" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q199804" start="16353" end="16357" title="COPD" label="COPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693864" start="16359" end="16375" title="knee replacement" label="knee replacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q32333487" start="16381" end="16396" title="hip replacement" label="hip replacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692008" start="16436" end="16478" title="Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality" label="Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="16694" end="16700" title="sepsis" label="sepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q32778" start="16726" end="16740" title="bronchiectasis" label="bronchiectasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q837142" start="17315" end="17339" title="skilled nursing facility" label="skilled nursing facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672123" start="18028" end="18042" title="long-term care" label="long-term care"/>
<link wikidata="Q423243" start="18065" end="18091" title="activities of daily living" label="activities of daily living"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="18416" end="18425" title="insurance" label="insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q608152" start="18876" end="18883" title="Hospice" label="Hospice"/>
<link wikidata="Q315412" start="19171" end="19186" title="assisted living" label="assisted living"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118919" start="19362" end="19378" title="grief counseling" label="grief counseling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806864" start="19928" end="19935" title="Medigap" label="Medigap"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316115" start="20122" end="20147" title="durable medical equipment" label="durable medical equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494444" start="20184" end="20189" title="cane (medical device)" label="canes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444064" start="20191" end="20198" title="walker (mobility)" label="walkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545645" start="20200" end="20210" title="lift chair" label="lift chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q191931" start="20213" end="20223" title="wheelchair" label="wheelchair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051178" start="20230" end="20246" title="mobility scooter" label="mobility scooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179623" start="20263" end="20282" title="mobility impairment" label="mobility impairment"/>
<link wikidata="Q181802" start="20285" end="20303" title="Prosthesis" label="Prosthetic devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q181802" start="20312" end="20327" title="artificial limb" label="artificial limb"/>
<link wikidata="Q994482" start="20333" end="20350" title="breast prosthesis" label="breast prosthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q848318" start="20361" end="20371" title="mastectomy" label="mastectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q37501" start="20396" end="20406" title="eyeglasses" label="eyeglasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818260" start="20417" end="20433" title="cataract surgery" label="cataract surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988216" start="20439" end="20445" title="oxygen therapy" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q65282028" start="20478" end="20497" title="Medical necessity" label="Medically necessary"/>
<link wikidata="Q763256" start="20801" end="20814" title="Air ambulance" label="air ambulance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875704" start="20823" end="20833" title="Fixed-wing aircraft" label="fixed-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="20837" end="20847" title="Helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111392" start="22258" end="22271" title="Out-of-pocket expense" label="out-of-pocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806635" start="23053" end="23068" title="Medicare Part D" label="Medicare Part D"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951214" start="23242" end="23268" title="Medicare Modernization Act" label="Medicare Modernization Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608038" start="24438" end="24450" title="step therapy" label="step therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="24867" end="24875" title="insurance premium" label="premiums"/>
<link wikidata="Q132560103" start="24877" end="24887" title="deductible" label="deductible"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111392" start="24940" end="24957" title="out-of-pocket expenses" label="pay out-of-pocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721589" start="24984" end="25008" title="Kaiser Family Foundation" label="Kaiser Family Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239847" start="25125" end="25156" title="preferred provider organization" label="preferred provider organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440204" start="25169" end="25210" title="Federal Employees Health Benefits Program" label="Federal Employees Health Benefits Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440261" start="25535" end="25570" title="Federal Insurance Contributions Act" label="Federal Insurance Contributions Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="26175" end="26192" title="insurance premium" label="insurance premium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623243" start="26303" end="26309" title="Model (abstract)" label="schema"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887451" start="26860" end="26874" title="benefit period" label="benefit period"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545541" start="27152" end="27173" title="Lifetime Reserve Days" label="Lifetime Reserve Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q19036767" start="27903" end="27963" title="Medicare Improvements for Patients and Providers Act of 2008" label="Medicare Improvements for Patients and Providers Act of 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883083" start="29169" end="29183" title="United States federal budget" label="federal budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250835" start="29477" end="29503" title="prospective payment system" label="prospective payment system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208158" start="29739" end="29762" title="diagnosis-related group" label="diagnosis-related group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806646" start="30676" end="30699" title="Medicare Economic Index" label="Medicare Economic Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315782" start="31544" end="31579" title="Resource-Based Relative Value Scale" label="Resource-Based Relative Value Scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310810" start="31599" end="31619" title="Relative Value Units" label="Relative Value Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q930752" start="31908" end="31918" title="Medical specialist" label="specialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q465697" start="31935" end="31963" title="American Medical Association" label="American Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574939" start="31971" end="32026" title="Specialty Society Relative Value Scale Update Committee" label="Specialty Society Relative Value Scale Update Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806646" start="32321" end="32344" title="Medicare Sustainable Growth Rate" label="Sustainable Growth Rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="34110" end="34148" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080320" start="34160" end="34254" title="SGR Repeal and Medicare Provider Payment Modernization Act of 2014 (H.R. 4015; 113th Congress)" label="SGR Repeal and Medicare Provider Payment Modernization Act of 2014 (H.R. 4015; 113th Congress)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414593" start="34423" end="34442" title="Affordable Care Act" label="Affordable Care Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q17076571" start="34709" end="34778" title="Protecting Access to Medicare Act of 2014 (H.R. 4302; 113th Congress)" label="Protecting Access to Medicare Act of 2014 (H.R. 4302; 113th Congress)"/>
<link wikidata="Q465697" start="34865" end="34893" title="American Medical Association" label="American Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149896" start="36467" end="36507" title="Columbia Mailman School of Public Health" label="Columbia Mailman School of Public Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="36777" end="36789" title="Chemotherapy" label="Chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="37660" end="37674" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653906" start="40354" end="40370" title="social insurance" label="social insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q65282028" start="41334" end="41351" title="medical necessity" label="medical necessity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414593" start="43263" end="43305" title="Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act" label="Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111958" start="44257" end="44269" title="productivity" label="productivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125991" start="44344" end="44371" title="Congressional Budget Office" label="Congressional Budget Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="46128" end="46150" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="46250" end="46259" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016991" start="48337" end="48371" title="Independent Payment Advisory Board" label="Independent Payment Advisory Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951214" start="48675" end="48701" title="Medicare Modernization Act" label="Medicare Modernization Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="51400" end="51419" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q749118" start="51731" end="51763" title="Government Accountability Office" label="Government Accountability Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929017" start="52996" end="53006" title="Blue Cross Blue Shield Association" label="Blue Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155049" start="53054" end="53070" title="community rating" label="community rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653906" start="53369" end="53385" title="social insurance" label="social insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060058" start="53918" end="53954" title="Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services" label="Health Care Financing Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="53962" end="53969" title="Bill Clinton" label="Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q749118" start="54245" end="54277" title="Government Accountability Office" label="Government Accountability Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703687" start="55064" end="55080" title="Joint Commission" label="Joint Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="55093" end="55116" title="non-profit organization" label="non-profit organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154755" start="55365" end="55403" title="Community Health Accreditation Program" label="Community Health Accreditation Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672831" start="55409" end="55449" title="Accreditation Commission for Health Care" label="Accreditation Commission for Health Care"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727218" start="55451" end="55470" title="the Compliance Team" label="the Compliance Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691229" start="55479" end="55526" title="Healthcare Quality Association on Accreditation" label="Healthcare Quality Association on Accreditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q256698" start="55722" end="55731" title="Residency (medicine)" label="residency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813474" start="55949" end="55966" title="teaching hospital" label="teaching hospital"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57665" end="57699" title="Social Security Amendments of 1965#Previous administrations" label="Social Security Amendments of 1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550826" start="57734" end="57761" title="Social Security Act of 1965" label="Social Security Act of 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849980" start="58012" end="58039" title="Balanced Budget Act of 1997" label="Balanced Budget Act of 1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951214" start="58059" end="58121" title="Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act" label="Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414593" start="58130" end="58172" title="Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act" label="Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q15023070" start="58177" end="58229" title="Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010" label="Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985020" start="58279" end="58305" title="Budget Control Act of 2011" label="Budget Control Act of 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849980" start="58384" end="58411" title="Balanced Budget Act of 1997" label="Balanced Budget Act of 1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865084" start="58427" end="58471" title="Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015" label="Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468254" start="58632" end="58655" title="Inflation Reduction Act of 2022" label="Inflation Reduction Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060058" start="58779" end="58815" title="Health Care Financing Administration" label="Health Care Financing Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060058" start="58945" end="58989" title="Centers for Medicare &amp;amp; Medicaid Services" label="Centers for Medicare &amp;amp; Medicaid Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208158" start="59018" end="59041" title="diagnosis-related group" label="diagnosis-related group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="59135" end="59147" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134288" start="59194" end="59217" title="1993 Clinton health care plan" label="health care reform plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="59299" end="59307" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951214" start="59319" end="59381" title="Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act" label="Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="59399" end="59413" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603105" start="59914" end="59919" title="State Children&amp;#x27;s Health Insurance Program" label="SCHIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414593" start="60459" end="60478" title="Affordable Care Act" label="Affordable Care Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016991" start="62402" end="62436" title="Independent Payment Advisory Board" label="Independent Payment Advisory Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059764" start="64202" end="64245" title="Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation" label="Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q529344" start="66461" end="66470" title="Ron Wyden" label="Ron Wyden"/>
<link wikidata="Q203966" start="66480" end="66489" title="Paul Ryan" label="Paul Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="66491" end="66492" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="66493" end="66497" title="Wis." label="Wis."/>
<link wikidata="Q876787" start="66953" end="66976" title="The Heritage Foundation" label="The Heritage Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806632" start="67350" end="67368" title="Medicare Advantage" label="Medicare Advantage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721589" start="68724" end="68748" title="Kaiser Family Foundation" label="Kaiser Family Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6580225" start="70711" end="70741" title="Veterans Health Administration" label="Veterans Health Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806648" start="72407" end="72446" title="Medicare dual eligible" label="eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357620" start="76538" end="76550" title="means test" label="means-tested"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169419" start="76918" end="76936" title="perverse incentive" label="perverse incentive"/>
<link wikidata="Q109236245" start="78383" end="78400" title="Build Back Better Act" label="Build Back Better"/>
<link wikidata="Q476190" start="79656" end="79679" title="congressional committee" label="congressional committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5960173" start="79689" end="79698" title="congressional oversight" label="oversight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495418" start="79734" end="79768" title="United States Senate Committee on Appropriations" label="Senate Committee on Appropriations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891231" start="79772" end="79853" title="United States Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Labor, Health and Human Services, Education, and Related Agencies" label="Subcommittee on Labor, Health and Human Services, Education, and Related Agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q142538" start="79856" end="79879" title="United States Senate Committee on the Budget" label="Senate Budget Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985424" start="79882" end="79909" title="United States Senate Committee on Finance" label="Senate Committee on Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489338" start="79912" end="79974" title="United States Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs" label="Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891330" start="79978" end="80081" title="United States Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Subcommittee on Oversight of Government Management, the Federal Workforce and the District of Columbia" label="Subcommittee on Oversight of Government Management, the Federal Workforce, and the District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495438" start="80084" end="80141" title="United States Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions" label="Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891329" start="80145" end="80241" title="United States Senate Homeland Security Subcommittee on Financial and Contracting Oversight" label="Subcommittee on Federal Financial Management, Government Information, and International Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891326" start="80245" end="80285" title="United States Senate Health Subcommittee on Primary Health and Retirement Security" label="Subcommittee on Primary Health and Aging"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891353" start="80288" end="80321" title="United States Senate Special Committee on Aging" label="Senate Special Committee on Aging"/>
<link wikidata="Q10863020" start="80333" end="80366" title="United States House Committee on Appropriations" label="House Committee on Appropriations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889944" start="80370" end="80451" title="United States House Appropriations Subcommittee on Labor, Health and Human Services, Education, and Related Agencies" label="Subcommittee on Labor, Health and Human Services, Education, and Related Agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11899544" start="80454" end="80476" title="United States House Committee on the Budget" label="House Budget Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1560114" start="80479" end="80517" title="United States House Committee on Energy and Commerce" label="House Committee on Energy and Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890001" start="80521" end="80543" title="United States House Energy Subcommittee on Health" label="Subcommittee on Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890002" start="80547" end="80591" title="United States House Energy Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations" label="Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889982" start="80594" end="80624" title="United States House Committee on Small Business" label="House Small Business Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q260239" start="80627" end="80660" title="United States House Committee on Ways and Means" label="House Committee on Ways and Means"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890092" start="80664" end="80686" title="United States House Ways and Means Subcommittee on Health" label="Subcommittee on Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673148" start="80698" end="80722" title="United States Congress Joint Economic Committee" label="Joint Economic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q358782" start="80740" end="80763" title="Administration on Aging" label="Administration on Aging"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440261" start="80766" end="80801" title="Federal Insurance Contributions Act" label="Federal Insurance Contributions Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358017" start="80804" end="80836" title="Health care in the United States" label="Health care in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519812" start="80839" end="80859" title="Health care politics" label="Health care politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156735" start="80862" end="80901" title="Health care reform in the United States" label="Health care reform in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691099" start="80904" end="80941" title="Health insurance in the United States" label="Health insurance in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793339" start="80944" end="80957" title="Maurice Mazel" label="Maurice Mazel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141363" start="80960" end="80968" title="Medicaid" label="Medicaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590113" start="80971" end="80991" title="Medicare (Australia)" label="Medicare (Australia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806631" start="80994" end="81011" title="Medicare (Canada)" label="Medicare (Canada)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865084" start="81014" end="81066" title="Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015" label="Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890779" start="81069" end="81089" title="Medicare for All Act" label="Medicare for All Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806638" start="81092" end="81139" title="Medicare Physician Group Practice Demonstration" label="Medicare Physician Group Practice Demonstration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806643" start="81142" end="81176" title="Medicare Prompt Pay Correction Act" label="Medicare Prompt Pay Correction Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806642" start="81179" end="81225" title="Medicare Quality Cancer Care Demonstration Act" label="Medicare Quality Cancer Care Demonstration Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933026" start="81228" end="81250" title="Medicare Rights Center" label="Medicare Rights Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="81253" end="81276" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="81278" end="81292" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5913573" start="81296" end="81358" title="National Quality Cancer Care Demonstration Project Act of 2009" label="National Quality Cancer Care Demonstration Project Act of 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414593" start="81361" end="81403" title="Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act" label="Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186266" start="81418" end="81442" title="Philosophy of healthcare" label="Philosophy of healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021512" start="81445" end="81469" title="Single-payer health care" label="Single-payer health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601961" start="81472" end="81481" title="Stark Law" label="Stark Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q972414" start="81651" end="81681" title="Congressional Research Service" label="Congressional Research Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q972414" start="81723" end="81753" title="Congressional Research Service" label="Congressional Research Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928358" start="81903" end="81906" title="United States Government Publishing Office" label="GPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="82874" end="82892" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58354" wikidata="Q6806631" url="?curid=58354" title="Medicare (Canada)">
<text>Medicare () is an unofficial designation used to refer to the publicly funded single-payer healthcare system of Canada. Canada&#x27;s health care system consists of 13 provincial and territorial health insurance plans, which provide universal healthcare coverage to Canadian citizens, permanent residents, and depending on the province or territory, certain temporary residents. The systems are individually administered on a provincial or territorial basis, within guidelines set by the federal government. The formal terminology for the insurance system is provided by the &quot;Canada Health Act&quot; and the health insurance legislation of the individual provinces and territories.

The name is a contraction of &quot;medical&quot; and &quot;care&quot; and has been used in the United States for health care programs since at least 1953, with Medicare becoming that nation&#x27;s official national health insurance program in 1965.

Under the terms of the &quot;Canada Health Act&quot;, all &quot;insured persons&quot; are entitled to receive &quot;insured services&quot; without copayment. Such services are defined as medically necessary services if provided in hospital or by practitioners (usually physicians). Approximately 70 percent of expenditures for healthcare in Canada come from public sources, with the rest paid privately (through both private insurance and out-of-pocket payments). The extent of public financing varies considerably across services. For example, approximately 99 percent of physician services and 90 percent of hospital care are paid by publicly funded sources, but almost all dental care is paid for privately. Most physicians are self-employed private entities that enjoy coverage under each province&#x27;s respective healthcare plans.

Services of non-physicians working within hospitals are covered; conversely, provinces have the option to cover services by non-physicians if they are provided outside hospitals. Changing the site of treatment may thus change coverage. For example, pharmaceuticals, nursing care, and physical therapy must be covered for inpatients, but there is considerable variation from province to province in the extent to which they are covered for patients discharged to the community such as after day surgery. The need to modernize coverage was pointed out in 2002 by both the Romanow Commission and the Kirby committee of the Canadian Senate (see External links below). Similarly, the extent to which non-physician providers of primary care are funded varies. For example, Quebec offers primary health care teams through its CLSC system.

==History==
Prior to World War II, health care in Canada was privately funded and delivered, with the exception of services provided to the sick poor that were financed by local governments. The traumatic experience of the 1930s left many Canadians in challenging financial situations. As personal financial situations deteriorated, the municipal governments were overwhelmed. Though the provinces provided relief payments for food, clothing, and shelter, additional medical costs were beyond the capacity of most of the provincial budgets. Many Canadians were not receiving adequate medical care, and those that did were overwhelmed with the associated costs. As such, preventable diseases and deaths were still common occurrences.

Ten years of economic depression, followed by six years of worldwide war, formed the social context of ambitious federal Green Book proposals. In a bid for unprecedented cooperation between the federal and provincial governments, these initiatives formed the foundations of a national program for social security, including provisions for health insurance. However, the failure to come to a consensus on the required allocation of tax resources at the Dominion-Provincial Conference in August 1945 precluded adoption and delayed subsequent action. Although the Green Book proposals were not adopted, they effectively created an appetite for government-funded health services.

Following the Green Book proposals, Saskatchewan in 1947 and Alberta in 1950, under provincial governments led by the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation (CCF) and the Social Credit party respectively, led initiatives to implement publicly funded health care at the provincial level. The first implementation of public health care at the federal level came about with the &quot;Hospital Insurance and Diagnostic Services Act&quot; (HIDS), which was passed by the Liberal majority government of Louis St. Laurent in 1957, and was adopted by all provinces by 1961. The HIDS implemented a high degree of federal regulation of the provincial health systems.


The fight for a broad publicly funded system began at the provincial level, and was originally led by Saskatchewan Premier Tommy Douglas and the CCF, who won the 1960 Saskatchewan general election on a campaign promise of publicly funded health care, over the opposition of the medical profession. When Douglas resigned to become the leader of the new federal New Democratic Party in 1961, the task of implementing Medicare fell to Woodrow Stanley Lloyd, who succeeded Douglas as premier. Lloyd overcame considerable public opposition to the plan, including a strike by the province&#x27;s doctors, who withdrew their services from the public in opposition to the proposed medicare plan. The resolution of the dispute was assisted by mediation by a British Labour peer, Lord Taylor, who had been involved in the development of the National Health Service in Britain.

The next stage in the development of Medicare was the Royal Commission on Health Services, 1961 to 1964, often cited as the Hall Commission, after its chair, Supreme Court Justice Emmett Hall. The commission was created by another Saskatchewanian, Prime Minister John G. Diefenbaker, who appointed Hall, also from Saskatchewan, to chair the commission. Both Diefenbaker and Hall were Progressive Conservatives, unlike the CCF government of Saskatchewan. In 1964, after intensive study and public consultations, the Hall Commission released the first volume of its report, calling for federal funding for a national medicare plan.

By the time the Hall Commission made its report, the Diefenbaker government had been defeated in the 1963 federal election. The new prime minister, Lester Pearson, had campaigned on establishing a national health care system. He began to work towards implementing a plan. His first Minister of Health, Judy LaMarsh, continued internal reviews and consultations with her provincial counterparts to implement the proposals. Pearson also consulted with the provincial premiers, and encountered provincial opposition. Alberta, Quebec, and Ontario all opposed the initial federal proposals, suggesting that each province should develop its own plan. Following his initial consultations, Pearson and his government developed a new, more decentralised plan. Relying on the advice of Al Johnson, the federal Deputy Minister of Finance and former Deputy Provincial Treasurer in Saskatchewan during the development of Medicare, the new plan set out four requirements. To be eligible for federal funding, a province would have to have (1) a publicly administered funding system, (2) providing universal coverage to residents, (3) for medically necessary services, (4) with portability when people moved. Although the provincial premiers were surprised that the proposal lacked central regulation of health care, continuing to leave the operation of the health systems to the provinces, some premiers such as Premier Manning of Alberta continued to oppose the federal proposal.
In the 1965 federal election, the Liberals campaigned on implementing their proposal. Although they were re-elected, it was with a minority, meaning that they would need at least some opposition support to have their proposed plan passed by Parliament. A split now developed in the Liberal Cabinet and caucus. The new Minister of Health and Welfare, Allan MacEachen, pushed for the enactment of the proposals, introducing the &quot;Medical Care Act, 1966&quot; into Parliament. Although opposed by the MPs for Progressive Conservative Party and Social Credit, the bill received support from the New Democratic Party, led by Tommy Douglas. It passed first reading in the House of Commons.

However, when Prime Minister Pearson left the country to attend a Commonwealth conference, the Acting Prime Minister and Minister of Finance, Mitchell Sharp, stated that the government might not be able to afford the new program, in light of the financial state of the country, and called to defer passage. The proposed policy shift almost triggered MacEachen&#x27;s resignation, and generated internal debates in the Liberal party. As word of the split within the Liberals became public, the PC and Social Credit MPs began to put greater pressure on the government to stop the bill in the Commons. The bill eventually passed second and third readings with NDP support, after contentious debates. The government agreed to defer implementation of the Act for one year, coming in force on July 1, 1968.

In 1984, the &quot;Canada Health Act&quot; was passed, amalgamating the 1966 &quot;Medical Care Act&quot; and the 1957 &quot;Hospital Insurance and Diagnostic Services Act&quot;. The &quot;Canada Health Act&quot; affirmed and clarified five founding principles: (a) &quot;public administration&quot; on a non-profit basis by a public authority; (b) &quot;comprehensiveness&quot; – provincial health plans must insure all services that are medically necessary; (c) &quot;universality&quot; – a guarantee that all residents in Canada must have access to public healthcare and insured services on uniform terms and conditions; (d) &quot;portability&quot; – residents must be covered while temporarily absent from their province of residence or from Canada; and (e) &quot;accessibility&quot; – insured persons must have reasonable and uniform access to insured health services, free of financial or other barriers. These five conditions prevent provinces from radical innovation, but many small differences do exist between the provinces.

==Eligibility==
Each province and territory can establish residency requirements for eligibility for coverage. For example, to qualify for enrollment in Ontario, one must, among other requirements, &quot;be physically present in Ontario for 153 days in any 12-month period; and be physically present in Ontario for at least 153 days of the first 183 days immediately after establishing residency in the province.&quot;

==Funding==
According to the Canadian Constitution, the provinces have responsibility for health care, education and welfare. However, the federal &quot;Canada Health Act&quot; sets standards for all the provinces. The &quot;Canada Health Act&quot; requires coverage for all medically necessary care provided in hospitals or by physicians, which explicitly includes diagnostic, treatment and preventive services. Coverage is universal for qualifying Canadian residents, regardless of income level.

Funding for the health care is transferred from the general revenues of the Canadian federal government to the 10 provinces and the 3 territories through the Canada Health Transfer. Some provinces also charge annual health care premiums. These are, in effect, taxes (since they are not tied to service use, nor to provincial health expenditures). The system is accordingly classified by the OECD as a tax-supported system, as opposed to the social insurance approaches used in many European countries. Boards in each province or territory regulate the cost, which is then reimbursed by the provincial or territorial government. Patients do not pay out of pocket costs to visit their doctor.

==Delivery==
Canada uses a mix of public and private organizations to deliver health care in what is termed a publicly funded, privately delivered system. Hospitals and acute care facilities, including long term complex care, are typically directly funded. Health care organizations bill the provincial health authorities, with few exceptions. Hospitals are largely non-profit organizations, historically often linked to religious or charitable organizations. In some provinces, individual hospital boards have been eliminated and combined into quasi-private regional health authorities, subject to varying degrees of provincial control.

Private services are provided by diagnostic laboratories, occupational and physical therapy centres, and other allied professionals. Non-medically necessary services, such as optional plastic surgery, are also often delivered by for-profit investor-owned corporations. In some cases patients pay directly and are reimbursed by the health care system, and in other cases a hospital or physician may order services and seek reimbursement from the provincial government.

With rare exceptions, medical doctors are small for-profit independent businesses. Historically, they have practised in small solo or group practices and billed the government Canadian Health Care system on a fee for service basis. Unlike the practice in fully socialized countries, hospital-based physicians are not all hospital employees, and some directly bill the provincial insurance plans on a fee-for-service basis. Since 2000, physicians have been allowed to incorporate for tax reasons (dates of authorization vary province to province).

Efforts to achieve &quot;primary health care reform&quot; have increasingly encouraged physicians to work in multidisciplinary teams, and be paid through blended funding models, including elements of capitation and other &#x27;alternative funding formulas&#x27;. Similarly, some hospitals (particularly teaching hospitals and rural/remote hospitals) have also experimented with alternatives to fee-for-service.

In summary, the system is known as a &quot;public system&quot; due to its public financing, but is not a nationalized system such as the UK&#x27;s NHS: most health care services are provided privately.

An additional complexity is that, because health care is under provincial jurisdiction, there is not a &quot;Canadian health care system&quot;. Most providers are private, and may or may not coordinate their care. Publicly funded insurance is organized at the level of the province/territory; each manages its own insurance system, including issuing its own healthcare identification cards (a list of the provincial medical care insurance programs is given at the end of this entry). Once care moves beyond the services required by the &quot;Canada Health Act&quot;—for which universal comprehensive coverage applies—there is inconsistency from province to province in the extent of publicly funded coverage, particularly for such items as outpatient drug coverage and rehabilitation, as well as vision care, mental health, and long-term care, with a substantial portion of such services being paid for privately, either through private insurance, or out-of-pocket. Eligibility for these additional programs may be based on various combinations of such factors as age (e.g., children, seniors), income, enrollment in a home care program, or diagnosis (e.g., HIV/AIDS, cancer, cystic fibrosis).

According to a 1958 study, Provincial governments have been responsible for providing necessary medical and hospital care &quot;to indigent residents of municipally unorganized territory&quot;.

===Drug coverage===
Unlike every other country with universal health insurance systems, Canada lacks a universal pharmaceutical subsidy scheme, with co-payment, cost ceilings, and special subsidy groups varying by private insurer and by province. Each province may provide its own prescription drug benefit plan, although the &quot;Canada Health Act&quot; requires only coverage for pharmaceuticals delivered to hospital inpatients. Provincial prescription drug benefit plans differ across provinces. Some provinces cover only those in particular age groups (usually, seniors) and/or those on social assistance. Others are more universal. Quebec achieves universal coverage through a combination of private and public plans. Co-payments also vary. Provinces maintain their own provincial formularies, although the Common Drug Review provides evidence-based formulary listing recommendations to the provincial ministries. Note that there is ongoing controversy in Canada, as in other countries, about inclusion of expensive drugs and discrepancies in their availability, as well as in what if any provisions are made for allowing medications not yet approved to be administered under &quot;exceptional drug&quot; provisions. Drug costs are contentious. Their prices are controlled by the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB). The PMPRB&#x27;s pricing formula ensures that Canada pays prices based on the average of those charged to selected countries; they are neither the highest, nor the lowest.

Since Medicare has been adopted, there have been regular pushes to add universal pharmacare to it. This came to a head in 2022, when the New Democratic Party and the governing Liberal Party negotiated a supply and confidence agreement, with pharmacare being one of the core concessions the Liberals made in exchange for the NDP&#x27;s confidence. As a result of this coalition, Canada&#x27;s pharmacare act received royal assent on October 10, 2024, with the first phase creating a single payer system for contraceptives and diabetic medications, as well as the creation of a government agency to identify which drugs will be added next. Since becoming law, the federal government has begun negotiating with the provinces on how it will be implemted, with British Columbia becoming the first province to sign on to the program.

===Dental care, eye care, and other services===
Dental care is not required to be covered by the government insurance plans. In Quebec, children under the age of 10 receive almost full coverage, and many oral surgeries are covered for everyone. Canadians rely on their employers or individual private insurance, pay cash themselves for dental treatments, or receive no care. In some jurisdictions, public health units have been involved in providing targeted programs to address the need of the young, the elderly or those who are on welfare. The Canadian Association of Public Health Dentistry tracks programs, and has been advocating for extending coverage to those currently unable to receive dental care.

The range of services for vision care coverage also varies widely among the provinces. Generally, &quot;medically required&quot; vision care is covered if provided by physicians (cataract surgery, diabetic vision care, some laser eye surgeries required as a result of disease, but not if the purpose is to replace the need for eyeglasses). Similarly, the standard vision test may or may not be covered. Some provinces allow a limited number of tests (e.g., no more than once within a two-year period). Others, including Ontario, Alberta, Saskatchewan, and British Columbia, do not, although different provisions may apply to particular sub-groups (e.g., diabetics, children).

Naturopathic services are covered in some cases, but homeopathic services are generally not covered. Chiropractic is partially covered in some provinces. Cosmetic procedures are not typically covered. Psychiatric services (provided by physicians) are covered, fee-for-service psychology services outside of hospitals or community based mental health clinics are usually not. Physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech therapy, nursing, and chiropractic services are often not covered unless within hospitals. Some provinces, including Ontario include some rehabilitation services for those in the home care program, those recently discharged from hospitals (e.g., after a hip replacement), or those in particular age categories. Again, considerable variation exists, and provinces can (and do) alter their coverage decisions.

==Inter-provincial imbalances==
The fact that health insurance plans are administered by the provinces and territories in a country where large numbers of residents of certain provinces work in other provinces may lead to inequitable inter-provincial outcomes with respect to revenues and expenditures. For example, many residents of the Atlantic provinces work in the oil and gas industry in the western province of Alberta. For most of the year these workers may be contributing significant tax revenue to Alberta (e.g. through fuel, tobacco and alcohol taxes) while their health insurance costs are borne by their home province in Atlantic Canada.

Another considerable inter-provincial imbalance is a person who is insured by Quebec and obtains healthcare in another province or territory. Quebec does not have any physician payment agreements with any other provinces or territories of Canada. As a result, someone that sees a physician outside Quebec, even in another part of Canada, must either pay the cost themselves and submit a request to the Régie de l&#x27;Assurance Maladie du Québec (RAMQ Medicare) for reimbursement (even then, expenses are often denied), or take out a third party insurance plan. The same situation also applies to a resident of any other part of Canada visiting Quebec, only they submit any claims to their respective provincial healthplan. All provinces and territories of Canada, however, do have reciprocal hospital agreements, so hospital admissions, for example, are covered throughout Canada.

==Opinions and activism on Canadian health care==

Polling data in the last few years have consistently cited Canadian Health Care as among the most important political issues in the minds of Canadian voters. Along with peacekeeping, Canadian Health Care was found, based on a CBC poll, to be among the foremost defining characteristics of Canada.

It has increasingly become a source of controversy in Canadian politics. As a recent report from the Health Council of Canada has noted
&quot;Herein lies one of the puzzles of Canadian health care: Canadians increasingly view the health care system as unsustainable and under threat, even as their own experiences with the system are mostly positive.&quot;

As analysts have noted, the root of the concern may be traced to successful cost control efforts in the mid-1990s, where public health expenditure per capita, in inflation-adjusted dollars, actually fell. These efforts arose from efforts by the federal government to deal with its deficit through various austerity measures, which led to cuts in their transfers to the provinces, and in turn to squeezing hospital budgets and physician reimbursements. The number of physicians being trained was reduced. The result was seen in increased wait times, particularly for elective procedures. More recently, government has been reinvesting in health care, but public confidence has been slow to recover.

A number of studies have compared Canada with other countries, and concluded that each system has its own strengths and weaknesses. The World Health Organization, ranked Canada in 2000 as 30th worldwide in performance. However, the basis for these rankings has been highly contentious. As Deber noted, &quot;The measure of &quot;overall health system performance&quot; derives from adjusting &quot;goal attainment&quot; for educational attainment. Although goal attainment is in theory based on five measures (level and distribution of health, level and distribution of &quot;responsiveness&quot; and &quot;fairness of financial contribution&quot;), the actual values assigned to most countries, including Canada, were never directly measured. The scores do not incorporate any information about the actual workings of the system, other than as reflected in life expectancy. The primary reason for Canada&#x27;s relatively low standing rests on the relatively high educational level of its population, particularly as compared to France, rather than on any features of its health system.&quot; Other countries had similar complaints, and the WHO has not repeated this ranking.

There has been considerable opposition to ongoing changes to the Canadian health system. This opposition has been largely spearheaded by the New Democratic Party. There is also activism by a volunteer community, particularly the Canadian Health Coalition (*[www.healthcoalition.ca]) and its provincial affiliates, as well as other organizations such as the Council for Canadians ().

==2003 Accord==
In 2003, the prime minister and the provincial premiers agreed upon priority areas for reinvestment. The 2003 First Ministers&#x27; Accord on Health Care Renewal reaffirmed their commitment to the principles of the &quot;Canada Health Act&quot;. They indicated the following principles:

&quot;Drawing from this foundation, First Ministers view this Accord as a covenant which will help to ensure that:
* all Canadians have timely access to health services on the basis of need, not ability to pay, regardless of where they live or move in Canada;
* the health care services available to Canadians are of high quality, effective, patient-centred and safe; and
* our health care system is sustainable and affordable and will be here for Canadians and their children in the future.&quot;

The accord set the following priority areas: primary health care, home care, catastrophic drug coverage, access to diagnostic/medical equipment and information technology and an electronic health record. The extent of progress in meeting reform goals has varied across these areas.

==Evaluating claims about the system==
Evaluating the accuracy of claims about the system is hampered by several factors. The highly decentralized nature of health care delivery means that good data is not always available. It is often difficult to distinguish compelling but atypical anecdotes from systemic problems. Considerable effort is being made to develop and implement comparable indicators to allow better assessment of progress. However, the Health Council of Canada—with a mandate to monitor and report on health reform—complained in 2007 that progress has stalled.

The debate about health care has also become heavily ideological. The Fraser Institute, a right leaning think tank supporting &quot;competitive market solutions for public policy problems&quot; is a frequent critic of publicly funded Canadian Health Care. It publishes yearly reports about wait times which are then used to argue that the system is both failing and unsustainable. Others criticize their methodology, which is based on physician perceptions rather than actual waits. Other complaints come from the political left, who object to &#x27;privatization&#x27; (by which they usually mean a heavier involvement of for-profit providers). (See, for example, the Canadian Health Coalition web page.)

===Wait times and access===
Common complaints relate to access, usually to accessing family physicians (with wait times beyond 365 days in Montreal), to elective surgery (especially hip and knee replacement and cataract surgery) and diagnostic imaging. These have been the primary targets of health care reinvestment, and it appears that considerable progress has been made for certain services, although the implications for procedures not on the target list are unclear. Canadian physicians have been heavily involved, particularly in developing appropriateness criteria to ensure timely access for necessary care. It is estimated to have cost Canada&#x27;s economy $14.8 billion in 2007 to have patients waiting longer than needed for medical procedures, assuming all patients normally work, and cannot work while waiting.
The Fraser Institute completed a study in October 2013, &quot;Waiting Your Turn: Wait Times for Health Care in Canada&quot;. The authors surveyed both private and publicly funded outpatient health care offices and estimated the amount of wait time between general practitioner and specialists for elective treatments such as getting breast implants. The Fraser Institute estimates that the wait times for elective treatments have increased 95 percent from 1993 to 2013.

===Health human resources===
A related issue is the volume, and distribution, of health human resources. There are ongoing issues about the distribution of physicians, with the pendulum swinging from arguing that there were too many, to arguing that there were too few. As Ben Chan found, the major factor driving the drop in physician numbers was changes in training programs. Combined with such factors as changes in the hours worked by each physician, and a decrease in the proportion of doctors choosing to go into family practice, there were shortages in some areas, particularly for general practitioners (GP) / family doctors. One response has been to encourage &#x27;primary care reform&#x27;, including greater use of multidisciplinary health care teams. There are also ongoing issues regarding nurses. (See Nursing Health Services Research Unit, which links to some reports. CIHI also gives data about nursing.)

===Delisting===
Delisting is the term used in Canada when a province decides that a medical procedure will no longer be covered by the health care system in that province.

While health care coverage is country wide, and is required to be portable and to have equal access, there are a few differences between what provinces will cover. In some cases, this has resulted in lost grants to the provinces; in other cases it has not.

An example of a delisted service is circumcision in Ontario. It is still possible to have a boy circumcised in Ontario by a doctor but the parents must pay the cost.

The issue of delisting services is becoming increasingly a political battleground in Canadian health care. In an effort to cut their health care budgets, some provincial governments will opt to delist specific services under the guise that they lack essential medical necessity; however, the question of what qualifies as medical necessity is in these instances typically debated. For example, except for seniors, children, and diabetics eye exams to check vision are no longer covered in Ontario.

==Parallel private debate==
Some politicians and think tanks have proposed removing barriers to the existence of a parallel private healthcare system. Others note that such systems act to erode cost control and impede equity.
Though polling suggests support for such reforms has been increasing, it has yet to be adopted as official policy by any of the main federal political parties.

Under federal law, private clinics are not legally allowed to charge patients directly for services covered by the &quot;Canada Health Act&#x27;, if they qualify for public insurance. Regardless of this legal issue, many do offer such services. There are disputes as to whether surgical procedures can be performed. Two related issues have obstructed the growth of such clinics. One is regulatory – hospital-based quality assurance often failed to encompass them. This gap has been filled in most provinces, but sometimes only after celebrated incidents in which patients died in unregulated clinics, including one physician who performed cosmetic surgery in an Ontario hotel room. The second is economic — there may be no way for physicians to recoup the additional costs of running a surgical facility from their fees. Here, provinces can choose to offer &#x27;facility fees&#x27; to these clinics, but doing so has often been contentious, particularly if hospitals felt that these costs would be better devoted to allowing them to increase their operating room time.

Note that uninsured persons can pay for care (including medical tourism), and that insured persons can still pay for uninsured services. These are both niche markets.

Opponents of Canadian health care often raise issues such as long wait times, a &#x27;brain-drain&#x27; drawing qualified professionals away from Canada to other jurisdictions where working in the health care field is more profitable, and impairment of the Canadian health care system due to budget cuts. Fox News ran a story in 2007 reporting that during a period of above average numbers of births, at least 40 Canadian mothers of premature babies had to travel to the U.S. for treatment due to insufficient capacity for premature babies in British Columbia neonatal units. Nonetheless, Canada&#x27;s health care system covered the health care costs of those mothers affected.

In 2003, the Government in Canada spent US$2,998 per capita on healthcare as compared to US$5,711 per capita in the United States, while almost every Canadian citizen is fully covered. In the United States, 11.9 percent of adults lack public or private health coverage, despite higher proportional spending along with large private investment.

The lack of competition has given healthcare unions a monopoly on essential services, thus ensuring a very strong bargaining position. Nova Scotia is currently debating healthcare legislation aimed at removing the threat of striking healthcare workers and replacing it with binding arbitration.

==Proposed reforms==

One proposed solution for improving the Canadian healthcare system is to increase funding. Proponents of this approach point to the rise of neo-conservative economic policies in Canada and the associated reduction in welfare state expenditure (particularly in the provinces) from the 1980s onwards as the cause of degradation in the system. While some say evidence clearly indicate an overall percentage increase on healthcare spending, the net spending has been drastically decreasing on top of inflation.

Other critics of healthcare state that increased funding will not solve systemic problems in the healthcare system including a rising cost of medical technology, infrastructure, and wages. These critics say that Canada&#x27;s proximity to the United States causes a &quot;brain drain&quot; or migration of Canadian-trained doctors and nurses (as well as other professionals) to the United States, where private hospitals can pay much higher wages and income tax rates are lower (partially because health care is not covered through taxation). Some of these critics argue that increased privatization of healthcare would improve Canada&#x27;s health infrastructure. Others argue vehemently against it. For example, large resources are required to train and educate doctors. Since the number of available doctors is therefore limited, doctors working for a private system would not be working under the public system creating little to no net increase in available services.

Critics of greater privatization state that funding for healthcare should be kept public (most services are provided by the private sector including doctors, who, in most cases, are private), in part because it separates Canadians from Americans by mandating equality and fairness in health care. That is in contrast to other countries, whose doctors are on a salary per capita. In that sense, Canadian healthcare is publicly funded, and services are provided by a mixture of public and private entities, which most Canadians support. Changing the system to eliminate the balance between public and private service providers to a completely public system is one such alternative.

==Ontario&#x27;s reform experiments==
Since the early 1990s, Ontario has implemented several systematic reforms to reduce health care costs. Similar reforms have been implemented in other provinces.

===User premiums===
Currently in Ontario, people with an annual taxable income above $20,000 must pay an annual health care premium ranging from $60–$900. Funding for health care in Ontario also comes in part from a dedicated Employer Health Tax (EHT) that ranges from 0.98 percent to 1.95 percent of employer payroll. Eligible employers are exempted from EHT on the first $400,000 of payroll. British Columbia and Quebec charge similar premiums.

===Medical clinics===
Ontario has increased the number of 24-hour drop-in medical clinic networks to reduce costs associated with treating off-hours emergencies in hospital emergency rooms.

Many family doctor practices have created their own clinics, offering 24-hour service for their patients if needed. Each doctor in the practice takes a turn at being &quot;on call&quot; on a rotating basis. Patients who have family doctors belonging to these practices are able to have a doctor come to their home in extreme situations. There is no additional charge for these services as they are billed to the Province, the same as an office visit.

Hospitals in some major Canadian cities, such as London, Ontario, have restructured their emergency services to share emergency treatment among several hospitals. One hospital may provide full emergency room care, while another sees patients who have broken limbs, minor injuries and yet another sees patients suffering cold, flu, etc.

In 2007, the first nurse practitioner-led office to relieve waiting times caused by a shortage of primary practitioners was opened in Sudbury, Ontario.

===Alternatives to fee-for-visit or service===
Ontario has also attempted to move the system away from bill for service or visit and toward preventive and community-based approaches to healthcare. The Ontario government in the early 1990s helped develop many community health care centres, often in low-income areas, which provide both medical and social support which combines health care with programs such as collective kitchens, Internet access, anti-poverty groups and groups to help people quit smoking.

While funding has decreased for these centres, and they have had to cut back, they have had a lower cost than the traditional fee-for-service approach. Many of these centres are filled to capacity in terms of general doctors, and there are often fairly long waiting lists and the centres also utilize nurse practitioners, who reduce the workload on the doctors and increase efficiency.

===Midwives and hospital birthing reforms===
Ontario and Quebec have recently licensed midwives, providing another option for childbirth which can reduce costs for uncomplicated births. Midwives remain close to hospital facilities in case the need for emergency care emerges. These births often cost much less than the traditional hospital delivery. Hospitals have also reformed their approach to birthing by adding private birthing areas, often with a hot tub (which is good for relieving pain without medication).

===Privatization===
Currently, privately owned and operated hospitals that allow patients to pay out-of-pocket for services cannot obtain public funding in Canada, as they contravene the &quot;equal accessibility&quot; tenets of the &quot;Canada Health Act&quot;. Some politicians and medical professionals have proposed allowing public funding for these hospitals. Workers&#x27; Compensation Boards, the Canadian Forces, the RCMP, federally incarcerated prisoners, and medical care for which an insurance company has liability (e.g., motor vehicle accidents) all pay for health care outside of the public systems in all provinces.

In Quebec, a recent legal change has allowed this reform to occur. In June 2005, the Supreme Court of Canada overturned a Quebec law preventing people from buying private health insurance to pay for medical services available through the publicly funded system and this ruling does not apply outside the province. See: Chaoulli v. Quebec (Attorney General).

In November 2005, the Quebec government announced that it would allow residents to purchase private medical insurance to comply with this ruling.

Private insurance from companies such as Blue Cross, Green Shield and Manulife have been available for many years to cover services not covered by the Canadian health care system, such as dental care and some eye care. Private insurance is provided by many employers as a benefit.

The Canadian Medical Association (CMA) released a report in July 2007 endorsing private healthcare as a means to improve an ailing healthcare system. Dr. Brian Day, who acted as President of the CMA in 2007/2008, is the owner of the largest private healthcare hospital in Canada and a proponent of mixed public and private healthcare in Canada.

===Canadian Health Practitioner standards===
It is generally accepted that physicians arriving in Canada from other countries must meet Canadian Health Practitioner standards. So there is concern that doctors from other countries are not trained or educated to meet Canadian standards. Consequently, doctors who want to practise in Canada must meet the same educational and medical qualifications as Canadian-trained practitioners. Others suggest that the Canadian Medical Association, the Ontario Medical Association, and the regulatory bodies (the provincial Colleges of Physicians and Surgeons) have created too much red tape to allow qualified doctors to practise in Canada. Canada&#x27;s health system is ranked 30th in the world, suggesting the logic of the doctor shortage defies the statistics. In fact according to a report by Keith Leslie of the Canadian Press in the Chronicle Journal, November 21, 2005, over 10,000 trained doctors are working in the United States, a country ranked 37th in the world. It would suggest money or the perception of better working conditions, or both, are resulting in an exodus of Canadian doctors (and nurses) to the USA.

It is important to recognize that many consider the doctor shortage in Canada to be a very severe problem affecting all sectors of health care. It may relate in part to the details of how doctors are paid; a detail often misunderstood. In Canada, almost all doctors receive a fee per-visit, not per-service. It has been suggested that this type of &quot;fee-for-visit&quot; payment system can encourage complexity, volume visits, repeat visits, referrals, and testing.

One consequence of the shortage in Canada is that a great many patients are left without family doctors, and trained specialists, making early intervention very difficult. As the article in the Toronto Star specially isolates, it is not so much a problem of a doctor shortage but of a shortage of &#x27;licensed doctors&#x27;. Michael Urbanski states that Canada already has a hidden reserve of foreign-trained MDs eager to begin medical practice. &quot;However, what&#x27;s crucial to understanding the issue of doctor shortage in Ontario is that while the Liberal government is planning to go &quot;poaching&quot; for other countries&#x27; doctors, there are an estimated 4,000 internationally trained doctors right here in Ontario working at low-wage jobs.&quot;

A CBC report [6](August 21, 2006) on the health care system reports the following:

Dr. Albert Schumacher, former president of the Canadian Medical Association estimates that 75 percent of health-care services are delivered privately, but funded publicly. &quot;Frontline practitioners whether they&#x27;re GPs or specialists by and large are not salaried. They&#x27;re small hardware stores. Same thing with labs and radiology clinics …The situation we are seeing now are more services around not being funded publicly but people having to pay for them, or their insurance companies. We have sort of a passive privatization.

In a report by Keith Leslie of the Canadian Press in the Chronicle Journal, November 21, 2005, commenting on an Ontario Medical Association Report, prepared by the human resources committee states &quot;The year 2005 finds the province in the midst of a deepening physician resources crisis&quot;. The report continues to report, &quot;the government should make it easier for doctors from other provinces to work in Ontario and ... &quot;. Here we have signs of inter-provincial competition affecting the doctor shortage in one province over another. Essentially, privatized healthcare is not a choice of interest for lower income Canadians, it is most likely to be unaffordable and unfair to those who suffer on a social standard.

==Provincial insurance plans==
Although the &quot;Canada Health Act&quot; provides national guidelines for healthcare, the provinces have exclusive jurisdiction over health under the constitution and are free to ignore these guidelines, although if they ignore the guidelines, the federal government may deny federal funding for healthcare. All provinces currently abide by the &quot;Canada Health Act&quot; in order to receive this funding; however the Alberta legislature has considered proposals to ignore the Act to allow them to implement reforms not allowed under the Act.

The federal government has no direct role in the delivery of medicine in the provinces and territories so each province and territory has its own independent public health insurance program. Under the &quot;Canada Health Act&quot;, each province and territory must provide services to members of plans in other provinces and territories.

===List of provincial programs===
==See also==
*Father of medicare
*Ontario Health Insurance Plan
*Medicare (Australia)
*Medicare (United States)
*National Health Service (UK)
*Canada Health Transfer
*Canada Health and Social Transfer
*Indian Health Transfer Policy
*Healthcare in Canada
* First Nations Health Authority
*Canadian Institute for Health Information
*Canadian and American health care systems compared
*Royal Commission on the Future of Health Care in Canada
*Saskatchewan doctors&#x27; strike of 1962
*Health Evidence Network of Canada

==References==
==External links==
*Canada Health Act
*Canadian Health Coalition (Canadian lobby group supporting public medicare)
*Medicare: A People&#x27;s Issue
*Maple Leaf Web: The Charter &amp; Public Health Care in Canada
*CBC Digital Archives – The Birth of Medicare
*Building on Values: The Future of Health Care in Canada (&quot;The Romanow Report&quot;, PDF) archived at Collections Canada
*Health Canada page linking to key Federal reports and commissions and their background material, including Romanow Report and Kirby Commission
*Pharmaceutical Pricing and Reimbursement Policies in Canada. OECD Health Working Papers 24, 2006
*Marchildon&#x27;s backgrounder on Canadian healthcare for WHO 2005
*Benjamin Isitt and Melissa Moroz, &quot;The Hospital Employees&#x27; Union Strike and the Privatization of Medicare in British Columbia, Canada,&quot; International Labor and Working-Class History, 71 (Spring 2007): 91–111</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6806631" start="0" end="8" title="Medicare (Canada)" label="Medicare"/>
<link wikidata="Q294308" start="62" end="77" title="publicly funded health care" label="publicly funded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021512" start="78" end="90" title="single-payer" label="single-payer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535133" start="91" end="108" title="healthcare in Canada" label="healthcare system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274205" start="233" end="253" title="universal healthcare" label="universal healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005289" start="266" end="282" title="Canadian citizen" label="Canadian citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578933" start="285" end="303" title="permanent residency in Canada" label="permanent resident"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408274" start="581" end="598" title="Canada Health Act" label="Canada Health Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q334911" start="613" end="629" title="health insurance" label="health insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="660" end="685" title="provinces and territories of Canada" label="provinces and territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q559392" start="848" end="856" title="Medicare (United States)" label="Medicare"/>
<link wikidata="Q317749" start="1085" end="1094" title="copayment" label="copayment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535133" start="1265" end="1285" title="healthcare in Canada" label="healthcare in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374041" start="2347" end="2365" title="Royal Commission on the Future of Health Care in Canada" label="Romanow Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q15516040" start="2374" end="2379" title="Michael J. L. Kirby" label="Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="2544" end="2550" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945858" start="2596" end="2600" title="CLSC" label="CLSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2631" end="2643" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599047" start="2805" end="2838" title="Great Depression in Canada" label="traumatic experience of the 1930s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453341" start="3796" end="3826" title="First Ministers&amp;#x27; conference" label="Dominion-Provincial Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104026" start="4139" end="4175" title="Co-operative Commonwealth Federation" label="Co-operative Commonwealth Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q951941" start="4190" end="4209" title="Social Credit Party of Canada" label="Social Credit party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5908457" start="4400" end="4446" title="Hospital Insurance and Diagnostic Services Act" label="Hospital Insurance and Diagnostic Services Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q128626" start="4516" end="4533" title="Louis St. Laurent" label="Louis St. Laurent"/>
<link wikidata="Q359653" start="4801" end="4814" title="Tommy Douglas" label="Tommy Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586443" start="4840" end="4874" title="1960 Saskatchewan general election" label="1960 Saskatchewan general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q130765" start="5038" end="5058" title="New Democratic Party" label="New Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q434670" start="5110" end="5131" title="Woodrow Stanley Lloyd" label="Woodrow Stanley Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7425194" start="5238" end="5275" title="Saskatchewan doctors&amp;#x27; strike" label="strike by the province&amp;#x27;s doctors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345132" start="5448" end="5459" title="Stephen Taylor, Baron Taylor" label="Lord Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373541" start="5726" end="5737" title="Emmett Matthew Hall" label="Emmett Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q128614" start="5809" end="5828" title="John G. Diefenbaker" label="John G. Diefenbaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292617" start="5930" end="5955" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada" label="Progressive Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q937472" start="6278" end="6299" title="1963 Canadian federal election" label="1963 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q724786" start="6479" end="6491" title="Judy LaMarsh" label="Judy LaMarsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711453" start="6953" end="6963" title="Albert Wesley Johnson" label="Al Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q780004" start="7650" end="7671" title="1965 Canadian federal election" label="1965 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q740733" start="7993" end="8008" title="Allan MacEachen" label="Allan MacEachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292617" start="8153" end="8183" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada" label="Progressive Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q456527" start="8474" end="8488" title="Mitchell Sharp" label="Mitchell Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q899061" start="10619" end="10640" title="Canadian Constitution" label="Canadian Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029383" start="11247" end="11269" title="Canada Health Transfer" label="Canada Health Transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="11480" end="11484" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691139" start="12340" end="12367" title="Health regions of Canada" label="regional health authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441151" start="13098" end="13113" title="fee for service" label="fee for service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813474" start="13740" end="13757" title="teaching hospital" label="teaching hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="13996" end="13999" title="National Health Service" label="NHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029662" start="16256" end="16274" title="Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health" label="Common Drug Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144531" start="16729" end="16766" title="Patented Medicine Prices Review Board" label="Patented Medicine Prices Review Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q12128" start="17826" end="17837" title="Dentistry" label="Dental care"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454975" start="21050" end="21093" title="Régie de l&amp;#x27;Assurance Maladie du Québec" label="Régie de l&amp;#x27;Assurance Maladie du Québec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354958" start="21751" end="21763" title="peacekeeping" label="peacekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="21808" end="21811" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="CBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q10871684" start="25480" end="25504" title="electronic health record" label="electronic health record"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451353" start="26234" end="26250" title="Fraser Institute" label="Fraser Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q840925" start="27517" end="27538" title="economy of Canada" label="Canada&amp;#x27;s economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104069" start="27539" end="27540" title="Canadian dollar" label="$"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002196" start="28022" end="28045" title="mammoplasty" label="getting breast implants"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="29137" end="29143" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q34876" start="29253" end="29261" title="province" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q230788" start="29469" end="29475" title="Grant (money)" label="grants"/>
<link wikidata="Q83345" start="29558" end="29570" title="circumcision" label="circumcision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="29574" end="29581" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="29646" end="29652" title="physician" label="doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q155271" start="30237" end="30247" title="think tank" label="think tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q757232" start="31702" end="31717" title="medical tourism" label="medical tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q190222" start="31900" end="31911" title="brain-drain" label="brain-drain"/>
<link wikidata="Q192139" start="33297" end="33313" title="Neoconservatism" label="neo-conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="33374" end="33387" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q190222" start="33937" end="33948" title="brain drain" label="brain drain"/>
<link wikidata="Q383434" start="37082" end="37098" title="Greater Sudbury" label="Sudbury, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q595071" start="37913" end="37931" title="nurse practitioner" label="nurse practitioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q185196" start="38086" end="38094" title="midwives" label="midwives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111392" start="38613" end="38626" title="Out-of-pocket expenses" label="out-of-pocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="38921" end="38936" title="Canadian Forces" label="Canadian Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072847" start="39468" end="39505" title="Chaoulli v. Quebec (Attorney General)" label="Chaoulli v. Quebec (Attorney General)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929017" start="39696" end="39706" title="Blue Cross Blue Shield Association" label="Blue Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q55137431" start="39708" end="39720" title="Green Shield Canada" label="Green Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652574" start="39725" end="39733" title="Manulife" label="Manulife"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963535" start="40087" end="40100" title="Brian Day" label="Dr. Brian Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867874" start="40739" end="40767" title="Canadian Medical Association" label="Canadian Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094835" start="40773" end="40800" title="Ontario Medical Association" label="Ontario Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983889" start="40844" end="40879" title="Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada" label="Colleges of Physicians and Surgeons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830185" start="42247" end="42263" title="Michael Urbanski" label="Michael Urbanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q899061" start="44231" end="44243" title="Constitution of Canada" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q422404" start="44329" end="44347" title="Government of Canada" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="44502" end="44509" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437683" start="45015" end="45033" title="Father of medicare" label="Father of medicare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094680" start="45035" end="45064" title="Ontario Health Insurance Plan" label="Ontario Health Insurance Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590113" start="45066" end="45086" title="Medicare (Australia)" label="Medicare (Australia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q559392" start="45088" end="45112" title="Medicare (United States)" label="Medicare (United States)"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="45114" end="45137" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029383" start="45144" end="45166" title="Canada Health Transfer" label="Canada Health Transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029384" start="45168" end="45201" title="Canada Health and Social Transfer" label="Canada Health and Social Transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020434" start="45203" end="45232" title="Indian Health Transfer Policy" label="Indian Health Transfer Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535133" start="45234" end="45254" title="Healthcare in Canada" label="Healthcare in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980795" start="45257" end="45287" title="First Nations Health Authority" label="First Nations Health Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030175" start="45289" end="45330" title="Canadian Institute for Health Information" label="Canadian Institute for Health Information"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156015" start="45332" end="45382" title="Canadian and American health care systems compared" label="Canadian and American health care systems compared"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374041" start="45384" end="45439" title="Royal Commission on the Future of Health Care in Canada" label="Royal Commission on the Future of Health Care in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7425194" start="45441" end="45474" title="Saskatchewan doctors&amp;#x27; strike" label="Saskatchewan doctors&amp;#x27; strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418330" start="45484" end="45517" title="Health Evidence Network of Canada" label="Health Evidence Network of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q913250" start="45899" end="45917" title="Collections Canada" label="Collections Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58357" wikidata="Q191730" url="?curid=58357" title="Evenki people">
<text>The Evenki, also known as the Evenks and formerly as the Tungus, are a Tungusic people of North Asia. In Russia, the Evenki are recognised as one of the Indigenous peoples of the Russian North, with a population of 38,396 (2010 census). In China, the Evenki form one of the 56 ethnic groups officially recognised by the People&#x27;s Republic of China, with a population of 30,875 (2010 census). There are 537 Evenki in Mongolia (2015 census), called &quot;Khamnigan&quot; in the Mongolian language.

== Origin ==
The Evenki or Ewenki are sometimes conjectured to be connected to the Shiwei people who inhabited the Greater Khingan Range in the 5th to 9th centuries, although the native land of the majority of Evenki people is in the vast regions of Siberia between Lake Baikal and the Amur River. The Evenki language forms the northern branch of the Manchu-Tungusic language group and is closely related to Even and Negidal in Siberia. By 1600 the Evenki or Ewenki of the Lena and Yenisey river valleys were successful reindeer herders. By contrast the Solons (ancestors of the Evenkis in China) and the Khamnigans (Ewenkis of Transbaikalia) had picked up horse breeding and the Mongolian deel from the Mongols. The Solons nomadized along the Amur River. They were closely related to the Daur people. To the west the Khamnigan were another group of horse-breeding Evenki in the Transbaikalia area. Also in the Amur valley a body of Siberian Evenki-speaking people were called Orochen by the Manchus.

=== Historical distribution ===
The ancestors of the south-eastern Evenki most likely lived in the Baikal region of Southern Siberia (near the modern-day Mongolian border) since the Neolithic era.

Considering the north-western Evenki, Vasilevich claims: &quot;The origin of the Evenki is the result of complex processes, different in time, involving the mixing of different ancient aboriginal tribes from the north of Siberia with tribes related in language to the Turks and Mongols. The language of these tribes took precedence over the languages of the aboriginal population&quot;. Elements of more modern Evenki culture, including conical tent dwellings, bone fish-lures, and birch-bark boats, were all present in sites that are believed to be Neolithic. From Lake Baikal, &quot;they spread to the Amur and Okhotsk Sea... the Lena Basin... and the Yenisey Basin&quot;.

=== Contact with Russians ===
In the 17th century, the Russian Empire made contact with the Evenki. Cossacks, who served as a kind of &quot;border-guard&quot; for the tsarist government, imposed a fur tax on the Siberian tribes. The Cossacks exploited the Evenki clan hierarchy, taking hostages from the highest members to ensure payment of the tax. Although there was some rebellion against local officials, the Evenki generally recognized the need for peaceful cultural relations with the Russians. The Russians and their constant demands for fur taxes pushed the Evenki east all the way to Sakhalin island, where some still live today. In the 19th century some groups migrated south and east into Mongolia and Manchuria. Today there are still Evenki populations in Sakhalin, Mongolia, and Manchuria, and to a lesser extent, their traditional Baikal region. 
Russian invasion of the Evenki caused them (and other indigenous peoples) language erosion, a decline in traditions, and identity loss, among others. This was especially true during the Soviet regime. Soviet policies of collectivization, forced sedentarization (sometimes referred to as sedentism), &quot;unpromising villages&quot;, and Russification of the education system compromised social, cultural, and mental well-being of the Evenki.

==Evenki of Russia==

The Evenki were formerly known as &quot;tungus&quot;. This designation was spread by the Russians, who acquired it from the Yakuts (in the Yakut language &quot;tongus&quot;) in the 17th century. The Evenki have several self-designations, of which the best known is &quot;evenk&quot;. This became the official designation for the people in 1931. Some groups call themselves &quot;orochen&quot; (&#x27;an inhabitant of the River Oro&#x27;), &quot;orochon&quot; (&#x27;a rearer of reindeer&#x27;), &quot;ile&quot; (&#x27;a human being&#x27;), etc. At one time or another tribal designations and place names have also been used as self-designations, for instance &quot;manjagir&quot;, &quot;birachen&quot;, &quot;solon&quot;, etc. Several of these have even been taken for separate ethnic entities.

There is also a similarly named Siberian group called the Evens (formerly known as &quot;Lamuts&quot;). Although related to the Evenki, the Evens are now considered to be a separate ethnic group.

The Evenki are spread over a huge territory of the Siberian taiga from the River Ob in the west to the Okhotsk Sea in the east, and from the Arctic Ocean in the north to Manchuria and Sakhalin in the south. The total area of their habitat is about 2,500,000 km2. In all of Russia only the Russians inhabit a larger territory. According to the administrative structure, the Evenki live, from west to east, in:
*Tyumen Oblast
*Tomsk Oblast
*Krasnoyarsk Krai
*Evenkiysky District (old Evenk Autonomous Okrug)
*Irkutsk Oblast 
*Chita Oblast
*Amur Oblast
*Republic of Buryatia
*Sakha Republic
*Khabarovsk Krai
*Sakhalin Oblast.
However, the territory where they are a titular nation is confined solely to the Evenk Autonomous Okrug, where 3,802 of the 35,527 Evenki live (according to the 2002 census). More than 18,200 Evenki live in the Sakha Republic.

Evenki is the largest of the northern group of the Manchu-Tungus languages, a group which also includes Even and Negidal.

Many Evenki in Russia still engage in a traditional lifestyle of raising reindeer, fishing, and hunting.

=== Census results ===
According to the 2021 census 39,226 Evenki lived in Russia.

==Evenki of China==


At the 2000 census, there were 30,505 Evenki in China, mainly made up of the Solons and the Khamnigans. 88.8% of China&#x27;s Evenki live in the Hulunbuir region in the north of the Inner Mongolia Province, near the city of Hailar. The Ewenki Autonomous Banner is also located near Hulunbuir. There are also around 3,000 Evenki in neighbouring Heilongjiang Province.

The Manchu Emperor Hong Taiji conquered the Evenki in 1640, and executed their leader Bombogor. After the Manchu conquest, the Evenki were incorporated into the Eight Banners.

In 1763, the Qing government moved 500 Solon Evenki and 500 Daur families to the Tacheng and Ghulja areas of Xinjiang, in order to strengthen the empire&#x27;s western border. Another 1020 Xibe families (some 4000 persons) also came the following year. Since then, however, the Solons of Xinjiang have assimilated into other ethnic groups, and are not identified as such anymore.

The Japanese occupation led to many murders of Evenkis, and Evenki men were conscripted as scouts and rangers by the Japanese secret service in 1942.
Some Evenkis fled to Soviet Siberia across the Amur river after murdering a Japanese officer to avoid punishment from the Japanese.

The Evenki of China today tend to be settled pastoralists and farmers.

===By county===
;County-level distribution of the Evenk

(Only includes counties or county-equivalents containing &gt;0.1% of China&#x27;s Evenki population.)
==Evenki of Ukraine==
According to the 2001 census, there were 48 Evenki living in Ukraine. The majority (35) stated that their native language was Russian; four indicated Evenki as their native language, and three that it was Ukrainian.

== Traditional life ==
Traditionally they were a mixture of pastoralists and hunter-gatherers—they relied on their domesticated reindeer for milk and transport and hunted other large game for meat. Today &quot;[t]he Evenki are divided into two large groups... engaging in different types of economy. These are the hunting and reindeer-breeding Evenki... and the horse and cattle pastoral Evenki as well as some farming Evenki&quot;.
The Evenki lived mostly in taiga, or boreal forest. They lived in conical tents made from birch bark or reindeer skin tied to birch poles. When they moved camp, the Evenki would leave these frameworks and carry only the more portable coverings. During winter, the hunting season, most camps consisted of one or two tents while spring encampments had up to 10 households 

Their skill at riding their domesticated reindeer allowed the Evenki to &quot;colonize vast areas of the eastern taiga which had previously been impenetrable&quot; The Evenki used a saddle unique to their culture, placed on the shoulders of the reindeer to lessen the strain on the animal, and used a stick rather than stirrups to balance. Evenki did not develop reindeer sledges until comparatively recent times They instead used their reindeer as pack animals and often traversed great distances on foot, using snowshoes or skis. The Evenki people did hunt and eat wild reindeer, but not their domesticated reindeer, which they kept for milk.

Large herds of reindeer were very uncommon. Most Evenki had around 25 head of reindeer, because they were generally bred for transportation. Unlike in several other neighboring tribes Evenki reindeer-breeding did not include &quot;herding of reindeer by dogs nor any other specific features&quot;. Very early in the spring season, winter camps broke up and moved to places suitable for calving. Several households pastured their animals together throughout the summer, being careful to keep &quot;[s]pecial areas... fenced off... to guard the newborn calves against being trampled on in a large herd&quot; 

=== Clothing ===
The Evenki wore a characteristic garb &quot;adapted to the cold but rather dry climate of the Central Siberia and to a life of mobility... they wore brief garments of soft reindeer or elk skin around their hips, along with leggings and moccasins, or else long supple boots reaching to the thigh&quot; (49). They also wore a deerskin coat that did not close in front but was instead covered with an apron-like cloth. Some Evenkis decorated their clothing with fringes or embroidery (50). The Evenki traditional costume always consisted of these elements: a loincloth made of animal hide, leggings, and boots of varying lengths Facial tattooing was also very common.

=== Hunting ===
The traditional Evenki economy was a mix of pastoralism (horses or reindeer), fishing, and hunting. The Evenki who lived near the Okhotsk Sea hunted seal, but for most of the taiga-dwellers, elk, wild reindeer, and fowl were the most important game animals. Other animals included &quot;roe deer, bear, wolverine, lynx, wolf, Siberian marmot, fox, and sable&quot; Trapping did not become important until the imposition of the fur tax by the tsarist government. Before they acquired guns in the 18th century, Evenki used steel bows and arrows. Along with their main hunting implements, hunters always carried a &quot;pike&quot;—&quot;which was a large knife on a long handle used instead of an axe when passing through thick taiga, or as a spear when hunting bear&quot;. The Evenki have deep respect for animals and all elements of nature: &quot;It is forbidden to torment an animal, bird, or insect, and a wounded animal must be finished off immediately. It is forbidden to spill the blood of a killed animal or defile it. It is forbidden to kill animals or birds that were saved from pursuit by predators or came to a person for help in a natural disaster.&quot;

==Religion==
Prior to contact with the Russians, the belief system of the Evenki was animistic. Many have adopted Tibetan Buddhism.

The Evenki, like most nomadic, pastoral, and subsistence agrarian peoples, spend most of their lives in very close contact with nature. Because of this, they develop what A. A. Sirina calls an &quot;ecological ethic&quot;. By this she means &quot;a system of responsibility of people to nature and her spirit masters, and of nature to people&quot;(9). Sirina interviewed many Evenki who until very recently spent much of their time as reindeer herders in the taiga, just like their ancestors. The Evenki people also spoke along the same lines: their respect for nature and their belief that nature is a living being.

This idea, &quot;[t]he embodiment, animation, and personification of nature—what is still called the animistic worldview—is the key component of the traditional worldview of hunter-gatherers&quot; Although most of the Evenkis have been &quot;sedentarized&quot;—that is, made to live in settled communities instead of following their traditional nomadic way of life —&quot;[m]any scholars think that the worldview characteristic of hunter-gatherer societies is preserved, even if they make the transition to new economic models.

Although nominally Christianized in the 18th century, the Evenki people maintain many of their historical beliefs—especially shamanism The Christian traditions were &quot;confined to the formal performance of Orthodox rites which were usually timed for the arrival of the priest in the taiga&quot; 

The religious beliefs and practices of the Evenki are of great historical interest since they retain some archaic forms of belief. Among the most ancient ideas are spiritualization and personification of all natural phenomena, belief in an upper, middle, and lower world, belief in the soul (&quot;omi&quot;) and certain totemistic concepts. There were also various magical rituals associated with hunting and guarding herds. Later on, these rituals were conducted by shamans. Shamanism brought about the development of the views of spirit-masters 

There are few sources on the shamanism of the Evenki peoples below the Amur/Helongkiang river in Northern China. There is a brief report of fieldwork conducted by Richard Noll and Kun Shi in 1994 of the life of the shamaness Dula&#x27;r (Evenki name), also known as Ao Yun Hua (her Han Chinese name). She was born in 1920 and was living in the village of Yiming Gatsa in the Evenki Banner (county) of the Hulunbuir Prefecture, in the Inner Mongolian Autonomous Region. While not a particularly good informant, she described her initiatory illness, her multiyear apprenticeship with a Mongol shaman before being allowed to heal at the age of 25 or 26, and the torments she experienced during the Cultural Revolution in the 1960s when most of her shamanic paraphernalia was destroyed. Mongol and Buddhist Lamaist influences on her indigenous practice of shamansim were evident. She hid her prize possession—an Abagaldi (bear spirit) shaman mask, which has also been documented among the Mongols and Dauer peoples in the region. The field report and color photographs of this shaman are available online.

Olga Kudrina (c. 1890–1944) was a shaman among the Reindeer Evenki of northern Inner Mongolia along the Amur River&#x27;s Great Bend (today under the jurisdiction of Genhe, Hulunbuir).

== Genetics ==
40 percent of Evenki men carry haplogroup C-M217. Their second most common Y-DNA haplogroup is N (34 %). 18 percent belong to its subgroup N1b-P43 and 16 percent belong to subgroup N1c. Other paternal haplogroups found among them are R1a (14 %), R1b (6 %), F (4 %) and I (2 %).

==Notable Evenki==
* Bombogor (died 1640), leader of Evenki federation
* Olga Kudrina (c. 1890–1944), shaman
* Semyon Nomokonov (1900–1973), sniper during World War II
* Nikita Sakharov (1915–1945), poet, prose writer
* Alitet Nemtushkin (1939–2006), poet
* Maria Fedotova-Nulgynet (born 1946), poet, children&#x27;s writer, storyteller
* Galina Varlamova (1951–2019), writer, philologist, folklorist
* Ureltu (born 1952), writer
* D. O. Chaoke (born 1958), linguist

==Gallery==
==See also==
*Hamnigan (Hamnigan Mongols)
*Bokon / Yungyuele / Nyukzha

==Bibliography==
** (The online edition needs a Book Reader for NLC and a ZIP extractor)
*&quot;Altaic.&quot; Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia. 6th ed. 2009. Academic Search Premier. EBSCO. Web. 4 Nov. 2009.
*Anderson, David G. &quot;Is Siberian Reindeer Herding in Crisis? Living with Reindeer Fifteen Years after the End of State Socialism.&quot; Nomadic Peoples NS 10.2 (2006): 87–103. EBSCO. Web. 6 Nov. 2009.
*Bulatova, Nadezhda, and Lenore Grenoble. Evenki. Munchen: LINCOM Europa, 1999. Print. Languages of the World.
*&quot;Evenki.&quot; Cassell&#x27;s Peoples, Nations, and Cultures. Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, 2005. EBSCO. Web. 4 Nov. 2009.
*&quot;Evenki.&quot; Ethnologue: Languages of the World, Sixteenth Edition. Ed. Paul M. Lewis. SIL International, 2009. Web. 8 Dec. 2009.
*Fondahl, Gail. Gaining ground? Evenkis, land and reform in southeastern Siberia. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1998. Print.
*Forsyth, James. History of the Peoples of Siberia: Russia&#x27;s North Asian Colony, 1581–1990. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1992. Print.
*Georg, Stefan, Peter A. Michalove, Alexis M. Ramer, and Paul J. Sidwell. &quot;Telling general linguists about Altaic.&quot; Journal of Linguistics 35.1 (1999): 65–98. JSTOR. Web. 8 Dec. 2009.
*Hallen, Cynthia L. &quot;A Brief Exploration of the Altaic Hypothesis.&quot; Department of Linguistics. Brigham Young University, 6 Sept. 1999. Web. 8 Dec. 2009.
*Janhunen, Juha. &quot;Evenki.&quot; Interactive Atlas of the World&#x27;s Languages in Danger. Ed. Christopher Moseley. UNESCO Culture Sector, 31 Mar. 2009. Web. 8 Dec. 2009.
*Nedjalkov, Igor. Evenki. London: Routledge, 1997. Print. Descriptive Grammars.
*Sirina, Anna A. &quot;Katanga Evenkis in the 20th Century and the Ordering of their Life-world&quot;, transl. from 2nd Russian edn (2002), Northern Hunter-Gatherers Research Series 2, Edmonton: CCI Press and Baikal Archaeology Project, 2006.
*Sirina, Anna A. &quot;People Who Feel the Land: The Ecological Ethic of the Evenki and Eveny.&quot; Trans. James E. Walker. Anthropology &amp; Archaeology of Eurasia 3rd ser. 47.Winter 2008-9 (2009): 9–37. EBSCOHost. Web. 27 November 2009.
*Turov, Mikhail G. &quot;Evenki Economy in the Central Siberian Taiga at the Turn of the 20th Century: Principles of Land Use&quot;, transl. from 2nd Russian edn (1990), Northern Hunter-Gatherers Research Series 5, Edmonton: CCI Press and the Baikal Archaeology Project, 2010.
*Vasilevich, G. M., and A. V. Smolyak. &quot;Evenki.&quot; The Peoples of Siberia. Ed. Stephen Dunn. Trans. Scripta Technica, Inc. Chicago: The University of Chicago, 1964. 620-54. Print.
*Vitebsky, Piers. Reindeer people: Living with Animals and Spirits in Siberia. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2005. Print.
*Wood, Alan, and R. A. French, eds. Development of Siberia: People and Resources. New York: St. Martin&#x27;s, 1989. Print.
=== In literature ===
* &quot;The Moose of Ewenki&quot; , picture book written by Gerelchimeg Blackcrane (), illustrated by Jiu Er (), translated by Helen Mixter . (Greystone Kids, 2019)
==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q191730" start="4" end="10" title="Evenki people" label="Evenki"/>
<link wikidata="Q191730" start="30" end="36" title="Evenki people" label="Evenks"/>
<link wikidata="Q191730" start="57" end="63" title="Evenki people" label="Tungus"/>
<link wikidata="Q868179" start="71" end="86" title="Tungusic peoples" label="Tungusic people"/>
<link wikidata="Q27329" start="90" end="100" title="North Asia" label="North Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661399" start="153" end="192" title="Indigenous peoples of the Russian North" label="Indigenous peoples of the Russian North"/>
<link wikidata="Q787182" start="223" end="234" title="Russian Census (2010)" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q476256" start="274" end="290" title="List of Chinese ethnic groups" label="56 ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="320" end="351" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578884" start="382" end="393" title="Sixth National Population Census of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="420" end="428" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q209003" start="457" end="466" title="Khamnigan" label="Khamnigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9246" start="480" end="498" title="Mongolian language" label="Mongolian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q836453" start="584" end="597" title="Shiwei people" label="Shiwei people"/>
<link wikidata="Q293713" start="616" end="631" title="Greater Khingan" label="Greater Khingan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="751" end="758" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513" start="767" end="778" title="Lake Baikal" label="Lake Baikal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6862" start="787" end="797" title="Amur River" label="Amur River"/>
<link wikidata="Q30004" start="803" end="818" title="Evenki language" label="Evenki language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34230" start="852" end="882" title="Tungusic_languages" label="Manchu-Tungusic language group"/>
<link wikidata="Q29960" start="909" end="913" title="Even language" label="Even"/>
<link wikidata="Q33676" start="918" end="925" title="Negidal language" label="Negidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="929" end="936" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640734" start="1021" end="1037" title="reindeer herding" label="reindeer herders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7558831" start="1055" end="1061" title="Solon people" label="Solons"/>
<link wikidata="Q209003" start="1106" end="1116" title="Hamnigan" label="Khamnigans"/>
<link wikidata="Q644111" start="1129" end="1142" title="Transbaikalia" label="Transbaikalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182320" start="1191" end="1195" title="Deel (clothing)" label="deel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="1205" end="1212" title="Mongols" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1225" end="1234" title=":wikt:nomadization" label="nomadized"/>
<link wikidata="Q6862" start="1245" end="1255" title="Amur River" label="Amur River"/>
<link wikidata="Q217464" start="1290" end="1301" title="Daur people" label="Daur people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059053" start="1478" end="1485" title="Oroqen people" label="Orochen"/>
<link wikidata="Q145665" start="1493" end="1499" title="Manchu people" label="Manchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="1685" end="1694" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6862" start="2305" end="2309" title="Amur River" label="Amur"/>
<link wikidata="Q41602" start="2314" end="2325" title="Sea of Okhotsk" label="Okhotsk Sea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2333" end="2343" title="Lena River#Basin" label="Lena Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q78707" start="2355" end="2362" title="Yenisei river" label="Yenisey"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="2432" end="2446" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q47805" start="2477" end="2485" title="Cossacks" label="Cossacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q15057121" start="2544" end="2551" title="Tsarist autocracy" label="tsarist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792" start="2970" end="2978" title="Sakhalin" label="Sakhalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q387080" start="3312" end="3328" title="language attrition" label="language erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q821122" start="3458" end="3474" title="Collectivization in the Soviet Union" label="collectivization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141745" start="3525" end="3534" title="sedentism" label="sedentism"/>
<link wikidata="Q19708520" start="3543" end="3563" title="unpromising villages" label="unpromising villages"/>
<link wikidata="Q332695" start="3575" end="3588" title="Russification" label="Russification"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="3792" end="3800" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q486316" start="3827" end="3833" title="Yakuts" label="Yakuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q39624" start="4181" end="4189" title="reindeer" label="reindeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142851" start="4557" end="4562" title="Evens" label="Evens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="4747" end="4754" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q69564" start="4756" end="4761" title="taiga" label="taiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q973" start="4771" end="4779" title="Ob River" label="River Ob"/>
<link wikidata="Q41602" start="4799" end="4810" title="Okhotsk Sea" label="Okhotsk Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q788" start="4837" end="4849" title="Arctic Ocean" label="Arctic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="4866" end="4875" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792" start="4880" end="4888" title="Sakhalin" label="Sakhalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="4969" end="4975" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5824" start="5106" end="5119" title="Tyumen Oblast" label="Tyumen Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5884" start="5121" end="5133" title="Tomsk Oblast" label="Tomsk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q6563" start="5135" end="5151" title="Krasnoyarsk Krai" label="Krasnoyarsk Krai"/>
<link wikidata="Q831406" start="5153" end="5172" title="Evenkiysky District" label="Evenkiysky District"/>
<link wikidata="Q214262" start="5178" end="5200" title="Evenk Autonomous Okrug" label="Evenk Autonomous Okrug"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585" start="5203" end="5217" title="Irkutsk Oblast" label="Irkutsk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q182902" start="5220" end="5232" title="Chita Oblast" label="Chita Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886" start="5234" end="5245" title="Amur Oblast" label="Amur Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809" start="5247" end="5267" title="Republic of Buryatia" label="Republic of Buryatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605" start="5269" end="5283" title="Sakha Republic" label="Sakha Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788" start="5285" end="5300" title="Khabarovsk Krai" label="Khabarovsk Krai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797" start="5302" end="5317" title="Sakhalin Oblast" label="Sakhalin Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460103" start="5359" end="5373" title="titular nation" label="titular nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605" start="5530" end="5544" title="Sakha Republic" label="Sakha Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30004" start="5547" end="5553" title="Evenki language" label="Evenki"/>
<link wikidata="Q34230" start="5598" end="5621" title="Manchu-Tungus languages" label="Manchu-Tungus languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361998" start="5660" end="5667" title="Negidal" label="Negidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q209003" start="5974" end="5984" title="Khamnigans" label="Khamnigans"/>
<link wikidata="Q571033" start="6027" end="6036" title="Hulunbuir" label="Hulunbuir"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="6064" end="6078" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q986724" start="6106" end="6112" title="Hailar, China" label="Hailar"/>
<link wikidata="Q571208" start="6118" end="6142" title="Ewenki Autonomous Banner" label="Ewenki Autonomous Banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q19206" start="6226" end="6238" title="Heilongjiang" label="Heilongjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q296367" start="6269" end="6279" title="Hong Taiji" label="Hong Taiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940762" start="6336" end="6344" title="Bombogor (Evenk chief)" label="Bombogor"/>
<link wikidata="Q340803" start="6411" end="6424" title="Eight Banners" label="Eight Banners"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="6440" end="6444" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q217464" start="6487" end="6491" title="Daur people" label="Daur"/>
<link wikidata="Q648696" start="6508" end="6515" title="Tacheng" label="Tacheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q866021" start="6520" end="6526" title="Ghulja" label="Ghulja"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="6536" end="6544" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044876" start="6616" end="6620" title="Xibe people" label="Xibe"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="7405" end="7412" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="7470" end="7477" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="7549" end="7558" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056738" start="7621" end="7633" title="pastoralists" label="pastoralists"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="7638" end="7654" title="hunter-gatherers" label="hunter-gatherers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006995" start="7702" end="7706" title="reindeer cheese" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q69564" start="8021" end="8026" title="taiga" label="taiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q253671" start="8084" end="8094" title="birch bark" label="birch bark"/>
<link wikidata="Q69564" start="8479" end="8484" title="taiga" label="taiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q155197" start="9731" end="9746" title="Central Siberian Plateau" label="Central Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="11569" end="11578" title="animistic" label="animistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q483889" start="11598" end="11614" title="Tibetan Buddhism" label="Tibetan Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q796378" start="13777" end="13789" title="Richard Noll" label="Richard Noll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7086608" start="14717" end="14729" title="Olga Kudrina" label="Olga Kudrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="14796" end="14810" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6862" start="14821" end="14831" title="Amur River" label="Amur River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354108" start="14883" end="14888" title="Genhe" label="Genhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q571033" start="14890" end="14899" title="Hulunbuir" label="Hulunbuir"/>
<link wikidata="Q80686" start="14949" end="14959" title="haplogroup" label="haplogroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5651742" start="14960" end="14966" title="Haplogroup C-M217" label="C-M217"/>
<link wikidata="Q49681" start="15013" end="15014" title="Haplogroup N-M231" label="N"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15057" end="15064" title="Haplogroup N-M231#N1a2b (P43)" label="N1b-P43"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15099" end="15102" title="Haplogroup N-M231#N1a1a (M178)" label="N1c"/>
<link wikidata="Q80658" start="15152" end="15155" title="Haplogroup R1a" label="R1a"/>
<link wikidata="Q674896" start="15164" end="15167" title="Haplogroup R1b" label="R1b"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034276" start="15175" end="15176" title="Haplogroup F-M89" label="F"/>
<link wikidata="Q429334" start="15187" end="15188" title="Haplogroup I-M170" label="I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940762" start="15218" end="15226" title="Bombogor (chief)" label="Bombogor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7086608" start="15270" end="15282" title="Olga Kudrina" label="Olga Kudrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4327201" start="15308" end="15324" title="Semyon Nomokonov" label="Semyon Nomokonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4409487" start="15367" end="15382" title="Nikita Sakharov" label="Nikita Sakharov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727367" start="15417" end="15434" title="Alitet Nemtushkin" label="Alitet Nemtushkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q66432200" start="15455" end="15478" title="Maria Fedotova-Nulgynet" label="Maria Fedotova-Nulgynet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4251135" start="15536" end="15552" title="Galina Varlamova" label="Galina Varlamova"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900379" start="15600" end="15606" title="Ureltu" label="Ureltu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203748" start="15629" end="15641" title="D. O. Chaoke" label="D. O. Chaoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q209003" start="15691" end="15699" title="Hamnigan" label="Hamnigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37924095" start="15720" end="15725" title="Bokon" label="Bokon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3811264" start="15728" end="15737" title="Yungyuele" label="Yungyuele"/>
<link wikidata="Q595026" start="15740" end="15747" title="Nyukzha" label="Nyukzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192617" start="18356" end="18371" title="Piers Vitebsky" label="Vitebsky, Piers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18679" end="18701" title="Gerelchimeg Blackcrane" label="Gerelchimeg Blackcrane"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58358" wikidata="Q181003" url="?curid=58358" title="Tryptophan">
<text>Tryptophan (symbol Trp or W) is an α-amino acid that is used in the biosynthesis of proteins. Tryptophan contains an α-amino group, an α-carboxylic acid group, and a side chain indole, making it a polar molecule with a non-polar aromatic beta carbon substituent. Tryptophan is also a precursor to the neurotransmitter serotonin, the hormone melatonin, and vitamin B3 (niacin). It is encoded by the codon UGG.

Like other amino acids, tryptophan is a zwitterion at physiological pH where the amino group is protonated (–; pKa = 9.39) and the carboxylic acid is deprotonated ( –COO−; pKa = 2.38).

Humans and many animals cannot synthesize tryptophan: they need to obtain it through their diet, making it an essential amino acid.

Tryptophan is named after the digestive enzymes trypsin, which were used in its first isolation from casein proteins. It was assigned the one-letter symbol W based on the double ring being visually suggestive to the bulky letter.

== Function ==
Amino acids, including tryptophan, are used as building blocks in protein biosynthesis, and proteins are required to sustain life. Tryptophan is among the less common amino acids found in proteins, but it plays important structural or functional roles whenever it occurs. For instance, tryptophan and tyrosine residues play special roles in &quot;anchoring&quot; membrane proteins within the cell membrane. Tryptophan, along with other aromatic amino acids, is also important in glycan-protein interactions. In addition, tryptophan functions as a biochemical precursor for the following compounds:
* Serotonin (a neurotransmitter), synthesized by tryptophan hydroxylase.
* Melatonin (a neurohormone) is in turn synthesized from serotonin, via N-acetyltransferase and 5-hydroxyindole-O-methyltransferase enzymes.
* Kynurenine, to which tryptophan is mainly (more than 95%) metabolized. Two enzymes, namely indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) in the immune system and the brain, and tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase (TDO) in the liver, are responsible for the synthesis of kynurenine from tryptophan. The kynurenine pathway of tryptophan catabolism is altered in several diseases, including psychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia, major depressive disorder, and bipolar disorder.
* Niacin, also known as vitamin B3, is synthesized from tryptophan via kynurenine and quinolinic acids.
* Auxins (a class of phytohormones) are synthesized from tryptophan.

The disorder fructose malabsorption causes improper absorption of tryptophan in the intestine, reduced levels of tryptophan in the blood, and depression.

In bacteria that synthesize tryptophan, high cellular levels of this amino acid activate a repressor protein, which binds to the trp operon. Binding of this repressor to the tryptophan operon prevents transcription of downstream DNA that codes for the enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of tryptophan. So high levels of tryptophan prevent tryptophan synthesis through a negative feedback loop, and when the cell&#x27;s tryptophan levels go down again, transcription from the trp operon resumes. This permits tightly regulated and rapid responses to changes in the cell&#x27;s internal and external tryptophan levels.
==Recommended dietary allowance==
In 2002, the U.S. Institute of Medicine set a Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) of 5 mg/kg body weight/day of tryptophan for adults 19 years and over.

===Dietary sources===
Tryptophan is present in most protein-based foods or dietary proteins. It is particularly plentiful in chocolate, oats, dried dates, milk, yogurt, cottage cheese, red meat, eggs, fish, poultry, sesame, chickpeas, almonds, sunflower seeds, pumpkin seeds, hemp seeds, buckwheat, spirulina, and peanuts. Contrary to the popular belief that cooked turkey contains an abundance of tryptophan, the tryptophan content in turkey is typical of poultry.

==Medical use==

===Depression===
Because tryptophan is converted into 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP) which is then converted into the neurotransmitter serotonin, it has been proposed that consumption of tryptophan or 5-HTP may improve depression symptoms by increasing the level of serotonin in the brain. Tryptophan is sold over the counter in the United States (after being banned to varying extents between 1989 and 2005) and the United Kingdom as a dietary supplement for use as an antidepressant, anxiolytic, and sleep aid. It is also marketed as a prescription drug in some European countries for the treatment of major depression. There is evidence that blood tryptophan levels are unlikely to be altered by changing the diet,&lt;ref name=&quot;DOI10.1111/j.1601-5215.2010.00508.x&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; but consuming purified tryptophan increases the serotonin level in the brain, whereas eating foods containing tryptophan does not.

In 2001 a Cochrane review of the effect of 5-HTP and tryptophan on depression was published. The authors included only studies of a high rigor and included both 5-HTP and tryptophan in their review because of the limited data on either. Of 108 studies of 5-HTP and tryptophan on depression published between 1966 and 2000, only two met the authors&#x27; quality standards for inclusion, totaling 64 study participants. The substances were more effective than placebo in the two studies included but the authors state that &quot;the evidence was of insufficient quality to be conclusive&quot; and note that &quot;because alternative antidepressants exist which have been proven to be effective and safe, the clinical usefulness of 5-HTP and tryptophan is limited at present&quot;. The use of tryptophan as an adjunctive therapy in addition to standard treatment for mood and anxiety disorders is not supported by the scientific evidence.

===Insomnia===
The American Academy of Sleep Medicine&#x27;s 2017 clinical practice guidelines recommended against the use of tryptophan in the treatment of insomnia due to poor effectiveness.

== Side effects ==
Potential side effects of tryptophan supplementation include nausea, diarrhea, drowsiness, lightheadedness, headache, dry mouth, blurred vision, sedation, euphoria, and nystagmus (involuntary eye movements).

== Interactions ==
Tryptophan taken as a dietary supplement (such as in tablet form) has the potential to cause serotonin syndrome when combined with antidepressants of the MAOI or SSRI class or other strongly serotonergic drugs. Because tryptophan supplementation has not been thoroughly studied in a clinical setting, its interactions with other drugs are not well known.

==Isolation==
The isolation of tryptophan was first reported by Frederick Hopkins in 1901. Hopkins recovered tryptophan from hydrolysed casein, recovering 4–8 g of tryptophan from 600 g of crude casein.

== Biosynthesis and industrial production ==
As an essential amino acid, tryptophan is not synthesized from simpler substances in humans and other animals, so it needs to be present in the diet in the form of tryptophan-containing proteins. Plants and microorganisms commonly synthesize tryptophan from shikimic acid or anthranilate: anthranilate condenses with phosphoribosylpyrophosphate (PRPP), generating pyrophosphate as a by-product. The ring of the ribose moiety is opened and subjected to reductive decarboxylation, producing indole-3-glycerol phosphate; this, in turn, is transformed into indole. In the last step, tryptophan synthase catalyzes the formation of tryptophan from indole and the amino acid serine.

The industrial production of tryptophan is also biosynthetic and is based on the fermentation of serine and indole using either wild-type or genetically modified bacteria such as &quot;B. amyloliquefaciens&quot;, &quot;B. subtilis&quot;, &quot;C. glutamicum&quot; or &quot;E. coli&quot;. These strains carry mutations that prevent the reuptake of aromatic amino acids or multiple/overexpressed trp operons. The conversion is catalyzed by the enzyme tryptophan synthase.

==Society and culture==

=== Showa Denko contamination scandal ===
There was a large outbreak of eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome (EMS) in the U.S. in 1989, with more than 1,500 cases reported to the CDC and at least 37 deaths. After preliminary investigation revealed that the outbreak was linked to intake of tryptophan, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recalled tryptophan supplements in 1989 and banned most public sales in 1990, with other countries following suit.

Subsequent studies suggested that EMS was linked to specific batches of -tryptophan supplied by a single large Japanese manufacturer, Showa Denko. It eventually became clear that recent batches of Showa Denko&#x27;s -tryptophan were contaminated by trace impurities, which were subsequently thought to be responsible for the 1989 EMS outbreak. However, other evidence suggests that tryptophan itself may be a potentially major contributory factor in EMS. There are also claims that a precursor reached sufficient concentrations to form a toxic dimer.

The FDA loosened its restrictions on sales and marketing of tryptophan in February 2001, but continued to limit the importation of tryptophan not intended for an exempted use until 2005.

The fact that the Showa Denko facility used genetically engineered bacteria to produce the contaminated batches of -tryptophan later found to have caused the outbreak of eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome has been cited as evidence of a need for &quot;close monitoring of the chemical purity of biotechnology-derived products&quot;. Those calling for purity monitoring have, in turn, been criticized as anti-GMO activists who overlook possible non-GMO causes of contamination and threaten the development of biotech.

===Turkey meat and drowsiness hypothesis===
A common assertion in the US and the UK is that heavy consumption of turkey meat—as seen during Thanksgiving and Christmas—results in drowsiness, due to high levels of tryptophan contained in turkey. However, the amount of tryptophan in turkey is comparable with that of other meats. Drowsiness after eating may be caused by other foods eaten with the turkey, particularly carbohydrates. Ingestion of a meal rich in carbohydrates triggers the release of insulin. Insulin in turn stimulates the uptake of large neutral branched-chain amino acids (BCAA), but not tryptophan, into muscle, increasing the ratio of tryptophan to BCAA in the blood stream. The resulting increased tryptophan ratio reduces competition at the large neutral amino acid transporter (which transports both BCAA and aromatic amino acids), resulting in more uptake of tryptophan across the blood–brain barrier into the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Once in the CSF, tryptophan is converted into serotonin in the raphe nuclei by the normal enzymatic pathway. The resultant serotonin is further metabolised into the hormone melatonin—which is an important mediator of the circadian rhythm—by the pineal gland. Hence, these data suggest that &quot;feast-induced drowsiness&quot;—or postprandial somnolence—may be the result of a heavy meal rich in carbohydrates, which indirectly increases the production of melatonin in the brain, and thereby promotes sleep.

== Research ==

=== Yeast amino acid metabolism ===
In 1912 Felix Ehrlich demonstrated that yeast metabolizes the natural amino acids essentially by splitting off carbon dioxide and replacing the amino group with a hydroxyl group. By this reaction, tryptophan gives rise to tryptophol.

=== Serotonin precursor ===
Tryptophan affects brain serotonin synthesis when given orally in a purified form and is used to modify serotonin levels for research. Low brain serotonin level is induced by administration of tryptophan-poor protein in a technique called acute tryptophan depletion. Studies using this method have evaluated the effect of serotonin on mood and social behavior, finding that serotonin reduces aggression and increases agreeableness.

=== Psychedelic effects ===
Tryptophan produces the head-twitch response (HTR) in rodents when administered at sufficiently high doses. The HTR is induced by serotonergic psychedelics like lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) and psilocybin and is a behavioral proxy of psychedelic effects. Tryptophan is converted into the trace amine tryptamine and tryptamine is &quot;N&quot;-methylated by indolethylamine &quot;N&quot;-methyltransferase (INMT) into &quot;N&quot;-methyltryptamine (NMT) and &quot;N&quot;,&quot;N&quot;-dimethyltryptamine (&quot;N&quot;,&quot;N&quot;-DMT), which are known serotonergic psychedelics.

=== Fluorescence ===
Tryptophan is an important intrinsic fluorescent probe (amino acid), which can be used to estimate the nature of the microenvironment around the tryptophan residue. Most of the intrinsic fluorescence emissions of a folded protein are due to excitation of tryptophan residues.

== See also ==
* 5-Hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP)
* α-Methyltryptophan
* Acree–Rosenheim reaction
* Adamkiewicz reaction
* Attenuator (genetics)
* &quot;N&quot;,&quot;N&quot;-Dimethyltryptamine
* Hopkins–Cole reaction
* Serotonin
* Tryptamine

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
== External links ==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q181003" start="0" end="10" title="Tryptophan" label="Tryptophan"/>
<link wikidata="Q181003" start="19" end="22" title="Tryptophan" label="Trp"/>
<link wikidata="Q181003" start="26" end="27" title="Tryptophan" label="W"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="37" end="47" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q851162" start="68" end="80" title="biosynthesis" label="biosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="84" end="91" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q910020" start="117" end="118" title="Alpha and beta carbon" label="α"/>
<link wikidata="Q134856" start="137" end="152" title="carboxylic acid" label="carboxylic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q319541" start="177" end="183" title="indole" label="indole"/>
<link wikidata="Q506623" start="197" end="211" title="polar molecule" label="polar molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q19834818" start="229" end="237" title="Aromatic hydrocarbon" label="aromatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q910020" start="238" end="249" title="Alpha and beta carbon" label="beta carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q162657" start="301" end="317" title="neurotransmitter" label="neurotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="318" end="327" title="serotonin" label="serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="333" end="340" title="hormone" label="hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q180912" start="341" end="350" title="melatonin" label="melatonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q30715691" start="356" end="366" title="vitamin B3" label="vitamin B3"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="383" end="390" title="Genetic code" label="encoded"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="398" end="403" title="codon" label="codon"/>
<link wikidata="Q245115" start="450" end="460" title="zwitterion" label="zwitterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275718" start="464" end="480" title="physiological pH" label="physiological pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q899488" start="506" end="516" title="protonated" label="protonated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2686738" start="560" end="572" title="deprotonation" label="deprotonated"/>
<link wikidata="Q245282" start="706" end="726" title="essential amino acid" label="essential amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q127450" start="777" end="784" title="trypsin" label="trypsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q193970" start="830" end="836" title="casein" label="casein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241589" start="867" end="884" title="List of amino acids by one-letter symbol" label="one-letter symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q211935" start="1041" end="1061" title="protein biosynthesis" label="protein biosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="1067" end="1074" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q188017" start="1276" end="1284" title="tyrosine" label="tyrosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q423042" start="1338" end="1354" title="membrane protein" label="membrane protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q29548" start="1367" end="1380" title="cell membrane" label="cell membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q705605" start="1411" end="1430" title="aromatic amino acid" label="aromatic amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q96379617" start="1454" end="1481" title="glycan-protein interactions" label="glycan-protein interactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q247994" start="1534" end="1543" title="Precursor (chemistry)" label="precursor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11173" start="1562" end="1571" title="chemical compounds" label="compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="1575" end="1584" title="Serotonin" label="Serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q162657" start="1588" end="1604" title="neurotransmitter" label="neurotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q418293" start="1622" end="1644" title="tryptophan hydroxylase" label="tryptophan hydroxylase"/>
<link wikidata="Q180912" start="1648" end="1657" title="Melatonin" label="Melatonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189071" start="1661" end="1673" title="neurohormone" label="neurohormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6951442" start="1718" end="1737" title="N-Acetyltransferase" label="N-acetyltransferase"/>
<link wikidata="Q21172348" start="1742" end="1777" title="5-hydroxyindole-O-methyltransferase" label="5-hydroxyindole-O-methyltransferase"/>
<link wikidata="Q415768" start="1789" end="1799" title="Kynurenine" label="Kynurenine"/>
<link wikidata="Q908221" start="1880" end="1907" title="indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase" label="indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q409970" start="1954" end="1980" title="tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase" label="tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q80417" start="2070" end="2088" title="kynurenine pathway" label="kynurenine pathway"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="2186" end="2199" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="2232" end="2248" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q134658" start="2252" end="2258" title="Niacin (substance)" label="Niacin"/>
<link wikidata="Q415768" start="2321" end="2331" title="kynurenine" label="kynurenine"/>
<link wikidata="Q411945" start="2336" end="2351" title="quinolinic acid" label="quinolinic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q190022" start="2356" end="2361" title="Auxin" label="Auxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192949" start="2375" end="2387" title="phytohormone" label="phytohormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671489" start="2437" end="2459" title="fructose malabsorption" label="fructose malabsorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q425218" start="2670" end="2679" title="repressor" label="repressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q287043" start="2708" end="2718" title="trp operon" label="trp operon"/>
<link wikidata="Q177900" start="2780" end="2793" title="transcription (genetics)" label="transcription"/>
<link wikidata="Q62527" start="2951" end="2968" title="negative feedback" label="negative feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q287043" start="3056" end="3066" title="trp operon" label="trp operon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352382" start="3245" end="3271" title="U.S. Institute of Medicine" label="U.S. Institute of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366307" start="3278" end="3307" title="Recommended Dietary Allowance" label="Recommended Dietary Allowance"/>
<link wikidata="Q195" start="3511" end="3520" title="chocolate" label="chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104" start="3522" end="3525" title="oat" label="oat"/>
<link wikidata="Q25292" start="3534" end="3538" title="Date Palm" label="date"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="3541" end="3545" title="milk" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q13317" start="3547" end="3553" title="yogurt" label="yogurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q13221624" start="3555" end="3569" title="cottage cheese" label="cottage cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243069" start="3571" end="3579" title="red meat" label="red meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q93189" start="3581" end="3585" title="egg (food)" label="eggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="3587" end="3591" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q178559" start="3593" end="3600" title="poultry" label="poultry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763698" start="3602" end="3608" title="sesame" label="sesame"/>
<link wikidata="Q81375" start="3610" end="3618" title="chickpea" label="chickpea"/>
<link wikidata="Q15545507" start="3621" end="3628" title="almonds" label="almonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076906" start="3630" end="3645" title="sunflower seeds" label="sunflower seeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056521" start="3647" end="3660" title="pumpkin seeds" label="pumpkin seeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150699" start="3662" end="3666" title="hemp" label="hemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q132734" start="3674" end="3683" title="buckwheat" label="buckwheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q285335" start="3685" end="3694" title="Spirulina (dietary supplement)" label="spirulina"/>
<link wikidata="Q37383" start="3700" end="3706" title="peanut" label="peanut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200953" start="3752" end="3758" title="turkey meat" label="turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q238544" start="3924" end="3943" title="5-hydroxytryptophan" label="5-hydroxytryptophan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154971" start="4176" end="4192" title="over the counter" label="over the counter"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="4200" end="4213" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4227" end="4274" title="#Showa Denko contamination scandal" label="banned to varying extents between 1989 and 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="4284" end="4298" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q645858" start="4304" end="4322" title="dietary supplement" label="dietary supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q76560" start="4337" end="4351" title="antidepressant" label="antidepressant"/>
<link wikidata="Q62903" start="4353" end="4363" title="anxiolytic" label="anxiolytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869874" start="4369" end="4378" title="sleep aid" label="sleep aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643563" start="4405" end="4422" title="prescription drug" label="prescription drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="4471" end="4487" title="major depression" label="major depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105187" start="4803" end="4818" title="Cochrane review" label="Cochrane review"/>
<link wikidata="Q269829" start="5252" end="5259" title="placebo" label="placebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481887" start="5601" end="5619" title="adjuvant therapy" label="adjunctive therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842842" start="5750" end="5784" title="American Academy of Sleep Medicine" label="American Academy of Sleep Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q878041" start="5797" end="5824" title="clinical practice guideline" label="clinical practice guideline"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269441" start="5954" end="5965" title="side effect" label="side effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="6005" end="6011" title="nausea" label="nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="6013" end="6021" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077823" start="6023" end="6033" title="drowsiness" label="drowsiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q57823162" start="6035" end="6050" title="lightheadedness" label="lightheadedness"/>
<link wikidata="Q86" start="6052" end="6060" title="headache" label="headache"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162276" start="6062" end="6071" title="Xerostomia" label="dry mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930803" start="6073" end="6087" title="blurred vision" label="blurred vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q574801" start="6089" end="6097" title="sedation" label="sedation"/>
<link wikidata="Q203994" start="6099" end="6107" title="euphoria" label="euphoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q220989" start="6113" end="6122" title="nystagmus" label="nystagmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q616181" start="6265" end="6283" title="serotonin syndrome" label="serotonin syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q410954" start="6326" end="6330" title="Monoamine oxidase inhibitor" label="MAOI"/>
<link wikidata="Q334477" start="6334" end="6338" title="Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor" label="SSRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q718753" start="6477" end="6489" title="drug interaction" label="interactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q233976" start="6592" end="6609" title="Frederick Hopkins" label="Frederick Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="6653" end="6663" title="hydrolysis" label="hydrolysed"/>
<link wikidata="Q193970" start="6664" end="6670" title="casein" label="casein"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="6984" end="6997" title="microorganism" label="microorganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q410830" start="7035" end="7048" title="shikimic acid" label="shikimic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q385140" start="7052" end="7064" title="anthranilic acid" label="anthranilate"/>
<link wikidata="Q420633" start="7094" end="7121" title="phosphoribosylpyrophosphate" label="phosphoribosylpyrophosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q55506489" start="7141" end="7154" title="pyrophosphate" label="pyrophosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q59817493" start="7188" end="7194" title="ribose" label="ribose"/>
<link wikidata="Q23005640" start="7195" end="7201" title="Moiety (chemistry)" label="moiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q898436" start="7239" end="7254" title="decarboxylation" label="decarboxylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q319541" start="7330" end="7336" title="indole" label="indole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307998" start="7356" end="7375" title="tryptophan synthase" label="tryptophan synthase"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="7376" end="7385" title="catalysis" label="catalyzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q183290" start="7445" end="7451" title="serine" label="serine"/>
<link wikidata="Q851162" start="7502" end="7514" title="biosynthesis" label="biosynthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q845523" start="7535" end="7547" title="Industrial fermentation" label="fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183290" start="7551" end="7557" title="serine" label="serine"/>
<link wikidata="Q319541" start="7562" end="7568" title="indole" label="indole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532933" start="7595" end="7624" title="genetically modified bacterium" label="genetically modified bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354408" start="7639" end="7659" title="Bacillus amyloliquefaciens" label="B. amyloliquefaciens"/>
<link wikidata="Q131238" start="7673" end="7684" title="Bacillus subtilis" label="B. subtilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q292314" start="7698" end="7711" title="Corynebacterium glutamicum" label="C. glutamicum"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419" start="7727" end="7734" title="Escherichia coli" label="E. coli"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="7762" end="7770" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q705605" start="7801" end="7821" title="aromatic amino acids" label="aromatic amino acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q287043" start="7848" end="7858" title="trp operon" label="trp operon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307998" start="7903" end="7922" title="tryptophan synthase" label="tryptophan synthase"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241045" start="8010" end="8018" title="outbreak" label="outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508806" start="8022" end="8051" title="eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome" label="eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="8122" end="8125" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="CDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="8254" end="8282" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q905412" start="8539" end="8550" title="Showa Denko" label="Showa Denko"/>
<link wikidata="Q762043" start="8949" end="8954" title="Dimer (chemistry)" label="dimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q159236" start="9189" end="9211" title="genetically engineered" label="genetically engineered"/>
<link wikidata="Q182726" start="9548" end="9551" title="Genetically modified organism" label="GMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200953" start="9771" end="9782" title="turkey meat" label="turkey meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913791" start="9798" end="9810" title="Thanksgiving (United States)" label="Thanksgiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="9815" end="9824" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077823" start="9836" end="9846" title="Somnolence" label="drowsiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234488" start="9986" end="10009" title="Postprandial somnolence" label="Drowsiness after eating"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="10075" end="10087" title="carbohydrate" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="10156" end="10163" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q420726" start="10220" end="10246" title="branched-chain amino acids" label="branched-chain amino acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009853" start="10420" end="10456" title="large neutral amino acid transporter" label="large neutral amino acid transporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q221694" start="10562" end="10581" title="blood–brain barrier" label="blood–brain barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q54196" start="10591" end="10610" title="cerebrospinal fluid" label="cerebrospinal fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="10664" end="10673" title="serotonin" label="serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061493" start="10681" end="10693" title="raphe nuclei" label="raphe nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q180912" start="10791" end="10800" title="melatonin" label="melatonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q208353" start="10839" end="10855" title="circadian rhythm" label="circadian rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q198654" start="10863" end="10875" title="pineal gland" label="pineal gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234488" start="10948" end="10971" title="postprandial somnolence" label="postprandial somnolence"/>
<link wikidata="Q122779" start="11187" end="11200" title="Felix Ehrlich" label="Felix Ehrlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q45422" start="11219" end="11224" title="yeast" label="yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="11290" end="11304" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q167198" start="11323" end="11334" title="Amine" label="amino group"/>
<link wikidata="Q104116" start="11342" end="11356" title="hydroxyl" label="hydroxyl group"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="11366" end="11374" title="chemical reaction" label="reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5479351" start="11401" end="11411" title="tryptophol" label="tryptophol"/>
<link wikidata="Q104855755" start="11681" end="11707" title="acute tryptophan depletion" label="acute tryptophan depletion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689075" start="11927" end="11947" title="head-twitch response" label="head-twitch response"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314176" start="12033" end="12057" title="serotonergic psychedelic" label="serotonergic psychedelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="12064" end="12090" title="lysergic acid diethylamide" label="lysergic acid diethylamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q208118" start="12101" end="12111" title="psilocybin" label="psilocybin"/>
<link wikidata="Q413778" start="12195" end="12206" title="trace amine" label="trace amine"/>
<link wikidata="Q409439" start="12207" end="12217" title="tryptamine" label="tryptamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407" start="12250" end="12260" title="methyl group" label="methylated"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614421" start="12264" end="12311" title="indolethylamine N-methyltransferase" label="indolethylamine &amp;quot;N&amp;quot;-methyltransferase"/>
<link wikidata="Q308875" start="12324" end="12354" title="N-methyltryptamine" label="&amp;quot;N&amp;quot;-methyltryptamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q407217" start="12365" end="12411" title="dimethyltryptamine" label="&amp;quot;N&amp;quot;,&amp;quot;N&amp;quot;-dimethyltryptamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q238544" start="12806" end="12825" title="5-Hydroxytryptophan" label="5-Hydroxytryptophan"/>
<link wikidata="Q82126090" start="12836" end="12854" title="α-Methyltryptophan" label="α-Methyltryptophan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16825087" start="12857" end="12881" title="Acree–Rosenheim reaction" label="Acree–Rosenheim reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4680169" start="12884" end="12904" title="Adamkiewicz reaction" label="Adamkiewicz reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q22260605" start="12907" end="12928" title="Attenuator (genetics)" label="Attenuator (genetics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q407217" start="12931" end="12977" title="N,N-Dimethyltryptamine" label="&amp;quot;N&amp;quot;,&amp;quot;N&amp;quot;-Dimethyltryptamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101611" start="12980" end="13001" title="Hopkins–Cole reaction" label="Hopkins–Cole reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="13004" end="13013" title="Serotonin" label="Serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q409439" start="13016" end="13026" title="Tryptamine" label="Tryptamine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58359" wikidata="Q27566029" url="?curid=58359" title="Kett's Rebellion">
<text>Kett&#x27;s Rebellion was a revolt in the English county of Norfolk during the reign of Edward VI, largely in response to the enclosure of land. It began at Wymondham on 8 July 1549 with a group of rebels destroying fences that had been put up by wealthy landowners. One of their targets was yeoman Robert Kett who, instead of resisting the rebels, agreed to their demands and offered to lead them. Kett and his forces, joined by recruits from Norwich and the surrounding countryside and numbering some 16,000, set up camp on Mousehold Heath to the north-east of the city on 12 July. 

The rebels stormed Norwich on 29 July and took the city. On 1 August the rebels defeated a Royal Army led by the Marquess of Northampton who had been sent by the government to suppress the uprising. Kett&#x27;s rebellion ended on 27 August when the rebels were defeated by an army under the leadership of the Earl of Warwick at the Battle of Dussindale. Kett was captured, held in the Tower of London, tried for treason, and hanged from the walls of Norwich Castle on 7 December 1549.

==Background==
The 1540s saw a crisis in agriculture in England. With the majority of the population depending on the land, this led to outbreaks of unrest across the country. Kett&#x27;s rebellion in Norfolk was the most serious of these. The main grievance of the rioters was enclosure, the fencing of common land by landlords for their own use. Enclosure left peasants with nowhere to graze their animals. Some landowners were forcing tenants off their farms so that they could engross their holdings and convert arable land into pasture for sheep, which had become more profitable as demand for wool increased. Inflation, unemployment, rising rents, and declining wages added to the hardships faced by the common people. As the historian Julian Cornwall put it, they &quot;could scarcely doubt that the state had been taken over by a breed of men whose policy was to rob the poor for the benefit of the rich&quot;.

==Uprising at Wymondham==
Kett&#x27;s rebellion, or &quot;the commotion time&quot; as it was also called in Norfolk, began in July 1549 in the small market town of Wymondham, nearly ten miles south-west of Norwich. The previous month there had been a minor disturbance at the nearby town of Attleborough where fences, built by the lord of the manor to enclose common lands, were torn down. The rioters thought they were acting legally, since Edward Seymour (1st Duke of Somerset, and Lord Protector during part of Edward VI&#x27;s minority) had issued a proclamation against illegal enclosures. Wymondham held its annual feast on the weekend of 6 July 1549 and a play in honour of St Thomas Becket, the co-patron of Wymondham Abbey, was performed. This celebration was illegal, as Henry VIII had decreed in 1538 that the name of Thomas Becket should be removed from the church calendar. On the Monday, when the feast was over, a group of people set off to the villages of Morley St. Botolph and Hethersett to tear down hedges and fences. One of their first targets was Sir John Flowerdew, a lawyer and landowner at Hethersett who was unpopular for his role as overseer of the demolition of Wymondham Abbey (part of which was the parish church) during the dissolution of the monasteries and for enclosing land. Flowerdew bribed the rioters to leave his enclosures alone and instead attack those of Robert Kett at Wymondham.
Kett was about 57 years old and was one of the wealthier farmers in Wymondham. The Ketts (also spelt Ket, Cat, Chat, or Knight) had been farming in Norfolk since the twelfth century. Kett was the son of Thomas and Margery Kett and had several brothers; clergyman Francis Kett was his nephew. Two or possibly three of Kett&#x27;s brothers were dead by 1549, but his eldest brother William joined him in the rebellion. Kett&#x27;s wife, Alice, and several sons are not recorded as having been involved in the rebellion. Kett had been prominent among the parishioners in saving their parish church when Wymondham Abbey was demolished and this had led to conflict with Flowerdew. Having listened to the rioters&#x27; grievances, Kett decided to join their cause and helped them tear down his own fences before taking them back to Hethersett where they destroyed Flowerdew&#x27;s enclosures. The following day, Tuesday 9 July, the protesters set off for Norwich. By now Kett was their leader and they were being joined by people from nearby towns and villages. A local tradition holds that a meeting point for the rebels was an oak tree on the road between Wymondham and Hethersett, where nine of the rebels were later hanged. Known as Kett&#x27;s Oak, it has been preserved by Norfolk County Council. The oak became a symbol of the rebellion when an oak tree on Mousehold Heath was made the centre of the rebel camp, but this &quot;Oak of Reformation&quot; no longer stands. According to one source the Oak of Reformation was cut down by Norwich City Council in the 1960s to make way for a car park, although Reg Groves wrote in the 1940s that it had already been destroyed.

==Bowthorpe, Eaton, and Drayton==
Kett and his followers camped for the night of 9 July at Bowthorpe, just west of Norwich. Here they were approached by a local official, either Nicholas L&#x27;Estrange, Sheriff of Norfolk and Suffolk, or former sheriff Sir Edmund Wyndham, who ordered them to disperse. The response was negative, and the official retreated to Norwich. Next the rebels were visited by the Mayor of Norwich, Thomas Codd, who met a similar response. The following night the rebels camped at nearby Eaton Wood and then, having been refused permission to march through Norwich to reach Mousehold Heath north-east of the city, crossed the River Wensum at Hellesdon and spent the night at Drayton.

==Rebel base on Mousehold Heath==

On Friday 12 July, the rebels reached Mousehold, where they had a vantage point overlooking Norwich, and set up the camp that was their base for the next six and a half weeks. The camp was the largest of several rebel camps that had appeared in East Anglia that summer. The rebels were known at the time as the &quot;camp men&quot; and the rebellion as the &quot;camping tyme&quot; or &quot;commotion tyme&quot;.

Kett set up his headquarters in St Michael&#x27;s Chapel, the ruins of which have since been known as Kett&#x27;s Castle. Mount Surrey, a house built by the Earl of Surrey on the site of the despoiled St Leonard&#x27;s Priory, had lain empty since the Earl&#x27;s execution in 1547 and was used to hold Kett&#x27;s prisoners. Kett&#x27;s council, which consisted of representatives from the Hundreds of Norfolk and one representative from Suffolk met under the Oak of Reformation to administer the camp, issuing warrants to obtain provisions and arms and arrest members of the gentry. The camp was joined by workers and artisans from Norwich, and by people from the surrounding towns and villages, until it was larger than Norwich, at that time the second-largest city in England with a population of about 12,000. The city authorities, having sent messengers to London, remained in negotiation with the rebels and Mayor Thomas Codd, former Mayor Thomas Aldrich, and preacher Robert Watson accepted the rebels&#x27; invitation to take part in their council.

Once the camp was established at Mousehold the rebels drew up a list of 29 grievances, signed by Kett, Codd, Aldrich, and the representatives of the Hundreds, and sent it to Protector Somerset. The grievances have been described by one historian as a shopping-list of demands but which nevertheless have a strong logic underlying them, articulating &quot;a desire to limit the power of the gentry, exclude them from the world of the village, constrain rapid economic change, prevent the overexploitation of communal resources, and remodel the values of the clergy&quot;. Although the rebels were all the while tearing down hedges and filling in ditches, only one of the 29 articles mentioned enclosure: &#x27;We pray your grace that where it is enacted for enclosing, that it be not hurtful to such as have enclosed saffren grounds, for they be greatly chargeable to them, and that from henceforth no man shall enclose any more.&#x27; The exemption for &#x27;saffren grounds&#x27; has puzzled historians; one has suggested that it may have been a scribal error for &#x27;sovereign grounds&#x27;, grounds that were the exclusive freehold property of their owners, while others have commented on the importance of saffron to local industry. The rebels also asked &#x27;that all bondmen may be made free, for God made all free, with his precious blood shedding.&#x27; The rebels may have been articulating a grievance against the 1547 &quot;Act for the Punishment of Vagabonds&quot;, which made it legal to enslave a discharged servant who did not find a new master within three days, though they may also have been calling for the manumission of the thousands of Englishmen and women who were serfs. (In 1549, an &quot;Act Touching on the Punishment of Vagabonds and Other Idle Persons&quot; avoided the word &quot;slave&quot; but retained many of the harshest provisions of the 1547 &quot;Act&quot;.)

==Events from 12 July==
The truce between the city and the camp was ended on 21 July by a messenger from the King&#x27;s Council, York Herald Bartholomew Butler, who arrived at Norwich from London, went with city officials to Mousehold, proclaimed the gathering a rebellion, and offered pardon. Kett rejected the offer, saying he had no need of a pardon because he had committed no treason. York Herald lacked the forces to arrest the rebels and retreated into Norwich with the Mayor. Kett and his followers were now officially rebels; the authorities therefore shut the city gates and set about preparing the city defences.

===Fall of Norwich===
On 22 July 1549, Kett proposed a truce but the offer was rejected by the city authorities and the rebels commenced an attack on Bishopsgate Bridge. They charged down from Mousehold and began swimming the Wensum between the Cow Tower and Bishopsgate. The city defenders fired volleys of arrows into the rebels as they crossed, but could not stop the attack and Norwich quickly fell to the rebels. The rebels captured guns and other military supplies and set up guards at strategic points. The York Herald offered a second pardon to the rebels. It was again rejected and the Herald left for London, leaving England&#x27;s second largest city in the hands of a rebel army. There was no random violence. Civic leaders were taken to Mousehold and imprisoned in Surrey House. Mayor Codd was released and stayed in the rebel camp, while his deputy Augustine Steward remained in the city.

===Attacks on the rebels===
The King sent the Marquess of Northampton with about 1,400 men, including Italian mercenaries, to quell the rebellion. As he drew near to the city he sent forward his herald to demand the surrender of the city. Deputy Mayor Augustine Steward consulted Mayor Codd, who was still on Mousehold and then opened the city gates to Northampton&#x27;s army, the rebels having withdrawn back to the safety of the high ground overlooking the city. Kett had already seen how difficult it was to defend miles of walls and gates and thought it more prudent to allow Northampton&#x27;s small army to defend the city while he again laid siege to it.

On the night of 31 July, the Royal army made its defensive preparations and started patrolling the city&#x27;s narrow streets. Around midnight alarms rang out, waking Northampton. It appeared hundreds of rebels were using the cover of darkness and their knowledge of the maze of small streets and alleys around Tombland to launch hit-and-run attacks on Royal troops. After three hours Northampton&#x27;s men had driven off the rebels, who suffered heavy casualties. 

By 8 am the following morning, 1 August, the ramparts were strengthened between the Cow Tower and Bishopsgate, so Lord Sheffield retired to The Maid&#x27;s Head inn for breakfast. A little after this, Northampton received information that the rebels wished to discuss surrender and were gathering around the Pockthorpe gate. Sheffield went with the Herald to discuss this apparent good turn of events with the rebels. On arrival, Sheffield found no rebels at all. It appears to have been either a false rumour or a diversion, as at that point thousands of rebels again began crossing the River Wensum around Bishopsgate.

Northampton&#x27;s main force was in the market place. As the attack developed, he fed men through the streets into a growing and vicious street battle across the whole eastern area of the city. Seeing things going the rebels&#x27; way, Sheffield took command of a body of cavalry and charged the rebels across the cathedral precinct, past St Martin at Place Church and into Bishopsgate Street. Outside the Great Hospital in Bishopsgate Street, Sheffield fell from his horse into a ditch. Expecting then to be captured and ransomed, as was the custom, he removed his helmet, only to be killed by a blow from a rebel, reputedly a butcher named Fulke. With the loss of a senior commander and his army being broken up in street fighting, Northampton ordered a retreat.
The Earl of Warwick was then sent with a stronger army of around 14,000 men including mercenaries from Wales, Germany, and Spain. Warwick had previously fought in France, was a former member of the House of Commons and subsequently the Privy Council, making him a strong leader. Despite the increased threat, the rebels were loyal to Kett throughout and continued to fight Warwick&#x27;s men.

Northampton served as Warwick&#x27;s second-in-command in the second attempt to deal with the rebel host, this time with a much larger force. Warwick managed to enter the city on 24 August by attacking the St Stephen&#x27;s and Brazen gates. The rebels retreated through the city, setting fire to houses as they went in an attempt to slow the Royal army&#x27;s advance. About 3 pm Warwick&#x27;s baggage train entered the city. It managed to get lost and rather than halting in the market place it continued through Tombland and straight down Bishopsgate Street towards the rebel army. A group of rebels saw the train from Mousehold and ran down into the city to capture it. Captain Drury led his men in an attempt to recapture the train, which included all the artillery. He managed to salvage some of the guns in yet another fierce fight around Bishopsgate.

On 25 August the rebels commenced an artillery attack on the walls around the northern area of the city near the Magdalen and Pockthorpe gates. With the north of the city again in rebel hands, Warwick launched an attack. Bitter street fighting eventually cleared the city once again.

===Rebels&#x27; defeat at Dussindale ===
On 26 August, 1,400 foreign mercenaries arrived in the city. These were German &quot;landsknechts&quot;, a mix of handgunners and pikemen. With these reinforcements, Warwick now had a formidable army with which to face the rebels. Kett and his people were aware of this, and that night they left their camp at Mousehold for lower ground in preparation for battle. During the morning of 27 August, the armies faced each other outside the city. The final battle took place at &quot;Dussindale&quot;, and was a disaster for the rebels. In the open, against well-armed and trained troops, they were routed and thousands were killed.

The location of Dussindale has not been established with certainty, but battlefield debris (musket balls and other lead shot—iron artefacts such as arrowheads having not readily survived) have suggested Long Valley, Norwich, now a partly built-up area to the north-east of the city centre. An alternative location, further to the east, is suggested by Anne Carter of Norfolk Archaeology, who found in parish records references to &quot;Dussings Dale&quot; adjoining the common of the village of Great Plumstead (). A map regression analysis published by the Council for British Archaeology supports Carter&#x27;s proposition, but its conclusion placed the exact spot some 200 metres to the west.

==Aftermath==

About 3,000 rebels are thought to have been killed at Dussindale, with Warwick&#x27;s army losing some 250 men. The morning after the battle, 28 August, rebels were hanged at the Oak of Reformation and outside the Magdalen Gate. Estimates of the number vary from 30 to 300. Warwick had already executed 49 rebels when he had entered Norwich a few days before. There is only one attested incident in which the rebels had killed in cold blood: one of Northampton&#x27;s Italian mercenaries had been hanged following his capture.

Kett was captured at the village of Swannington the night after the battle and taken, together with his brother William, to the Tower of London to await trial for treason. Found guilty, the brothers were returned to Norwich at the beginning of December. Kett was hanged from the walls of Norwich Castle on 7 December 1549; on the same day William was hanged from the west tower of Wymondham Abbey.

==Legacy and commemoration==

In 1550, the Norwich authorities decreed that in future 27 August should be a holiday to commemorate &quot;the deliverance of the city&quot; from Kett&#x27;s Rebellion, and paid for lectures in the cathedral and parish churches on the sins of rebellion. This tradition continued for over a century.

The rising was discussed by Sir John Cheke in &quot;The hurt of sedicion howe greueous it is to a commune welth,&quot; (1549). The only known surviving eye-witness account of the rebellion, a manuscript by Nicholas Sotherton, son of a Norwich mayor, probably Nicholas Sotherton (d.1540), is hostile towards the rebels. So too is Alexander Neville&#x27;s 1575 Latin history of the rebellion, &quot;De furoribus Norfolciensium&quot;. Neville was secretary to Matthew Parker, who had preached to Kett&#x27;s followers under the Oak of Reformation on Mousehold, unsuccessfully appealing to them to disperse. In 1615 Neville&#x27;s work was translated into English by Norfolk clergyman Richard Woods under the title &quot;Norfolke Furies&quot; and was reprinted throughout the following century. Francis Blomefield&#x27;s detailed account in his &quot;History of Norwich&quot; (published in parts during 1741 and 1742) was based on Neville but supplemented with material from other sources such as the works of Raphael Holinshed, Peter Heylin and Thomas Fuller, together with various local records. &#x27;Blomefield allowed himself sufficient impartiality to be able to set out, without comment, the grievances of those taking part, but heaped abuse on them for going further than their original intentions&#x27;.

It was only in the 19th century that more sympathetic portrayals of the rebellion appeared in print and started the process that saw Kett transformed from traitor to folk hero. An anonymous work of 1843 was critical of Neville&#x27;s account of the rebellion, and in 1859 clergyman Frederic Russell, who had unearthed new material in archives for his account of the rebellion, concluded that &quot;though Kett is commonly considered a rebel, yet the cause he advocated is so just, that one cannot but feel he deserved a better name and a better fate&quot;.

In 1948, Alderman Fred Henderson, a former mayor of Norwich who had been imprisoned in the castle for his part in the food riots of 1885, proposed a memorial to Kett. Originally hoping for a statue, he settled for a plaque on the walls of Norwich Castle engraved with his words and unveiled in 1949, 400 years after the rebellion. In the 21st century the death of Kett is still remembered by the people of Norwich. On 7 December 2011, the anniversary of his death, a memorial march by members of Norwich &quot;Occupy&quot; and Norwich Green Party took place and a wreath was laid by the gates of Norwich Castle.
After the rebellion the lands of Kett and his brother William were forfeited, although some of them were later restored to one of his sons. In the longer term the Kett family do not seem to have suffered from their association with the rebellion, but to have prospered in various parts of Norfolk. 

The rebellion is remembered in the names of schools, streets, pubs and a walking route in the Norwich and Wymondham area, including the Robert Kett Junior School in Wymondham, Dussindale Primary School in Norwich, the Robert Kett pub in Wymondham, Kett House residence at the University of East Anglia, and Kett&#x27;s Tavern in Norwich, and in a folk band, Lewis Garland and Kett&#x27;s Rebellion, and a beer, Kett&#x27;s Rebellion, by Woodforde&#x27;s Brewery in Norwich.

Kett&#x27;s rebellion has featured in novels, including Frederick H. Moore&#x27;s &quot;Mistress Haselwode: A tale of the Reformation Oak&quot; (1876), F. C. Tansley&#x27;s &quot;For Kett and Countryside&quot; (1910), Jack Lindsay&#x27;s &quot;The Great Oak&quot; (1949), Sylvia Haymon&#x27;s children&#x27;s story &quot;The Loyal Traitor&quot; (1965), Margaret Callow&#x27;s &quot;A Rebellious Oak&quot; (2012), and C. J. Sansom&#x27;s &quot;Tombland&quot; (2018); plays, including George Colman Green&#x27;s &quot;Kett the Tanner&quot; (1909); and poetry, including Keith Chandler&#x27;s collection &quot;Kett&#x27;s Rebellion and Other Poems&quot; (1982). In 1988 British composer Malcolm Arnold produced the &quot;Robert Kett Overture (Opus 141)&quot;, inspired by the rebellion.

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
*
*Groves, R. 1947 &quot;Rebel&#x27;s Oak: the story of the great rebellion of 1549&quot;. London: Red Flag Fellowship
*Hoare, A. 2002 &quot;An unlikely rebel: Robert Kett and the Norfolk Rising, 1549&quot;. Wymondham: Wymondham Heritage Society
*
*
*
*
*Wyler, S. 2009 &quot;A history of community asset ownership&quot;. London: Development Trusts Association

==Further reading==
*

==External links==
* Audio of a talk on Robert Kett by Peter Clark for Bristol Radical History Group.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q27566029" start="0" end="21" title="Kett&amp;#x27;s Rebellion" label="Kett&amp;#x27;s Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q23109" start="60" end="67" title="Norfolk" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q83229" start="88" end="97" title="Edward VI" label="Edward VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q792164" start="126" end="135" title="enclosure" label="enclosure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787230" start="157" end="166" title="Wymondham" label="Wymondham"/>
<link wikidata="Q862823" start="292" end="298" title="yeoman" label="yeoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q594511" start="299" end="310" title="Robert Kett" label="Robert Kett"/>
<link wikidata="Q130191" start="444" end="451" title="Norwich" label="Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926094" start="526" end="541" title="Mousehold Heath" label="Mousehold Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2797815" start="699" end="722" title="William Parr, 1st Marquess of Northampton" label="Marquess of Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q347125" start="895" end="910" title="John Dudley, 1st Duke of Northumberland" label="Earl of Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="971" end="986" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672292" start="1036" end="1050" title="Norwich Castle" label="Norwich Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q792164" start="1350" end="1359" title="enclosure" label="enclosure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259176" start="1376" end="1387" title="common land" label="common land"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604062" start="1553" end="1560" title="engrossing (law)" label="engross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787230" start="2156" end="2165" title="Wymondham" label="Wymondham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975526" start="2283" end="2295" title="Attleborough" label="Attleborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="2335" end="2340" title="Manorialism" label="manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q792164" start="2344" end="2351" title="enclosure" label="enclose"/>
<link wikidata="Q163936" start="2434" end="2448" title="Edward Seymour, 1st Duke of Somerset" label="Edward Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q83229" start="2506" end="2515" title="Edward VI" label="Edward VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q192236" start="2676" end="2689" title="Thomas Becket" label="Thomas Becket"/>
<link wikidata="Q8039988" start="2708" end="2723" title="Wymondham Abbey" label="Wymondham Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="2773" end="2783" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q6912556" start="2964" end="2982" title="Morley St. Botolph" label="Morley St. Botolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q181821" start="2987" end="2997" title="Hethersett" label="Hethersett"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="3247" end="3277" title="dissolution of the monasteries" label="dissolution of the monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441604" start="3678" end="3690" title="Francis Kett" label="Francis Kett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787230" start="4567" end="4576" title="Wymondham" label="Wymondham"/>
<link wikidata="Q181821" start="4581" end="4591" title="Hethersett" label="Hethersett"/>
<link wikidata="Q21061506" start="4646" end="4661" title="Kett&amp;#x27;s Oak" label="Kett&amp;#x27;s Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386227" start="4688" end="4710" title="Norfolk County Council" label="Norfolk County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926094" start="4773" end="4788" title="Mousehold Heath" label="Mousehold Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951449" start="5178" end="5187" title="Bowthorpe" label="Bowthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7025738" start="5265" end="5289" title="Nicholas L&amp;#x27;Estrange" label="Nicholas L&amp;#x27;Estrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q11797894" start="5291" end="5321" title="Sheriff of Norfolk and Suffolk" label="Sheriff of Norfolk and Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926094" start="5686" end="5701" title="Mousehold Heath" label="Mousehold Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980777" start="5738" end="5750" title="River Wensum" label="River Wensum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596192" start="5754" end="5763" title="Hellesdon" label="Hellesdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q589226" start="5787" end="5794" title="Drayton, Norfolk" label="Drayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q372211" start="6403" end="6417" title="Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey" label="Earl of Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153479" start="6637" end="6656" title="Hundreds of Norfolk" label="Hundreds of Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q163936" start="7479" end="7497" title="Edward Seymour, 1st Duke of Somerset" label="Protector Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q18750935" start="8732" end="8784" title="Vagabonds Act 1547" label="1547 &amp;quot;Act for the Punishment of Vagabonds&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055458" start="9336" end="9347" title="York Herald" label="York Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179414" start="10077" end="10086" title="Cow Tower, Norwich" label="Cow Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821216" start="10695" end="10712" title="Augustine Steward" label="Augustine Steward"/>
<link wikidata="Q2797815" start="10782" end="10805" title="William Parr, 1st Marquess of Northampton" label="Marquess of Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339822" start="11982" end="11996" title="Edmund Sheffield, 1st Baron Sheffield" label="Lord Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q347125" start="13260" end="13275" title="John Dudley, 1st Duke of Northumberland" label="Earl of Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5914849" start="13454" end="13470" title="House of Commons of England" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246345" start="13492" end="13505" title="Privy Council of England" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q156733" start="14922" end="14933" title="landsknecht" label="landsknecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259176" start="15937" end="15943" title="Common land" label="common"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966897" start="15962" end="15977" title="Great and Little Plumstead" label="Great Plumstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143764" start="15984" end="16007" title="Map regression" label="map regression analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998867" start="16025" end="16056" title="Council for British Archaeology" label="Council for British Archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2776302" start="16743" end="16754" title="Swannington, Norfolk" label="Swannington"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="16835" end="16850" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672292" start="16995" end="17009" title="Norwich Castle" label="Norwich Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8039988" start="17088" end="17103" title="Wymondham Abbey" label="Wymondham Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219653" start="17468" end="17478" title="John Cheke" label="John Cheke"/>
<link wikidata="Q99578124" start="17695" end="17713" title="Nicholas Sotherton" label="Nicholas Sotherton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719745" start="17765" end="17789" title="Alexander Neville (scholar)" label="Alexander Neville&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q711332" start="17893" end="17907" title="Matthew Parker" label="Matthew Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480266" start="18227" end="18245" title="Francis Blomefield" label="Francis Blomefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q503126" start="18442" end="18459" title="Raphael Holinshed" label="Raphael Holinshed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376642" start="18461" end="18473" title="Peter Heylin" label="Peter Heylin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248758" start="18478" end="18491" title="Thomas Fuller" label="Thomas Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495431" start="19322" end="19336" title="Fred Henderson" label="Fred Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q939103" start="19808" end="19826" title="Occupy movement" label="&amp;quot;Occupy&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499324" start="19839" end="19850" title="Green Party (UK)" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032675" start="20653" end="20677" title="Woodforde&amp;#x27;s Brewery" label="Woodforde&amp;#x27;s Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378541" start="20909" end="20921" title="Jack Lindsay" label="Jack Lindsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q20666651" start="20963" end="20976" title="Sylvia Haymon" label="Sylvia Haymon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749126" start="21012" end="21029" title="The Loyal Traitor" label="The Loyal Traitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q856014" start="21108" end="21120" title="C. J. Sansom" label="C. J. Sansom"/>
<link wikidata="Q60764342" start="21134" end="21142" title="Tombland" label="Tombland"/>
<link wikidata="Q313554" start="21375" end="21389" title="Malcolm Arnold" label="Malcolm Arnold"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58361" wikidata="Q232403" url="?curid=58361" title="Allentown">
<text>Allentown may refer to:

==Places==
*Allentown, California, now called Toadtown, California
*Allentown, Georgia, a city in four counties in Georgia
*Allentown, Illinois, an unincorporated community in Tazewell County
*Allentown, New Jersey, a borough in Monmouth County
*Allentown, Buffalo, a neighborhood in Buffalo, New York
*Allentown, a hamlet in the town of Alma, New York in Allegany County
*Allentown, a hamlet in the town of Hadley, New York in Saratoga County
*Allentown, Ohio, an unincorporated community
*Allentown, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, a suburb of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
*Allentown, Pennsylvania, a city in eastern Pennsylvania
*Allentown-Bethlehem-Easton metropolitan area, a metropolitan area also known as the Lehigh Valley
*Allentown, Washington, a neighborhood in Tukwila, Washington

==Music==
*&quot;Allentown&quot; (song), by American singer Billy Joel (1982) about Allentown, Pennsylvania
*&quot;Allentown Jail&quot;, a folk-style song written by American Irving Gordon

==Sports==
*Allentown Ambassadors (1997-2003), a defunct independent baseball team
*Allentown Jets (1958-1981), a defunct minor league basketball team

==See also==
*Allen (disambiguation)
*Allenton (disambiguation)
*Allensworth (disambiguation)
*Allenstown (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q232403" start="0" end="9" title="Allentown" label="Allentown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811384" start="37" end="58" title="Allentown, California" label="Allentown, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670381" start="93" end="111" title="Allentown, Georgia" label="Allentown, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732046" start="149" end="168" title="Allentown, Illinois" label="Allentown, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085875" start="218" end="239" title="Allentown, New Jersey" label="Allentown, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732045" start="271" end="289" title="Allentown, Buffalo" label="Allentown, Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709154" start="363" end="377" title="Alma, New York" label="Alma, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708474" start="433" end="449" title="Hadley, New York" label="Hadley, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q22133475" start="470" end="485" title="Allentown, Ohio" label="Allentown, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732052" start="516" end="557" title="Allentown, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania" label="Allentown, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q142811" start="597" end="620" title="Allentown, Pennsylvania" label="Allentown, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q123202" start="738" end="751" title="Lehigh Valley" label="Lehigh Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732051" start="753" end="774" title="Allentown, Washington" label="Allentown, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732053" start="826" end="854" title="Allentown (song)" label="&amp;quot;Allentown&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732065" start="930" end="944" title="Allentown Jail" label="Allentown Jail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732054" start="1017" end="1038" title="Allentown Ambassadors" label="Allentown Ambassadors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647892" start="1089" end="1103" title="Allentown Jets" label="Allentown Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q219314" start="1171" end="1193" title="Allen (disambiguation)" label="Allen (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498513" start="1195" end="1220" title="Allenton (disambiguation)" label="Allenton (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55551146" start="1222" end="1250" title="Allensworth (disambiguation)" label="Allensworth (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251527" start="1252" end="1279" title="Allenstown (disambiguation)" label="Allenstown (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58362" wikidata="Q224738" url="?curid=58362" title="Arlington">
<text>Arlington most often refers to:

*Arlington, Virginia
**Arlington National Cemetery, a United States military cemetery
*Arlington, Texas
Arlington may also refer to:
==Places==
===Australia===
*Arlington light rail station, on the Inner West Light Rail in Sydney

===Canada===
*Arlington, Nova Scotia
*Rural Municipality of Arlington No. 79, Saskatchewan
*Arlington, Yukon

===South Africa===
*Arlington, Free State

===United Kingdom===
*Arlington, Devon
*Arlington, East Sussex
*Arlington, Gloucestershire
*Arlington Road, London

===United States===
*Arlington, Alabama
*Arlington, Arizona
*Arlington, California
*Arlington, Colorado
*Arlington (Jacksonville), a geographical section east of downtown Jacksonville, Florida
*Arlington, Georgia
*Arlington, Illinois
*Arlington, Monroe County, Indiana
*Arlington, Rush County, Indiana
*Arlington, Iowa
*Arlington, Kansas
*Arlington, Kentucky
*Arlington, Baltimore, Maryland
*Arlington, Massachusetts, a town in Middlesex County
*Arlington station (MBTA), on the Green Line, Boston, Massachusetts
*Arlington Township, Michigan
*Arlington, Minnesota
*Arlington, Missouri
*Arlington, Nebraska
*Arlington, New Jersey
*Arlington, New York
*Arlington, Staten Island, New York, a neighborhood
*Arlington, North Carolina
*Arlington, Ohio, a village in Hancock County
*Arlington, Montgomery County, Ohio, an unincorporated community
*Arlington, Oregon
*Arlington (Pittsburgh), Pennsylvania, a neighborhood
*Arlington, South Dakota
*Arlington, Tennessee
*Arlington, Texas
*Arlington, Vermont
*Arlington, Northampton County, Virginia
*Arlington, Washington
*Arlington, Harrison County, West Virginia
*Arlington, Upshur County, West Virginia
*Arlington (town), Wisconsin
*Arlington, Wisconsin, a village
*Upper Arlington, Ohio, a city in Franklin County

==Historic homes==
*Arlington (Columbia, Maryland), a historic plantation
*Arlington (Westover, Maryland), a historic home
*Arlington (Natchez, Mississippi), a historic house
*Arlington Antebellum Home &amp; Gardens in Birmingham, Alabama
*Arlington House, The Robert E. Lee Memorial in Arlington County, Virginia

==Ships==
*SS &quot;Arlington&quot;, a steamship that sank in Lake Superior in 1940
*USS &quot;Arlington&quot; (APA-129), a Haskell-class attack transport
*USS &quot;Arlington&quot; (AGMR-2), a command ship
*USS &quot;Arlington&quot; (LPD-24), a San Antonio-class amphibious transport dock

== Other uses ==
*Arlington (band), an American rock group from Southern California
*&quot;Arlington&quot; (song), by Trace Adkins, 2005
*Arlington Steward, a character in the 2009 American psychological thriller film &quot;The Box&quot;
*Baron Arlington, a title
*The Arlington, a mixed-use skyscraper in Charlotte, North Carolina, U.S.
*Arlington (restaurant), a restaurant in London

== People with the given name ==
* Sir Arlington Butler (1938–2017), Bahamian teacher, lawyer, and politician
* Arlington Hambright (born 1996), American football player
* Arlington Nelson Lindenmuth (1856–1950), American landscape and portrait painter
* Arlington G. Reynolds (1849–1934), Republican politician from Ohio who was Speaker of the Ohio House of Representatives from 1900 to 1901
* Arlington Valles (1886–1970), Academy Award-winning Hollywood costume designer from London
* Arlington P. Van Dyke (1926–1990), American businessman and politician from New York

==See also==
*Arlington Archeological Site in Northampton County, Virginia
*Arlington Fleet Group, rail maintenance and repair company based in Eastleigh Works, Hampshire, United Kingdom
*Arlington Heights (disambiguation)
*Arlington High School (disambiguation)
*Arlington Hotel (disambiguation)
*Arlington House (disambiguation)
*Arlington Plantation (disambiguation)
*Arlington Stadium, former home of Major League Baseball&#x27;s Texas Rangers
*Arlington station (disambiguation), railway stations and other places with similar names
*Arlington Theater, Santa Barbara, California
*Darlington (disambiguation)
*Harlington (disambiguation)
*USS &quot;Arlington&quot;, a list of U.S. naval ships</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q224738" start="0" end="9" title="Arlington" label="Arlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q107126" start="34" end="53" title="Arlington County, Virginia" label="Arlington, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q216344" start="56" end="83" title="Arlington National Cemetery" label="Arlington National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q17943" start="120" end="136" title="Arlington, Texas" label="Arlington, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q224738" start="137" end="146" title="Arlington" label="Arlington"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="231" end="252" title="Inner West Light Rail#Arlington" label="Inner West Light Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792256" start="278" end="300" title="Arlington, Nova Scotia" label="Arlington, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792375" start="302" end="340" title="Rural Municipality of Arlington No. 79" label="Rural Municipality of Arlington No. 79"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013978" start="356" end="372" title="Arlington, Yukon" label="Arlington, Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643030" start="394" end="415" title="Arlington, Free State" label="Arlington, Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2799206" start="439" end="455" title="Arlington, Devon" label="Arlington, Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q733060" start="457" end="479" title="Arlington, East Sussex" label="Arlington, East Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q947945" start="481" end="507" title="Arlington, Gloucestershire" label="Arlington, Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q67212739" start="509" end="531" title="Arlington Road, London" label="Arlington Road, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q11285768" start="554" end="572" title="Arlington, Alabama" label="Arlington, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792251" start="574" end="592" title="Arlington, Arizona" label="Arlington, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792248" start="594" end="615" title="Arlington, California" label="Arlington, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792250" start="617" end="636" title="Arlington, Colorado" label="Arlington, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q48834680" start="638" end="662" title="Arlington (Jacksonville)" label="Arlington (Jacksonville)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567888" start="727" end="745" title="Arlington, Georgia" label="Arlington, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q616442" start="747" end="766" title="Arlington, Illinois" label="Arlington, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q490385" start="768" end="801" title="Arlington, Monroe County, Indiana" label="Arlington, Monroe County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777661" start="803" end="834" title="Arlington, Rush County, Indiana" label="Arlington, Rush County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762861" start="836" end="851" title="Arlington, Iowa" label="Arlington, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353888" start="853" end="870" title="Arlington, Kansas" label="Arlington, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q675500" start="872" end="891" title="Arlington, Kentucky" label="Arlington, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792243" start="893" end="913" title="Arlington, Baltimore" label="Arlington, Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090461" start="925" end="949" title="Arlington, Massachusetts" label="Arlington, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792268" start="979" end="1003" title="Arlington station (MBTA)" label="Arlington station (MBTA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792414" start="1047" end="1075" title="Arlington Township, Michigan" label="Arlington Township, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944206" start="1077" end="1097" title="Arlington, Minnesota" label="Arlington, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792254" start="1099" end="1118" title="Arlington, Missouri" label="Arlington, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q428980" start="1120" end="1139" title="Arlington, Nebraska" label="Arlington, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q19460275" start="1141" end="1162" title="Arlington, New Jersey" label="Arlington, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q675521" start="1164" end="1183" title="Arlington, New York" label="Arlington, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792257" start="1185" end="1209" title="Arlington, Staten Island" label="Arlington, Staten Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025520" start="1237" end="1262" title="Arlington, North Carolina" label="Arlington, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q690513" start="1264" end="1279" title="Arlington, Ohio" label="Arlington, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q22752196" start="1310" end="1344" title="Arlington, Montgomery County, Ohio" label="Arlington, Montgomery County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140579" start="1375" end="1392" title="Arlington, Oregon" label="Arlington, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792269" start="1394" end="1416" title="Arlington (Pittsburgh)" label="Arlington (Pittsburgh)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452048" start="1448" end="1471" title="Arlington, South Dakota" label="Arlington, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508961" start="1473" end="1493" title="Arlington, Tennessee" label="Arlington, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q17943" start="1495" end="1511" title="Arlington, Texas" label="Arlington, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q675558" start="1513" end="1531" title="Arlington, Vermont" label="Arlington, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792255" start="1533" end="1572" title="Arlington, Northampton County, Virginia" label="Arlington, Northampton County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055866" start="1574" end="1595" title="Arlington, Washington" label="Arlington, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792252" start="1597" end="1638" title="Arlington, Harrison County, West Virginia" label="Arlington, Harrison County, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792258" start="1640" end="1679" title="Arlington, Upshur County, West Virginia" label="Arlington, Upshur County, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840758" start="1681" end="1708" title="Arlington (town), Wisconsin" label="Arlington (town), Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q925550" start="1710" end="1730" title="Arlington, Wisconsin" label="Arlington, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924921" start="1743" end="1764" title="Upper Arlington, Ohio" label="Upper Arlington, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q17985601" start="1813" end="1843" title="Arlington (Columbia, Maryland)" label="Arlington (Columbia, Maryland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792271" start="1868" end="1898" title="Arlington (Westover, Maryland)" label="Arlington (Westover, Maryland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792265" start="1917" end="1949" title="Arlington (Natchez, Mississippi)" label="Arlington (Natchez, Mississippi)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792278" start="1969" end="2008" title="Arlington Antebellum Home &amp;amp; Gardens" label="Arlington Antebellum Home &amp;amp; Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q675702" start="2033" end="2076" title="Arlington House, The Robert E. Lee Memorial" label="Arlington House, The Robert E. Lee Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7393185" start="2119" end="2143" title="SS Arlington" label="SS &amp;quot;Arlington&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871573" start="2193" end="2228" title="USS Arlington (APA-129)" label="USS &amp;quot;Arlington&amp;quot; (APA-129)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303926" start="2264" end="2298" title="USS Arlington (AGMR-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Arlington&amp;quot; (AGMR-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468484" start="2316" end="2350" title="USS Arlington (LPD-24)" label="USS &amp;quot;Arlington&amp;quot; (LPD-24)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65075209" start="2417" end="2433" title="Arlington (band)" label="Arlington (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792272" start="2484" end="2512" title="Arlington (song)" label="&amp;quot;Arlington&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2623" end="2630" title="The Box (2009 film)#Cast" label="The Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862113" start="2638" end="2653" title="Baron Arlington" label="Baron Arlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714264" start="2664" end="2677" title="The Arlington" label="The Arlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q102229624" start="2738" end="2760" title="Arlington (restaurant)" label="Arlington (restaurant)"/>
<link wikidata="Q43066114" start="2825" end="2841" title="Arlington Butler" label="Arlington Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q95263067" start="2898" end="2917" title="Arlington Hambright" label="Arlington Hambright"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792372" start="2958" end="2985" title="Arlington Nelson Lindenmuth" label="Arlington Nelson Lindenmuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792317" start="3041" end="3062" title="Arlington G. Reynolds" label="Arlington G. Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q675760" start="3181" end="3197" title="Arlington Valles" label="Arlington Valles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012412" start="3274" end="3295" title="Arlington P. Van Dyke" label="Arlington P. Van Dyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148410" start="3374" end="3402" title="Arlington Archeological Site" label="Arlington Archeological Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330761" start="3436" end="3457" title="Arlington Fleet Group" label="Arlington Fleet Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q254019" start="3548" end="3582" title="Arlington Heights (disambiguation)" label="Arlington Heights (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792336" start="3584" end="3622" title="Arlington High School (disambiguation)" label="Arlington High School (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q675680" start="3624" end="3656" title="Arlington Hotel (disambiguation)" label="Arlington Hotel (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792355" start="3658" end="3690" title="Arlington House (disambiguation)" label="Arlington House (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792385" start="3692" end="3729" title="Arlington Plantation (disambiguation)" label="Arlington Plantation (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861657" start="3731" end="3748" title="Arlington Stadium" label="Arlington Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q22349598" start="3809" end="3843" title="Arlington station (disambiguation)" label="Arlington station (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792404" start="3899" end="3916" title="Arlington Theater" label="Arlington Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q253775" start="3945" end="3972" title="Darlington (disambiguation)" label="Darlington (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q400832" start="3974" end="4001" title="Harlington (disambiguation)" label="Harlington (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q533428" start="4003" end="4028" title="USS Arlington" label="USS &amp;quot;Arlington&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58365" wikidata="Q239741" url="?curid=58365" title="Bloomfield">
<text>Bloomfield may refer to:

==People==
* Bloomfield (surname)

==Places==
===Australia===
* Bloomfield, Queensland, a town and locality in the Shires of Cook and Douglas
* Bloomfield River, in Queensland

===Canada===
* Bloomfield, Carleton County, New Brunswick
* Bloomfield, Kings County, New Brunswick
* Bloomfield, Newfoundland and Labrador
* Bloomfield, Ontario
* Bloomfield, Prince Edward Island
** Bloomfield Provincial Park

===United Kingdom===
* Bloomfield (Bangor suburb), Northern Ireland
* Bloomfield, Belfast, an electoral ward of East Belfast, Northern Ireland

===United States===
* Bloomfield, Arkansas, in Benton County
* Bloomfield, California
* North Bloomfield, California, former name Bloomfield
* Bloomfield, Connecticut
* Bloomfield (St. Georges, Delaware), a historic home listed on the National Register of Historic Places
* Bloomfield, Indiana, a town in Greene County
* Bloomfield, Jay County, Indiana, an unincorporated community
* Bloomfield, Spencer County, Indiana, an unincorporated community
* Bloomfield, Iowa
* Bloomfield, Kentucky
* Sharpsburg, Kentucky, formerly known as Bloomfield
* Bloomfield, Missouri
* Bloomfield, Montana
* Bloomfield, Nebraska
* Bloomfield, New Jersey
** Bloomfield College
** Bloomfield (NJT station), a New Jersey Transit station
* Bloomfield, New Mexico
* Bloomfield, New York, a village in Ontario County
* Bloomfield, Staten Island, New York
* Bloomfield, Morrow County, Ohio, an unincorporated community
* Bloomfield, Muskingum County, Ohio, an unincorporated community
* Bloomfield, Washington County, Ohio, an unincorporated community
* Bloomfield, Pennsylvania, a borough in Perry County
* Bloomfield (Pittsburgh), Pennsylvania
* Bloomfield, Vermont
* Bloomfield, Virginia
* Bloomfield (Herndon, Virginia), also known as Holly Knoll, a historic home located in Fairfax County
* Bloomfield (village), Wisconsin, in Walworth County
* Bloomfield, Walworth County, Wisconsin, a town
* Bloomfield, Waushara County, Wisconsin, a town
* Bloomfield Hills, Michigan
* Bloomfield Township (disambiguation), several townships
* East Bloomfield, New York
* New Bloomfield, Missouri
* North Bloomfield, California
* North Bloomfield, Ohio
* South Bloomfield, Ohio
* West Bloomfield, New York
* West Bloomfield Township, Michigan

==Sports==
* Bloomfield Stadium, a football (soccer) stadium in Tel Aviv, Israel
* Bloomfield Road, a football (soccer) stadium in Blackpool, England
* Bloomfield Cricket and Athletic Club, a major cricket team in Colombo, Sri Lanka

==Coal mines==
* Bloomfield Colliery, in Tipton, England, site of a Watt steam engine
* Bloomfield, a coal mine in Australia operated by Bloomfield Collieries; See Coal companies of Australia

==Other uses==
* Bloomfield (microprocessor), a processor marketed under the Intel Core i7 name
* &quot;Bloomfield&quot; (film), a 1971 film
* Bloomfield Academy (Oklahoma), a school in the Chickasaw Nation, (Indian Territory), near the present town of Achille, Oklahoma

==See also==
* Bloomfield High School (disambiguation)
* Blumenfeld, a surname
* Blumfeld, an indie-pop band from Germany
* Broomfield (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q239741" start="0" end="10" title="Bloomfield" label="Bloomfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q16823594" start="39" end="59" title="Bloomfield (surname)" label="Bloomfield (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049482" start="90" end="112" title="Bloomfield, Queensland" label="Bloomfield, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907048" start="170" end="186" title="Bloomfield River" label="Bloomfield River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907034" start="218" end="260" title="Bloomfield, Carleton County, New Brunswick" label="Bloomfield, Carleton County, New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875578" start="263" end="302" title="Bloomfield, Kings County, New Brunswick" label="Bloomfield, Kings County, New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928218" start="305" end="342" title="Bloomfield, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Bloomfield, Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q109924233" start="345" end="364" title="Bloomfield, Ontario" label="Bloomfield, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907039" start="367" end="399" title="Bloomfield, Prince Edward Island" label="Bloomfield, Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928253" start="403" end="429" title="Bloomfield Provincial Park" label="Bloomfield Provincial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q806551" start="454" end="480" title="Bloomfield (Bangor suburb)" label="Bloomfield (Bangor suburb)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4882237" start="501" end="520" title="Bloomfield, Belfast" label="Bloomfield, Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873583" start="597" end="617" title="Bloomfield, Arkansas" label="Bloomfield, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928216" start="638" end="660" title="Bloomfield, California" label="Bloomfield, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054205" start="663" end="691" title="North Bloomfield, California" label="North Bloomfield, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q542675" start="718" end="741" title="Bloomfield, Connecticut" label="Bloomfield, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928225" start="744" end="778" title="Bloomfield (St. Georges, Delaware)" label="Bloomfield (St. Georges, Delaware)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2693850" start="849" end="868" title="Bloomfield, Indiana" label="Bloomfield, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928217" start="896" end="927" title="Bloomfield, Jay County, Indiana" label="Bloomfield, Jay County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197767" start="959" end="994" title="Bloomfield, Spencer County, Indiana" label="Bloomfield, Spencer County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914630" start="1026" end="1042" title="Bloomfield, Iowa" label="Bloomfield, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2794301" start="1045" end="1065" title="Bloomfield, Kentucky" label="Bloomfield, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026888" start="1068" end="1088" title="Sharpsburg, Kentucky" label="Sharpsburg, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q952941" start="1121" end="1141" title="Bloomfield, Missouri" label="Bloomfield, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843325" start="1144" end="1163" title="Bloomfield, Montana" label="Bloomfield, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q965314" start="1166" end="1186" title="Bloomfield, Nebraska" label="Bloomfield, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q648622" start="1189" end="1211" title="Bloomfield, New Jersey" label="Bloomfield, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928235" start="1215" end="1233" title="Bloomfield College" label="Bloomfield College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928222" start="1237" end="1261" title="Bloomfield (NJT station)" label="Bloomfield (NJT station)"/>
<link wikidata="Q885351" start="1294" end="1316" title="Bloomfield, New Mexico" label="Bloomfield, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452732" start="1319" end="1339" title="Bloomfield, New York" label="Bloomfield, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928220" start="1371" end="1396" title="Bloomfield, Staten Island" label="Bloomfield, Staten Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q22033316" start="1409" end="1440" title="Bloomfield, Morrow County, Ohio" label="Bloomfield, Morrow County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q22133564" start="1472" end="1506" title="Bloomfield, Muskingum County, Ohio" label="Bloomfield, Muskingum County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q22133339" start="1538" end="1573" title="Bloomfield, Washington County, Ohio" label="Bloomfield, Washington County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133241" start="1605" end="1629" title="Bloomfield, Pennsylvania" label="Bloomfield, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928223" start="1659" end="1682" title="Bloomfield (Pittsburgh)" label="Bloomfield (Pittsburgh)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974810" start="1699" end="1718" title="Bloomfield, Vermont" label="Bloomfield, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q885349" start="1721" end="1741" title="Bloomfield, Virginia" label="Bloomfield, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843320" start="1744" end="1774" title="Bloomfield (Herndon, Virginia)" label="Bloomfield (Herndon, Virginia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14714411" start="1847" end="1878" title="Bloomfield (village), Wisconsin" label="Bloomfield (village), Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928227" start="1901" end="1939" title="Bloomfield, Walworth County, Wisconsin" label="Bloomfield, Walworth County, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917381" start="1950" end="1988" title="Bloomfield, Waushara County, Wisconsin" label="Bloomfield, Waushara County, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q885355" start="1999" end="2025" title="Bloomfield Hills, Michigan" label="Bloomfield Hills, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q728902" start="2028" end="2064" title="Bloomfield Township (disambiguation)" label="Bloomfield Township (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708723" start="2086" end="2111" title="East Bloomfield, New York" label="East Bloomfield, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q427353" start="2114" end="2138" title="New Bloomfield, Missouri" label="New Bloomfield, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054205" start="2141" end="2169" title="North Bloomfield, California" label="North Bloomfield, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054207" start="2172" end="2194" title="North Bloomfield, Ohio" label="North Bloomfield, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930809" start="2197" end="2219" title="South Bloomfield, Ohio" label="South Bloomfield, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708963" start="2222" end="2247" title="West Bloomfield, New York" label="West Bloomfield, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851708" start="2250" end="2284" title="West Bloomfield Township, Michigan" label="West Bloomfield Township, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q130150" start="2299" end="2317" title="Bloomfield Stadium" label="Bloomfield Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q870859" start="2369" end="2384" title="Bloomfield Road" label="Bloomfield Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928238" start="2438" end="2474" title="Bloomfield Cricket and Athletic Club" label="Bloomfield Cricket and Athletic Club"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2537" end="2556" title="Bloomfield Colliery" label="Bloomfield Colliery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099902" start="2588" end="2605" title="Watt steam engine" label="Watt steam engine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2684" end="2711" title="Coal companies of Australia#Bloomfield Collieries Pty Ltd" label="Coal companies of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907041" start="2730" end="2757" title="Bloomfield (microprocessor)" label="Bloomfield (microprocessor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907035" start="2811" end="2840" title="Bloomfield (film)" label="&amp;quot;Bloomfield&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928229" start="2856" end="2885" title="Bloomfield Academy (Oklahoma)" label="Bloomfield Academy (Oklahoma)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928242" start="3000" end="3039" title="Bloomfield High School (disambiguation)" label="Bloomfield High School (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21489135" start="3042" end="3052" title="Blumenfeld" label="Blumenfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q11894" start="3066" end="3074" title="Blumfeld" label="Blumfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437071" start="3109" end="3136" title="Broomfield (disambiguation)" label="Broomfield (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58366" wikidata="Q248282" url="?curid=58366" title="Bridgewater">
<text>Bridgewater or Bridgwater may refer to:

==Companies==
* Bridgewater Associates, global investment manager
* Bridgewater Systems, Canadian software company

==Education==
* Bridgewater College, Virginia, United States
* Bridgewater High School (disambiguation)
* Bridgewater State University, Massachusetts
* Bridgewater-Raynham Regional High School, Massachusetts, United States

== People ==
* Bridgewater (surname)
* Earl of Bridgewater and Duke of Bridgewater, UK peerage

== Places ==
=== Australia ===
* Bridgewater, South Australia
* Bridgewater, Tasmania, suburb of Hobart
* Bridgewater On Loddon, Victoria
* Cape Bridgewater, Victoria, Australia

=== Canada ===
* Bridgewater, Nova Scotia

=== United Kingdom ===
* Bridgwater, town and civil parish in Somerset
** Bridgwater (UK Parliament constituency) which existed from 1885 to 2010
** Bridgwater and West Somerset (UK Parliament constituency), current constituency for this area
* RHS Garden Bridgewater, Greater Manchester
* Bridgewater, Banbridge, a development in County Down, Northern Ireland

=== United States ===
* Bridgewater, Connecticut
** Bridgewater (CDP), Connecticut, census-designated place
* Bridgewater, Iowa
* Bridgewater, Maine
* Bridgewater, Massachusetts
** Bridgewater (CDP), Massachusetts, census-designated place
** Bridgewater (MBTA station)
* Bridgewater, Michigan, unincorporated community
* Bridgewater, New Hampshire
* Bridgewater Township, New Jersey, commonly referred to as &quot;Bridgewater&quot;
* Bridgewater, New York, a town
** Bridgewater (CDP), New York, in the town of Bridgewater
* Bridgewater, New York (disambiguation)
* Bridgewater, Pennsylvania
* Bridgewater, South Dakota
* Bridgewater, Vermont
* Bridgewater, Virginia
* Bridgewater Township (disambiguation)
* Bridgewater Historic District (disambiguation)
* Bridgewater Center (disambiguation)

==Structures==
* Bridgewater Bridge (disambiguation)
* Bridgewater Hall, a concert hall in Manchester
* Bridgewater House (disambiguation)
* Bridgewater Monument, Hertfordshire
* Bridgewater Place, Leeds
* Bridgewater State Hospital, Massachusetts, a hospital for the criminally insane, subject of the film &quot;Titicut Follies&quot;

==Transportation==
* , one of four East Indiamen of the British East India Company
* Bridgwater and Taunton Canal, Somerset, England
* Port of Bridgwater, Somerset, England
* Bridgewater Canal, from Preston Brook and Worsley to Manchester, England
* Bridgewater railway line, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia
* Bridgewater station (MBTA), in Bridgewater, Massachusetts, United States
* Bridgewater station (New York), in Bridgewater, New York, United States
* Bridgewater station (NJ Transit), in Bridgewater, New Jersey, United States
* HMS &quot;Bridgewater&quot;, the name of four ships of the Royal Navy, and one of the Commonwealth of England

==See also==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q248282" start="0" end="11" title="Bridgewater" label="Bridgewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q248282" start="15" end="25" title="Bridgewater" label="Bridgwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q652431" start="57" end="79" title="Bridgewater Associates" label="Bridgewater Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966862" start="109" end="128" title="Bridgewater Systems" label="Bridgewater Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966838" start="173" end="192" title="Bridgewater College" label="Bridgewater College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966840" start="220" end="260" title="Bridgewater High School (disambiguation)" label="Bridgewater High School (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446076" start="263" end="291" title="Bridgewater State University" label="Bridgewater State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966828" start="309" end="349" title="Bridgewater-Raynham Regional High School" label="Bridgewater-Raynham Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q16860440" start="396" end="417" title="Bridgewater (surname)" label="Bridgewater (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129742" start="420" end="439" title="Earl of Bridgewater" label="Earl of Bridgewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966824" start="510" end="538" title="Bridgewater, South Australia" label="Bridgewater, South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426910" start="541" end="562" title="Bridgewater, Tasmania" label="Bridgewater, Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966856" start="583" end="614" title="Bridgewater On Loddon, Victoria" label="Bridgewater On Loddon, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034626" start="617" end="633" title="Cape Bridgewater" label="Cape Bridgewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q474178" start="673" end="697" title="Bridgewater, Nova Scotia" label="Bridgewater, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q914015" start="724" end="734" title="Bridgwater" label="Bridgwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q126877547" start="773" end="812" title="Bridgwater (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Bridgwater (UK Parliament constituency)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137895" start="848" end="905" title="Bridgwater and West Somerset (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Bridgwater and West Somerset (UK Parliament constituency)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090129" start="944" end="966" title="RHS Garden Bridgewater" label="RHS Garden Bridgewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q129164830" start="989" end="1011" title="Bridgewater, Banbridge" label="Bridgewater, Banbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446075" start="1085" end="1109" title="Bridgewater, Connecticut" label="Bridgewater, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q106630312" start="1113" end="1143" title="Bridgewater (CDP), Connecticut" label="Bridgewater (CDP), Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233639" start="1171" end="1188" title="Bridgewater, Iowa" label="Bridgewater, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q913937" start="1191" end="1209" title="Bridgewater, Maine" label="Bridgewater, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086280" start="1212" end="1238" title="Bridgewater, Massachusetts" label="Bridgewater, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966829" start="1242" end="1274" title="Bridgewater (CDP), Massachusetts" label="Bridgewater (CDP), Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966830" start="1303" end="1329" title="Bridgewater (MBTA station)" label="Bridgewater (MBTA station)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966865" start="1332" end="1353" title="Bridgewater, Michigan" label="Bridgewater, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418044" start="1382" end="1408" title="Bridgewater, New Hampshire" label="Bridgewater, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q367285" start="1411" end="1443" title="Bridgewater Township, New Jersey" label="Bridgewater Township, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966823" start="1495" end="1516" title="Bridgewater, New York" label="Bridgewater, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461734" start="1528" end="1555" title="Bridgewater (CDP), New York" label="Bridgewater (CDP), New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966822" start="1586" end="1624" title="Bridgewater, New York (disambiguation)" label="Bridgewater, New York (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132739" start="1627" end="1652" title="Bridgewater, Pennsylvania" label="Bridgewater, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300650" start="1655" end="1680" title="Bridgewater, South Dakota" label="Bridgewater, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q3447795" start="1683" end="1703" title="Bridgewater, Vermont" label="Bridgewater, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376704" start="1706" end="1727" title="Bridgewater, Virginia" label="Bridgewater, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q913952" start="1730" end="1767" title="Bridgewater Township (disambiguation)" label="Bridgewater Township (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966843" start="1770" end="1816" title="Bridgewater Historic District (disambiguation)" label="Bridgewater Historic District (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22348532" start="1819" end="1854" title="Bridgewater Center (disambiguation)" label="Bridgewater Center (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q913941" start="1873" end="1908" title="Bridgewater Bridge (disambiguation)" label="Bridgewater Bridge (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925178" start="1911" end="1927" title="Bridgewater Hall" label="Bridgewater Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966846" start="1960" end="1994" title="Bridgewater House (disambiguation)" label="Bridgewater House (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15108035" start="1997" end="2017" title="Bridgewater Monument" label="Bridgewater Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q500732" start="2035" end="2052" title="Bridgewater Place" label="Bridgewater Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966861" start="2062" end="2088" title="Bridgewater State Hospital" label="Bridgewater State Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966938" start="2277" end="2305" title="Bridgwater and Taunton Canal" label="Bridgwater and Taunton Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006324" start="2327" end="2345" title="Port of Bridgwater" label="Port of Bridgwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q913932" start="2367" end="2384" title="Bridgewater Canal" label="Bridgewater Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966864" start="2442" end="2466" title="Bridgewater railway line" label="Bridgewater railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966830" start="2507" end="2533" title="Bridgewater station (MBTA)" label="Bridgewater station (MBTA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706197" start="2582" end="2612" title="Bridgewater station (New York)" label="Bridgewater station (New York)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966831" start="2656" end="2688" title="Bridgewater station (NJ Transit)" label="Bridgewater station (NJ Transit)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5631671" start="2734" end="2761" title="HMS Bridgewater" label="HMS &amp;quot;Bridgewater&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58369" wikidata="Q349196" url="?curid=58369" title="Brookfield">
<text>Brookfield may refer to:
== Australia ==
*Brookfield, Queensland, a suburb of Brisbane
*Brookfield, Victoria

== Canada ==
*Brookfield, Manitoba, on Manitoba Highway 11
*Brookfield, Newfoundland and Labrador
*Brookfield, Nova Scotia
*Brookfield, Ontario, a neighbourhood of Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario
*Brookfield, Prince Edward Island

== New Zealand ==
*Brookfield, New Zealand, a suburb of Otumoetai in Tauranga, Bay of Plenty
*Brookfield Outdoor Education Centre, Wellington, a Scouts Aotearoa camp site which has hosted the New Zealand Rover moot

== United Kingdom ==
*Brookfield, Derbyshire, a location in Derbyshire, England
*Brookfield, Preston, in Lancashire, England
*Brookfield, Middlesbrough, a location in Middlesbrough, England
*Brookfield, Renfrewshire, Scotland
* Brookfield, a neighbourhood of Robroyston, Glasgow, Scotland
*Brookfield, County Fermanagh, a townland in County Fermanagh, Northern Ireland

== United States ==
*Brookfield, Colorado, a place in Baca County, Colorado
*Brookfield, Connecticut
**Brookfield Center, Connecticut
**Brookfield Center Historic District (Brookfield, Connecticut)
*Brookfield, Delaware, a place in Kent County, Delaware
*Brookfield, Georgia
*Brookfield, Illinois
**Brookfield Zoo, in Brookfield, Illinois
*Brookfield, Indiana
*Brookfield, Massachusetts
**Brookfield (CDP), Massachusetts
*Brookfield, Missouri
*Brookfield, New Hampshire
*Brookfield, New York
**Brookfield (hamlet), New York
*Brookfield, Chester County, Pennsylvania, a place in Pennsylvania
*Brookfield, Tioga County, Pennsylvania, a place in Pennsylvania
*Brookfield, Vermont
*Brookfield (plantation) of Virginia, a former plantation and fixture of Gabriel&#x27;s Rebellion of 1800
*Brookfield, Wisconsin, a city
*Brookfield (town), Wisconsin
*Brookfield Place (New York City)
*Brookfield Township (disambiguation)

== Companies ==
*Brookfield Corporation
**Brookfield Properties
*Brookfield Engineering, a manufacturer of viscometers
*Brookfield Glass Company

== Other uses ==
* &quot;Brookfield&quot; (song), a song by Silverstein from the 2012 album &quot;Short Songs&quot;
* A British school in the 1934 James Hilton novella &quot;Good-bye, Mr. Chips&quot;
* A farm featured prominently in the British radio soap opera &quot;The Archers&quot;
* Brookfield (surname), list of people with the surname

== See also ==
*Brookfield Community School (disambiguation)
*Brookfield High School (disambiguation)
*Brookfield Place (disambiguation)
*Brookfield railway station (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q349196" start="0" end="10" title="Brookfield" label="Brookfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167769" start="42" end="64" title="Brookfield, Queensland" label="Brookfield, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974556" start="88" end="108" title="Brookfield, Victoria" label="Brookfield, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124" end="144" title="Brookfield, Manitoba" label="Brookfield, Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750017" start="149" end="168" title="Manitoba Highway 11" label="Manitoba Highway 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974553" start="170" end="207" title="Brookfield, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Brookfield, Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974552" start="209" end="232" title="Brookfield, Nova Scotia" label="Brookfield, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6988175" start="234" end="253" title="Brookfield, Ontario" label="Brookfield, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259888" start="301" end="333" title="Brookfield, Prince Edward Island" label="Brookfield, Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q96359482" start="354" end="377" title="Brookfield, New Zealand" label="Brookfield, New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="429" end="476" title="Brookfield Outdoor Education Centre, Wellington" label="Brookfield Outdoor Education Centre, Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592083" start="527" end="549" title="List of New Zealand Rover Moots" label="New Zealand Rover moot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="573" end="595" title="Brookfield, Derbyshire" label="Brookfield, Derbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="" start="599" end="630" title="List of United Kingdom locations: Broo-Brt" label="location in Derbyshire, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974549" start="632" end="651" title="Brookfield, Preston" label="Brookfield, Preston"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="677" end="702" title="Brookfield, Middlesbrough" label="Brookfield, Middlesbrough"/>
<link wikidata="" start="706" end="740" title="List of United Kingdom locations: Broo-Brt" label="location in Middlesbrough, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974558" start="742" end="766" title="Brookfield, Renfrewshire" label="Brookfield, Renfrewshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353484" start="810" end="820" title="Robroyston" label="Robroyston"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="841" end="869" title="Brookfield, County Fermanagh" label="Brookfield, County Fermanagh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="873" end="901" title="List of townlands in County Fermanagh#B" label="townland in County Fermanagh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="942" end="962" title="Brookfield, Colorado" label="Brookfield, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980360" start="966" end="996" title="List of places in Colorado" label="place in Baca County, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q225389" start="998" end="1021" title="Brookfield, Connecticut" label="Brookfield, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q106492951" start="1024" end="1054" title="Brookfield Center, Connecticut" label="Brookfield Center, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q14714875" start="1057" end="1118" title="Brookfield Center Historic District (Brookfield, Connecticut)" label="Brookfield Center Historic District (Brookfield, Connecticut)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1120" end="1140" title="Brookfield, Delaware" label="Brookfield, Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633660" start="1144" end="1174" title="List of places in Delaware" label="place in Kent County, Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q22058887" start="1176" end="1195" title="Brookfield, Georgia" label="Brookfield, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486605" start="1197" end="1217" title="Brookfield, Illinois" label="Brookfield, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q929075" start="1220" end="1234" title="Brookfield Zoo" label="Brookfield Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q22033495" start="1261" end="1280" title="Brookfield, Indiana" label="Brookfield, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536826" start="1282" end="1307" title="Brookfield, Massachusetts" label="Brookfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q16301244" start="1310" end="1341" title="Brookfield (CDP), Massachusetts" label="Brookfield (CDP), Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q962400" start="1343" end="1363" title="Brookfield, Missouri" label="Brookfield, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430054" start="1365" end="1390" title="Brookfield, New Hampshire" label="Brookfield, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708317" start="1392" end="1412" title="Brookfield, New York" label="Brookfield, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q48740552" start="1415" end="1444" title="Brookfield (hamlet), New York" label="Brookfield (hamlet), New York"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1446" end="1486" title="Brookfield, Chester County, Pennsylvania" label="Brookfield, Chester County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1490" end="1511" title="List of places in Pennsylvania: B" label="place in Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1513" end="1551" title="Brookfield, Tioga County, Pennsylvania" label="Brookfield, Tioga County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1555" end="1576" title="List of places in Pennsylvania: B" label="place in Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068923" start="1578" end="1597" title="Brookfield, Vermont" label="Brookfield, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q107071745" start="1599" end="1622" title="Brookfield (plantation)" label="Brookfield (plantation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q929024" start="1705" end="1726" title="Brookfield, Wisconsin" label="Brookfield, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q942524" start="1736" end="1764" title="Brookfield (town), Wisconsin" label="Brookfield (town), Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006299" start="1766" end="1798" title="Brookfield Place (New York City)" label="Brookfield Place (New York City)"/>
<link wikidata="Q929042" start="1800" end="1836" title="Brookfield Township (disambiguation)" label="Brookfield Township (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q908324" start="1855" end="1877" title="Brookfield Corporation" label="Brookfield Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974584" start="1880" end="1901" title="Brookfield Properties" label="Brookfield Properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974574" start="1903" end="1925" title="Brookfield Engineering" label="Brookfield Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q20857842" start="1958" end="1982" title="Brookfield Glass Company" label="Brookfield Glass Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959719" start="2003" end="2032" title="Brookfield (song)" label="&amp;quot;Brookfield&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268056" start="2158" end="2177" title="Goodbye, Mr. Chips" label="Good-bye, Mr. Chips"/>
<link wikidata="Q386813" start="2252" end="2263" title="The Archers" label="The Archers"/>
<link wikidata="Q37015761" start="2272" end="2292" title="Brookfield (surname)" label="Brookfield (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16767696" start="2343" end="2387" title="Brookfield Community School (disambiguation)" label="Brookfield Community School (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974576" start="2389" end="2428" title="Brookfield High School (disambiguation)" label="Brookfield High School (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16767699" start="2430" end="2463" title="Brookfield Place (disambiguation)" label="Brookfield Place (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27792523" start="2465" end="2508" title="Brookfield railway station (disambiguation)" label="Brookfield railway station (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58370" wikidata="Q485470" url="?curid=58370" title="Poweshiek County, Iowa">
<text>Poweshiek County is a county in the southeastern part of the U.S. state of Iowa. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 18,662. The county seat is Montezuma. The county is named for the chief of the Fox tribe who signed the treaty ending the Black Hawk War. It lies along Interstate 80 between Des Moines and Iowa City. Poweshiek County&#x27;s largest city is Grinnell.

==History==
Poweshiek County was formed in 1843. It was named for Meskwaki Chief Poweshiek (1791–1854), a chief of the Meskwaki people. The Poweshiek County Courthouse, completed in 1859, is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

==Government and infrastructure==
County business is overseen by three elected county supervisors. The county website provides names and contact information for the current supervisors.












==Poweshiek County Elected Officials==
*County Supervisors: Chairman Jeff Tindle (R), Vice-Chair Jason Roudabush (D), Jacki Bolen (R)
*County Attorney: Bart Klaver (R)
*County Auditor: Missy Eilander (R)
*County Recorder: Lora Wyckoff (R)
*County Sheriff: Matt Maschmann (R) 
*County Treasurer: Sandy Ross (R)

===Healthcare===
Poweshiek County is served by Grinnell Regional Medical Center, an acute care hospital licensed for 81 beds. GRMC was established in 1967 after the merger of two hospitals.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.2%) is water. It is drained by the north fork of Skunk River, which crosses the southwest corner, and by English River and other streams.

===Major highways===
* Interstate 80
* U.S. Highway 6
* U.S. Highway 63
* Iowa Highway 21
* Iowa Highway 85
* Iowa Highway 146

===Transit===
* List of intercity bus stops in Iowa

===Adjacent counties===
*Tama County (north)
*Iowa County (east)
*Keokuk County (southeast)
*Mahaska County (south)
*Jasper County (west)

==Demographics==

===2020 census===

The 2020 census recorded a population of 18,662 in the county, with a population density of . 96.55% of the population reported being of one race. There were 8,906 housing units, of which 7,536 were occupied.
===2010 census===
The 2010 census recorded a population of 18,914 in the county, with a population density of . There were 8,949 housing units, of which 7,555 were occupied.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 18,815 people, 7,398 households, and 4,882 families in the county. The population density was . There were 8,556 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 96.74% White, 0.55% Black or African American, 0.23% Native American, 1.07% Asian, 0.05% Pacific Islander, 0.49% from other races, and 0.87% from two or more races. 1.20% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

Of the 7,398 households 29.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 55.8% were married couples living together, 7.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.0% were non-families. 29.2% of households were one person and 13.9% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.35 and the average family size was 2.88.

The age distribution was 22.7% under the age of 18, 12.8% from 18 to 24, 24.4% from 25 to 44, 22.5% from 45 to 64, and 17.6% 65 or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females there were 92.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 88.8 males.

The median household income was $37,836 and the median family income was $46,599. Males had a median income of $32,781 versus $22,465 for females. The per capita income for the county was $18,629. About 6.2% of families and 9.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 12.0% of those under age 18 and 5.9% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
Poweshiek County is served by three community school districts:


Poweshiek County is home to Grinnell College, a small liberal arts college founded in 1846.

There is one private school in the county, Central Iowa Christian School, in Grinnell.

==Communities==

===Cities===

*Barnes City
*Brooklyn
*Deep River
*Grinnell
*Guernsey
*Hartwick
*Malcom
*Montezuma
*Searsboro
*Victor
===Unincorporated communities===
*Ewart

==Population==

===Political Townships===

* Bear Creek
* Chester
* Deep River
* Grant
* Jackson
* Jefferson
* Lincoln
* Madison
* Malcom
* Pleasant
* Scott
* Sheridan
* Sugar Creek
* Union
* Warren
* Washington
===Census-designated places===
*Holiday Lake

===Population ranking===
The population ranking of the following table is based on the 2020 United States census.

† &quot;county seat&quot;

==See also==

*Poweshiek County Courthouse
*National Register of Historic Places listings in Poweshiek County, Iowa

==References==
==External links==

*Poweshiek County Official County website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q485470" start="0" end="16" title="Poweshiek County, Iowa" label="Poweshiek County"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="22" end="28" title="County (United States)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="61" end="71" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="75" end="79" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="91" end="116" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="149" end="160" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911096" start="164" end="173" title="Montezuma, Iowa" label="Montezuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440169" start="216" end="225" title="Fox (Native American)" label="Fox tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q879980" start="259" end="273" title="Black Hawk War" label="Black Hawk War"/>
<link wikidata="Q452286" start="289" end="302" title="Interstate 80 in Iowa" label="Interstate 80"/>
<link wikidata="Q39709" start="311" end="321" title="Des Moines, Iowa" label="Des Moines"/>
<link wikidata="Q487977" start="326" end="335" title="Iowa City, Iowa" label="Iowa City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903250" start="377" end="385" title="Grinnell, Iowa" label="Grinnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440169" start="507" end="515" title="Meskwaki" label="Meskwaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236876" start="528" end="555" title="Poweshiek County Courthouse" label="Poweshiek County Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="593" end="629" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609528" start="1188" end="1220" title="Grinnell Regional Medical Center" label="Grinnell Regional Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1363" end="1381" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537031" start="1489" end="1500" title="Skunk River (Iowa)" label="Skunk River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342848" start="1545" end="1558" title="English River (Iowa)" label="English River"/>
<link wikidata="Q452286" start="1602" end="1615" title="Interstate 80 in Iowa" label="Interstate 80"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481425" start="1618" end="1632" title="U.S. Route 6 in Iowa" label="U.S. Highway 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q104869130" start="1635" end="1650" title="U.S. Route 63 in Iowa" label="U.S. Highway 63"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192306" start="1653" end="1668" title="Iowa Highway 21" label="Iowa Highway 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427125" start="1671" end="1686" title="Iowa Highway 85" label="Iowa Highway 85"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477703" start="1689" end="1705" title="Iowa Highway 146" label="Iowa Highway 146"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1723" end="1758" title="List of intercity bus stops in Iowa" label="List of intercity bus stops in Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q119372" start="1785" end="1796" title="Tama County, Iowa" label="Tama County"/>
<link wikidata="Q486000" start="1806" end="1817" title="Iowa County, Iowa" label="Iowa County"/>
<link wikidata="Q485926" start="1826" end="1839" title="Keokuk County, Iowa" label="Keokuk County"/>
<link wikidata="Q485922" start="1853" end="1867" title="Mahaska County, Iowa" label="Mahaska County"/>
<link wikidata="Q485736" start="1877" end="1890" title="Jasper County, Iowa" label="Jasper County"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2348" end="2354" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2533" end="2546" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2572" end="2577" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2585" end="2590" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2594" end="2610" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2618" end="2633" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2641" end="2646" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2654" end="2670" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2759" end="2767" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2771" end="2777" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3693" end="3705" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982991" start="3888" end="3904" title="Grinnell College" label="Grinnell College"/>
<link wikidata="Q189329" start="3914" end="3926" title="liberal arts" label="liberal arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922763" start="4073" end="4084" title="Barnes City, Iowa" label="Barnes City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944898" start="4086" end="4094" title="Brooklyn, Iowa" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901319" start="4096" end="4106" title="Deep River, Iowa" label="Deep River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903250" start="4108" end="4116" title="Grinnell, Iowa" label="Grinnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932445" start="4118" end="4126" title="Guernsey, Iowa" label="Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932010" start="4128" end="4136" title="Hartwick, Iowa" label="Hartwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q612219" start="4138" end="4144" title="Malcom, Iowa" label="Malcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911096" start="4146" end="4155" title="Montezuma, Iowa" label="Montezuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890249" start="4157" end="4166" title="Searsboro, Iowa" label="Searsboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233630" start="4168" end="4174" title="Victor, Iowa" label="Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878149" start="4261" end="4271" title="Bear Creek Township, Poweshiek County, Iowa" label="Bear Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9037551" start="4274" end="4281" title="Chester Township, Poweshiek County, Iowa" label="Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q9038193" start="4284" end="4294" title="Deep River Township, Poweshiek County, Iowa" label="Deep River"/>
<link wikidata="Q10762738" start="4297" end="4302" title="Grant Township, Poweshiek County, Iowa" label="Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9040573" start="4305" end="4312" title="Jackson Township, Poweshiek County, Iowa" label="Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9040743" start="4315" end="4324" title="Jefferson Township, Poweshiek County, Iowa" label="Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9041492" start="4327" end="4334" title="Lincoln Township, Poweshiek County, Iowa" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q10789711" start="4337" end="4344" title="Madison Township, Poweshiek County, Iowa" label="Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q9041932" start="4347" end="4353" title="Malcom Township, Poweshiek County, Iowa" label="Malcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q10807489" start="4356" end="4364" title="Pleasant Township, Poweshiek County, Iowa" label="Pleasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q10819091" start="4367" end="4372" title="Scott Township, Poweshiek County, Iowa" label="Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878979" start="4375" end="4383" title="Sheridan Township, Poweshiek County, Iowa" label="Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9045007" start="4386" end="4397" title="Sugar Creek Township, Poweshiek County, Iowa" label="Sugar Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5573912" start="4400" end="4405" title="Union Township, Poweshiek County, Iowa" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482784" start="4408" end="4414" title="Warren Township, Poweshiek County, Iowa" label="Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q10834352" start="4417" end="4427" title="Washington Township, Poweshiek County, Iowa" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5900990" start="4460" end="4472" title="Holiday Lake, Iowa" label="Holiday Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="4561" end="4586" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236876" start="4631" end="4658" title="Poweshiek County Courthouse" label="Poweshiek County Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977245" start="4660" end="4731" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Poweshiek County, Iowa" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Poweshiek County, Iowa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58371" wikidata="Q223835" url="?curid=58371" title="Bloomington">
<text>Bloomington may refer to:
==Places==
===United States (most commonly)===
*Bloomington, Illinois
*Bloomington, Indiana
*Bloomington, Minnesota

===United States (less commonly)===
*Bloomington, California
*Bloomington, Idaho
*Bloomington, Kansas
*Bloomington, Maryland
*Bloomington, Missouri
*Bloomington, Nebraska
*Bloomington, New York
*Bloomington, Ohio
*Bloomington, South Dakota, a ghost town in South Dakota
*Bloomington, Texas
*Bloomington, Utah
*Bloomington (Louisa, Virginia), a historic house
*Bloomington, Wisconsin
*Bloomington (town), Wisconsin
*Bloomington Township, McLean County, Illinois
*Bloomington Township, Indiana
*Bloomington Township, Decatur County, Iowa
*Bloomington Township, Muscatine County, Iowa
*Bloomington Township, Kansas
*Bloomington Township, Buchanan County, Missouri
*New Bloomington, Ohio

===Canada===
*Bloomington, Nova Scotia
*Bloomington, Stormont-Dundas-Glengarry, Ontario, in North Stormont
*Bloomington, York Region, Ontario

== Other ==
* &quot;Bloomington&quot; (album), a 1993 Branford Marsalis live album
* &quot;Bloomington&quot; (film), a 2010 film

==See also==
* Bloomington Thunder (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q223835" start="0" end="11" title="Bloomington" label="Bloomington"/>
<link wikidata="Q577802" start="74" end="95" title="Bloomington, Illinois" label="Bloomington, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q490385" start="97" end="117" title="Bloomington, Indiana" label="Bloomington, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q490737" start="119" end="141" title="Bloomington, Minnesota" label="Bloomington, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q885396" start="180" end="203" title="Bloomington, California" label="Bloomington, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513388" start="205" end="223" title="Bloomington, Idaho" label="Bloomington, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q17510523" start="225" end="244" title="Bloomington, Kansas" label="Bloomington, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3886935" start="246" end="267" title="Bloomington, Maryland" label="Bloomington, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928326" start="269" end="290" title="Bloomington, Missouri" label="Bloomington, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898110" start="292" end="313" title="Bloomington, Nebraska" label="Bloomington, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q38249793" start="315" end="336" title="Bloomington, New York" label="Bloomington, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016407" start="338" end="355" title="Bloomington, Ohio" label="Bloomington, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="357" end="382" title="Bloomington, South Dakota" label="Bloomington, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191669" start="386" end="412" title="List of ghost towns in South Dakota" label="ghost town in South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q981314" start="414" end="432" title="Bloomington, Texas" label="Bloomington, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928331" start="434" end="451" title="Bloomington, Utah" label="Bloomington, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q14712042" start="453" end="483" title="Bloomington (Louisa, Virginia)" label="Bloomington (Louisa, Virginia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425396" start="503" end="525" title="Bloomington, Wisconsin" label="Bloomington, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928337" start="527" end="556" title="Bloomington (town), Wisconsin" label="Bloomington (town), Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q948077" start="558" end="603" title="Bloomington Township, McLean County, Illinois" label="Bloomington Township, McLean County, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928363" start="605" end="634" title="Bloomington Township, Indiana" label="Bloomington Township, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892309" start="636" end="678" title="Bloomington Township, Decatur County, Iowa" label="Bloomington Township, Decatur County, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10740394" start="680" end="724" title="Bloomington Township, Muscatine County, Iowa" label="Bloomington Township, Muscatine County, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928361" start="726" end="754" title="Bloomington Township, Kansas" label="Bloomington Township, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928360" start="756" end="803" title="Bloomington Township, Buchanan County, Missouri" label="Bloomington Township, Buchanan County, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021368" start="805" end="826" title="New Bloomington, Ohio" label="New Bloomington, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928328" start="842" end="866" title="Bloomington, Nova Scotia" label="Bloomington, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="868" end="915" title="Bloomington, Stormont-Dundas-Glengarry, Ontario" label="Bloomington, Stormont-Dundas-Glengarry, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q11792998" start="920" end="934" title="North Stormont" label="North Stormont"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928330" start="936" end="969" title="Bloomington, York Region, Ontario" label="Bloomington, York Region, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q18358708" start="985" end="1016" title="Bloomington (album)" label="&amp;quot;Bloomington&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975821" start="1056" end="1086" title="Bloomington (film)" label="&amp;quot;Bloomington&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27790665" start="1116" end="1152" title="Bloomington Thunder (disambiguation)" label="Bloomington Thunder (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58372" wikidata="Q224175" url="?curid=58372" title="Burlington">
<text>Burlington may refer to:

==Places==
===Canada===
====Geography====
* Burlington, Newfoundland and Labrador
* Burlington, Nova Scotia
* Burlington, Ontario, the most populous city with the name Burlington
* Burlington, Prince Edward Island
* Burlington Bay, now known as Hamilton Harbour, Ontario, Canada

====Electoral districts====
* Burlington (federal electoral district), a federal electoral district in Ontario, Canada
* Burlington (provincial electoral district), a provincial electoral district in Ontario, Canada
* Burlington South (provincial electoral district), was the name of a provincial electoral district in Ontario, Canada

===England===
* Bridlington in Yorkshire, previously known as Burlington
* Burlington (UK), a codename for the Central Government War Headquarters underground complex
* Burlington, a small hamlet in East Shropshire lying along the A5 road near Telford, Shropshire, UK
* Burlington Estate, Mayfair, London, UK
* Burlington House, Mayfair, London, UK

===United States===
====Geography====
* Burlington, Colorado
* Burlington, Connecticut
* Burlington, Illinois
* Burlington, Indiana
* Burlington, Iowa
* Burlington, Kansas
* Burlington, Kentucky
* Burlington, Maine
* Burlington, Massachusetts
* Burlington, Michigan
* Burlington, New Jersey
* Burlington, New York
* Burlington, North Carolina, the most populous U.S. city with this name
* Burlington, North Dakota
* Burlington, Ohio, a census-designated place in Lawrence County
* Burlington, Fulton County, Ohio, an unincorporated community

* Burlington, Oklahoma
* Burlington, Linn County, Oregon
* Burlington, Multnomah County, Oregon
* Burlington, Pennsylvania
* Burlington, Texas
* Burlington, Vermont, most populous city in Vermont
* Burlington, Washington
* Burlington, West Virginia
* Burlington (city), Wisconsin
* Burlington (town), Wisconsin
* Burlington, Wyoming
* Burlington County, New Jersey
* Burlington Flats, New York, a hamlet in Otsego County, New York
* South Burlington, Vermont

====Buildings====
* Burlington (Nashville, Tennessee), a demolished historic mansion
* Burlington (Barboursville, Virginia), a historic plantation house
* Burlington (Petersburg, Virginia), a historic plantation house

==Brands and enterprises==
* Burlington (department store), an American department store retailer formerly known as Burlington Coat Factory
* Burlington Arcade, a covered shopping arcade in London
* Burlington Company, a group of eight investors from Burlington, New Jersey that were active in the 1770s
* Burlington Industries, a diversified American fabric maker
* Burlington Northern Santa Fe Corporation, an American railroad
* Burlington Resources, an American oil and gas company that was acquired by ConocoPhillips in 2006
* Burlington Slate Quarries, a British quarry that produces a characteristic blue grey slate

==Arts, entertainment, and media==
* &quot;Burlington Bertie&quot;, an English music hall song of 1900 associated with Vesta Tilley
* &quot;Burlington Post&quot;, the local newspaper of Burlington, Ontario, Canada
* &quot;The Burlington Free Press&quot;, the daily newspaper of Burlington, Vermont, U.S.
* &quot;The Burlington Magazine&quot;, a monthly magazine

==Sports==
* Burlington Bees, an American Class A minor league baseball team
* Burlington Braves, a Canadian junior football league team
* Burlington Chiefs, a Canadian junior &quot;A&quot; box lacrosse team
* Burlington Cougars, a Canadian Tier II Junior &quot;A&quot; ice hockey team
* Burlington Royals, an American minor league baseball team

==Transportation==
* Burlington Bay James N. Allan Skyway, a bridge between the Ontario municipalities of Burlington and Hamilton in Canada
* Burlington Cars, a British motor vehicle manufacturer
* Burlington Executive Airport, in Burlington, Ontario, Canada
* Burlington GO Station, a train and bus station in Burlington, Ontario, Canada
* Burlington International Airport, the largest airport in Vermont
* Burlington station (Iowa), an Amtrak station
* Burlington station (North Carolina), an Amtrak station
* Burlington Street (Hamilton, Ontario), an expressway/arterial road in Canada
* Burlington Union Station (Vermont), a rail station serving Vermont Railway and Amtrak
* Burlington Transit
* Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad, a railroad that operated in the midwestern United States, one of the predecessors of the BNSF railroad

==Ships==
* HMS &quot;Burlington&quot;, the name of two ships of the Royal Navy
* USS &quot;Burlington&quot; (PF-51), a United States Navy patrol frigate in commission from 1944 to 1945 and from 1951 to 1952

==Other uses==
* Burlington College, in Burlington, Vermont
* Chobham armour, a type of vehicle armour also known as Burlington
* Earl of Burlington, a title in the peerage of the United Kingdom

==See also==
* Burlington Historic District (disambiguation)
* Burlington Junction (disambiguation)
* Burlington Mall (disambiguation)
* Burlington Township (disambiguation)
* New Burlington, Ohio (disambiguation)
* West Burlington (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q224175" start="0" end="10" title="Burlington" label="Burlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928513" start="70" end="107" title="Burlington, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Burlington, Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999189" start="110" end="133" title="Burlington, Nova Scotia" label="Burlington, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34218" start="136" end="155" title="Burlington, Ontario" label="Burlington, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928514" start="207" end="239" title="Burlington, Prince Edward Island" label="Burlington, Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999203" start="242" end="256" title="Burlington Bay" label="Burlington Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q774538" start="336" end="375" title="Burlington (federal electoral district)" label="Burlington (federal electoral district)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999195" start="427" end="469" title="Burlington (provincial electoral district)" label="Burlington (provincial electoral district)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999284" start="524" end="572" title="Burlington South (provincial electoral district)" label="Burlington South (provincial electoral district)"/>
<link wikidata="Q527391" start="658" end="669" title="Bridlington" label="Bridlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061135" start="717" end="732" title="Burlington (UK)" label="Burlington (UK)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295978" start="873" end="880" title="A5 road (Great Britain)" label="A5 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016629" start="912" end="929" title="Burlington Estate" label="Burlington Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q225471" start="953" end="969" title="Burlington House" label="Burlington House"/>
<link wikidata="Q939025" start="1032" end="1052" title="Burlington, Colorado" label="Burlington, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446117" start="1055" end="1078" title="Burlington, Connecticut" label="Burlington, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941911" start="1081" end="1101" title="Burlington, Illinois" label="Burlington, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014557" start="1104" end="1123" title="Burlington, Indiana" label="Burlington, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q580182" start="1126" end="1142" title="Burlington, Iowa" label="Burlington, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931582" start="1145" end="1163" title="Burlington, Kansas" label="Burlington, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016628" start="1166" end="1186" title="Burlington, Kentucky" label="Burlington, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3451553" start="1189" end="1206" title="Burlington, Maine" label="Burlington, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q995255" start="1209" end="1234" title="Burlington, Massachusetts" label="Burlington, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333442" start="1237" end="1257" title="Burlington, Michigan" label="Burlington, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550922" start="1260" end="1282" title="Burlington, New Jersey" label="Burlington, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708339" start="1285" end="1305" title="Burlington, New York" label="Burlington, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016633" start="1308" end="1334" title="Burlington, North Carolina" label="Burlington, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018782" start="1381" end="1405" title="Burlington, North Dakota" label="Burlington, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000682" start="1408" end="1424" title="Burlington, Ohio" label="Burlington, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018004" start="1473" end="1504" title="Burlington, Fulton County, Ohio" label="Burlington, Fulton County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948212" start="1537" end="1557" title="Burlington, Oklahoma" label="Burlington, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q21279319" start="1560" end="1591" title="Burlington, Linn County, Oregon" label="Burlington, Linn County, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q22021917" start="1594" end="1630" title="Burlington, Multnomah County, Oregon" label="Burlington, Multnomah County, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133197" start="1633" end="1657" title="Burlington, Pennsylvania" label="Burlington, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999191" start="1660" end="1677" title="Burlington, Texas" label="Burlington, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q31058" start="1680" end="1699" title="Burlington, Vermont" label="Burlington, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144352" start="1733" end="1755" title="Burlington, Washington" label="Burlington, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4408159" start="1758" end="1783" title="Burlington, West Virginia" label="Burlington, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016638" start="1786" end="1814" title="Burlington (city), Wisconsin" label="Burlington (city), Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999198" start="1817" end="1845" title="Burlington (town), Wisconsin" label="Burlington (town), Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029106" start="1848" end="1867" title="Burlington, Wyoming" label="Burlington, Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q138141" start="1870" end="1899" title="Burlington County, New Jersey" label="Burlington County, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999241" start="1902" end="1928" title="Burlington Flats, New York" label="Burlington Flats, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q26065" start="1968" end="1993" title="South Burlington, Vermont" label="South Burlington, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q55606179" start="2015" end="2048" title="Burlington (Nashville, Tennessee)" label="Burlington (Nashville, Tennessee)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15205985" start="2082" end="2118" title="Burlington (Barboursville, Virginia)" label="Burlington (Barboursville, Virginia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14712110" start="2150" end="2183" title="Burlington (Petersburg, Virginia)" label="Burlington (Petersburg, Virginia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999220" start="2243" end="2272" title="Burlington (department store)" label="Burlington (department store)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928520" start="2356" end="2373" title="Burlington Arcade" label="Burlington Arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999221" start="2413" end="2431" title="Burlington Company" label="Burlington Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q924995" start="2520" end="2541" title="Burlington Industries" label="Burlington Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q267122" start="2581" end="2621" title="Burlington Northern Santa Fe Corporation" label="Burlington Northern Santa Fe Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999281" start="2646" end="2666" title="Burlington Resources" label="Burlington Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999283" start="2746" end="2771" title="Burlington Slate Quarries" label="Burlington Slate Quarries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999207" start="2881" end="2898" title="Burlington Bertie" label="Burlington Bertie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999271" start="2978" end="2993" title="Burlington Post" label="Burlington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520162" start="3060" end="3085" title="The Burlington Free Press" label="The Burlington Free Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016639" start="3150" end="3173" title="The Burlington Magazine" label="The Burlington Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999206" start="3214" end="3229" title="Burlington Bees" label="Burlington Bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999209" start="3280" end="3297" title="Burlington Braves" label="Burlington Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999217" start="3340" end="3357" title="Burlington Chiefs" label="Burlington Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999224" start="3411" end="3429" title="Burlington Cougars" label="Burlington Cougars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999279" start="3489" end="3506" title="Burlington Royals" label="Burlington Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999205" start="3569" end="3605" title="Burlington Bay James N. Allan Skyway" label="Burlington Bay James N. Allan Skyway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999215" start="3690" end="3705" title="Burlington Cars" label="Burlington Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311240" start="3746" end="3774" title="Burlington Executive Airport" label="Burlington Executive Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999238" start="3809" end="3830" title="Burlington GO Station" label="Burlington GO Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750047" start="3889" end="3921" title="Burlington International Airport" label="Burlington International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999187" start="3956" end="3981" title="Burlington station (Iowa)" label="Burlington station (Iowa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999188" start="4003" end="4038" title="Burlington station (North Carolina)" label="Burlington station (North Carolina)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999287" start="4060" end="4097" title="Burlington Street (Hamilton, Ontario)" label="Burlington Street (Hamilton, Ontario)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886064" start="4139" end="4173" title="Union Station (Burlington, Vermont)" label="Burlington Union Station (Vermont)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928517" start="4227" end="4245" title="Burlington Transit" label="Burlington Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071790" start="4248" end="4287" title="Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad" label="Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5631718" start="4405" end="4431" title="HMS Burlington" label="HMS &amp;quot;Burlington&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867943" start="4475" end="4509" title="USS Burlington (PF-51)" label="USS &amp;quot;Burlington&amp;quot; (PF-51)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999222" start="4619" end="4637" title="Burlington College" label="Burlington College"/>
<link wikidata="Q672645" start="4664" end="4678" title="Chobham armour" label="Chobham armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687837" start="4732" end="4750" title="Earl of Burlington" label="Earl of Burlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016631" start="4813" end="4858" title="Burlington Historic District (disambiguation)" label="Burlington Historic District (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999253" start="4861" end="4897" title="Burlington Junction (disambiguation)" label="Burlington Junction (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999256" start="4900" end="4932" title="Burlington Mall (disambiguation)" label="Burlington Mall (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016642" start="4935" end="4971" title="Burlington Township (disambiguation)" label="Burlington Township (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7006207" start="4974" end="5011" title="New Burlington, Ohio (disambiguation)" label="New Burlington, Ohio (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223410" start="5014" end="5046" title="West Burlington (disambiguation)" label="West Burlington (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58375" wikidata="Q963799" url="?curid=58375" title="M. John Harrison">
<text>Michael John Harrison (born 26 July 1945), known for publication purposes primarily as M. John Harrison, is an English author and literary critic. His work includes the Viriconium sequence of novels and short stories (1971–1984), &quot;Climbers&quot; (1989), and the Kefahuchi Tract trilogy, which consists of &quot;Light&quot; (2002), &quot;Nova Swing&quot; (2006) and &quot;Empty Space&quot; (2012). 

He is widely considered one of the major stylists of modern fantasy and science fiction, and a &quot;genre contrarian&quot;. Robert Macfarlane has said: &quot;Harrison is best known as one of the restless fathers of modern SF, but to my mind he is among the most brilliant novelists writing today, with regard to whom the question of genre is an irrelevance.&quot; The &quot;Times Literary Supplement&quot; described him as &quot;a singular stylist&quot; and the &quot;Literary Review&quot; called him &quot;a witty and truly imaginative writer&quot;.

== Life and career ==
===Early years===

Harrison was born in Rugby, Warwickshire, in 1945 to an engineering family. His father died when he was a teenager and he found himself &quot;bored, alienated, resentful and entrapped&quot;, playing truant from Dunsmore School (now Ashlawn School). An English teacher introduced him to George Bernard Shaw which resulted in an interest in polemic. He ended school in 1963 at age 18; he worked at various times as a groom (for the Atherstone Hunt), a student teacher (1963–65), and a clerk for the Royal Masonic Charity Institute, London (1966). His hobbies included electric guitars and writing pastiches of H. H. Munro.

His first short story was published in 1966 by Kyril Bonfiglioli at &quot;Science Fantasy&quot; magazine, on the strength of which he relocated to London. He there met Michael Moorcock, who was editing &quot;New Worlds&quot; magazine. He began writing reviews and short fiction for &quot;New Worlds&quot;, and by 1968 he was appointed books editor. Harrison was critical of what he perceived as the complacency of much genre fiction of the time. During 1970, Harrison scripted comic stories illustrated by R.G. Jones for such forums as &quot;Cyclops&quot; and &quot;Finger&quot;. An illustration by Jones appears in the first edition of Harrison&#x27;s &quot;The Committed Men&quot; (1971).

In an interview with &quot;Zone&quot; magazine, Harrison said: &quot;I liked anything bizarre, from being about four years old. I started on Dan Dare and worked up to the Absurdists. At 15 you could catch me with a pile of books that contained an Alfred Bester, a Samuel Beckett, a Charles Williams, the two or three available J. G. Ballard&#x27;s, &quot;On the Road&quot; by Jack Kerouac, some Keats, some Allen Ginsberg, maybe a Thorne Smith. I&#x27;ve always been pick &#x27;n&#x27; mix: now it&#x27;s a philosophy.&quot;

===1968–1975: &quot;New Worlds&quot;, &quot;The Committed Men&quot;, &quot;The Pastel City&quot;, and &quot;The Centauri Device&quot;===

From 1968 to 1975 he was literary editor of the New Wave science fiction magazine &quot;New Worlds&quot;, regularly contributing criticism. He was important to the New Wave style which also included writers such as Norman Spinrad, Barrington Bayley, Langdon Jones and Thomas M. Disch. As a reviewer for &quot;New Worlds&quot; he often used the pseudonym &quot;Joyce Churchill&quot; and was critical of many works and writers published using the rubric of science fiction. One of his critical pieces, &quot;By Tennyson Out of Disney&quot; was initially written for &quot;Sword and Sorcery Magazine&quot;, a publication planned by Kenneth Bulmer but which was never published; the piece was printed in &quot;New Worlds&quot; 2.

Amongst his works of that period are three stories utilising the Jerry Cornelius character invented by Michael Moorcock. These stories do not appear in any of Harrison&#x27;s own collections but do appear in the &quot;Nature of the Catastrophe&quot; and &quot;New Nature of the Catastrophe.&quot; Other early stories published from 1966 were featured in anthologies such as &quot;New Writings in SF&quot;, edited by John Carnell, and in magazines such as &quot;Transatlantic Review&quot;, &quot;The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction&quot;, &quot;New Worlds&quot;, and &quot;Quark&quot;.

A number of Harrison&#x27;s short stories of this early period remain uncollected, gathered neither in his first collection &quot;The Machine in Shaft Ten&quot;, nor in his later collections.

The novel &quot;The Committed Men&quot; (1971) (dedicated to Michael Moorcock and his wife Hilary Bailey) is an archetypal British New-Wave vision of a crumbling future with obvious debts to the work of Michael Moorcock and J. G. Ballard. It is set in England after the apocalypse. Social organisation has collapsed, and the survivors, riddled with skin cancers, eke out a precarious scavenging existence in the ruins of the Great Society. A few bizarre communities try to maintain their structure in a chromium wilderness linked by crumbling motorways. But their rituals are meaningless clichés mouthed against the devastation. Only the roaming bands of hippie-style &quot;situationalists&quot; (presumably a reference to the then contemporaneous situationist group) have grasped that the old order, with its logic, its pseudo-liberalism and its immutable laws of cause and effect, has now been superseded. Among the mutants are a group of reptilian humans – alien, cancer-free but persecuted by the &#x27;smoothskins&#x27;. When one of them is born of a human mother in Tinhouse, a group of humans sets off to deliver it to its own kind – a search of the committed men for the tribes of mutants. David Pringle called the novel &quot;brief, bleak, derivative – but stylishly written.&quot;

Harrison&#x27;s first novel of the Viriconium sequence, &quot;The Pastel City&quot; was also published in 1971. Harrison would continue adding to this series until 1984. During 1972, the story &quot;Lamia Mutable&quot; appeared in Harlan Ellison&#x27;s anthology &quot;Again, Dangerous Visions&quot;; while this tale forms part of the Viriconium sequence, it has been omitted from omnibus editions of the Viriconium tales to date.

During 1974 Harrison&#x27;s third novel was published, the space opera &quot;The Centauri Device&quot; (described prior to its publication, by &quot;New Worlds&quot; magazine, as &quot;a sort of hippie space opera in the baroque tradition of Alfred Bester and Charles Harness). An extract was published in &quot;New Worlds&quot; in advance of the novel&#x27;s publication, with the title &quot;The Wolf That Follows&quot;. The novel&#x27;s protagonist, space tramp John Truck, is the last of the Centaurans, victims of a genocide. Rival groups need him to arm the most powerful weapon in the galaxy: the Centauri Device, which will respond only to the genetic code of a true Centauran.

Harrison himself has said of this book:

I never liked that book much but at least it took the piss out of sf’s three main tenets: (1) The reader-identification character always drives the action; (2) The universe is knowable; (3) the universe is anthropocentrically structured &amp; its riches are an appropriate prize for the colonialist people like us. TCD tried to out space opera as a kind of counterfeit pulp which had carefully cleaned itself of Saturday night appetite, vacuuming out all the concerns of real pulp fiction to keep it under the radar of the Mothers of America or whatever they called themselves. Pulp’s lust for life was replaced, if you were lucky, by a jaunty shanty &amp; a comedy brawl. Otherwise, it was lebensraum &amp; a cadetship in the Space Police (these days it’s primarily low-bourgeois freedom motifs &amp; nice friendly sexual release).
Harrison&#x27;s first short story collection &quot;The Machine in Shaft Ten&quot; (1975) collects many (but not all) of his early short tales, from such sources as &quot;New Worlds Quarterly&quot;, &quot;New Worlds Monthly&quot;, &quot;New Writings in SF&quot;, &quot;Transatlantic Review&quot; and others. &quot;The Lamia and Lord Cromis&quot; is an early Viriconium tale. The moody &quot;London Melancholy&quot; features a ruined future London haunted by winged people. None of the stories, with the exception of &quot;Running Down&quot;, (a psychological horror tale about a man who is literally a walking disaster area), have been reprinted in his subsequent short story collections. &quot;The Bringer with the Window&quot; features Dr Grishkin, a character also appearing in &quot;The Centauri Device&quot;, seemingly in Harrison&#x27;s recurring fictional city of Viriconium. 

Harrison&#x27;s early novels &quot;The Committed Men&quot;, &quot;The Pastel City&quot; and &quot;The Centauri Device&quot; have been reprinted several times. The latter was included in the SF Masterworks series.

===1978–1985: &quot;Manchester Review&quot;, &quot;The Ice Monkey&quot;, more Viriconium ===
Harrison later relocated to Manchester and was a regular contributor to &quot;New Manchester Review&quot; (1978–79). David Britton and Michael Butterworth of Savoy Books employed him to write in their basement (where he did so &quot;amidst stacks of antique &quot;Eagles&quot;, &quot;Freindz&quot;, &quot;New Worlds&quot; and &quot;Styng&quot;. A basement that reverberates with indecent exposures of stolen sound, bootlegs sucked from hidden mikes, stacked in neat piles.&quot;). The commissioned work, originally announced in Savoy publications as &quot;By Gas Mask and Fire Hydrant&quot;, eventually became the novel &quot;In Viriconium&quot;.

During the decade of 1976–1986, Harrison lived in the Peak District. In 1983, he published his second short story collection, &quot;The Ice Monkey and Other Stories&quot;, containing seven tales which capture the pathos, humour, awe, despair, pain and black humour of the human condition. &quot;The Ice Monkey&quot; was praised by Ramsey Campbell, who stated &quot;M. John Harrison is the finest British writer now writing horror fiction and by far the most original&quot;. In &quot;The Incalling&quot;, a story of seedy suburban magic which in some ways foreshadows his later novel &quot;The Course of the Heart&quot;, an editor is haunted by an author&#x27;s attempts to cure himself of cancer by faith healing. The &quot;Incalling&quot; is one of the few of Harrison&#x27;s tales (aside from &quot;Running Down&quot;) in which a male character is physically ill; though many of his stories feature male characters who are psychologically unwell, in many of his fictions, it is women who are damaged - either physically or emotionally ill or both. &quot;The New Rays&quot; here exemplifies this tendency.

In 1980 Harrison contributed an introduction to Michael Moorcock&#x27;s early allegorical fantasy, written by Moorcock at age 18, entitled &quot;The Golden Barge&quot; and published by Savoy Books. That same year he released his second novel in the Viriconium sequence, &quot;A Storm of Wings&quot;. Set eighty years later than &quot;The Pastel City,&quot; stylistically it is denser and more elaborate. A race of intelligent insects is invading Earth as human interest in survival wanes. A third novel, entitled &quot;In Viriconium&quot; (1982) (US title: &quot;The Floating Gods&quot;), was nominated for the Guardian Fiction Prize during 1982. It is a moody portrait of artistic subcultures in a city beset by a mysterious plague.

The short story &quot;A Young Man&#x27;s Journey to Viriconium&quot; (1985, later retitled &quot;A Young Man&#x27;s Journey to London&quot;) is set in our world and concerns the idea of escape from it. 

===1985–1989: &quot;Climbers&quot;===
Harrison&#x27;s interest in rock climbing resulted in his semi-autobiographical novel &quot;Climbers&quot; (1989), the first novel to receive the Boardman Tasker Prize for Mountain Literature. Harrison also ghost-wrote the autobiography of one of Britain&#x27;s best rock climbers, Ron Fawcett (&quot;Fawcett on Rock&quot;, 1987, as by Mike Harrison). Harrison has repeatedly affirmed in print the importance of rock climbing for his writing as an attempt to grapple with reality and its implications, which he had largely neglected while writing fantasy. The difference in his approach pre- and post-&quot;Climbers&quot;, can be observed in the extreme stylistic differences between the first novel of the Viriconium sequence &quot;The Pastel City&quot; and the second, &quot;A Storm of Wings&quot;. Around the time of writing &quot;Climbers&quot;, he declared that he had abandoned science fiction forever.

Robert Macfarlane wrote an introduction to the 2013 reissue of &quot;Climbers&quot;. Writing about the book in &quot;The Guardian&quot;, he said: &quot;...it is surely the best novel about rock-climbing ever written – though such a description drastically limits its achievement&quot;.

===1990s: &quot;The Course of the Heart&quot;, &quot;Signs of Life&quot;, and Gabriel King novels ===

Subsequent novels and short stories, such as &quot;The Course of the Heart&quot; (1991) and &quot;Empty&quot; (1993), were set between London and the Peak District. They have a lyrical style and a strong sense of place, and take their tension from characteristically conflicting veins of mysticism and realism.

&quot;The Course of the Heart&quot; deals in part with an experiment in ritual magic gone wrong, and with an imaginary country which may exist at the heart of Europe, as well as Gnostic themes such as the Pleroma. It weaves together mythology, sexuality, and the troubled past and present of Eastern Europe. The origin of the narrative lies in the occasion when three Cambridge students perform a ritualistic act (never shown or fully described) that changes their lives. Years later, none of the participants can remember what exactly occurred; but their vague memories can&#x27;t rid them of an overwhelming sense of dread. Pam Stuyvesant is an epileptic haunted by strange sensual visions. Her husband Lucas believes that a dwarfish creature is stalking him. Self-styled sorcerer Yaxley becomes obsessed with a terrifyingly transcendent reality. The narrator, the seemingly least affected participant in the ritual (who is haunted by the smell of roses) attempts to help his friends escape the torment that has engulfed their lives. Joel Lane has described &quot;The Course of the Heart&quot; as &quot;a brilliant use of supernatural themes to explore humanity mortality and loss.&quot; The novel incorporates versions of several other Harrison stories including &quot;The Great God Pan&quot;, &quot;The Quarry&quot; and &quot;The Incalling&quot;.

The novel &quot;Signs of Life&quot; (1996) is a romantic thriller which explores concerns about genetics and biotechnology amidst the turmoil of what might be termed a three-way love affair between its central characters.

Beginning with &quot;The Wild Road&quot; in 1996 and concluding with &quot;Nonesuch&quot; (2001), Harrison coauthored four associated fantasies about cats with Jane Johnson, under the joint pseudonym of &quot;Gabriel King&quot;.

Harrison has collaborated on several short stories with Simon Ings, and with Simon Pummel on the short film &quot;Ray Gun Fun&quot; (1998). His work has been classified by some as forming part of the style dubbed the New Weird, along with writers such as China Miéville, though Harrison himself resists being labelled as part of any literary style.

Harrison won the Richard Evans Award in 1999 (named after the near-legendary figure of UK publishing) given to the author who has contributed significantly to the SF genre without concomitant commercial success.

===2002–2012: The Kefahuchi Tract trilogy and other works===
Harrison continued to publish short fiction in a wide variety of magazines through the late 1990s and early 21st century. Such tales were published in magazines as diverse as Conjunctions (&quot;Entertaining Angels Unawares&quot;, Fall issue 2002), &quot;The Independent on Sunday&quot; (&quot;Cicisbeo&quot;, 2003), &quot;The Times Literary Supplement&quot; (&quot;Science and the Arts&quot;, 1999) and &quot;Woman&#x27;s Journal&quot; (&quot;Old Women&quot;, 1982). They were collected in his major short story collections &quot;Travel Arrangements&quot; (2000) and &quot;Things That Never Happen&quot; (2002).

During 2007 Harrison provided material for performance by Barbara Campbell (&quot;1001 Nights Cast&quot;, 2007, 2008) and Kate McIntosh (&quot;Loose Promise&quot;, 2007).

In 2002, &quot;Light&quot; marked a return to science fiction for Harrison and marked the beginning of the Kefahuchi Tract trilogy. &quot;Light&quot; was co-winner of the James Tiptree, Jr. Award in 2003. Its sequel, &quot;Nova Swing&quot; (2006), which contained elements of noir, won the Arthur C. Clarke Award in 2007 and the Philip K. Dick Award in 2008. The third novel, &quot;Empty Space: A Haunting&quot;, was published in August 2012.

===2012–present: &quot;You Should Come with Me Now&quot;, &quot;The Sunken Land Begins to Rise Again&quot; and &quot;Wish I Were Here&quot;===

Harrison published two short stories on Kindle: &quot;Cave and Julia&quot; (2013) and &quot;The 4th Domain&quot; (2014).

In 2014, Rhys Williams and Mark Bould organised a conference on Harrison&#x27;s work at the University of Warwick, UK, called &quot;Irradiating the Object: M. John Harrison&quot;. The keynote speakers were Fred Botting (Kingston University) and Sara Wasson (Edinburgh-Napier University). The conference papers, including the keynote address by Tim Etchells, was published as &quot;M. John Harrison: Critical Essays&quot; edited by Rhys Williams and Mark Bould.

In 2016, he received an honorary D. Litt. from the University of Warwick, UK.

A collection of short stories, &quot;You Should Come With Me Now&quot;, was published in November 2017.

2020 saw two new books: a novel, &quot;The Sunken Land Begins to Rise Again&quot; and &quot;Settling the World: Selected Stories 1970-2020&quot;. &quot;The Sunken Land Begins to Rise Again&quot; won the 2020 Goldsmiths Prize, and was longlisted for the 2020 BSFA Award.

In 2023, Harrison released &quot;Wish I Was Here&quot;, an &quot;anti-memoir&quot;.

==Reviewing, judging and teaching==

For Harrison&#x27;s work in &quot;New Worlds&quot; magazine, see above. The bulk of his reviews were collected in the volume &quot;Parietal Games&quot; (2005; see below).

Since 1991, Harrison has reviewed fiction and nonfiction for &quot;The Guardian&quot;, &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;, the &quot;Times Literary Supplement&quot; and &quot;The New York Times&quot;.

During 2003 Harrison was on the jury of the Michael Powell Award at the Edinburgh International Film Festival.

He has taught creative writing courses in Devon and Wales, focusing on landscape and autobiography, with Adam Lively and the travel writer Jim Perrin.

In 2009, Harrison shared (with Sarah Hall and Nicholas Royle) the judging of the Manchester Fiction Prize.

==Style==
His work has been acclaimed by writers including Angela Carter, Neil Gaiman, Iain Banks (who called him &quot;a Zen master of prose&quot;), China Miéville, William Gibson, Robert Macfarlane and Clive Barker, who has referred to him as &quot;a blazing original&quot;. Olivia Laing has said of him: &quot;No one alive can write sentences as he can. He’s the missing evolutionary link between William Burroughs and Virginia Woolf&quot;. In a &quot;Locus&quot; magazine interview, Harrison describes his work as &quot;a deliberate intention to illustrate human values by describing their absence.&quot;

Many of Harrison&#x27;s novels include expansions or reworkings of previously published short stories. For instance, &quot;The Ice Monkey&quot; (title story of the collection) provides the basis for the novel &quot;Climbers&quot; (1989); the novel &quot;The Course of the Heart&quot; (1992) is based on his short story &quot;The Great God Pan&quot;. The story &quot;Isobel Avens Returns to Stepney in the Spring&quot; is expanded as the novel &quot;Signs of Life&quot; (1996); the short story &quot;Anima&quot;, first published in &quot;Interzone&quot; magazine, also forms one of the central thematic threads of &quot;Signs of Life&quot;.

In interviews, Harrison has described himself as an anarchist, and Michael Moorcock wrote in an essay entitled &quot;Starship Stormtroopers&quot; that, &quot;His books are full of anarchists – some of them very bizarre like the anarchist aesthetes of &quot;The Centauri Device&quot;.&quot;

==Critical response==

China Miéville has written: &quot;That M. John Harrison is not a Nobel laureate proves the bankruptcy of the literary establishment. Austere, unflinching and desperately moving, he is one of the very great writers alive today. And yes, he writes fantasy and sf, though of a form, scale and brilliance that it shames not only the rest of the field, but most modern fiction.&quot;

David Wingrove has written of Harrison: &quot;Making use of forms from sword-and-sorcery, space opera and horror fiction, Harrison pursues an idiosyncratic vision: often grim, but with a strong vein of sardonic humour and sensual detail. Typically, his characters make ill-assorted alliances to engage in manic and often ritualistic quests for obscure objectives. Out of the struggle, unacknowledged motives emerge, often to bring about a frightful conclusion, which, it is suggested, was secretly desired all along. Harrison&#x27;s vivid, highly finished prose convinces the reader of everything.&quot;

==Bibliography==
;Fiction

;Graphic novels

;Nonfiction

==References==
;Critical essays
*Leigh Blackmore. &quot;Undoing the Mechanisms: Genre Expectation, Subversion and Anti-Consolation in the Kefahuchi Tract Novels of M. John Harrison.&quot; &quot;Studies in the Fantastic&quot;. 2 (Winter 2008/Spring 2009). (University of Tampa Press). 
* Various hands. &quot;Parietal Games&quot; (2005), edited by Mark Bould and Michelle Reid, compiles Harrison&#x27;s reviews and essays from 1968 to 2004 as well as eight essays on Harrison&#x27;s fiction by other authors. Foreword by Elizabeth Hand.
* Mark Bould and Rhys Williams, eds. &quot;M. John Harrison: Critical Essays&quot;. Gylphi, March 2019. ISBN 9781780240770. 

== External links ==

* the m john harrison blog (since June 2008)
* Uncle Zip&#x27;s Window (Harrison&#x27;s blog, December 2006 to April 2008) 
* &quot;Infinity Plus&quot; interview with David Mathew
* Podcast of interview with M John Harrison during the Irradiating the Object conference on Harrison&#x27;s work at the University of Warwick on 21st of August 2014 
* John Coulthart, &quot;Covering Viriconium&quot;
* M. John Harrison profile from The Guardian</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q963799" start="0" end="21" title="M. John Harrison" label="Michael John Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q963799" start="87" end="103" title="M. John Harrison" label="M. John Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934793" start="169" end="179" title="Viriconium" label="Viriconium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133659" start="236" end="244" title="Climbers (novel)" label="Climbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3838395" start="316" end="321" title="Light (novel)" label="Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064327" start="342" end="352" title="Nova Swing" label="Nova Swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="464" end="471" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="476" end="491" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347248" start="529" end="546" title="Robert Macfarlane (writer)" label="Robert Macfarlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768060" start="779" end="804" title="The Times Literary Supplement" label="Times Literary Supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q623765" start="1019" end="1038" title="Rugby, Warwickshire" label="Rugby, Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805286" start="1230" end="1244" title="Ashlawn School" label="Ashlawn School"/>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="1284" end="1303" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="George Bernard Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813576" start="1428" end="1443" title="Atherstone Hunt" label="Atherstone Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="1564" end="1579" title="electric guitar" label="electric guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q311526" start="1606" end="1617" title="H. H. Munro" label="H. H. Munro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634009" start="1667" end="1684" title="Kyril Bonfiglioli" label="Kyril Bonfiglioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q316138" start="1788" end="1804" title="Michael Moorcock" label="Michael Moorcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198979" start="2162" end="2169" title="Cyclops (magazine)" label="Cyclops"/>
<link wikidata="Q92440" start="2453" end="2461" title="Dan Dare" label="Dan Dare"/>
<link wikidata="Q286116" start="2559" end="2572" title="Alfred Bester" label="Alfred Bester"/>
<link wikidata="Q37327" start="2576" end="2590" title="Samuel Beckett" label="Samuel Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q124735" start="2594" end="2610" title="Charles Williams (British writer)" label="Charles Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q140201" start="2639" end="2652" title="J. G. Ballard" label="J. G. Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q160534" start="2688" end="2700" title="Jack Kerouac" label="Jack Kerouac"/>
<link wikidata="Q82083" start="2707" end="2712" title="Keats" label="Keats"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711" start="2719" end="2733" title="Allen Ginsberg" label="Allen Ginsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428988" start="2743" end="2755" title="Thorne Smith" label="Thorne Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296283" start="3024" end="3048" title="New Wave science fiction" label="New Wave science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027727" start="3064" end="3074" title="New Worlds (magazine)" label="New Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q455951" start="3191" end="3205" title="Norman Spinrad" label="Norman Spinrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q790762" start="3207" end="3224" title="Barrington Bayley" label="Barrington Bayley"/>
<link wikidata="Q708581" start="3244" end="3259" title="Thomas M. Disch" label="Thomas M. Disch"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="3431" end="3446" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q708029" start="3605" end="3619" title="Kenneth Bulmer" label="Kenneth Bulmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503293" start="3768" end="3783" title="Jerry Cornelius" label="Jerry Cornelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q316138" start="3806" end="3822" title="Michael Moorcock" label="Michael Moorcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225230" start="4119" end="4131" title="John Carnell" label="John Carnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833785" start="4164" end="4184" title="Transatlantic Review (1959)" label="Transatlantic Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q937202" start="4198" end="4243" title="The Magazine of Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction" label="The Magazine of Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q316138" start="4553" end="4569" title="Michael Moorcock" label="Michael Moorcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760877" start="4583" end="4596" title="Hilary Bailey" label="Hilary Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q140201" start="4716" end="4729" title="J. G. Ballard" label="J. G. Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q850181" start="5240" end="5252" title="situationist" label="situationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934793" start="5819" end="5829" title="Viriconium" label="Viriconium"/>
<link wikidata="Q311253" start="6015" end="6029" title="Harlan Ellison" label="Harlan Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690992" start="6053" end="6077" title="Again, Dangerous Visions" label="Again, Dangerous Visions"/>
<link wikidata="Q468478" start="6275" end="6286" title="space opera" label="space opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721873" start="6293" end="6312" title="The Centauri Device" label="The Centauri Device"/>
<link wikidata="Q286116" start="6458" end="6471" title="Alfred Bester" label="Alfred Bester"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496029" start="6476" end="6491" title="Charles Harness" label="Charles Harness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934793" start="8134" end="8144" title="Viriconium" label="Viriconium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390023" start="8851" end="8865" title="SF Masterworks" label="SF Masterworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="8996" end="9006" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231755" start="9085" end="9098" title="David Britton" label="David Britton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828975" start="9103" end="9122" title="Michael Butterworth (author)" label="Michael Butterworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q97172660" start="9594" end="9607" title="In Viriconium" label="In Viriconium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330811" start="9670" end="9683" title="Peak District" label="Peak District"/>
<link wikidata="Q703476" start="9947" end="9962" title="Ramsey Campbell" label="Ramsey Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q104869742" start="11000" end="11016" title="A Storm of Wings" label="A Storm of Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q97172660" start="11243" end="11256" title="In Viriconium" label="In Viriconium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11287" end="11304" title="The Floating Gods" label="The Floating Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982841" start="11335" end="11357" title="Guardian Fiction Prize" label="Guardian Fiction Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133659" start="11793" end="11801" title="Climbers (novel)" label="Climbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q584081" start="11847" end="11892" title="Boardman Tasker Prize for Mountain Literature" label="Boardman Tasker Prize for Mountain Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q623386" start="11908" end="11919" title="ghostwriter" label="ghost-wrote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646506" start="11983" end="11994" title="Ron Fawcett" label="Ron Fawcett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347248" start="12611" end="12628" title="Robert Macfarlane (writer)" label="Robert Macfarlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330811" start="13151" end="13164" title="Peak District" label="Peak District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155334" start="13385" end="13397" title="Ceremonial magic" label="ritual magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="13491" end="13498" title="Gnosticism" label="Gnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192850" start="13518" end="13525" title="Pleroma" label="Pleroma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513060" start="14681" end="14694" title="Signs of Life (Harrison novel)" label="Signs of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q95092" start="15048" end="15060" title="Jane Johnson (writer, born 1960)" label="Jane Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="15078" end="15087" title="pseudonym" label="pseudonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287595" start="15174" end="15184" title="Simon Ings" label="Simon Ings"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15195" end="15207" title="Simon Pummel" label="Simon Pummel"/>
<link wikidata="Q24862" start="15215" end="15225" title="short film" label="short film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425198" start="15335" end="15344" title="New weird" label="New Weird"/>
<link wikidata="Q319196" start="15373" end="15387" title="China Miéville" label="China Miéville"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15485" end="15504" title="Richard Evans Award" label="Richard Evans Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161170" start="15917" end="15929" title="Conjunctions (journal)" label="Conjunctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="15997" end="16022" title="The Independent" label="The Independent on Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q18163866" start="16152" end="16172" title="Woman&amp;#x27;s Journal (British magazine)" label="Woman&amp;#x27;s Journal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16273" end="16292" title="Travel Arrangements" label="Travel Arrangements"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16316" end="16340" title="Things That Never Happen" label="Things That Never Happen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16478" end="16491" title="Kate McIntosh" label="Kate McIntosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3838395" start="16543" end="16548" title="Light (novel)" label="Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681198" start="16699" end="16723" title="James Tiptree, Jr. Award" label="James Tiptree, Jr. Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064327" start="16751" end="16761" title="Nova Swing" label="Nova Swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940294" start="16804" end="16808" title="roman noir" label="noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q708830" start="16818" end="16840" title="Arthur C. Clarke Award" label="Arthur C. Clarke Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341487" start="16857" end="16877" title="Philip K. Dick Award" label="Philip K. Dick Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16904" end="16939" title="Empty Space (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Empty Space: A Haunting&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230785" start="17582" end="17594" title="Tim Etchells" label="Tim Etchells"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580323" start="18092" end="18108" title="Goldsmiths Prize" label="Goldsmiths Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q787680" start="18142" end="18152" title="BSFA Award" label="BSFA Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027727" start="18311" end="18321" title="New Worlds (magazine)" label="New Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="18516" end="18528" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="18546" end="18561" title="Daily Telegraph" label="Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768060" start="18579" end="18604" title="Times Literary Supplement" label="Times Literary Supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="18625" end="18639" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284745" start="18720" end="18757" title="Edinburgh International Film Festival" label="Edinburgh International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679414" start="18865" end="18876" title="Adam Lively" label="Adam Lively"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197467" start="18899" end="18909" title="Jim Perrin" label="Jim Perrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473359" start="18943" end="18953" title="Sarah Hall (writer)" label="Sarah Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q12040897" start="18958" end="18972" title="Nicholas Royle" label="Nicholas Royle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747405" start="18993" end="19017" title="Manchester Fiction Prize" label="Manchester Fiction Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q234519" start="19079" end="19092" title="Angela Carter" label="Angela Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q210059" start="19094" end="19105" title="Neil Gaiman" label="Neil Gaiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q312579" start="19107" end="19117" title="Iain Banks" label="Iain Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q319196" start="19170" end="19184" title="China Miéville" label="China Miéville"/>
<link wikidata="Q188987" start="19186" end="19200" title="William Gibson" label="William Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347248" start="19202" end="19219" title="Robert Macfarlane (writer)" label="Robert Macfarlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q298761" start="19224" end="19236" title="Clive Barker" label="Clive Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q28871669" start="19297" end="19309" title="Olivia Laing" label="Olivia Laing"/>
<link wikidata="Q319196" start="20585" end="20599" title="China Miéville" label="China Miéville"/>
<link wikidata="Q343539" start="20965" end="20979" title="David Wingrove" label="David Wingrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999690" start="21036" end="21053" title="sword-and-sorcery" label="sword-and-sorcery"/>
<link wikidata="Q468478" start="21055" end="21066" title="space opera" label="space opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q16575965" start="21071" end="21085" title="horror fiction" label="horror fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6519534" start="21660" end="21675" title="Leigh Blackmore" label="Leigh Blackmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q601304" start="22147" end="22161" title="Elizabeth Hand" label="Elizabeth Hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="22739" end="22751" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58376" wikidata="Q473834" url="?curid=58376" title="École Polytechnique massacre">
<text>The massacre (), also known as the Montreal massacre, was an antifeminist mass shooting that occurred on December 6, 1989, at the in Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Fourteen women were murdered; another ten women and four men were injured.
The perpetrator was 25-year-old Marc Lépine, armed with a legally obtained Ruger Mini-14, 30-round high-capacity magazines, and a hunting knife. He began his rampage at a mechanical engineering class at the , where he separated the male and female students, ordering the men to leave. He shot all nine women in the room, killing six. For nearly 20 minutes the shooter moved through corridors on multiple floors of the building, the cafeteria, and another classroom, targeting women. He wounded more students and killed eight more women before fatally shooting himself. 

The massacre is now widely regarded as an act of misogynist terrorism and representative of wider societal violence against women. The anniversary of the massacre is commemorated annually in Canada as the National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women. The gunman had said he was against feminism; after the attack, Canadians debated various interpretations of the events, their significance, and the shooter&#x27;s motives. Some interpretations noted that the shooter had been abused as a child, or suggested that the massacre was the isolated act of a madman, unrelated to larger social issues.

Politicians in the House of Commons responded by passing more stringent gun control laws, and officials took other actions to end violence against women. The massacre also led to policy changes in emergency services protocols to shootings; for instance, that police would intervene immediately to try to reduce casualties. These changes were credited with later minimizing casualties during incidents of shooting in Montreal and elsewhere. This was the deadliest mass shooting in Canada until attacks in Nova Scotia more than 30 years later, which resulted in twenty-two deaths.

==Timeline==
Sometime after 4 p.m. on December 6, 1989, Marc Lépine arrived at the building housing the École Polytechnique, an engineering school affiliated with the Université de Montréal, armed with a Ruger Mini-14 rifle and a hunting knife. He had legally purchased the gun less than a month earlier on November 21 in a Checkmate Sports store in Montreal, saying that he was going to hunt small game. Investigators learned that he had been in and around the École Polytechnique building at least seven times in the weeks leading up to December 6.

The gunman sat for a while in the office of the registrar on the second floor. He did not speak to anyone, although a staff member asked if she could help him. He left the office and was seen in other parts of the building before he entered a second-floor mechanical engineering class of about sixty students at about 5:10 p.m. After approaching the student giving a presentation, he asked everyone to stop everything and ordered the women and men to opposite sides of the classroom. No one moved at first, believing it to be a joke, but he fired a shot into the ceiling.

After separating the students, Lépine ordered the estimated fifty men to leave the room. He asked the women whether they knew why they were there; a student asked who he was. He said that he was fighting feminism. One of the students, Nathalie Provost, protested that they were women studying engineering, not feminists fighting against men or marching to prove that they were better. He opened fire on the students, from left to right, killing six—Hélène Colgan, Nathalie Croteau, Barbara Daigneault, Anne-Marie Lemay, Sonia Pelletier, and Annie St-Arneault—and wounding three others, including Provost. 

The gunman continued into the second-floor corridor and wounded three students before entering another room where he twice attempted to shoot a female student. When his weapon failed to fire, he entered the emergency staircase and reloaded his gun. He tried to return to the room he had just left, but the students had locked the door. He failed to open it although he fired three shots into the door. 

He shot at other students in the corridor, wounding one, and approached the financial services office. There he shot and killed Maryse Laganière through the window of the door she had just locked.

The gunman went down to the first-floor cafeteria, in which about 100 people were gathered. As he shot nursing student Barbara Maria Klucznick near the kitchens and wounded another student, the crowd scattered. Entering an unlocked storage area at the end of the cafeteria, the gunman shot and killed Anne-Marie Edward and Geneviève Bergeron, who were hiding. He told a male and female student to come out from under a table; they complied and he let them live.

The shooter walked up an escalator to the third floor, where he shot and wounded one female and two male students in the hallway. He entered another classroom and told the men to &quot;get out&quot;, shooting and wounding Maryse Leclair, who was giving a presentation at the front of the classroom. He fired on students in the front row, killing Maud Haviernick and Michèle Richard, who were trying to escape the room. Other students dove under their desks. The killer wounded another three female students and killed Annie Turcotte. He changed the 30-round high-capacity magazine in his weapon and moved to the front of the class, shooting in all directions. The wounded Maryse Leclair asked for help; the gunman stabbed her three times with his hunting knife, killing her. He took off his cap, wrapped his coat around his rifle, said, &quot;Oh shit&quot;, and killed himself with a shot to the head. It was 20 minutes since he had begun the attack. About 60 unfired cartridges remained in the boxes he carried with him. He had fired about 100 rounds during the shooting.

===Emergency services response===
Emergency response to the shootings was harshly criticized for failures to protect the students and staff. Security guards at the École Polytechnique were poorly trained, organized and equipped. Communication issues at the 911 call centre delayed the dispatch of police and ambulances, who were initially routed to incorrect addresses.

The police officers were disorganized and poorly coordinated. They established a perimeter around the building and waited before entering the building. During this period, the gunman killed several women. Three official investigations severely condemned the emergency response. 

Following subsequent changes to emergency response protocols, police handling of the 1992 shootings at Concordia University, the Dawson College shooting in 2006, and the 2014 attack on Parliament hill in Ottawa were generally praised. In these incidents, the police conducted rapid and immediate intervention, and improved coordination amongst emergency response agencies was credited with minimizing the loss of life.

==Aftermath==
On December 6, 1989, the Montreal Police director of public relations Pierre Leclair briefed reporters outside the Polytechnique building; when he entered, he found the body of his own daughter Maryse among the dead.

The Quebec and Montreal governments declared three days of mourning. A joint funeral for nine of the women was held at Notre-Dame Basilica on December 11, 1989, and was attended by Governor General Jeanne Sauvé, Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, Quebec premier Robert Bourassa, and Montreal mayor Jean Doré, along with thousands of other mourners.

==Victims==
Lépine killed fourteen women (twelve engineering students, one nursing student, and one employee of the university) and injured fourteen others, eleven women and three men.

* Geneviève Bergeron (born 1968; aged 21), civil engineering student
* Hélène Colgan (born 1966; aged 23), mechanical engineering student
* Nathalie Croteau (born 1966; aged 23), mechanical engineering student
* Barbara Daigneault (born 1967; aged 22), mechanical engineering student
* Anne-Marie Edward (born 1968; aged 21), chemical engineering student
* Maud Haviernick (born 1960; aged 29), materials engineering student
* Maryse Laganière (born 1964; aged 25), budget clerk in the École Polytechnique&#x27;s finance department
* Maryse Leclair (born 1966; aged 23), materials engineering student
* Anne-Marie Lemay (born 1967; aged 22), mechanical engineering student
* Sonia Pelletier (born 1961; aged 28), mechanical engineering student
* Michèle Richard (born 1968; aged 21), materials engineering student
* Annie St-Arneault (born 1966; aged 23), mechanical engineering student
* Annie Turcotte (born 1969; aged 20), materials engineering student
* Barbara Klucznik-Widajewicz (born 1958; aged 31), nursing student

==Memorials==
* The École Polytechnique installed a circular memorial on an exterior wall, naming all the victims who were killed and the date of the massacre.
* &quot;&quot; is a public monument in the national capital that honours the lives of local women and girls murdered by men between 1990 and 2000. It is located in Minto Park, off Elgin Street, in Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. It was built in 1992 by the Women&#x27;s Urgent Action Committee in reaction to this event and is a site of annual memorials of this event. It is a protests against a patriarchal climate of violence against women.
* The City of Vancouver, British Columbia, commissioned a memorial to the victims that was created by Beth Alber and installed in a city park. (See photo about names of victims.)

==Perpetrator==
Marc Lépine (born Gamil Rodrigue Liass Gharbi) was the son of Monique Lépine, a French Canadian former Catholic nun, and an Algerian father, who was a non-practising Muslim. He and his sister Nadia were baptized Catholic but received little instruction. According to the mother in a 2006 article, the father, a mutual funds salesman, did not consider women to be the equal of men. He was physically and verbally abusive to his wife and son, and discouraged tenderness between the two. When Gamil was seven, his parents separated; his father ceased contact with his children soon after. His mother returned to nursing to support the family; because of her schedule, the children lived with other families during the week. 

At age 14, Gamil changed his name to &quot;Marc Lépine&quot;, citing his hatred of his father and taking his mother&#x27;s surname to further separate from the man. He had difficulty as he advanced in school and toward adulthood.

Lépine had attempted to join the Canadian Army during the winter of 1980–1981. According to his 1989 suicide letter found on his body at the attacks, he was rejected because he was &quot;anti-social&quot;. 

The brief biography of the shooter that police released the day after the killings described him as intelligent but troubled. He disliked feminists, career women, and women in traditionally-male occupations, such as the police force. He began a pre-university CEGEP (college) program in Pure Sciences in 1982, but switched to a three-year vocational program in electronics technology after his first year. He abandoned this program in his final semester without explanation. Lépine applied to the École Polytechnique in 1986 and in 1989 but lacked two CEGEP courses required for admission. He completed one of them in the winter of 1989.

===Suicide letter===
On the day of the massacre, Lépine wrote three letters: two were sent to friends, and one was found in an inside pocket of his jacket. The police revealed some details from the suicide letter in the days after the attack, but did not disclose the full text. 

The media filed an access to information case to compel the police to release the suicide letter but were unsuccessful. A year after the attacks, the three-page statement was leaked to journalist and feminist Francine Pelletier. It contained a list of nineteen Quebec women whom Lépine labeled as &quot;radical feminists&quot; and apparently intended to kill. The list included Pelletier, plus a union leader, a politician, a TV figure, and six police officers who the gunman knew from their playing together on an amateur volleyball team. The letter (without the list of women) was subsequently published in the newspaper &quot;La Presse&quot;, where Pelletier was a columnist. 

In the leaked letter, Lépine wrote that he was rational and blamed &#x27;feminists&#x27; for ruining his life. He said he was angry at feminists for seeking social changes that &quot;retain the advantages of being women [...] while trying to grab those of the men&quot;. He referred to Denis Lortie, a Canadian Armed Forces corporal who had killed three government employees and wounded thirteen others in an armed attack on the National Assembly of Quebec on May 8, 1984. The text of the original letter in French is available, as well as an English translation.

==Search for a rationale==
The massacre profoundly shocked Canadians. Government and criminal justice officials feared that extensive public discussion about the massacre would cause pain to the families and lead to more antifeminist violence. As a result, they did not conduct a public inquiry, and did not release Lépine&#x27;s suicide letter. In addition, although an extensive police investigation into the perpetrator and the killings took place, the resulting report was not made public. The coroner was authorized to have a copy as a source in her investigation. The media, academics, women&#x27;s organizations, and family members of the victims protested the lack of a public inquiry and paucity of information released.

The gender of the victims, as well as Lépine&#x27;s oral statements during the massacre and in the suicide note, have resulted in the attack being interpreted as antifeminist and as an example of the wider issue of violence against women in Canadian society. Initially, politicians and the media downplayed the antifeminism angle of the attack. Political leaders such as Robert Bourassa, Claude Ryan, and Jacques Parizeau spoke about &quot;victims&quot; and &quot;youth&quot; rather than &quot;women&quot; or &quot;girls&quot;. The television journalist Barbara Frum pleaded against interpreting the massacre as an antifeminist attack or solely violence against women. She asked why people were &quot;diminishing&quot; the tragedy by &quot;suggesting that it was an act against just one group?&quot;

As predicted by the shooter in his suicide letter, some observers believed the event was the isolated act of a madman. A psychiatrist interviewed the gunman&#x27;s family and friends, and examined his writings as part of the police investigation. He noted that the perpetrator defined suicide as his primary motivation, and that he chose a specific suicide method, namely killing oneself after killing others (multiple homicide/suicide strategy), which is considered a sign of a serious personality disorder. Other psychiatrists emphasized the traumatic events of his childhood, suggesting that the blows he had received may have caused brain damage, or that he was psychotic, having lost touch with reality as he tried to erase the memories of a brutal (yet largely absent) father while unconsciously identifying with a violent masculinity that dominated women. A different theory was that the shooter&#x27;s childhood experiences of abuse led him to feel victimized as he faced losses and rejections in his later life. His mother wondered whether her son might have suffered from attachment disorder, due to the abuse and sense of abandonment he had experienced in his childhood.

Others framed the killer&#x27;s actions as the result of societal changes that had led to increased poverty, powerlessness, individual isolation, and polarization between men and women. Noting the gunman&#x27;s interest in violent action films, some suggested that violence in the media and in society may have influenced his actions. Following the shootings at Dawson College in September 2006, &quot;Globe and Mail&quot; columnist Jan Wong suggested that Lépine may have felt alienated from Quebec society as he was the child of an immigrant; this provoked controversy as Canada has received numerous immigrants.

In the years since, however, the attack has been widely acknowledged by the public, governments, and the media as a misogynistic attack on women and on feminism. 

Scholars believe that the gunman&#x27;s actions sprang from widespread societal misogyny, including tolerance of violence against women. Criminologists regard the massacre as an example of a hate or bias crime against women, as the victims were selected solely because of their membership in the category of women. The women targeted were interchangeable with other women. They categorize it as a &quot;pseudo-community&quot; type of &quot;pseudo-commando&quot; murder-suicide, in which the perpetrator targets a specific group, often in a public place, and intends to die in &quot;a blaze of glory&quot;. 

Individuals close to the massacre also commented: Lépine&#x27;s mother wondered if the attack was symbolically directed at her, as some would have classified her as a feminist since she was a single, working mother. Survivor Nathalie Provost who, during and after the attack, denied being a feminist, later claimed what she said was this &quot;beautiful title&quot; for herself. She also said that she believed the massacre was clearly an antifeminist act.

==Legacy==
The injured and witnesses among university staff and students suffered a variety of physical, social, existential, financial, and psychological consequences, including post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). At least two students died by suicide afterward, and left notes confirming that their deaths were due to distress caused by the massacre. Nine years after the event, survivors reported still being affected by their experiences, though some of the effects had lessened.

===Actions against violence against women===
The massacre galvanized the Canadian women&#x27;s movement, who immediately saw it as a symbol of violence against women. &quot;The death of those young women would not be in vain, we promised&quot;, Canadian feminist Judy Rebick recalled. &quot;We would turn our mourning into organizing to put an end to male violence against women.&quot;

In response to the killings, a House of Commons Sub-Committee on the Status of Women was created. It released a report &quot;The War against Women&quot; in June 1991, which was not endorsed by the full standing committee. But, following its recommendations, the federal government established the Canadian Panel on Violence Against Women in August 1991. The panel issued a final report, &quot;Changing the Landscape: Ending Violence – Achieving Equality&quot;, in June 1993. The panel proposed a two-pronged &quot;National Action Plan&quot; consisting of an &quot;Equality Action Plan&quot; and a &quot;Zero Tolerance Policy&quot; designed to increase women&#x27;s equality and reduce violence against women through government policy. Critics of the panel said that the plan failed to provide a workable timeline and strategy for implementation and that with more than four hundred recommendations, the final report was too diffuse to make an impact.

In Québec, family members of the victims formed a foundation to support organizations combatting violence, particularly violence against women. It has continued throughout all levels of society. Survivors and their relatives have continued to speak about the issue. Researchers increased their study of family violence and violence against women. On December 6, 1995, the Quebec government adopted the &quot;Policy on Intervention in Conjugal Violence&quot; with the goal of detecting, preventing and ending domestic violence.

===Gun control===
The massacre was a major spur for the Canadian gun control movement. Less than a week after the event, two École Polytechnique professors created a petition addressed to the Canadian government demanding tighter gun control; and more than half a million signatures were collected. Heidi Rathjen, a student who was in one of the classrooms that Lépine skipped, organized the Coalition for Gun Control with Wendy Cukier to pressure for a gun registry and increased firearm regulation. Suzanne Laplante-Edward and Jim Edward, parents of one of the victims, were also deeply involved. 

Their activities, along with others, led to the passage of Bill C-17 in 1992, and C-68, commonly known as the &quot;Firearms Act&quot;, in 1995, ushering in stricter gun control regulations. These new regulations included requirements on the training of gun owners, screening of firearm applicants, a 28-day waiting period on new applicants, rules concerning safe firearm and ammunition storage, the registration of all firearms, magazine capacity limits to 5 rounds for semi automatic rifles and 10 rounds for semi-automatic pistols, and reclassifying some additional firearms as restricted or prohibited. In 2009, survivors of the massacre, their families, and Polytechnique students past and present came together to create PolySeSouvient in opposition to legislative actions by Stephen Harper&#x27;s Conservative government aimed at ending the registration of ordinary long guns. The long-gun registry was abolished by the Harper government in April 2012, but the Quebec government won a temporary injunction, preventing the destruction of the province&#x27;s gun registry data, and ordering the continued registration of long guns in Quebec. In March 2015, the Supreme Court of Canada ruled against Quebec, allowing the destruction of all the federal registry data, although Quebec created its own provincial gun registry to replace it. Since its creation, PolySeSouvient, with survivors Nathalie Provost and Heidi Rathjen as spokespersons, has continued to be active in lobbying for stricter gun control and safety in Quebec and Canada. In 2018 Justin Trudeau&#x27;s Liberal government introduced Bill C-71, which restored the requirement for sales of firearms to be registered, but PolySeSouvient denounced the proposed regulations as ineffective and incomplete. In 2020, in the wake of the mass killing in Nova Scotia, and while also citing the École Polytechnique massacre, Trudeau announced a ban on around 1,500 models of &quot;military-grade assault-style weapons&quot;, including the Ruger Mini-14 used for the killings in Montreal. PolySeSouvient welcomed the news, but critiqued the possibility of a grandfathering clause for the weapons as a danger to public safety. On December 5th, 2024, one day before the anniversary of the massacre, the Government of Canada announced that they will be extending the previous 2020 &quot;military-grade assault-style weapons ban&quot; order in council with another OIC. This ban consists of 104 families of firearms, encompassing 324 unique makes and models, all of them semi-automatic. There will also be a mandatory buyback program with an amnesty deadline expiring on October 30, 2025.

==Controversy==
The feminist movement has been criticized for appropriating the massacre as a symbol of male violence against women. In 1990 journalist Roch Côté responded to the publication of &quot;Polytechnique, 6 décembre&quot;, a feminist memorial anthology, with an essay entitled &quot;Manifeste d&#x27;un salaud&quot; where he suggested that feminists used the massacre as a chance to unleash &quot;insanities&quot;. Men&#x27;s rights and antifeminist commentators state that feminism has provoked violence against women and, without explicitly condoning the shootings, view the massacre as an extreme expression of men&#x27;s frustrations. Some antifeminists see the killer as a hero, glorifying his actions, and threatening violence.

Male survivors of the massacre have been criticised for not intervening to stop the shooter. In an interview immediately after the event, a reporter asked one of the men why they &quot;abandoned&quot; the women when it was clear that his targets were women. René Jalbert, the sergeant-at-arms who persuaded Lortie to surrender, said that someone should have intervened at least to distract Lépine, but acknowledged that &quot;ordinary citizens cannot be expected to react heroically in the midst of terror&quot;. Conservative newspaper columnist Mark Steyn suggested that male inaction during the massacre illustrated a &quot;culture of passivity&quot; prevalent among men in Canada, which enabled the shooting spree. Male students and staff expressed feelings of remorse for not having attempted to prevent the shootings. This issue has been strongly rejected by the Polytechnique student community. Nathalie Provost, one of the female survivors, said that she felt that nothing could have been done to prevent the tragedy and that her fellow students should not feel guilty. Asmaa Mansour, another survivor, emphasized the actions of the men in saving her life and in helping the injured.

==Commemoration==

Since 1991, the anniversary of the massacre has been designated the National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women, intended as a call to action against discrimination against women. A White Ribbon Campaign was launched in 1991 by a group of men in London, Ontario in the wake of the massacre, for the purpose of raising awareness about the prevalence of male violence against women, with the ribbon symbolizing &quot;the idea of men giving up their arms&quot;.

The Place du 6-Décembre-1989 in the Côte-des-Neiges/Notre-Dame-de-Grâce borough of Montreal was created as a memorial to the victims of the massacre. Located at the corner of Decelles Avenue and Queen Mary Road, a short distance from the university, it includes the art installation &quot;Nef pour quatorze reines&quot; (&quot;Nave for Fourteen Queens&quot;) by Rose-Marie Goulet. Originally described as a memorial for a &quot;tragic event&quot;, in 2019, the plaque was changed to reflect indicate that the attack was antifeminist and that 14 women were killed.

Events are held across the country each year on December 6 in memory of the slain women and numerous memorials have been built. The memorial in Vancouver sparked controversy because it was dedicated to &quot;all women murdered by men&quot;, which critics say implies all men are potential murderers. Women involved in the project received death threats and the Vancouver Park Board banned future memorials that might antagonize other groups.

Since the commemorative ceremony on the 25th anniversary of the massacre in 2014, fourteen searchlights representing the women killed have been installed annually on the summit of Mount Royal. At 5:10 p.m., the time when the attack began, the name of each victim is read, and a light beam is projected upward into the sky. The event is attended by local and national leaders.

The Anne-Marie Edward Science Building at John Abbott College, constructed in 2013, was named in honour of one of the victims who had attended the CEGEP before going on to university. The Order of the White Rose was established in 2014 to provide a $30,000 national scholarship for female engineering graduate students. The selection committee is chaired by Michèle Thibodeau-DeGuire, the first female graduate of École Polytechnique.

==Depiction in media==
The event has also been commemorated in the arts. The critically acclaimed movie &quot;Polytechnique&quot;, directed by Denis Villeneuve, was released in 2009 and caused discussion over the desirability of reliving the tragedy in a mainstream film. In a play about the shootings by Adam Kelly called &quot;The Anorak&quot;, the audience are separated by gender: it was named as one of the best plays of 2004 by the Montreal &quot;Gazette&quot;. Colleen Murphy&#x27;s play &quot;The December Man (L&#x27;homme de décembre)&quot; was first staged in Calgary in 2007. Wajdi Mouawad&#x27;s 2007 play &quot;Forêts&quot; was inspired by and contains echoes of the tragedy. In 2009 Quebec playwright Gilbert Turp wrote &quot;Pur chaos du désir&quot;, which examined a marriage breakdown in the aftermath of the Polytechnique killings. Several songs have been written about the events, including &quot;This Memory&quot; by the folk duo the Wyrd Sisters, &quot;Montreal&quot;&#x27; by The Tragically Hip and &quot;6 December 1989&quot; by the Australian singer Judy Small.

==See also==
* 2014 Isla Vista killings, a killing spree in the United States in which misogyny was cited as one of the killer&#x27;s motives
* 2018 Toronto van attack, another mass killing in Canada motivated in part by misogyny
* Port Arthur massacre, a 1996 shooting in Port Arthur, Tasmania, Australia, that similarly changed opinion on gun control in that country
* &quot;&quot;, a monument in Canada to women killed by men
* List of massacres in Canada

==References==
==External links==
* CBC Digital Archives
* Crime Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q473834" start="4" end="12" title="École Polytechnique massacre" label="massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q473834" start="35" end="52" title="École Polytechnique massacre" label="Montreal massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q575220" start="61" end="73" title="Antifeminism" label="antifeminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q21480300" start="74" end="87" title="mass shooting" label="mass shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="133" end="149" title="Montreal, Quebec" label="Montreal, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q575023" start="266" end="277" title="Marc Lépine" label="Marc Lépine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322733" start="309" end="322" title="Ruger Mini-14" label="Ruger Mini-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843194" start="324" end="356" title="high-capacity magazines" label="30-round high-capacity magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q338399" start="364" end="377" title="hunting knife" label="hunting knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q104846396" start="854" end="874" title="misogynist terrorism" label="misogynist terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187073" start="1010" end="1074" title="National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women" label="National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558419" start="1493" end="1509" title="Firearms regulation in Canada" label="gun control laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q91129213" start="1914" end="1936" title="2020 Nova Scotia attacks" label="attacks in Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q575023" start="2057" end="2068" title="Marc Lépine" label="Marc Lépine"/>
<link wikidata="Q392189" start="2168" end="2190" title="Université de Montréal" label="Université de Montréal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322733" start="2205" end="2218" title="Ruger Mini-14" label="Ruger Mini-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q338399" start="2231" end="2244" title="hunting knife" label="hunting knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q223930" start="2394" end="2404" title="Game (hunting)" label="small game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309424" start="2601" end="2610" title="Registrar (education)" label="registrar"/>
<link wikidata="Q112661063" start="3361" end="3377" title="Nathalie Provost" label="Nathalie Provost"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693003" start="3404" end="3430" title="Women in STEM fields" label="women studying engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843194" start="5356" end="5378" title="high-capacity magazine" label="high-capacity magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3541871" start="6613" end="6646" title="Concordia University massacre" label="shootings at Concordia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q64112" start="6652" end="6675" title="Dawson College shooting" label="Dawson College shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q18338238" start="6698" end="6733" title="2014 shootings at Parliament Hill, Ottawa" label="attack on Parliament hill in Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326140" start="6982" end="6997" title="Service de police de la Ville de Montréal" label="Montreal Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q887686" start="7294" end="7313" title="Notre-Dame Basilica (Montreal)" label="Notre-Dame Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q433191" start="7373" end="7385" title="Jeanne Sauvé" label="Jeanne Sauvé"/>
<link wikidata="Q128563" start="7402" end="7416" title="Brian Mulroney" label="Brian Mulroney"/>
<link wikidata="Q650980" start="7433" end="7448" title="Robert Bourassa" label="Robert Bourassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3171790" start="7469" end="7478" title="Jean Doré" label="Jean Doré"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869668" start="9056" end="9066" title="Minto Park" label="Minto Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3447793" start="9072" end="9084" title="Elgin Street (Ottawa)" label="Elgin Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="9089" end="9095" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="9097" end="9112" title="Ontario, Canada" label="Ontario, Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q181339" start="9281" end="9292" title="Patriarchy" label="patriarchal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800556" start="9304" end="9326" title="violence against women" label="violence against women"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="9342" end="9369" title="Vancouver, British Columbia" label="Vancouver, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="9604" end="9619" title="French Canadians" label="French Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="9648" end="9655" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q25436" start="10511" end="10524" title="Canadian Army" label="Canadian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110056" start="10946" end="10951" title="CEGEP" label="CEGEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672475" start="11625" end="11646" title="Access to Information Act" label="access to information"/>
<link wikidata="Q5479864" start="11815" end="11833" title="Francine Pelletier (journalist)" label="Francine Pelletier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083289" start="12235" end="12244" title="La Presse (Canadian newspaper)" label="La Presse"/>
<link wikidata="Q542493" start="12573" end="12585" title="Denis Lortie" label="Denis Lortie"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="12589" end="12610" title="Canadian Armed Forces" label="Canadian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492249" start="12716" end="12743" title="National Assembly of Quebec" label="National Assembly of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12830" end="12849" title="Marc Lépine#Suicide statement" label="English translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q575220" start="13073" end="13085" title="antifeminist" label="antifeminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q650980" start="13954" end="13969" title="Robert Bourassa" label="Robert Bourassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978118" start="13971" end="13982" title="Claude Ryan" label="Claude Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393455" start="13988" end="14004" title="Jacques Parizeau" label="Jacques Parizeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883940" start="14137" end="14149" title="Barbara Frum" label="Barbara Frum"/>
<link wikidata="Q270673" start="14871" end="14891" title="personality disorder" label="personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="15050" end="15059" title="psychotic" label="psychotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076509" start="15213" end="15224" title="masculinity" label="masculinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q167191" start="15319" end="15324" title="child abuse" label="abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540868" start="15466" end="15485" title="attachment disorder" label="attachment disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q188473" start="15798" end="15809" title="action film" label="action film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983587" start="15929" end="15943" title="Dawson College" label="Dawson College"/>
<link wikidata="Q604525" start="15969" end="15983" title="The Globe and Mail" label="Globe and Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q710973" start="16000" end="16008" title="Jan Wong" label="Jan Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6150224" start="16009" end="16018" title="Jan Wong controversy" label="suggested"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983893" start="16152" end="16180" title="Immigration to Canada" label="received numerous immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q308857" start="16299" end="16311" title="Misogyny" label="misogynistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q459409" start="16538" end="16556" title="hate crime" label="hate or bias crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136456" start="17053" end="17081" title="Matricide" label="symbolically directed at her"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="17592" end="17622" title="post-traumatic stress disorder" label="post-traumatic stress disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800556" start="18044" end="18066" title="violence against women" label="violence against women"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304563" start="18164" end="18175" title="Judy Rebick" label="Judy Rebick"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="19748" end="19765" title="domestic violence" label="domestic violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451694" start="20485" end="20497" title="Firearms Act, 1995" label="Firearms Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087682" start="20635" end="20644" title="background check" label="screening"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423633" start="20769" end="20797" title="Canadian Firearms Registry" label="registration of all firearms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291248" start="20840" end="20861" title="Semi-automatic rifle" label="semi automatic rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389302" start="20880" end="20902" title="semi-automatic pistols" label="semi-automatic pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q119854065" start="21096" end="21110" title="PolySeSouvient" label="PolySeSouvient"/>
<link wikidata="Q206" start="21151" end="21165" title="Stephen Harper" label="Stephen Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q488523" start="21173" end="21185" title="Conservative Party of Canada" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099714" start="21920" end="21934" title="Justin Trudeau" label="Justin Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="21942" end="21949" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q91129213" start="22167" end="22194" title="2020 Nova Scotia attacks" label="mass killing in Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808602" start="22323" end="22344" title="assault-style weapons" label="assault-style weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322733" start="22366" end="22379" title="Ruger Mini-14" label="Ruger Mini-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q830408" start="22484" end="22498" title="Grandfather clause" label="grandfathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808602" start="22725" end="22746" title="assault-style weapons" label="assault-style weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q185943" start="22964" end="22971" title="amnesty" label="amnesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292853" start="23437" end="23454" title="Men&amp;#x27;s rights movement" label="Men&amp;#x27;s rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q575220" start="23459" end="23471" title="Antifeminism" label="antifeminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q662697" start="24015" end="24027" title="René Jalbert" label="René Jalbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611907" start="24033" end="24049" title="Sergeant-at-Arms" label="sergeant-at-arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q332357" start="24303" end="24313" title="Mark Steyn" label="Mark Steyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q112661063" start="24658" end="24674" title="Nathalie Provost" label="Nathalie Provost"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187073" start="25036" end="25100" title="National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women" label="National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q19340777" start="25171" end="25192" title="White Ribbon Campaign" label="White Ribbon Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q92561" start="25235" end="25250" title="London, Ontario" label="London, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629887" start="25485" end="25520" title="Côte-des-Neiges/Notre-Dame-de-Grâce" label="Côte-des-Neiges/Notre-Dame-de-Grâce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962296" start="25644" end="25659" title="Queen Mary Road (Montreal)" label="Queen Mary Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q188714" start="25776" end="25780" title="Nave" label="Nave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757764" start="26637" end="26648" title="Mount Royal" label="Mount Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q930450" start="26876" end="26895" title="John Abbott College" label="John Abbott College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311704" start="27192" end="27217" title="Michèle Thibodeau-DeGuire" label="Michèle Thibodeau-DeGuire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053630" start="27374" end="27399" title="Polytechnique (film)" label="&amp;quot;Polytechnique&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q548823" start="27413" end="27429" title="Denis Villeneuve" label="Denis Villeneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679324" start="27575" end="27585" title="Adam Kelly" label="Adam Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713886" start="27599" end="27609" title="The Anorak" label="The Anorak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549535" start="27708" end="27736" title="Montreal Gazette" label="Montreal &amp;quot;Gazette&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16186390" start="27738" end="27759" title="Colleen Murphy (filmmaker)" label="Colleen Murphy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q733091" start="27858" end="27871" title="Wajdi Mouawad" label="Wajdi Mouawad"/>
<link wikidata="Q8040445" start="28225" end="28237" title="Wyrd Sisters (band)" label="Wyrd Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q682030" start="28269" end="28287" title="The Tragically Hip" label="The Tragically Hip"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304598" start="28345" end="28355" title="Judy Small" label="Judy Small"/>
<link wikidata="Q16938335" start="28373" end="28397" title="2014 Isla Vista killings" label="2014 Isla Vista killings"/>
<link wikidata="Q52152274" start="28502" end="28525" title="2018 Toronto van attack" label="2018 Toronto van attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357517" start="28590" end="28610" title="Port Arthur massacre (Australia)" label="Port Arthur massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627236" start="28789" end="28816" title="List of massacres in Canada" label="List of massacres in Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58379" wikidata="Q672288" url="?curid=58379" title="Arcadia (play)">
<text>Arcadia is a 1993 stage play written by English playwright Tom Stoppard, which explores the relationship between past and present, order and disorder, certainty and uncertainty. It has been praised by many critics as the finest play from &quot;one of the most significant contemporary playwrights&quot; in the English language. In 2006, the Royal Institution of Great Britain named it one of the best science-related works ever written.

==Synopsis==

In 1809, Thomasina Coverly, the daughter of the house, is a precocious teenager with ideas about mathematics, nature, and physics well ahead of her time. She studies with her tutor Septimus Hodge, a friend of Lord Byron (an unseen guest in the house). In the present, writer Hannah Jarvis and literature professor Bernard Nightingale converge on the house: she is investigating a hermit who once lived on the grounds; he is researching a mysterious chapter in the life of Byron. As their studies unfold – with the help of Valentine Coverly, a post-graduate student in mathematical biology – the truth about what happened in Thomasina&#x27;s time is gradually revealed.

===Scene 1 (Act 1)===
The play opens on 10 April 1809, in a garden-front room of the house. Septimus Hodge is trying to distract 13-year-old Thomasina from her curiosity about &quot;carnal embrace&quot; by challenging her to prove Fermat&#x27;s Last Theorem; he also wants to focus on reading the poem &quot;The Couch of Eros&quot; by Ezra Chater, who with his wife is a guest at the house. Thomasina starts asking why jam mixed in rice pudding can never be unstirred, which leads her to the topic of determinism and to a beginning theory about chaotic shapes in nature. This is interrupted by Chater himself, who is angry that his wife was caught in the aforementioned &quot;carnal embrace&quot; with Septimus; he has come to demand a duel. Septimus tries to defuse the situation by heaping praise on Chater&#x27;s &quot;The Couch of Eros&quot;. The tactic works, because Chater does not know it was Septimus who had savaged an earlier work of his, &quot;The Maid of Turkey&quot;. Landscape architect Richard Noakes enters, shortly accompanied by Captain Brice and Lady Croom; the three discuss proposed modifications to the Arcadian style gardens, while Thomasina sketches an imaginary hermit on Noakes&#x27;s technical drawing of the garden.

===Scene 2===
The present day. Hannah Jarvis is researching the house, the garden, and specifically the hermit, for a study of hermits and the Romantic imagination. Bernard Nightingale enters with Chloe Coverly; she conceals the professor&#x27;s identity from Hannah, as Nightingale had given Hannah&#x27;s last book a poor review. Chloe&#x27;s brother, Valentine, is gathering data on the population biology of the grouse in the surrounding grounds, using the house&#x27;s &quot;game books&quot;. When Chloe accidentally reveals Bernard&#x27;s identity, Hannah reacts angrily; but she agrees to share her research material. This enables him to propose the theory that one of the 1809 inhabitants, Ezra Chater, was killed by Lord Byron in a duel. Bernard notes that records of Chater the poet disappeared after 1809, and the only other Chater of record is a botanist.

===Scene 3===
The 19th century. Septimus is tutoring Thomasina, this time in translating Latin. Again their focus diverts, this time to the destruction of the Alexandrian Library, which upsets Thomasina. She mourns the loss of the knowledge stored there, and Septimus responds that all that was lost will eventually turn up again. They are interrupted by Chater, who succeeds in challenging Septimus to a duel, having learned (from Lord Byron off-stage) that Septimus wrote the damning review of his work.

===Scene 4===
The present. Hannah rediscovers Thomasina&#x27;s primer containing her ideas on iteration and chaos theory; this recalls Septimus&#x27; assertion that what was lost is eventually rediscovered. Valentine reacts with interest to the notes, as his own research centres on similar concepts.

===Scene 5 (Act 2)===
Bernard gives Hannah, Valentine, and Chloe a preview of his lecture theorising that Lord Byron shot and killed Chater in a duel. When Hannah and Valentine challenge his logic, Bernard launches into a diatribe about the irrelevance of science, then departs for his lecture (and a promotional media appearance) in London. Hannah begins to suspect that the hermit of Sidley Park – who was reportedly obsessed with algebraic computations about the heat death of the universe, the theory suggested in Thomasina&#x27;s diagram – could have been Septimus.

===Scene 6===
Returning to 1809, we learn that the duel never occurred. Instead, the Chater couple left for the West Indies with Captain Brice. Chater served as the expedition&#x27;s botanist and his wife Charity was the captain&#x27;s secret paramour. Lord Byron has also left the country. Septimus has gone rabbit hunting for Thomasina, who favours rabbit pie; he returns to find Lady Croom searching for him. She has found two letters, a love letter addressed to her, and another to Thomasina about rice pudding, both written by Septimus in case he died in a duel. She invites Septimus to an amorous rendezvous.

===Scene 7===
Both 1812 and the present, the actions running concurrently. Some present-day characters are in fancy dress for a party, so that both casts appear similarly attired. After reading a newspaper report on the Byron murder theory, Chloe talks about determinism with Valentine, echoing the discussion between Septimus and Thomasina. Chloe, however, believes that sex is the force that disrupts the universe&#x27;s ordered plan. Valentine, using his computer to extrapolate Thomasina&#x27;s ideas, relates them to the later developed concept of entropy. He wonders whether Thomasina or Septimus was the genius behind the theories. Hannah and Valentine mention that Thomasina died in a fire on the eve of her seventeenth birthday.

Meanwhile, Thomasina asks Septimus to teach her to dance, to prepare for her forthcoming 17th birthday party. Lady Croom enters, complaining to Noakes about the noise of his steam engine; Thomasina notes that the machine obeys the laws of entropy (which have not yet been formalized), which describe the universe as winding down. In the present, Bernard arrives and is met by Hannah, who has found a letter detailing the facts of Chater&#x27;s death – this discovery totally discredits Bernard&#x27;s theory and vindicates Lord Byron&#x27;s reputation. While Septimus awaits appropriate music for Thomasina&#x27;s dance lesson, he examines the sketch she made to illustrate the irreversibility of heat; his action mirrors that of Hannah and Valentine, who pondered the same diagram. Bernard is caught in a compromising position with Chloe, and is asked to depart.

Eventually a waltz starts, and Septimus dances with Thomasina, revealing that their relationship is increasingly complicated by hints of romance. Gus (Valentine and Chloe&#x27;s younger brother, who has been silent for the entire play) hands another of Thomasina&#x27;s drawings to a surprised Hannah. It depicts Septimus and the tortoise, confirming her suspicion that the hermit, who had a tortoise called Plautus, was Septimus. After Thomasina&#x27;s tragic death, he apparently became a hermit. Accepting her challenge to the laws of the universe as propounded by Newton, he worked for the rest of his life to apply &quot;honest English algebra&quot; to the question of the universe&#x27;s future.

==Characters==
===Characters of 1809===
* Thomasina Coverly: The 13-year-old (later 16-year-old) daughter of Lord and Lady Croom, Thomasina is a precocious genius. She comes to understand chaos theory and the second law of thermodynamics, before either is established in the mathematical and scientific communities. Stoppard &quot;apparently based&quot; the character on Lord Byron&#x27;s daughter Ada Lovelace (Augusta Ada King, Countess of Lovelace). She was an English mathematician who conceptualised how Charles Babbage&#x27;s Analytical engine could be used, foreseeing the binary computer.
* Septimus Hodge: Thomasina&#x27;s tutor, and the academic colleague and friend of Lord Byron (an unseen but important character). While teaching Thomasina, he works on his own research and has affairs with the older women of the house. When Thomasina is older, he falls in love with her; after her death, he becomes the &quot;hermit of Sidley Park&quot;, working on her theories until his own death.
* Jellaby: The Crooms&#x27; butler. His chief functions are to spread gossip and to deliver letters.
* Ezra Chater: An unsuccessful poetaster staying at Sidley Park. His wife&#x27;s romantic affairs lead him to challenge Septimus to a duel. Later, it is revealed that he is the amateur botanist &quot;Mr. Chater,&quot; who dies of a monkey bite in Martinique, where he has travelled with his wife and Captain Brice.
* Charity Chater: Ezra Chater&#x27;s wife. Though she, like Byron, never appears onstage, she plays a vital role. She sleeps with Septimus, and her repeatedly cuckolded husband challenges him to a duel. She sleeps with Lord Byron and gets him, Captain Brice, her husband and herself expelled from Sidley Park.
* Richard Noakes: Lady Croom&#x27;s gardener. Throughout the play, he is working to transform Sidley Park&#x27;s classical, Arcadia-like landscape into the popular Gothic style – which Lady Croom begrudgingly accepts. He is key in exposing Septimus&#x27;s and Mrs. Chater&#x27;s affair.
* Lady Croom: Thomasina&#x27;s mother. She rules the Coverly estate with an iron fist, but flirts with Septimus and other gentlemen throughout the play. A second Lady Croom, the mother of Valentine, Chloe, and Gus in the modern half of the play, never appears on stage.
* Captain Brice: The brother of Lady Croom (of 1809). He is a sea captain who falls in love with Mrs. Chater. He takes her and her husband to the West Indies at the end of the play. After Mr. Chater&#x27;s death, Captain Brice marries the widowed Charity Chater.
* Augustus Coverly: Thomasina&#x27;s trouble-making younger brother. He appears in only a few brief scenes. (Gus and Augustus are played by the same actor.)

===Characters of the present===
* Hannah Jarvis: The author of a best-seller on Byron&#x27;s mistress Lady Caroline Lamb. Hannah is researching the elusive hermit of Sidley Park, said to have lived there in the early 19th century. Hannah collaborates (warily) with Bernard and also with Valentine, though she rejects the romantic advances of both.
* Chloe Coverly: The 18-year-old daughter of the modern Lady Croom. While her mind is not as rigorous as Thomasina&#x27;s, Chloe likes to propose wild ideas. She argues that the Newtonian universe has been destabilized by sex and the problems it causes. She tries to set up Hannah with Bernard, but ends up sleeping with him herself.
* Bernard Nightingale: A don at a modern university in Sussex, England. Bernard comes to Sidley Park hoping to work with Hannah on his theory about Lord Byron staying at the estate. Instead of seeking further evidence, he announces on TV his theory that Lord Byron killed Ezra Chater in a duel. At the end of the play, Hannah proves him wrong, much to his chagrin.
* Valentine Coverly: Chloe&#x27;s older brother. A graduate student of mathematics, he pores over several old documents and comes to acknowledge Thomasina&#x27;s genius.
* Gus Coverly: Valentine and Chloe&#x27;s younger brother, who has been mute since the age of five. Gus helps to pass several important props from past to present, and helps connect key moments in the play. (Gus and Augustus are played by the same actor.)

==Genre==
&quot;Arcadia&quot; is, on the surface, somewhere between a tragedy and a comedy. It involves some elements of classical tragedy – &quot;noble&quot; characters and the audience&#x27;s foreknowledge of Thomasina&#x27;s death – but the predominant element is comedy, in the way that the characters interact with each other and in their witty, epigrammatic dialogue.

==Themes==
&quot;Arcadia&quot; explores the nature of evidence and truth in the context of modern ideas about history, mathematics, and physics. It shows how clues left by the past are interpreted in the present, by both laypeople and scholars. Stoppard has said that his initial inspiration came from reading James Gleick&#x27;s 1987 bestseller, &quot;&quot;, &quot;which is about this new kind of mathematics. That sounds fairly daunting if one&#x27;s talking about a play. I thought, here is a marvellous metaphor.&quot; Besides chaos, the play attends to a wide array of subjects, including thermodynamics, computer algorithms, fractals, population dynamics, determinism (especially in the context of love and death), classics, landscape design, Romanticism vs. Classicism, English literature (particularly poetry), Byron, 18th century periodicals, modern academia, and even South Pacific botany. These are all concrete topics of conversation; their more abstract resonances rise into epistemology, nihilism, and the origins of lust and madness.

&quot;Arcadia&quot;&#x27;s themes are presented in a series of dichotomies. Most prominent is chaos versus order. The play&#x27;s characters and action embody this, moving from a settled social order, in which relationships arise, toward the final scene, where the social order – and even the separation of the two eras – dissolve in the party&#x27;s chaos, relationships collapse, and the characters die or disperse. Yet within that chaos, order can still be found. As Valentine declares: &quot;In an ocean of ashes, islands of order. Patterns making themselves out of nothing.&quot; Although the play&#x27;s world grows increasingly chaotic – with overlapping time periods, increasingly complex ideas, and ever greater variations in social norms and assumptions – connections and order can still be discerned. The characters attempt to find and articulate the order they perceive in their world, even as it is continually overturned.

The center-stage table that collects props from both time periods throughout the play is a vivid metaphor of the chaos/order dichotomy. As Paul Edwards, professor of English and History of Art at Bath Spa University, suggests: 
At the end of the play, the table has accumulated a variety of objects that, if one saw them without having seen the play, would seem completely random and disordered. Entropy is high. But if one has seen the play, one has full information about the objects and the hidden &#x27;order&#x27; of their arrangement, brought about by the performance itself. Entropy is low; this can be proved by reflecting that tomorrow night&#x27;s performance of the play will finish with the table in a virtually identical &#x27;disorder&#x27; – which therefore cannot really be disorder at all.

A closely related theme in &quot;Arcadia&quot; is the opposition of Classicism and Romanticism. This appears most clearly in the running arguments between Noakes and Lady Croom about proposed changes to the garden. Their disagreements are about changing from the tidy order of Classic style to the rugged naturalism and Gothic mystery of the Romantic. A parallel dichotomy is expressed by Septimus and Thomasina: He instructs her in the Newtonian vision of the universe, while she keeps posing questions and proposing theories that undercut it. Hannah&#x27;s search for the hermit of Sidley Park also touches on this theme. &quot;The whole Romantic sham!&quot; she passionately exclaims to Bernard. &quot;It&#x27;s what happened to the Enlightenment, isn&#x27;t it? A century of intellectual rigour turned in on itself. A mind in chaos suspected of genius ... The decline from thinking to feeling.&quot;

Another major theme is entropy and the irreversibility of time. Thomasina examines this scientifically, remarking that while Newtonian equations work both backwards and forwards, things in reality – like her rice pudding – cannot be &quot;unstirred.&quot; Heat, too, she notes, flows in only one direction (the second law of thermodynamics). This is embodied by the characters, who burn bridges in relationships, burn candles, and burn letters – and in the end, Thomasina herself (like a short-lived candle) burns to death.

Thomasina&#x27;s insights into thermodynamics and heat transfer, and the idea that the universe is cooling, echo the poem &quot;Darkness&quot; by her &quot;real life&quot; contemporary, Lord Byron. Written in 1816 – the &quot;Year Without a Summer&quot;, caused by atmospheric ash from the volcano Mount Tambora erupting in the Dutch East Indies – &quot;Darkness&quot; depicts a world grown dark and cold because the sun has been extinguished.

The play&#x27;s end brings all these dichotomous themes together, showing that while things may appear to contradict – Romanticism and Classicism, intuition and logic, thought and feeling – they can exist, paradoxically, in the same time and space. Order is found amid the chaos.

==Style==
Jim Hunter writes that &quot;Arcadia&quot; is a relatively realistic play, compared to Stoppard&#x27;s other works, though the realism is &quot;much enhanced and teased about by the alternation of two eras&quot;. The setting and characters are true-to-life, without being archetypal. It is comprehensible: the plot is both logical and probable, following events in a linear fashion. &quot;Arcadia&quot;&#x27;s major deviation from realism, of course, is in having two plotlines that are linear and parallel. Thus we see Thomasina deriving her mathematical equations to describe the forms of nature; we later see Val, with his computer, plotting them to produce the image of a leaf.

==Language==
The language of &quot;Arcadia&quot; switches between the colloquialisms of early 19th-century England and those of modern England. Stoppard&#x27;s language reflects his periods, historical and modern, and he uses speech patterns and lexicons in keeping with his characters.

But his is a stylised dialogue, conveying the &quot;look and feel&quot; of the past as perceived by the modern audience. Still, it has sufficient latitude in register to make plain the relationships between the characters. For example, Septimus, after failing to deflect a question from Thomasina with a joke, bluntly explains to his pupil the nature of &quot;carnal embrace&quot; – but this bluntness is far removed from that with which he dismisses Chater&#x27;s self-deceiving defence of his wife&#x27;s reputation (which, Septimus says, &quot;could not be adequately defended with a platoon of musketry&quot;). With Lady Croom, in responding to his employer&#x27;s description of Mrs. Chater as a &quot;harlot&quot;, Septimus delicately admits that &quot;her passion is not as fixed&quot; as one might wish.

In the modern sequences, the dialogue is more realistic. But Bernard consciously assumes some stylisation of language: He rehearses his public lecture in heightened, flamboyant rhetoric; and he unleashes a polemic against Valentine&#x27;s scientific thought (describing the concept as no more than &quot;performance art&quot;), not from spite but for &quot;recreation&quot;.

The play&#x27;s scientific concepts are set forth primarily in the historical scenes, where Thomasina delivers her precocious (or even anachronistic) references to entropy, the deterministic universe and iterated equations in improvised, colloquial terms. In the modern era, Valentine explains the significance of Thomasina&#x27;s rediscovered notebook with careful detail, reflecting Stoppard&#x27;s research into his play&#x27;s scientific materials.

Consciously echoed phrases, across the time frames, help to unify the play. For example, Chloe asks Valentine if &quot;the future is all programmed like a computer&quot;, and whether she is the first to think that theory discredited &quot;because of sex&quot;. Thomasina has been there before: &quot;If you could stop every atom in its position and direction ... you could write the formula for all the future,&quot; she tells Septimus, then adds, &quot;Am I the first person to have thought of this?&quot; The difference is significant: Chloe&#x27;s intuitive version allows for the effects of chaos, illustrating Stoppard&#x27;s theme of the interdependence of science and art, and between professional and amateur thinking.

==Title==
The play&#x27;s title is abbreviated from its initial version: &quot;Et in Arcadia ego&quot;. &quot;Arcadia&quot; refers to the pastoral ideal; the phrase literally translates, &quot;and in Arcadia I am&quot;. The tradition of placing a tomb in a pastoral idyll can be traced to Virgil&#x27;s &quot;Eclogues&quot;, while the phrase first appears in Guercino&#x27;s painting dated in 1618-1622. Both the image and the motto are commonly considered a &quot;memento mori&quot;, with the phrase being spoken by Death: &quot;I, too, am in Arcadia&quot;. But the enigmatic phrase remains a subject of much academic discussion.

Lady Croom, enthusing about paintings of pretty landscapes, translates the phrase as &quot;Here I am in Arcadia!&quot; Thomasina drily comments, &quot;Yes Mama, if you would have it so&quot;. Septimus notices; later, suspecting his pupil will appreciate the motto&#x27;s true meaning, he offers the translation &quot;Even in Arcadia, there am I&quot;. He is right – &quot;Oh, phooey to Death!&quot; she exclaims. Although these brief exchanges are the only direct references in the play to its title, they presage the two main characters&#x27; fates: Thomasina&#x27;s early death, and Septimus&#x27;s voluntary exile from life. Stoppard originally wanted to make this connection more explicit by using &quot;Et in Arcadia Ego&quot; for the title, but &quot;box office sense prevailed&quot;.

In a more obvious sense, the title also invokes the ideal of nature as an ordered paradise, while the estate&#x27;s landscape steadily evolves into a more irregular form. This provides a recurring image of the different ways in which &quot;true nature&quot; can be understood, and a homely parallel to Thomasina&#x27;s theoretical description of the natural world&#x27;s structure and entropic decline using mathematics.

==Contextual information==
In &quot;Arcadia&quot;, Stoppard presents his audience with several highly complex but fundamental mathematical and scientific concepts. He also uses these theories and ideas to illuminate relationships among his characters, adding to their poignancy.

One of the play&#x27;s main thematic concepts is chaos theory. Paul Edwards, in his essay &quot;Science in &quot;Hapgood&quot; and &quot;Arcadia&quot;&quot;, notes that &quot;chaos mathematics is about the recovery of information from apparently chaotic and random systems where entropy is high. [...] It is &#x27;asymmetric&#x27; (unlike the equations of classical physics), yet it finds regularities that prove to be the regularities of nature itself. Strikingly, this mathematics can generate patterns of amazing complexity, but it also has the power to generate seemingly natural or organic shapes that defeat Newtonian geometry. The promise, then, (however questionable it is in reality) is that information, and by extension, nature itself, can overcome the tendency to increase in entropy&quot;.
John Fleming, in his book &quot;Stoppard&#x27;s Theatre: Finding Order amid Chaos&quot;, makes a similar observation. &quot;Deterministic chaos&quot;, he writes, &quot;deals with systems of unpredictable determinism. ... [T]he uncertainty does not result in pure randomness, but rather in complex patterns. Traditionally, scientists expected dynamic systems to settle into stable, predictable behavior.&quot; But as systems respond to variations in input, they become more random or chaotic. &quot;Surprisingly, within these random states, windows of order reappear. [...] There is order in chaos – an unpredictable order, but a determined order nonetheless, and not merely random behavior.&quot;

Closely related scientific and mathematical concepts in &quot;Arcadia&quot; are the second law of thermodynamics and entropy. Fleming describes these two principles. &quot;Entropy is the measure of the randomness or disorder of a system. The law of increase of entropy states that as a whole, the universe is evolving from order to disorder. This relates to the second law of thermodynamics, which states that heat spontaneously flows in only one direction, from hotter to colder. Since these equations, unlike Newton&#x27;s laws of motion, do not go backward and forward, there is an &#x27;arrow of time&#x27; that points toward the eventual &#x27;heat death&#x27; of the universe.&quot;

In &quot;Arcadia&quot;, Stoppard uses all these concepts to reveal that &quot;there is an underlying order to seemingly random events.&quot; The characters discuss these topics, while their interactions reflect them. Often these discussions themselves create order and connections beneath the appearance of disunity. For example, both Thomasina&#x27;s theories on heat and Valentine&#x27;s search for a &quot;signal&quot; in the &quot;noise&quot; of the local grouse population refer to the physicist Joseph Fourier and his development of the Fourier transform, which he first used to analyze the physics of heat transfer but has since found wide application. Though the characters would seem to have little in common, their work in fact relates to the same topic.

Some ideas in the play recall Goethe&#x27;s novella &quot;Elective Affinities&quot;: Stoppard&#x27;s characters &quot;Thomasina&quot; and &quot;Septimus&quot; have parallels in Goethe&#x27;s &quot;Ottilie&quot; and &quot;Eduard&quot;, and the historical section of Stoppard&#x27;s play is set in 1809, the year of Goethe&#x27;s novella. Among other parallels, the older work takes the theory of affinity between chemical elements as a metaphor for ineluctable, inevitable &quot;human chemistry&quot; in the same way as Stoppard makes use of the force of determinism acting on his characters. A feature of both works is the preoccupation with remodelling country house landscapes; Goethe&#x27;s young character &quot;Ottilie&quot; (the counterpart to Thomasina) dies as an indirect result of this.

==Productions==
 &quot;Arcadia&quot; first opened at the Royal National Theatre in London on 13 April 1993, in a production directed by Trevor Nunn with Rufus Sewell as Septimus Hodge, Felicity Kendal as Hannah Jarvis, Bill Nighy as Bernard Nightingale, Emma Fielding as Thomasina Coverly, Allan Mitchell as Jellaby, Derek Hutchinson as Ezra Chater, Sidney Livingstone as Richard Noakes, Harriet Walter as Lady Croom, Graham Sinclair as Captain Brice, Harriet Harrison as Chloe Coverly, Timothy Matthews as Augustus and Gus Coverly and Samuel West as Valentine Coverly. It won the 1993 Olivier and Evening Standard Awards for Best Play.

The first New York production opened in March 1995, at the Vivian Beaumont Theater. It was again directed by Trevor Nunn, but with an entirely new cast. It starred Billy Crudup as Septimus, Blair Brown as Hannah, Victor Garber as Bernard, Robert Sean Leonard as Valentine and Jennifer Dundas as Thomasina. This production was the Broadway debut of Paul Giamatti, who played Ezra Chater. The other actors were Lisa Banes (Lady Croom), Richard Clarke (Jellaby), John Griffin (Gus/Augustus), Peter Maloney (Noakes), David Manis (Captain Brice, RN) and Haviland Morris (Chloe). This production won the New York Drama Critics&#x27; Circle Award, and was nominated for the 1995 Tony Award for Best Play, losing to Terrence McNally&#x27;s &quot;Love! Valour! Compassion!&quot;.

In December 1996, the first major US regional production was mounted at the Arena Stage in Washington, D.C.

On 27 May 2009, a London production, directed by David Leveaux, opened at the Duke of York&#x27;s Theatre starring Dan Stevens (Septimus Hodge), Samantha Bond (Hannah Jarvis), Jessie Cave (Thomasina Coverly), Nancy Carroll (Lady Croom), Trevor Cooper (Richard Noakes), Sam Cox (Jellaby), Lucy Griffiths (Chloë Coverly), Tom Hodgkins (Captain Brice), Hugh Mitchell (Augustus/Gus Coverly), Neil Pearson (Bernard Nightingale), George Potts (Ezra Chater) and Ed Stoppard (Valentine Coverly). The production recouped its costs and closed on 12 September 2009.

&quot;Arcadia&quot; returned to Broadway, at the Ethel Barrymore Theatre, on 17 March 2011, again directed by David Leveaux. The cast included Margaret Colin (Lady Croom), Billy Crudup (Septimus in the original Broadway version, now playing Bernard Nightingale), Raúl Esparza (Valentine Coverly), Glenn Fleshler (Captain Brice), Grace Gummer (Chloë Coverly), Edward James Hyland (Jellaby), Byron Jennings (Richard Noakes), Bel Powley (Thomasina Coverly), Tom Riley (Septimus Hodge), Noah Robbins (Gus Coverly/Augustus Coverly), David Turner (Ezra Chater), and Lia Williams (Hannah Jarvis). The production was nominated for the Tony Award for Best Revival of a Play.

==Reception==
&quot;The Times&quot;, reviewing the first production in 1993, praised it as a &quot;perfect marriage of ideas and high comedy&quot;. But for some, the ideas overwhelmed the comedy: &quot;[T]oo clever by about two-and-three-quarters,&quot; noted critic Jack Tinker. &quot;One comes away instructed with more than one can usefully wish to know.&quot; After an eight-month run at the National, the play&#x27;s transfer to the West End gave an opportunity for re-appraisal. &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; critic commented: &quot;I have never left a play more convinced that I had just witnessed a masterpiece&quot;.

Vincent Canby of &quot;The New York Times&quot; described the play as &quot;Tom Stoppard&#x27;s richest, most ravishing comedy to date, a play of wit, intellect, language, brio and, new for him, emotion&quot;. But other New York reviews were mixed or unfavourable, complaining of the anachronisms and lack of realism. The production left John Simon of &quot;New York Magazine&quot; with the view that &quot;Stoppard overdoes it…&quot;Arcadia&quot; makes better reading than seeing&quot;. The book review website The Pequod rated the play a 10.0 (out of 10.0), saying &quot;&quot;Arcadia&quot; combines an astonishing range of disparate elements — romance, humor, tragedy, sorrow, scientific history, and even gardening — into an entirely unique work of art.&quot;

The 2009 London revival prompted more critics to laud the play as &quot;Stoppard&#x27;s finest work&quot;. Michael Billington wrote in &quot;The Guardian&quot; that the play &quot;gets richer with each viewing. ... [T]here is poetry and passion behind the mathematics and metaphysics.&quot; Johann Hari of &quot;The Independent&quot; speculated that &quot;Arcadia&quot; would be recognised &quot;as the greatest play of its time&quot;.

The 2011 Broadway staging met with a mixed reception. Ben Brantley of &quot;The New York Times&quot; called the production &quot;a half-terrific revival of Mr. Stoppard&#x27;s entirely terrific &quot;Arcadia&quot;&quot;, noting that &quot;several central roles are slightly miscast&quot;, and &quot;some of the performances from the Anglo-American cast are pitched to the point of incoherence.&quot; Similar concerns were raised by critics from the &quot;New York&quot; magazine, &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot;, &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot;, &quot;New York Daily News&quot;, &quot;Time Out New York&quot; and Bloomberg News.

==Awards and nominations== 
; Awards
* 1993 Laurence Olivier Award for Best New Play
; Nominations
* 1995 Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Play
* 1995 Tony Award for Best Play
* 2006 &quot;Arcadia&quot; was voted onto the shortlist for the Royal Institution award for &quot;the best science book ever written&quot;. The winner, announced on 19 October 2006, was &quot;The Periodic Table&quot; by Primo Levi.
* 2011 Tony Award for Best Revival of a Play

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* Stoppard, Tom. &quot;Arcadia&quot;, L.A. Theatre Works Audio Theatre Collections, radio play (2009). Full-cast performance featuring: Kate Burton, Mark Capri, Jennifer Dundas, Gregory Itzin, David Manis, Christopher Neame, Peter Paige, Darren Richardson, Kate Steele, Serena Scott Thomas, and Douglas Weston. . (Available as e-audiobook through OverDrive.)

==External links==
* 
* A list of &quot;Arcadia&quot;-related articles and other links
* Chaos, Fractals, and Arcadia, written by Robert L. Devaney from Boston University.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25379" start="18" end="28" title="stage play" label="stage play"/>
<link wikidata="Q294773" start="59" end="71" title="Tom Stoppard" label="Tom Stoppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171086" start="341" end="375" title="Royal Institution of Great Britain" label="Royal Institution of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897050" start="396" end="422" title="Best science book ever" label="best science-related works"/>
<link wikidata="Q901222" start="627" end="632" title="tutor" label="tutor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="661" end="671" title="Lord Byron" label="Lord Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764321" start="832" end="868" title="Garden hermit" label="hermit who once lived on the grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q751611" start="1020" end="1040" title="mathematical biology" label="mathematical biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q178066" start="1304" end="1318" title="carnal desire" label="carnal embrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q132469" start="1353" end="1379" title="Fermat&amp;#x27;s Last Theorem" label="Fermat&amp;#x27;s Last Theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q19029" start="1554" end="1566" title="rice pudding" label="rice pudding"/>
<link wikidata="Q131133" start="1623" end="1634" title="determinism" label="determinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q191503" start="1858" end="1862" title="duel" label="duel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815948" start="2104" end="2123" title="Landscape architect" label="Landscape architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="2511" end="2519" title="Romanticism" label="Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098652" start="2758" end="2776" title="population biology" label="population biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q201240" start="2784" end="2790" title="grouse" label="grouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="3226" end="3234" title="botanist" label="botanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3326" end="3331" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q435" start="3373" end="3415" title="Destruction of the Library of Alexandria" label="the destruction of the Alexandrian Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000421" start="3807" end="3813" title="Primer (textbook)" label="primer"/>
<link wikidata="Q651022" start="3838" end="3847" title="iteration" label="iteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q166314" start="3852" end="3864" title="chaos theory" label="chaos theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q139931" start="4512" end="4538" title="heat death of the universe" label="heat death of the universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="4730" end="4741" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q629129" start="4861" end="4869" title="Extramarital sex" label="paramour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961375" start="4927" end="4941" title="rabbiting" label="rabbit hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278638" start="4969" end="4979" title="rabbit pie" label="rabbit pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759320" start="5344" end="5355" title="fancy dress" label="fancy dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q45003" start="5787" end="5794" title="entropy" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12760" start="6147" end="6159" title="steam engine" label="steam engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433067" start="6245" end="6255" title="Formalism (mathematics)" label="formalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="6277" end="6285" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q632388" start="6651" end="6674" title="Irreversible process" label="irreversibility of heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q193434" start="6851" end="6856" title="waltz" label="waltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="7406" end="7412" title="Sir Isaac Newton" label="Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q177045" start="7750" end="7778" title="second law of thermodynamics" label="second law of thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259" start="7939" end="7951" title="Ada Lovelace" label="Ada Lovelace"/>
<link wikidata="Q46633" start="8050" end="8065" title="Charles Babbage" label="Charles Babbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q485257" start="8073" end="8090" title="Analytical engine" label="Analytical engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12901590" start="8671" end="8680" title="poetaster" label="poetaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054" start="8887" end="8897" title="Martinique" label="Martinique"/>
<link wikidata="Q235665" start="10345" end="10363" title="Lady Caroline Lamb" label="Lady Caroline Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q189829" start="10399" end="10405" title="hermit" label="hermit"/>
<link wikidata="Q80930" start="11787" end="11794" title="tragedy" label="tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329012" start="11864" end="11869" title="Integrity" label="noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q193121" start="12068" end="12075" title="epigram" label="epigram"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="12228" end="12235" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q113105" start="12402" end="12414" title="James Gleick" label="James Gleick"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="12687" end="12701" title="thermodynamics" label="thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="12712" end="12722" title="algorithms" label="algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q81392" start="12724" end="12732" title="fractals" label="fractals"/>
<link wikidata="Q904564" start="12734" end="12753" title="population dynamics" label="population dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q131133" start="12755" end="12766" title="determinism" label="determinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="12814" end="12822" title="classics" label="classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8071177" start="12824" end="12840" title="landscape design" label="landscape design"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="12842" end="12853" title="Romanticism" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170292" start="12858" end="12868" title="Classicism" label="Classicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q186579" start="12870" end="12888" title="English literature" label="English literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="12912" end="12917" title="George Gordon Byron, 6th Baron Byron" label="Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002697" start="12932" end="12942" title="periodical" label="periodical"/>
<link wikidata="Q162633" start="12952" end="12960" title="academia" label="academia"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="12985" end="12991" title="botany" label="botany"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="13081" end="13093" title="epistemology" label="epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q80968" start="13095" end="13103" title="nihilism" label="nihilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498477" start="13124" end="13128" title="lust" label="lust"/>
<link wikidata="Q505619" start="13133" end="13140" title="Insanity" label="madness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091754" start="14276" end="14295" title="Bath Spa University" label="Bath Spa University"/>
<link wikidata="Q170292" start="14956" end="14966" title="Classicism" label="Classicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="14971" end="14982" title="Romanticism" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q38433" start="15918" end="15937" title="Newtonian mechanics" label="Newtonian equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223691" start="16446" end="16454" title="Darkness (poem)" label="Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q209625" start="16544" end="16565" title="Year Without a Summer" label="Year Without a Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q168714" start="16616" end="16629" title="Mount Tambora" label="Mount Tambora"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="16646" end="16663" title="Dutch East Indies" label="Dutch East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q9485200" start="17113" end="17122" title="Realism (theatre)" label="realistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156948" start="17344" end="17358" title="Comprehension (logic)" label="comprehensible"/>
<link wikidata="Q182598" start="17690" end="17698" title="Graph of a function" label="plotting"/>
<link wikidata="Q901711" start="17807" end="17820" title="colloquialism" label="colloquialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q286576" start="18183" end="18191" title="Register (sociolinguistics)" label="register"/>
<link wikidata="Q45003" start="19378" end="19385" title="entropy" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131133" start="19391" end="19413" title="deterministic universe" label="deterministic universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q651022" start="19418" end="19436" title="Iteration" label="iterated equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q166314" start="20263" end="20268" title="Chaos theory" label="chaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q259012" start="20755" end="20779" title="Et in Arcadia ego (Guercino)" label="Guercino&amp;#x27;s painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q273383" start="20861" end="20873" title="memento mori" label="memento mori"/>
<link wikidata="Q45003" start="22205" end="22221" title="entropy" label="entropic decline"/>
<link wikidata="Q166314" start="22571" end="22583" title="chaos theory" label="chaos theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q81745" start="22878" end="22895" title="classical physics" label="classical physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="23667" end="23681" title="dynamic system" label="dynamic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q177045" start="24107" end="24135" title="second law of thermodynamics" label="second law of thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q45003" start="24140" end="24147" title="entropy" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q38433" start="24534" end="24562" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s laws of motion" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s laws of motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q186559" start="24614" end="24627" title="arrow of time" label="arrow of time"/>
<link wikidata="Q8772" start="25214" end="25228" title="Joseph Fourier" label="Joseph Fourier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520159" start="25256" end="25273" title="Fourier transform" label="Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="25509" end="25515" title="Goethe" label="Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q951198" start="25537" end="25556" title="Elective Affinities" label="Elective Affinities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25864" end="25908" title="Chemical affinity#Early theories" label="theory of affinity between chemical elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q511108" start="26334" end="26356" title="Royal National Theatre" label="Royal National Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334509" start="26413" end="26424" title="Trevor Nunn" label="Trevor Nunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q299217" start="26430" end="26442" title="Rufus Sewell" label="Rufus Sewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603654" start="26462" end="26477" title="Felicity Kendal" label="Felicity Kendal"/>
<link wikidata="Q207179" start="26496" end="26506" title="Bill Nighy" label="Bill Nighy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4298583" start="26531" end="26544" title="Emma Fielding" label="Emma Fielding"/>
<link wikidata="Q112107879" start="26627" end="26645" title="Sidney Livingstone" label="Sidney Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q271177" start="26665" end="26679" title="Harriet Walter" label="Harriet Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5979744" start="26764" end="26780" title="Tim Matthews (actor)" label="Timothy Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389078" start="26813" end="26824" title="Samuel West" label="Samuel West"/>
<link wikidata="Q28470" start="26863" end="26870" title="Olivier Award" label="Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416631" start="26875" end="26897" title="Evening Standard Award" label="Evening Standard Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q176205" start="26974" end="26997" title="Vivian Beaumont Theater" label="Vivian Beaumont Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334509" start="27024" end="27035" title="Trevor Nunn" label="Trevor Nunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q313650" start="27079" end="27091" title="Billy Crudup" label="Billy Crudup"/>
<link wikidata="Q242709" start="27105" end="27116" title="Blair Brown" label="Blair Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q270664" start="27128" end="27141" title="Victor Garber" label="Victor Garber"/>
<link wikidata="Q193160" start="27154" end="27173" title="Robert Sean Leonard" label="Robert Sean Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q531532" start="27191" end="27206" title="Jennifer Dundas" label="Jennifer Dundas"/>
<link wikidata="Q208649" start="27263" end="27276" title="Paul Giamatti" label="Paul Giamatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6557799" start="27324" end="27334" title="Lisa Banes" label="Lisa Banes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273327" start="27464" end="27479" title="Haviland Morris" label="Haviland Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711507" start="27513" end="27548" title="New York Drama Critics&amp;#x27; Circle" label="New York Drama Critics&amp;#x27; Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="27587" end="27597" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566335" start="27623" end="27639" title="Terrence McNally" label="Terrence McNally"/>
<link wikidata="Q13599102" start="27653" end="27678" title="Love! Valour! Compassion!" label="Love! Valour! Compassion!"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788912" start="27763" end="27774" title="Arena Stage" label="Arena Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236525" start="27845" end="27858" title="David Leveaux" label="David Leveaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275938" start="27874" end="27901" title="Duke of York&amp;#x27;s Theatre" label="Duke of York&amp;#x27;s Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q958385" start="27911" end="27922" title="Dan Stevens" label="Dan Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q238356" start="27941" end="27954" title="Samantha Bond" label="Samantha Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q233439" start="27972" end="27983" title="Jessie Cave" label="Jessie Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962590" start="28005" end="28018" title="Nancy Carroll (British actress)" label="Nancy Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839105" start="28033" end="28046" title="Trevor Cooper" label="Trevor Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203380" start="28065" end="28072" title="Sam Cox (actor)" label="Sam Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q40002" start="28084" end="28098" title="Lucy Griffiths (actress, born 1986)" label="Lucy Griffiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q742428" start="28146" end="28159" title="Hugh Mitchell (actor)" label="Hugh Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874313" start="28184" end="28196" title="Neil Pearson" label="Neil Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020161" start="28251" end="28262" title="Ed Stoppard" label="Ed Stoppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403074" start="28401" end="28424" title="Ethel Barrymore Theatre" label="Ethel Barrymore Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q267001" start="28495" end="28509" title="Margaret Colin" label="Margaret Colin"/>
<link wikidata="Q313650" start="28524" end="28536" title="Billy Crudup" label="Billy Crudup"/>
<link wikidata="Q747697" start="28615" end="28627" title="Raúl Esparza" label="Raúl Esparza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486444" start="28681" end="28693" title="Grace Gummer" label="Grace Gummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881743" start="28775" end="28785" title="Bel Powley" label="Bel Powley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148197" start="28807" end="28816" title="Tom Riley (actor)" label="Tom Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q38483333" start="28835" end="28847" title="Noah Robbins" label="Noah Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6539402" start="28912" end="28924" title="Lia Williams" label="Lia Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821798" start="28979" end="29016" title="Tony Award for Best Revival of a Play" label="Tony Award for Best Revival of a Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="29039" end="29048" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q6115488" start="29286" end="29297" title="Jack Tinker" label="Jack Tinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="29510" end="29529" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q716442" start="29648" end="29661" title="Vincent Canby" label="Vincent Canby"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="29671" end="29689" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q6257894" start="29986" end="29996" title="John Simon (critic)" label="John Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507987" start="30006" end="30023" title="New York (magazine)" label="New York Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15488776" start="30520" end="30538" title="Michael Billington (critic)" label="Michael Billington"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="30554" end="30566" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q437536" start="30704" end="30715" title="Johann Hari" label="Johann Hari"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="30725" end="30740" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885332" start="30904" end="30916" title="Ben Brantley" label="Ben Brantley"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="30926" end="30944" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507987" start="31305" end="31313" title="New York (magazine)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="31336" end="31358" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="31372" end="31395" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q627827" start="31409" end="31428" title="Daily News (New York)" label="New York Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657609" start="31442" end="31459" title="Time Out New York" label="Time Out New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q13977" start="31470" end="31484" title="Bloomberg L.P." label="Bloomberg News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500798" start="31531" end="31571" title="Laurence Olivier Award for Best New Play" label="Laurence Olivier Award for Best New Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305720" start="31593" end="31630" title="Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Play" label="Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799442" start="31638" end="31662" title="Tony Award for Best Play" label="Tony Award for Best Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171086" start="31727" end="31744" title="Royal Institution" label="Royal Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249636" start="31855" end="31873" title="The Periodic Table (short story collection)" label="The Periodic Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q153670" start="31883" end="31893" title="Primo Levi" label="Primo Levi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821798" start="31902" end="31939" title="Tony Award for Best Revival of a Play" label="Tony Award for Best Revival of a Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q6456238" start="32013" end="32031" title="L.A. Theatre Works" label="L.A. Theatre Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635894" start="32059" end="32069" title="Radio drama" label="radio play"/>
<link wikidata="Q460457" start="32111" end="32122" title="Kate Burton (actress)" label="Kate Burton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32124" end="32134" title="Mark Capri" label="Mark Capri"/>
<link wikidata="Q531532" start="32136" end="32151" title="Jennifer Dundas" label="Jennifer Dundas"/>
<link wikidata="Q18992" start="32153" end="32166" title="Gregory Itzin" label="Gregory Itzin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32168" end="32179" title="David Manis" label="David Manis"/>
<link wikidata="Q466789" start="32181" end="32198" title="Christopher Neame" label="Christopher Neame"/>
<link wikidata="Q919229" start="32200" end="32211" title="Peter Paige" label="Peter Paige"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32213" end="32230" title="Darren Richardson" label="Darren Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32232" end="32243" title="Kate Steele" label="Kate Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q466957" start="32245" end="32264" title="Serena Scott Thomas" label="Serena Scott Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32270" end="32284" title="Douglas Weston" label="Douglas Weston"/>
<link wikidata="Q106833" start="32304" end="32313" title="audiobook" label="audiobook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113376" start="32322" end="32331" title="OverDrive Media Console" label="OverDrive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156869" start="32465" end="32482" title="Robert L. Devaney" label="Robert L. Devaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q49110" start="32488" end="32505" title="Boston University" label="Boston University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58382" wikidata="Q432424" url="?curid=58382" title="YaST">
<text>YaST (Yet another Setup Tool) is a Linux operating system setup and configuration tool.

YaST is featured in the openSUSE Linux distribution, as well as in SUSE&#x27;s derived commercial distributions. It is also part of the defunct United Linux.

YaST features tools that can configure many aspects of the system.

YaST was released first in April 1995. The first SuSE distribution that included YaST was released in May 1996. YaST was re-written in 1999 and included first in SuSE Linux 6.3 as only an installer. YaST2 was added to the desktop in SuSE Linux 6.4 and co-existed with YaST1 until YaST1&#x27;s removal in SuSE Linux 8.0.

==Details==
YaST is free software that SUSE has made available under the GPL in 2004. 
It is a tool for administering and maintaining a SUSE Linux installation. It allows administrators to install software, configure hardware, set up networks and servers, and more.

A feature of YaST is that it contains both Graphical user interface (GUI) and Text-based user interface (TUI) (with ncurses) front ends. This is especially useful for non-GUI installations such as servers, for system administration over slow Internet connections, and for when one is unable to boot into a graphical X server but still requires an advanced user interface to the package manager (for example, a novice user trying to downgrade an Xorg package to fix a graphical installation).

YaST offers package management functionality through the ZYpp project. The first ZYpp enabled package management YaST applications had performance problems and long start up times, but was improved in the 10.2 and 10.3 releases. Starting with openSUSE 11.0 alpha 3, ZYpp was integrated with the SAT solver project, making YaST and Zypper faster than other rpm based package managers.

YaST used to include SaX and SaX2, the Suse Advanced X configuration. SaX was re-written as SaX2 in SuSE Linux 6.4. SaX1 was removed in SuSE Linux 8.1 and SaX2 was removed from the YaST Control Center in openSUSE 11.2. SaX2 was removed completely in openSUSE 11.3. The GTK interface was removed in openSUSE Leap 42.1.

YaST often receives updates and improvements in Tumbleweed and between versions of Leap. openSUSE Leap 15.1, for example, saw improvements to the YaST interface for managing firewalls including the addition of an interface in the command line version of YaST. In this same release of openSUSE Leap, YaST now has an updated logo and improved partition management module.

YaST is implemented in the Ruby programming language.

==AutoYaST==
AutoYaST is a system for installing one or more openSUSE systems automatically without user intervention. AutoYaST installations are performed using a control file with installation and configuration data.

The profile of each current system is stored in codice_1.

==WebYaST==
WebYaST is a web interface for YaST that can be used to check the status of the current machine. It can check on the installation of packages, shutdown or reboot the system, change some system settings (such as the time), and change the status of system services or daemons.

==YaST4Debian==
The change of license of YaST from a previous rather restrictive license to the GPL in 2004 made it possible to port YaST to other Linux distributions.
As a consequence of this, the project &quot;YaST4Debian&quot; was launched, which worked on a port of YaST to Debian.

The project, which was in contact with the YaST team of Novell/SuSE, reached some important milestones, such as the port of the modules &quot;yast2-ncurses&quot; and &quot;yast2-qt&quot;. Currently, the project is dormant, searching for a new voluntary project maintainer.

==See also==

* Webmin
* GAdmintools
* Calamares
* APT (software)
* RPM Package Manager
* ZYpp

==References==
==External links==
* YaST on GitHub
* YaST at openSUSE
* SUSE Linux Enterprise Administration Guide – contains many YaST usage examples
* YaST, AutoYast and ZENworks Linux Management
* YAST for Fedora?
* Project: Yast - oss.oracle.com
* YaST4Debian Project website </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q432424" start="0" end="4" title="YaST" label="YaST"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714261" start="6" end="17" title="Yet another" label="Yet another"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="41" end="57" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781447" start="68" end="81" title="computer configuration" label="configuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q16691" start="113" end="121" title="openSUSE" label="openSUSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q131669" start="122" end="140" title="Linux distribution" label="Linux distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16691" start="156" end="160" title="SUSE Linux" label="SUSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530090" start="233" end="245" title="United Linux" label="United Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="657" end="670" title="free software" label="free software"/>
<link wikidata="Q16691" start="676" end="680" title="SUSE Linux" label="SUSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="710" end="713" title="GNU General Public License" label="GPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="947" end="971" title="Graphical user interface" label="Graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q184752" start="982" end="1007" title="Text-based user interface" label="Text-based user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q310974" start="1020" end="1027" title="ncurses" label="ncurses"/>
<link wikidata="Q518900" start="1349" end="1353" title="X.Org Server" label="Xorg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823191" start="1454" end="1458" title="ZYpp" label="ZYpp"/>
<link wikidata="Q189464" start="2051" end="2054" title="GTK" label="GTK"/>
<link wikidata="Q161053" start="2499" end="2524" title="Ruby (programming language)" label="Ruby programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q891055" start="2951" end="2959" title="Package (package management system)" label="packages"/>
<link wikidata="Q257506" start="2961" end="2969" title="Shutdown (computing)" label="shutdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709148" start="2973" end="2979" title="Reboot (computing)" label="reboot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1220872" start="3072" end="3080" title="Service (systems architecture)" label="services"/>
<link wikidata="Q308980" start="3084" end="3091" title="Daemon (computing)" label="daemons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715973" start="3372" end="3378" title="Debian" label="Debian"/>
<link wikidata="Q576322" start="3671" end="3677" title="Webmin" label="Webmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28709823" start="3694" end="3703" title="Calamares (software)" label="Calamares"/>
<link wikidata="Q230724" start="3706" end="3720" title="APT (software)" label="APT (software)"/>
<link wikidata="Q492650" start="3723" end="3742" title="RPM Package Manager" label="RPM Package Manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823191" start="3745" end="3749" title="ZYpp" label="ZYpp"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58384" wikidata="Q253438" url="?curid=58384" title="Jumper">
<text>Jumper or Jumpers may refer to:
==Clothing==
*Jumper (sweater), is a long-sleeve article of clothing; also called a top, pullover, or sweater
**A waist-length top garment of dense wool, part of the Royal Navy uniform and the uniform of the United States Navy
**In Australian English, a sporting jersey or guernsey
*Jumper (dress) (U.S. English; known elsewhere as a &quot;pinafore dress&quot;), a sleeveless dress intended to be worn over a top or blouse
*Jumpsuit - one piece outfit

==People==
* Betty Mae Tiger Jumper (1923–2011), first female chief of the Seminole Tribe of Florida
* Hunter Jumper (born 1989), American soccer player
* John Jumper (Seminole chief) (1820–1896), principal chief of the Seminoles from 1849 to 1865
* John P. Jumper (born 1945), former Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force
* William Jumper (1660–1715), Royal Navy officer
* Jimmy J. Jumper (1923-1979), Airforce Major General and father of General John P. Jumper 

==Arts, media, and entertainment==
* &quot;Jumper&quot; (novel), a novel by Steven Gould
** &quot;Jumper&quot; (2008 film), a 2008 film adaptation of the novel
** , a video game based on the film
** , a novel based on the film
* &quot;Jumper&quot; (1991 film), a pornographic film
* &quot;Jumpers&quot; (play), a play by Tom Stoppard
* &quot;Jumpers&quot;, an episode of the television series &quot;Zoboomafoo&quot;
* Jumpers (&quot;Wild Cards&quot;), characters in the &quot;Wild Cards&quot; series of books
* Jumper (short story), a short story by Stephen King

===Music===
* Jumper (band), a Swedish pop group 1996-2001
* &quot;Jumper&quot; (Third Eye Blind song), 1998
* &quot;Jumper&quot; (Hardwell and W&amp;W song), 2013
* &quot;Jumper&quot;, by Capsule from &quot;More! More! More!&quot;, 2008
* &quot;Jumper&quot;, by Cravity from &quot;Hideout: Remember Who We Are - Season 1,&quot; 2020
*&quot;Jumper&quot;, by Rudimental from &quot;Ground Control&quot;, 2021
* &quot;Jumpers&quot;, by Sleater-Kinney from &quot;The Woods&quot;, 2005

==Computers and software==
* Jumper (computing), an electrical connector
* Jumper 2.0, open source collaborative enterprise search software

==Electronics==
* Jumper (BEAM), in BEAM robotics, a robot that moves by jumping
* Jump wire (also known as jumper, jumper wire, jumper cable, DuPont wire or cable)

==Religious groups==
* Jumpers, members of the Welsh Methodist Revival

==Sports==
* Jump shot (basketball)
* Show jumper, a type of equestrian competition, or the horses that compete in same
* Jumper, a person who participates in parachuting

==Other meanings==
* Jumper (person), a person who kills themself by jumping from a height
* Jumper ant, venomous ant of Australian temperate regions
* Citroën Jumper, a French van
* IAI JUMPER, a self-contained missile launcher system
* A common name for jumping spiders

==See also==
* Jumper cable (disambiguation)
* Jumpertown, Mississippi, a town, United States</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q253438" start="0" end="6" title="Jumper" label="Jumper"/>
<link wikidata="Q253438" start="10" end="17" title="Jumper" label="Jumpers"/>
<link wikidata="Q232191" start="46" end="62" title="Jumper (sweater)" label="Jumper (sweater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374565" start="198" end="216" title="Royal Navy uniform" label="Royal Navy uniform"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="225" end="258" title="Uniforms of the United States Navy#Service Dress" label="uniform of the United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687904" start="295" end="301" title="jersey_(clothing)" label="jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q28429540" start="305" end="313" title="guernsey (Australian rules football)" label="guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479458" start="315" end="329" title="Jumper (dress)" label="Jumper (dress)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16472452" start="456" end="464" title="Jumpsuit" label="Jumpsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898915" start="498" end="520" title="Betty Mae Tiger Jumper" label="Betty Mae Tiger Jumper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944427" start="588" end="601" title="Hunter Jumper" label="Hunter Jumper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242326" start="640" end="668" title="John Jumper (Seminole chief)" label="John Jumper (Seminole chief)"/>
<link wikidata="Q911264" start="735" end="749" title="John P. Jumper" label="John P. Jumper"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013810" start="818" end="832" title="William Jumper" label="William Jumper"/>
<link wikidata="Q131274164" start="867" end="882" title="Jimmy J. Jumper" label="Jimmy J. Jumper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045974" start="995" end="1021" title="Jumper (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Jumper&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q541079" start="1050" end="1080" title="Jumper (2008 film)" label="&amp;quot;Jumper&amp;quot; (2008 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16237782" start="1187" end="1217" title="Jumper (1991 film)" label="&amp;quot;Jumper&amp;quot; (1991 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6311242" start="1241" end="1267" title="Jumpers (play)" label="&amp;quot;Jumpers&amp;quot; (play)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109770" start="1357" end="1367" title="Zoboomafoo" label="Zoboomafoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604121" start="1376" end="1408" title="Jumpers (Wild Cards)" label="Jumpers (&amp;quot;Wild Cards&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q115804430" start="1469" end="1489" title="Jumper (short story)" label="Jumper (short story)"/>
<link wikidata="Q39829" start="1508" end="1520" title="Stephen King" label="Stephen King"/>
<link wikidata="Q10541335" start="1536" end="1549" title="Jumper (band)" label="Jumper (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071039" start="1583" end="1624" title="Jumper (Third Eye Blind song)" label="&amp;quot;Jumper&amp;quot; (Third Eye Blind song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q39070959" start="1633" end="1679" title="Jumper (Hardwell and W&amp;amp;W song)" label="&amp;quot;Jumper&amp;quot; (Hardwell and W&amp;amp;W song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323870" start="1730" end="1747" title="More! More! More! (Capsule album)" label="More! More! More!"/>
<link wikidata="Q90628571" start="1785" end="1792" title="Cravity" label="Cravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q108582266" start="1902" end="1916" title="Ground Control (album)" label="Ground Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311214" start="1981" end="1990" title="The Woods (album)" label="The Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q872157" start="2033" end="2051" title="Jumper (computing)" label="Jumper (computing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4779410" start="2079" end="2089" title="Jumper 2.0" label="Jumper 2.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q545834" start="2163" end="2176" title="Jumper (BEAM)" label="Jumper (BEAM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6311222" start="2228" end="2237" title="Jump wire" label="Jump wire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2358" end="2381" title="Welsh Methodist revival#Jumpers" label="Welsh Methodist Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q838913" start="2396" end="2418" title="Jump shot (basketball)" label="Jump shot (basketball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q211773" start="2421" end="2432" title="Show jumper" label="Show jumper"/>
<link wikidata="Q193210" start="2542" end="2553" title="parachuting" label="parachuting"/>
<link wikidata="Q796006" start="2576" end="2591" title="Jumper (person)" label="Jumper (person)"/>
<link wikidata="Q138636" start="2648" end="2658" title="Jumper ant" label="Jumper ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141520" start="2707" end="2721" title="Citroën Jumper" label="Citroën Jumper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897263" start="2738" end="2748" title="IAI JUMPER" label="IAI JUMPER"/>
<link wikidata="Q11687" start="2811" end="2825" title="jumping spider" label="jumping spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q6311239" start="2843" end="2872" title="Jumper cable (disambiguation)" label="Jumper cable (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q798660" start="2875" end="2898" title="Jumpertown, Mississippi" label="Jumpertown, Mississippi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58386" wikidata="Q6121926" url="?curid=58386" title="Jaffas">
<text>Jaffas are an Australian–New Zealand registered trademark for a small round confectionery consisting of a solid, orange-flavoured chocolate centre with a hard covering of a red confectionery shell. The name derives from the Jaffa orange. Jaffas are part of both Australiana and Kiwiana.

James Stedman-Henderson&#x27;s Sweets Ltd., under their brand Sweetacres, released Jaffas onto the Australian and New Zealand markets in 1931. The confectionery is currently made in Australia by Allen&#x27;s lollies, a division of Nestlé and in New Zealand by RJ&#x27;s Confectionery in Levin.

A number of Australian and New Zealand amateur sporting groups use &quot;Jaffa&quot; as a team name. In Dunedin, New Zealand, every year a vast quantity of Jaffas is raced down Baldwin Street – the world&#x27;s steepest residential street, according to the &quot;Guinness World Records&quot; – as part of the Cadbury Chocolate carnival, which is held in conjunction with the New Zealand International Science Festival. The initial number of 20,000 Jaffas has now been increased to 30,000 Jaffas. Similarly, &quot;rolling Jaffas down the aisle&quot; at the movie theatre is also a piece of Australian and New Zealand folklore, to the point that it was included in advertising in the 1970s.

The Australian supermarket business Coles has a generic version called &quot;Choc Orange Balls&quot;; similar products are made by other manufacturers.

==See also==
* Jaffa Cakes

==References==
==External links==

* Chocolate Carnival</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6121926" start="0" end="6" title="Jaffas" label="Jaffas"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="48" end="57" title="trademark" label="trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159627" start="76" end="89" title="confectionery" label="confectionery"/>
<link wikidata="Q195" start="130" end="139" title="chocolate" label="chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159627" start="177" end="190" title="confectionery" label="confectionery"/>
<link wikidata="Q115167" start="224" end="236" title="Jaffa orange" label="Jaffa orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825240" start="262" end="273" title="Australiana" label="Australiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744000" start="278" end="285" title="Kiwiana" label="Kiwiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732020" start="483" end="495" title="Allen&amp;#x27;s (confectionery)" label="Allen&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q160746" start="519" end="525" title="Nestlé" label="Nestlé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821910" start="575" end="580" title="Levin, New Zealand" label="Levin"/>
<link wikidata="Q133073" start="687" end="694" title="Dunedin" label="Dunedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q804877" start="760" end="774" title="Baldwin Street, Dunedin" label="Baldwin Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="846" end="868" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015455" start="958" end="1000" title="New Zealand International Science Festival" label="New Zealand International Science Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108172" start="1309" end="1314" title="Coles Supermarkets" label="Coles"/>
<link wikidata="Q29330" start="1441" end="1452" title="Jaffa Cakes" label="Jaffa Cakes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58387" wikidata="Q359247" url="?curid=58387" title="Dreamland">
<text>Dreamland or Dream Land may refer to:
==Arts, entertainment and media==
===Film===
* &quot;Dreamland&quot; (2006 film), an American drama
* &quot;Dreamland&quot; (2007 film), an American science fiction film
* &quot;Dreamland&quot; (2009 film), an Icelandic documentary
* &quot;Dreamland&quot; (2016 film), an American comedy-drama 
* &quot;Dreamland&quot; (2019 American film), an American drama thriller film with Finn Cole and Margot Robbie
* &quot;Dreamland&quot; (2019 Canadian film), a Canadian fantasy film directed by Bruce McDonald
* &quot;&quot;, a 2021 American documentary film

===Television===
* &quot;Dreamland&quot; (TV series), a 2023 British comedy television series
* &quot;Utopia&quot; (Australian TV series), a 2014 comedy renamed &quot;Dreamland&quot; for non-Australian audiences
* &quot;Dreamland&quot; (&quot;Doctor Who&quot;), a 2009 animated serial based on &quot;Doctor Who&quot;
* &quot;Dreamland&quot; (&quot;The X-Files&quot;), a 1998 sixth-season episode 
* &quot;Dreamland&quot;, the title of season 8 of &quot;Archer&quot;

===Gaming===
* &quot;Kirby&#x27;s Dream Land&quot;, a 1992 video game

===Literature===
* &quot;Dreamland&quot; (Baker novel), a 1999 historical novel by Kevin Baker
* &quot;Dreamland&quot; (Dessen novel), a 2000 teen novel by Sarah Dessen
* &quot;Dreamland&quot;, a book series by Dale Brown, and the title of the first book
* &quot;Dreamland&quot;, a novel series by Jody Lynn Nye
* &quot;Dreamland&quot;, an 1882 poem by Lewis Carroll
* &quot;Dream-Land&quot;, an 1844 poem by Edgar Allan Poe
* &quot;&quot;, a 2006 non-fiction book by Andri Snær Magnason
* &quot;&quot;, a 2015 non-fiction book by Sam Quinones
* Dreamlands, a fictional location in the work of H. P. Lovecraft

===Music===
====Albums====
* &quot;Dreamland&quot; (Aztec Camera album), 1993
* &quot;Dreamland&quot; (Beat Circus album), 2008
* &quot;Dreamland&quot; (Black Box album), 1990
* &quot;Dreamland&quot; (Glass Animals album), 2020
* &quot;Dreamland&quot; (Amos Lee album), 2022
* &quot;Dreamland&quot; (Robert Miles album), 1996
* &quot;Dreamland&quot; (Joni Mitchell album), 2004
* &quot;Dreamland&quot; (Madeleine Peyroux album), 1996
* &quot;Dreamland&quot; (Robert Plant album), 2002
* &quot;Dreamland&quot; (Wild Belle album), 2016
* &quot;Dreamland&quot; (Yellowjackets album), 1995
* &quot;Dreamland&quot;, a 2010 album by Brent Spiner and Maude Maggart
* &quot;Dreamland&quot;, a 2020 album by COIN
* &quot;Dreamland&quot;, a 2004 album by Dale Watson

====Songs====
* &quot;Dreamland&quot; (Bennie K song), 2005 
* &quot;Dreamland&quot; (Pet Shop Boys song), 2019 
* &quot;Dreamland&quot;, a 1992 song by The B-52s from the album &quot;Good Stuff&quot;
* &quot;Dreamland&quot;, a 2004 song by Bruce Hornsby from the album &quot;Halcyon Days&quot;
* &quot;Dreamland&quot;, a 1998 song by HammerFall from the album &quot;Legacy of Kings&quot;
* &quot;Dreamland&quot;, a 1976 song by Roger McGuinn from the album &quot;Cardiff Rose&quot;
* &quot;Dreamland&quot;, a 1977 song by Joni Mitchell from the album &quot;Don Juan&#x27;s Reckless Daughter&quot;
* &quot;Dreamland&quot;, a 2011 song by Lillix
* &quot;Dreamland&quot;, a 2009 song by Émilie Simon
* &quot;Dream Land&quot;, a 2013 song by Perfume from &quot;Level3&quot;

==Places==
===Amusement parks===
* Dreamland (Coney Island, 1904), in Brooklyn, New York, United States
* Dreamland (Coney Island, 2009), in Brooklyn, New York, United States
* Dreamland (Melbourne amusement park), in Australia
* Dreamland Margate, in Kent, United Kingdom
* Dream Land Isfahan, in Iran
* Nara Dreamland, near Nara, Japan
* Seabreeze Amusement Park in Rochester, New York, United States, known as Dreamland from the 1940s to the 1970s
* Yokohama Dreamland, in Yokohama, Japan

===Other places===
* Dreamland, Michigan, United States
* Dreamland (Egypt), a private urban development
* Dreamland (Fallujah, Iraq), a former U.S. military base 
* Dreamland Ballroom, a music venue in Omaha, Nebraska, United States
* Dreamland Beach, in Bali, Indonesia
* Dreamland Rink, an entertainment venue in San Francisco
* Area 51, also known as Dreamland, a United States Air Force facility in Nevada 

==Other uses==
* Dreamland Bar-B-Que, a chain of restaurants in Alabama and Georgia, U.S.
* Dreamland Recording Studios, in Hurley, New York, U.S.

==See also==
* Dreamworld (disambiguation)
* Graceland (disambiguation)
* Dreamlanders, the cast and crew of regulars whom John Waters has used in his films
* &quot;The Dreamland Chronicles&quot;, fantasy webcomic and comic book series
* Dreamland Egypt Classic, a former tennis tour series</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q359247" start="0" end="9" title="Dreamland" label="Dreamland"/>
<link wikidata="Q359247" start="13" end="23" title="Dreamland" label="Dream Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428139" start="85" end="118" title="Dreamland (2006 film)" label="&amp;quot;Dreamland&amp;quot; (2006 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306644" start="140" end="173" title="Dreamland (2007 film)" label="&amp;quot;Dreamland&amp;quot; (2007 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767095" start="210" end="243" title="Dreamland (2009 film)" label="&amp;quot;Dreamland&amp;quot; (2009 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25136772" start="272" end="305" title="Dreamland (2016 film)" label="&amp;quot;Dreamland&amp;quot; (2016 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q57524639" start="335" end="377" title="Dreamland (2019 American film)" label="&amp;quot;Dreamland&amp;quot; (2019 American film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q107065152" start="446" end="488" title="Dreamland (2019 Canadian film)" label="&amp;quot;Dreamland&amp;quot; (2019 Canadian film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q115481652" start="610" end="643" title="Dreamland (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Dreamland&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18166956" start="687" end="728" title="Utopia (Australian TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Utopia&amp;quot; (Australian TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039282" start="805" end="851" title="Dreamland (Doctor Who)" label="&amp;quot;Dreamland&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Doctor Who&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15704257" start="910" end="957" title="Dreamland (The X-Files)" label="&amp;quot;Dreamland&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;The X-Files&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q29044313" start="1026" end="1056" title="Archer (season 8)" label="season 8 of &amp;quot;Archer&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154044" start="1079" end="1102" title="Kirby&amp;#x27;s Dream Land" label="Kirby&amp;#x27;s Dream Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306651" start="1148" end="1183" title="Dreamland (Baker novel)" label="&amp;quot;Dreamland&amp;quot; (Baker novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306655" start="1226" end="1262" title="Dreamland (Dessen novel)" label="&amp;quot;Dreamland&amp;quot; (Dessen novel)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1340" end="1350" title="Dale Brown#Dreamland series" label="Dale Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6208106" start="1427" end="1440" title="Jody Lynn Nye" label="Jody Lynn Nye"/>
<link wikidata="Q38082" start="1482" end="1495" title="Lewis Carroll" label="Lewis Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1530" end="1553" title="Poems by Edgar Allan Poe#Dream-Land (1844)" label="poem by Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271327" start="1675" end="1685" title="Dreamlands" label="Dreamlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306645" start="1769" end="1811" title="Dreamland (Aztec Camera album)" label="&amp;quot;Dreamland&amp;quot; (Aztec Camera album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306647" start="1820" end="1861" title="Dreamland (Beat Circus album)" label="&amp;quot;Dreamland&amp;quot; (Beat Circus album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15839407" start="1870" end="1909" title="Dreamland (Black Box album)" label="&amp;quot;Dreamland&amp;quot; (Black Box album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q98279558" start="1918" end="1961" title="Dreamland (Glass Animals album)" label="&amp;quot;Dreamland&amp;quot; (Glass Animals album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q123045330" start="1970" end="2008" title="Dreamland (Amos Lee album)" label="&amp;quot;Dreamland&amp;quot; (Amos Lee album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933829" start="2017" end="2059" title="Dreamland (Robert Miles album)" label="&amp;quot;Dreamland&amp;quot; (Robert Miles album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3715245" start="2068" end="2111" title="Dreamland (Joni Mitchell album)" label="&amp;quot;Dreamland&amp;quot; (Joni Mitchell album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039287" start="2120" end="2167" title="Dreamland (Madeleine Peyroux album)" label="&amp;quot;Dreamland&amp;quot; (Madeleine Peyroux album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q608495" start="2176" end="2218" title="Dreamland (Robert Plant album)" label="&amp;quot;Dreamland&amp;quot; (Robert Plant album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090168" start="2227" end="2267" title="Dreamland (Wild Belle album)" label="&amp;quot;Dreamland&amp;quot; (Wild Belle album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039280" start="2276" end="2319" title="Dreamland (Yellowjackets album)" label="&amp;quot;Dreamland&amp;quot; (Yellowjackets album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q311453" start="2367" end="2379" title="Brent Spiner" label="Brent Spiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792305" start="2384" end="2397" title="Maude Maggart" label="Maude Maggart"/>
<link wikidata="Q28452455" start="2439" end="2443" title="Coin (band)" label="COIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157870" start="2485" end="2496" title="Dale Watson (singer)" label="Dale Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197219" start="2514" end="2551" title="Dreamland (Bennie K song)" label="&amp;quot;Dreamland&amp;quot; (Bennie K song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85757681" start="2561" end="2603" title="Dreamland (Pet Shop Boys song)" label="&amp;quot;Dreamland&amp;quot; (Pet Shop Boys song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582974" start="2682" end="2692" title="Good Stuff" label="Good Stuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641201" start="2774" end="2786" title="Halcyon Days (Bruce Hornsby album)" label="Halcyon Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352070" start="2865" end="2880" title="Legacy of Kings" label="Legacy of Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038458" start="2962" end="2974" title="Cardiff Rose" label="Cardiff Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256386" start="3056" end="3089" title="Don Juan&amp;#x27;s Reckless Daughter" label="Don Juan&amp;#x27;s Reckless Daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591737" start="3136" end="3142" title="Lillix" label="Lillix"/>
<link wikidata="Q234737" start="3183" end="3195" title="Émilie Simon" label="Émilie Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14645678" start="3256" end="3262" title="Level3 (Perfume album)" label="Level3"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039284" start="3305" end="3335" title="Dreamland (Coney Island, 1904)" label="Dreamland (Coney Island, 1904)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30716992" start="3376" end="3406" title="Dreamland (Coney Island, 2009)" label="Dreamland (Coney Island, 2009)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306652" start="3447" end="3483" title="Dreamland (Melbourne amusement park)" label="Dreamland (Melbourne amusement park)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039291" start="3500" end="3517" title="Dreamland Margate" label="Dreamland Margate"/>
<link wikidata="Q100809514" start="3545" end="3563" title="Dream Land Isfahan" label="Dream Land Isfahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139847" start="3575" end="3589" title="Nara Dreamland" label="Nara Dreamland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440208" start="3610" end="3634" title="Seabreeze Amusement Park" label="Seabreeze Amusement Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054626" start="3723" end="3741" title="Yokohama Dreamland" label="Yokohama Dreamland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306640" start="3784" end="3803" title="Dreamland, Michigan" label="Dreamland, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306649" start="3821" end="3838" title="Dreamland (Egypt)" label="Dreamland (Egypt)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306650" start="3870" end="3896" title="Dreamland (Fallujah, Iraq)" label="Dreamland (Fallujah, Iraq)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16855131" start="3929" end="3947" title="Dreamland Ballroom" label="Dreamland Ballroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4261865" start="3999" end="4014" title="Dreamland Beach" label="Dreamland Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423180" start="4037" end="4051" title="Dreamland Rink" label="Dreamland Rink"/>
<link wikidata="Q177397" start="4095" end="4102" title="Area 51" label="Area 51"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306656" start="4193" end="4212" title="Dreamland Bar-B-Que" label="Dreamland Bar-B-Que"/>
<link wikidata="Q30672035" start="4268" end="4295" title="Dreamland Recording Studios" label="Dreamland Recording Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306805" start="4339" end="4366" title="Dreamworld (disambiguation)" label="Dreamworld (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q422861" start="4369" end="4395" title="Graceland (disambiguation)" label="Graceland (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883076" start="4398" end="4410" title="Dreamlanders" label="Dreamlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730982" start="4489" end="4513" title="The Dreamland Chronicles" label="The Dreamland Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322369" start="4562" end="4585" title="Dreamland Egypt Classic" label="Dreamland Egypt Classic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58388" wikidata="Q5454368" url="?curid=58388" title="Fis phenomenon">
<text>The fis phenomenon is a phenomenon during a child&#x27;s language acquisition that demonstrates that perception of phonemes occurs earlier than a child&#x27;s ability to produce the appropriate allophone. It is also illustrative of a larger theme in child language acquisition: that skills in linguistic comprehension generally precede corresponding skills in linguistic production. The name comes from an incident reported in 1960 by J. Berko and R. Brown, in which a child referred to his inflatable plastic fish as a &quot;fis&quot;. However, when adults asked him, &quot;Is this your &quot;fis&quot;?&quot; he rejected the statement. When he was asked, &quot;Is this your fish?&quot; he responded, &quot;Yes, my fis.&quot; This shows that although the child could not produce the phoneme /ʃ/, he could perceive it as being different from the phoneme /s/. In some cases, the sounds produced by the child are actually acoustically different, but not significantly enough for others to distinguish since the language in question does not make such contrasts.

== Occurrences in ASL ==
Researchers saw the Fis Phenomenon occur while doing research on Juli, a toddler who speaks ASL. The observers had seen it occur with her use of the word for &#x27;water&#x27; when Juli was outside holding rocks in her hand and speaking to the observer through a window. Juli produced the sign [ix-rock water ix-loc(hose)] with the &quot;20&quot; handshape error for &quot;water&quot;. The observer saw what Juli had signed, thinking that Juli wanted to eat the rocks in her hand and commented to Juli that she could not eat the rocks. As soon as Juli saw that the observer had interpreted her signing attempt of &#x27;water&#x27; being the sign for &#x27;food/eat&#x27; she corrected herself and repeated her sign with the &#x27;W&#x27; handshape which signaled &#x27;water&#x27;. The adult then realized what Juli meant and asked if what she meant was that she wanted to use the water hose and Juli nodded.

== Language acquisition ==
All languages can be deconstructed into smaller elements, they are considered levels of languages that are divided into: The Phonological System, the Reference System, the Morphological System, and the Syntactic System. The Phonological System correlates to the different stages that a child acquires language. The acquisition process begins at birth, the brain begins to specialize in the sounds heard around them and begin to produce vowel-like sounds. This is the cooing stage. The babbling stage, six to 11 months, is when consonants like /m/ and /b/ are combined with vowels, m&quot;a-ma-ma ba-ba-ba&quot;. The next two stages are the one word stage, 12 to 18 months, and two word stage, 18 months to two years of age. At around two years, the child enters the telegraphic stage, where they learn to put multiple words together. Note that researchers can only estimate the ages in which a child transitions through the stages. This is due to many varying factors when the child is acquiring language, like mental capability, the right language environment, exposure to language, and more.

The Phonological System is broken up into two different categories, perception and production. As the child goes through the stage of acquiring the language, perception and production is being developed in the brain. The Fis Phenomenon occurs due to lack of production ability by the kid, though the child perceives the sound to be correct. The relation between perception, production and the Fis Phenomenon is discussed below.

=== Perception ===
The phonological performance of children is predominantly consistent and predictable, leading to the generally accepted notion that their performance is governed by a set of rules, and it is not a result of random deviations. These rules are used to navigate from the surface form (adult pronunciation) to child pronunciation. This idea might help explain the occurrence of things such as the Fis Phenomenon.

There is evidence to support the idea that a child manipulates isomorphic adult representations of language. This evidence stems from three areas: 1) that a child has the ability to recognize disparities in the adult form that the child is unable to produce 2) that the child understands their own speech and 3) their grammatical and morphological tendencies.

The role of perception in the phonological performance of children is that their lexical representation of the adult form is first passed through the child&#x27;s perceptual filter. Meaning that the adult pronunciation, or surface form, is not necessarily the form that is being affected by the child&#x27;s phonological rules. There is a clear difference between the adult form and the child&#x27;s mental representation. Barton (1976) tested this hypothesis and the results largely supported it, though there were later requests for a “perceptual explanation”.

The most notable example, shown below, illustrates the perception of consonant clusters compared to the child&#x27;s output. Clusters consisting of [+nasal] followed by a [+voice] or [-voice] consonant are perceived differently by children.

mend → mɛn meant → mɛt

The nasal before consonant[+voice] is long and notable (mend)

The nasal before consonant[-voice] is indistinct, leaving the following consonant as the most notable of the cluster.

The child&#x27;s mental representation is then converted by a small set of rules called Realization Rules, which are used to reach the final form, the child&#x27;s pronunciation. An example of the implementation of Realization Rules is informally illustrated in the sample derivation below, where a child consistently produced &quot;squat&quot; as &quot;[gɔp]&quot;:

/skwɒt/ → [skwɔp] (harmonizing a coronal to a preceding labialized sequence /kw/)

[skwɔp] → [kwɔp] (deleting pre-consonantal /s/)

[kwɔp] → [kɔp] (deleting post-consonantal sonorants)

[kɔp] → [gɔp] (neutralizing the voicing distinction)

=== Production ===
Although children seem to be able to recognize the correct pronunciation of “fish”, they can only produce an /s/, meaning that they are left saying “fis” instead. Since the problem doesn&#x27;t seem to be speech perception, experts believe that the problem is associated with mostly the coordination of speech muscles, leaving them to think that these children&#x27;s speech muscles need practice. One way that experts encourage the practice of speech production in children are by word/phrase repetition. In this case, it&#x27;ll be helpful to practice words that contain the /ʃ/ sound in “fish”.

== Experiments and studies ==
=== Covert contrast as a stage in the acquisition of phonetics and phonology ===
Scoobie et al. in 1996 looked into the notion of child perception and how they acquire their speech as well as how children contrast minimal pairs. Used Children with phonological disorders and focused on /s/ initial-stop clusters for their acquisition of them.

=== Invariant order of phonological development ===
In a 1941 study by Roman Jakobson, he hypothesized that children who speak English basically follow a phonological order when acquiring their language&#x27;s feature distinctions. Stating that children can&#x27;t fully acquire some distinctions unless some were learned previously. In a 1948 study, Schvachkin hypothesized that Russian-speaking children develop phonetic distinctions in an invariant order. A table is then shown where the “hushing” vs “hissing” sibilants were second to last on the order of acquisition. Given that children are still refining and working on their phonetic production skills, it might be the case that these features are not produced accurately because previous ones still need work.

=== Juliette Blevins and claims ===
Juliette Blevins claimed that children can perceive both their own use of the language minimal pairs along with the adult usages. Though the child may believe that the subtle differences in their use of the minimal pair can be perceived by the adult, because the child themselves can recognize the differences.

== See also ==
* Language acquisition
* Phonological development
* Speech disorder
* Speech–language pathology
* Wug test

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5454368" start="4" end="18" title="Fis phenomenon" label="fis phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q815859" start="57" end="77" title="language acquisition" label="language acquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="115" end="122" title="phoneme" label="phoneme"/>
<link wikidata="Q146863" start="194" end="203" title="allophone" label="allophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451195" start="293" end="317" title="Language comprehension" label="linguistic comprehension"/>
<link wikidata="Q463837" start="360" end="381" title="Language production" label="linguistic production"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350253" start="435" end="443" title="Jean Berko Gleason" label="J. Berko"/>
<link wikidata="Q13574025" start="448" end="456" title="Roger Brown (psychologist)" label="R. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q815859" start="8084" end="8104" title="Language acquisition" label="Language acquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187288" start="8107" end="8131" title="Phonological development" label="Phonological development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282114" start="8134" end="8149" title="Speech disorder" label="Speech disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q33226" start="8152" end="8177" title="Speech–language pathology" label="Speech–language pathology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350253" start="8180" end="8188" title="Wug test" label="Wug test"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58394" wikidata="Q1557936" url="?curid=58394" title="Narconon">
<text>Narconon International (commonly known as Narconon) is a Scientology organization which promotes the theories of founder L. Ron Hubbard regarding substance abuse treatment and addiction. Its parent company is the Association for Better Living and Education (ABLE), which is owned and controlled by the Church of Scientology. Headquartered in Hollywood, California, United States, Narconon operates several dozen residential centers worldwide, chiefly in the U.S. and western Europe. The organization was formed in 1966 by Scientologist William Benitez with Hubbard&#x27;s help, and was incorporated in 1970.

The Scientology organization and Narconon state that Narconon is a secular program independent of Hubbard&#x27;s writings about Scientology, and that it provides legitimate drug education and rehabilitation. The organization has been described by many government reports and former patients as a Scientology front group.

Hubbard&#x27;s writings, which underlie the program, assert that drugs and their metabolites are stored in the body&#x27;s fatty tissue, causing the addict&#x27;s cravings when partially released later on, and can be flushed out through a regimen known as Purification Rundown, which involves exercise, sauna and intake of high doses of vitamins. This hypothesis is contradicted by experimental evidence, and is not medically accepted. There are no independently recognized studies that confirm the efficacy of the Narconon program.

The program has garnered considerable controversy as a result of its origins in Scientology and its methods. Its drug rehabilitation treatment has been described as &quot;medically unsafe&quot;, &quot;quackery&quot; and &quot;medical fraud&quot;, while academic and medical experts have dismissed its educational program as containing &quot;factual errors in basic concepts such as physical and mental effects, addiction and even spelling&quot;. Narconon&#x27;s facilities have been the location of several deaths, some of which have been linked to a lack of trained medical personnel on site.

==History==

===Origins===

Narconon was established 19 February 1966 as a drug rehabilitation program based on the book &quot;&quot; by L. Ron Hubbard, the creator of Scientology, and was first delivered to drug abusers in the Arizona prison system. The name &quot;Narconon&quot; originally referred not to an organization but to the program.

Narconon&#x27;s creator was William C. Benitez, a former Arizona prison inmate who had served time for narcotics offenses. His work was supported by Hubbard, and in 1970 Hubbard sponsored the incorporation of Narconon as an organization. The organization was co-founded by Benitez and two Scientologists, Henning Heldt and Arthur Maren.

Even before Narconon became established, Scientology and Dianetics were promoted as providing a cure for drug addiction. In 1970, the Rev. John W. Elliot, senior minister of the Church of Scientology and chairman of its Drug Abuse Prevention team, announced that &quot;Dianetic Counseling&quot; had &quot;completely cured 30 out of 30 people&quot; who came to Scientology for help. Rev. Elliott also reported that Dianetics could cure hay fever, asthma and arthritis.

In the early days of Narconon, no distinction was made between Scientology&#x27;s &quot;religious&quot; and &quot;secular&quot; branches; Narconon was considered by Scientologists to be an example of Scientology in action. &quot;Narconon, with the Scientology program, is another example of the workability of Dianetics and Scientology&quot;, said an adherent in 1970. &quot;The program has been expanded and is used in all Scientology churches and missions&quot;.

The Narconon website reports that the keynote of Narconon is that the “...individual is responsible for his own condition and that anyone can improve his condition if he is given a workable way to do so... man is basically good and it is pain, suffering, and loss that lead him astray&quot;. It positions the program as an approach to rehabilitation without recourse to alternative drugs. This early program did not, however, deal directly with withdrawal symptoms. In 1973, the Narconon program adopted procedures to include drug-free withdrawal.

===21st century===
A number of Scientologist celebrities have publicly attested that Narconon was helpful in their own lives. Musician Nicky Hopkins and actress Kirstie Alley have credited Narconon for their recovery from addiction to drugs and alcohol. Alley subsequently became a public spokesperson for Narconon. Elsewhere, the New York Rescue Workers Detoxification Project has used Hubbard&#x27;s sauna detoxification regimen in an effort to improve the health of rescue workers exposed to toxic substances from 9/11, although the results are disputed. Toxicologist Dr Ronald E. Gots described the Narconon / Purification Rundown program in a 1987 report on its use by California firefighters:

In 2004 and 2005, &quot;WISE at Work&quot; magazine and &quot;International Scientology News&quot; each published articles clarifying the relationship between Narconon and Scientology; each placed Narconon in Scientology&#x27;s &quot;Division 6B&quot;, with responsibility for introducing the public to Scientology services.

By the end of 2005, according to the International Association of Scientologists (IAS), Narconon was operating 183 rehabilitation centers around the world. New centers opened that year included in Hastings, East Sussex, England (now closed), and in Battle Creek, Michigan. Narconon President Clark Carr asserted that drug prevention lectures &quot;have been given to over 2 million children and adults over several decades... and are currently being delivered across the United States, all New England States, Washington D.C., Georgia, Florida, Oklahoma and surrounding states, Michigan and Illinois, Texas, New Mexico, Idaho, California, Nevada, Hawaii and possibly others&quot; in response to an inquiry from &quot;The Humanist.&quot;

On 17 July 2006, the Narconon center in Trois-Rivières, Quebec, Canada, started a website at Narcodex.ca. Narcodex was a wiki purported to contain drug information. The domain name of Narcodex.ca was owned by ABLE Canada, a Scientology subsidiary. The funding for the website came entirely from Narconon Trois-Rivières, which also controlled the content on the site. The center was closed by the local health authorities in 2012.

In July 2013, Narconon proposed to acquire the 150 acre Hockley, Ontario, estate of Donald Blenkarn, who had died the previous year. Narconon planned to convert the estate into a rehabilitation center for alcohol and other drug use, but drew widespread opposition from residents who were opposed to the presence of a rehab center, and to the presence of Narconon and Scientology specifically. The Blenkarn family ultimately chose to sell to an unidentified person within the community for below the asking price, and rejected a counter-offer from Narconon.

In January 2014, Narconon instituted a Hubbard-based detoxification program in Annapolis, Maryland, to treat veterans suffering from war-related conditions. The treatments were funded by the Department of Defense through a September 2010 grant for $633,677 given to University of Albany, where David O. Carpenter serves as the director of the school&#x27;s Institute for Health and the Environment and is the program&#x27;s chief investigator. As of December 2014, seven Gulf War veterans completed the program. It was administered on a seven-day-per-week schedule, with the regimen being completed in 33 days. The program&#x27;s purpose was to discover whether Hubbard&#x27;s program has a scientific basis for therapy and whether it was effective in reducing symptoms and improving the functional status of veterans whose physical pain and anxiety improved upon completion of the program. Carpenter affirmed that the program was effective in his own treatment.

==Narconon and Scientology==


Narconon&#x27;s affiliation with the Church of Scientology has made the program a focus of controversy. The organization has never denied that many of its administrators are committed Scientologists or that its methods are based on the teachings of L. Ron Hubbard.

In its early days, Narconon used unaltered Scientology materials in its courses, and Scientology executives ran the organization; founders Heldt and Maren were high-ranking members of the Church&#x27;s public-relations department known as the Guardian&#x27;s Office (GO). In April 1970, Scientology spokesman Max Prudente described Narconon as &quot;based solely on the philosophy and tenets of Scientology&quot;, claiming an 85% success rate.

However, as Narconon promoted its drug treatment services to a variety of governmental jurisdictions within the U.S., the organization repeatedly found itself at the center of controversy when its ties to Scientology were raised by journalists or politicians. Such ties raised questions about the constitutional appropriateness of governmental bodies sponsoring a religiously affiliated organization (see &quot;Lemon v. Kurtzman&quot;). These problems were further intensified by claims that the program was medically unsound and served as a fundraising and recruitment program for Scientology.

By the late 1970s, Scientology was keen to disavow its connection with Narconon. When the FBI raided Scientology offices on 8 July 1977, papers seized revealed that Scientologists were instructed to refer to Narconon and other &quot;front groups&quot; using code names:

In 1994, John Wood, the head of Narconon UK, denied any connection between Narconon and Scientology, saying, &quot;I know beyond doubt that Narconon does not recruit for nor promote the Church of Scientology&quot;, despite the final stage in Narconon&#x27;s process for patients at that time being &quot;Route to nearest Org (Scientology organisation) for further services&quot;, but by 2001 Scientology spokesman Graeme Wilson was describing Narconon as Scientology&#x27;s &quot;affiliate charity&quot;.

A March 1998 &quot;Boston Herald&quot; series exposed how two Scientology-linked groups, Narconon and the World Literacy Crusade, used anti-drug and learn-to-read programs to gain access to public schools without disclosing their Scientology ties. Heber Jentzsch, president of the Church of Scientology International, who said in an interview that the Purification Rundown saved his life, confirmed after the &quot;Herald&quot; report was published that Scientology&#x27;s Los Angeles law firm had hired private investigators to look into the personal life of &quot;Herald&quot; reporter Joseph Mallia, who wrote the series. The &quot;Herald&quot; noted numerous other instances over the years where reporters were harassed with &quot;noisy investigations&quot; after writing stories exposing Scientology.

In Montreal, Narconon employees describe themselves as &quot;FSM&#x27;s&quot;, a Scientology abbreviation for Field Staff Member, while in Georgia a memo released under court order showed Narconon executive director Mary Rieser reporting directly to Scientology&#x27;s Office of Special Affairs (OSA) as well as to parent organization ABLE.

==Drug rehabilitation program==
Since its establishment, Narconon has faced considerable controversy over the safety and effectiveness of its rehabilitation methods and the organization&#x27;s links to Scientology. Medical professionals have been sharply critical of Narconon&#x27;s methods, which rely on theories of drug metabolism that are not supported by mainstream toxicology. Narconon teaches that drugs reside in body fat, and remain there indefinitely; and that to recover from drug abuse, addicts can remove the drugs from their fat through saunas and use of vitamins. Experts disagree with this basic understanding of physiology, saying that no significant amount of drugs are stored in fat, and that drugs can&#x27;t be &quot;sweated out&quot; as Narconon claims. In one 2005 report, experts stated that Narconon&#x27;s treatment methods &quot;does not reflect accurate, widely accepted medical and scientific evidence.&quot; Particular criticism has been directed at the therapy&#x27;s use of vitamins (including massive doses of niacin) and extended sauna sessions.

David Root, an occupational medicine practitioner and a member of the Narconon Scientific Advisory Board, defended the program&#x27;s validity. He told the &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot; in 1991 that drugs and other poisons &quot;come out through the skin in the form of sebaceous, or fatty, sweat. The material is frequently visible and drips, or is rubbed off on towels&quot;. This apparently explains the need for &quot;daily doses of vitamins, minerals, and oils, including niacin&quot;.

Narconon&#x27;s &quot;New Life Program&quot; consists of two principal stages: detoxification and rehabilitation. The program, adapted from Hubbard&#x27;s Purification Rundown, consists of six elements: exercise, sauna, supplements, sufficient liquids, regular diet with fresh vegetables, and adequate sleep.

According to Narconon spokesman John Bitinas, there are more than 200 beds at Narconon Arrowhead, the program&#x27;s flagship center in Pittsburg County, Oklahoma. Asked whether medications are used to help patients going through withdrawal, he said that, &quot;Narconon is drug-free, meaning we do not use substitute drugs as part of our rehabilitation process.&quot; All patients are assessed at enrollment to determine whether they are &quot;psychiatrically or medically qualified for the level of care we offer here. If they are found to need a higher level of care then Narconon is qualified to offer at that time, they are referred to a more appropriate facility.&quot; If patients require medications to treat physical conditions like diabetes or infections, those medications are prescribed by the Narconon physician, who is part-time but available on-call on a 24-hour basis, according to Bitinas. Each U.S. patient spends an average of three to four months at Narconon, for a fee that ranges from $10,000 to around $30,000.

===Overview===

The Narconon detoxification program is based on Hubbard&#x27;s theory that &quot;small amounts of drugs [and their metabolites] stored in fat cells are released at a later time causing the person to re-experience the drug effect and desire to use again.&quot; According to Narconon, exercise helps to release toxins from body fat as fat deposits are burned for energy, while concurrently releasing chemicals via sweating, sebum (produced by the skin&#x27;s sebaceous glands), and regular bowel movements.

Narconon is not a medical model. The program rejects the disease model of addiction, and its literature has described the terminology used by that model as being disempowering to patients.

The Narconon program follows the &quot;social education&quot; model of drug rehabilitation. The program is four to six months long and includes a regimen of detoxification that includes &quot;aerobic exercise, dry-sauna sweating, hydration and nutrition supplements; life skills trainings; and personalized plans for after-graduation living.&quot; The main premise of the detoxification regimen is that &quot;the activation of drug residuals stored in the body can elicit drug cravings in the former drug user thus tempting relapse. The Narconon detoxification regimen is designed to eliminate drug residues from drug users&#x27; bodies and thus reduce the cravings that may be caused by these residues.&quot;

Experts from mainstream medicine and toxicology have repeatedly argued that Hubbard&#x27;s method has no validity: &quot;one may from a pharmacological point of view strongly question the idea of using enforced sweating to expel drugs from the body&quot;, said Professor Folke Sjoqvist in a 1996 report for the Swedish government, while an Oklahoma Board of Mental Health report from 1990 states that, &quot;Although minute quantities of some drugs may be found in sweat the amount represents a small fraction of drug elimination&quot;. In a deposition concerning the death of Patrick Desmond at Narconon Georgia, expert witness Louis A. Casal was questioned by plaintiff&#x27;s attorney Jeff Harris:
Narconon asserts that methadone, amphetamines, methamphetamines, morphine, copper, mercury, and other toxins, some consumed years earlier, leave the body by means of sweating. This contrasts with the view of the body&#x27;s drug retention taken by mainstream science, which has found that most recreational drugs leave the body within a few days (with the exception of cannabis, which in the case of frequent use can remain in the body for up to a month).

===Niacin===

According to Narconon, vitamin and mineral supplements are needed to address nutritional deficiencies and offset nutrient loss due to sweating. Other key elements in the program are the use of niacin, which Hubbard believed to increase free fatty acid mobilization, and the inclusion of polyunsaturated fats that he thought to increase the excretion rate of some toxin compounds. Together with a proper amount of sleep, this regime is thought by Narconon to mobilize and eliminate long-term stored toxins.

Narconon&#x27;s &quot;drug bomb&quot; includes a niacin dose of 4000 mg/day. The risk to patients of taking high-dose niacin is one reason why medical experts assessing the Narconon program have found that it is a danger to patients; the program has been banned in a number of jurisdictions including Quebec and France as a result.

Because Narconon doctrines dictate that patients undergoing its program exhibit physical symptoms relating to the drugs that are (supposedly) being &quot;sweated out,&quot; and because Narconon&#x27;s staff are not medically qualified or typically qualified in orthodox drug rehabilitation, there is a risk that serious medical symptoms—from niacin overdose or from other causes—may be misinterpreted by Narconon staff as the desirable effects of detoxification:

===Training routines===
The remainder of the Narconon course uses Scientology&#x27;s &quot;Training Routines&quot; or &quot;TRs&quot;. They were originally devised by Hubbard to teach communications skills to Scientologists. In the Narconon variant, these courses claim to be designed to rehabilitate drug abusers. These routines sometimes include TR 8, which involves the individual commanding an ashtray to &quot;stand up&quot; and &quot;sit down&quot;, and thanking it for doing so, as loudly as they can. Former Scientologists say that the purpose of the drill is for the individual to &quot;beam&quot; their &quot;intention&quot; into the ashtray to make it move.

===Efficacy===

Narconon typically claims success rates as high as 75% of the graduates of its program remaining drug-free for the rest of their lives, and has in the past claimed &quot;very close to a 100% success rate&quot;. However, these numbers are highly controversial, and there exist no independent studies that support these claims.

Independent researchers have found considerably lower rates of success. At least one website critical of Narconon cites a Swedish research study that gives a rate of 6.6%. Narconon has reported the same study&#x27;s findings as being much more favorable, although its representation of the study is greatly simplified.

The Church of Scientology claims that &quot;the Narconon success rate is not merely the world&#x27;s highest, it is four times better than international averages&quot;, while a systematic review of evidence regarding Narconon&#x27;s efficacy conducted by the Norwegian Knowledge Centre for the Health Services on behalf of the Norwegian Directorate of Health concluded that:

In April 2014, the town council of Wyong, New South Wales, Australia refused permission for Narconon to open a new centre at nearby Yarramalong, saying that the program&#x27;s method of treatment was a factor in the decision. Wyong Mayor Doug Eaton said:

==Education program==

===Florida===
In 1999, Scientologists from Clearwater, Florida, tried to get a Narconon drug education program instituted into the Pinellas County school district curriculum. After a hearing on the matter, a school district committee refused to allow students to participate in an anti-drug program based on Hubbard&#x27;s teachings, citing that teaching students about the &quot;tone scale&quot; and other trappings of Scientology was inappropriate for a drug education program for their schools.

===California===
In 2004, Narconon offered an anti-drug program to public schools in California, free of charge. However, a series of articles in the &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot; in June 2004, resulted in California school officials investigating Narconon&#x27;s claims. The study found that Narconon&#x27;s program did not reflect medically and scientifically based practices and that it offered students misleading information about drug use and abuse. As a result of the investigation, on 23 February 2005, the state&#x27;s superintendent of public instruction, Jack O&#x27;Connell, officially recommended that all schools in the state reject the Narconon program. O&#x27;Connell&#x27;s secretary announced that the school systems in Los Angeles and San Francisco had dropped the program. The president of Narconon, Clark Carr, responded that the study presented only limited information about his organization&#x27;s work, and that those efforts were &quot;accurate and relevant to the current challenges children face with drugs.&quot;

A May 2014 investigation by the &quot;Chronicle&quot; discovered that some California schools were still using the Narconon program, in spite of the 2004 decision. Steve Heilig, one of the experts who evaluated the Narconon education program on behalf of the school district and found it to be scientifically unsound, urged schools to check the accreditation of drug education programs before allowing them access to students, saying, &quot;One imperative of drug education is that we not deceive students, as once they discover that you are not telling them factual information, they are likely to disbelieve everything you say&quot;.

===United Kingdom===
The UK prisons ombudsman recommended to prison governors that Narconon rehabilitation programs not be used in prisons although some schools in the UK are using these programs; &quot;The Sunday Times&quot; said this was because schools are less aware of Narconon&#x27;s links to Scientology. In September 2012, the 149 Church of England schools in the Diocese of London were warned not to accept offers from Narconon to give lectures to their pupils, following complaints from parents.

In November 2016, Narconon was reported to have given talks on the dangers of drug addiction in two schools in Camden, London. Elizabeth Kitcatt, Camden School for Girls headteacher, said in a statement that the students found the talk &quot;very useful&quot;, while Harry Shapiro, Director of DrugWise, called out the schools for being unaware to the group&#x27;s ties to Scientology. A Brecknock Primary spokeswoman said: &quot;The school&#x27;s deputy head was in the room for the whole drug awareness talk and at no point was there any mention of Scientology or any religious connotations. It was marketed as an anti-drug talk and that&#x27;s exactly what it was&quot;. President of Narconon UK Noel Nile claimed that the group was &quot;in the business of saving lives&quot;.

===Cecchini/Lennox study===
In 2008, Narconon executive Marie Cecchini published, with Richard Lennox, a paper that claimed to show that the Narconon educational program reduced drug use among youths. However, the study was funded by Narconon&#x27;s parent organisation, ABLE, and subsequent correspondence in the same journal asserted that the study&#x27;s conclusions were contradicted by its own data: that the control group &quot;were more likely to resist pressures to take drugs&quot; than the Narconon group.

==Deaths==

===Jocelyne Dorfmann, Grancey-sur-Ource, France (1984)===
In 1984, a 34-year-old French woman named Jocelyne Dorfmann died from an untreated epilepsy seizure while undergoing treatment at a Narconon center in Grancey-sur-Ource (near Dijon). The assistant-director of that center was convicted of lack of assistance to a person in danger. The Narconon center was closed. Medical experts reported that her death was caused by &quot;an epileptic seizure due to the absence of sufficient treatment at its beginning and of emergency treatment during the seizure&quot;. Narconon staff failed to call for medical assistance, as a result of which Dorfmann died.

=== X del Pozo, Cercedilla, Spain (1985) ===

In 1985, a young man surnamed Del Pozo, a native of Ceuta, injected himself with an overdose of heroin while he was in Narconon Cercedilla, in the Community of Madrid. He was taken by ambulance to the hospital, where he died. The El Escorial Court opened an investigation, but ended up closing the case for lack of evidence and testimonies to clarify the incident.

===Paride Ella and Giuseppe Tomba, Valsassina, Italy (1995)===
In 1995, two young men, Paride Ella (22) and Giuseppe Tomba (26), died suddenly at the Narconon centre in Taceno, Province of Lecco, Italy. Ella died of acute kidney failure (symptoms consistent with a niacin overdose), while the recorded cause of death for Giuseppe Tomba was heart attack. Both patients suffered similar symptoms, namely vomiting and diarrhea, for days before their deaths. The young men died within a few days of one another, in the so-called &quot;detoxification&quot; stage of the Narconon program.

The Narconon centre had no medical staff and was unable in either case to diagnose the seriousness of their condition. Before the deaths, Taceno&#x27;s mayor had asked for the Narconon centre to be closed.

===Federica X, Torre dell&#x27;Orso, Italy (2002)===
In 2002, a 33-year-old Italian patient identified as &quot;Federica X&quot;, from , died from peritonitis, according to her autopsy. She first began to suffer from stomach pains on Monday 7 October, and was driven to a first aid station where she was given painkillers. Federica was driven to hospital the following evening, where she died soon after being admitted in a coma.

Narconon patient Giovanni Costa later stabbed staff member Rodolfo Savino, whom Costa claimed had ignored Federica&#x27;s symptoms and had given her insufficient medical aid. Costa was arrested and charged with attempted murder.

===Patrick Desmond, Norcross, Georgia, United States (2008)===
Patrick W. &quot;Ricko&quot; Desmond, a former member of the United States Marine Corps, died at Narconon Georgia on 11 June 2008, aged 28, from a heroin overdose. Desmond&#x27;s family alleged wrongful death and filed a lawsuit against Narconon, claiming that their actions led to his death and that Narconon falsely claimed to be a licensed inpatient program.

WSB-TV in Atlanta reported that:

Desmond&#x27;s family paid Narconon $30,000 for his treatment. Narconon Georgia director Mary Rieser commented to a reporter:

The lawsuit between Narconon Georgia and the Desmond family was settled out of court in February 2013, three days before jury selection was scheduled to begin. The settlement followed harsh sanctions against Narconon by the trial judge Stacey K. Hydrick, who said in a court order that Narconon Georgia had:

 and that it had: 

Judge Hydrick withdrew Narconon&#x27;s response to the Desmond family&#x27;s allegations, meaning that if the case had not been settled then the family&#x27;s claims would essentially have gone unopposed by Narconon.

Narconon International denied that it had any connection with Narconon Georgia, although documents disclosed in the Patrick case showed that Narconon Georgia&#x27;s executive director, Mary Rieser, reported to Narconon International, Scientology&#x27;s Office of Special Affairs, and to ABLE, describing in her reports the evening of Patrick&#x27;s death:
===John Cunningham, Watsonville, California, United States (2015)===
In July 2015, John Cunningham, a 58-year-old Boeing employee addicted to benzodiazepines, was sent by his sister to Redwood Cliffs, a Narconon facility in Watsonville, California. The staff at Redwood Cliffs sent Cunningham to be detoxed to Bright Futures Recovery, which removed Cunningham from medications he was taking for depression. Cunningham was sent to the &quot;local ER three times in just five days for withdrawal symptoms&quot;. On 22 August 2015, he was left alone in his room long enough for him to &quot;hang himself by a belt in his bedroom closet&quot;. Cunningham&#x27;s sister did not know that Narconon was a Scientology outfit until after her brother&#x27;s death.

Represented by attorney H. Gavin Long, Cunningham&#x27;s family sued Redwood Cliffs and Bright Futures Recovery for $1 million each. The rehabilitation centers countered with an offer of &quot;$100,000 and $350,000, respectively&quot;. The family refused and took the case to a jury in Santa Cruz. After a twelve-day trial where Narconon tried to argue that they had not referred Cunningham to Bright Futures Recovery, the jury awarded the family $11 million. According to journalist Tony Ortega, it was very rare for the case to go to a jury, and since this court case, &quot;Scientology cut ties with its Northern California Narconon network, and the Redwood Cliffs facility has closed. But Narconon is still on the hook for its share of the verdict&quot;.

===Deaths at Narconon Arrowhead, Oklahoma, United States (2009–2012)===
In August 2012, Pittsburg County sheriffs and the Oklahoma Department of Mental Health (ODMHSAS), along with the Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation (OSBI), began an investigation of deaths at Narconon Arrowhead following the deaths of three patients in a period of nine months.

The investigation included the recent deaths of four patients: Stacy Dawn Murphy, aged 20, who died at Narconon Arrowhead on 19 July 2012; Hillary Holten, 21, who was found dead at the facility on 11 April 2012; and 32-year-old Gabriel Graves, who died at the facility on 26 October 2011. The investigation later expanded to cover the death of 28-year-old Kaysie Dianne Werninck, who died at Narconon Arrowhead on 3 March 2009.

Following media attention surrounding the deaths, the National Association of Forensic Counselors (NAFC) permanently revoked the Certified Chemical Dependency Counseling certification of several Narconon Arrowhead employees, including director Gary Smith. In August 2013, the ODMHSAS permanently revoked the facility&#x27;s permit for medical detoxification after Narconon had exhausted all avenues for protesting the decision.

In August 2013, Inspector General Kim Poff and investigator Michael DeLong, both of the ODMHSAS, who had been investigating the deaths at Narconon Arrowhead, had their employment terminated. No reason was given for the termination, but the investigators&#x27; attorney later claimed that the two were wrongfully fired, saying: &quot;Their termination, in part, relates to the Narconon investigation&quot;.

==== Kaysie Dianne Werninck (2009) ====
Kaysie Dianne Werninck died at Narconon Arrowhead on 3 March 2009. Her parents filed a lawsuit against the center claiming her death was &quot;a result of the defendant&#x27;s gross negligence&quot;. The case was settled.

==== Gabriel Graves (2011) ====
Gabriel Graves, who died at the facility in October 2011, was the subject of an open records request made to the ODMHSAS by the &quot;Tulsa World&quot; newspaper, which revealed reports of use and distribution of drugs at the facility. Graves&#x27; autopsy recorded his cause of death as &quot;unknown&quot;.

==== Hillary Holten (2012) ====
Hillary Holten died on April 11, 2012. Her parents filed a lawsuit against Narconon Arrowhead, and alleged Hillary had died due to lack of medical care. Their lawsuit states that she &quot;had a history of Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia, a condition that required the daily administration of Dexamethasone and in extreme circumstances, an injection of liquid cortisone&quot;, and that Narconon Arrowhead did not properly manage her condition. Gary Smith of Narconon refrained from comment, adding that &quot;there are federal rights to privacy laws which prohibit us from discussing anything about former clients.&quot;

==== Stacy Dawn Murphy (2012) ====
Stacy Dawn Murphy died on July 20, 2012 at Narconon Arrowhead. Stacy&#x27;s father said Narconon officials told him that, when his daughter was found dead alone in the &quot;detox&quot; room, she had not been checked on for two and a half hours. &quot;That&#x27;s too long, if they thought she was overdosed, why didn&#x27;t they have someone with her the whole time?&quot; he said, adding, &quot;We sent her there to get better, not to die&quot;. Gary Smith responded in an email statement that, &quot;It is always deeply saddening when drug addiction takes a life or destroys a family. ... For the family the pain of losing a loved one to addiction is unimaginable.&quot;

A patient who was resident at Narconon Arrowhead at the time of Stacy&#x27;s death said, &quot;There was no doctor there, no nurse on staff. There&#x27;s nothing like that there ... The staff, they&#x27;re all former patients. ... My understanding is that everyone there is pretty much a former patient. ... The drugs that would have saved Stacy&#x27;s life were either not available or no one there knew how to administer it.&quot; Now told reporters that he feared retaliation by Narconon for talking to the police and media: &quot;I&#x27;m afraid for my life.&quot; Stacy&#x27;s roommate, Destanie Ramsey, called police on the night of her death in order to leave Narconon Arrowhead, where she claimed she was being held against her will.

====Public and media response====
Protests over the deaths took place outside Narconon Arrowhead; one protest in late June 2012, planned to include bereaved family members, was disrupted by road resurfacing works outside the facility, paid for by Narconon. Pittsburg County Commission Chairman Gene Rogers explained that, &quot;[Gary Smith] called me and said they might be having a problem with the public that weekend and he wanted help policing the area and he asked about doing overlaying [of the road]&quot;.

Oklahoma State Senator Tom Ivester commented that, &quot;Clearly something isn&#x27;t right and we have a moral obligation to do everything in our power to end this predatory business being run by the Church of Scientology disguised as drug treatment&quot;, adding, &quot;This is a disgusting business that preys on desperate family members and their sick loved ones, scamming them out of thousands of dollars with the promise of providing hope and new life. It&#x27;s a disgrace to have these people operating in the state of Oklahoma.&quot; In direct response to the Arrowhead deaths, Ivestor introduced legislation to expand Oklahoma&#x27;s ability to regulate rehab facilities.

In response to an NBC &quot;Rock Center&quot; segment on the facility, Narconon President Clark Carr called its criticism of Narconon &quot;bigoted&quot; and described the program as addicts&#x27; &quot;last chance for a decent, honest, drug-free life&quot;.

==Controversies==
===State code violations===
Narconon facilities in California have been cited repeatedly for violations by state inspectors. Violations included administering medication without authorization, having alcohol on the premises, and not having proper bedding for patients. Narconon has also attempted to silence opposition, including sending letters to neighbors of a proposed facility in Leona Valley threatening legal action for criticism. Residents had been concerned that Narconon would increase crime. The local town council recommended an eight-foot security fence and independent security, which was objected to by Narconon officials.

=== Narconon Chilocco licensing problems ===

Narconon began operations in Oklahoma in 1990, as an unlicensed facility on the site of the Chilocco Indian Agricultural School near the town of Newkirk, claiming that it did not require a state license as it was operating on an Indian reservation. In 1992 Narconon applied for a state licence, and was twice refused by the ODMHSAS, which found &quot;no evidence that drug and alcohol abuse education was part of the program&quot; and declared the program &quot;not medically safe&quot;, a decision to which Narconon spokesperson Kirstie Alley responded, &quot;The arrogance and irresponsibility of the mental health board will not survive the outrage of the many thousands of parents, graduates and supporters from the scientific community&quot;.

Between 1989 and 1992, Narconon, through Scientology attorney Tim Bowles, filed lawsuits against the ODMHSAS; its members; and local newspaper editor Robert Lobsinger, who had written about Narconon&#x27;s Scientology connection. Narconon contacted the Mayor of Newkirk&#x27;s 12-year-old son at a library, and hired private detectives to research Narconon&#x27;s opponents, leading residents to fear retribution if they spoke out against the organization. A Narconon spokesman quoted by &quot;The New York Times&quot; described Narconon&#x27;s critics in Newkirk as &quot;in favor of drug abuse... They&#x27;re either connected to selling drugs or they&#x27;re using drugs.&quot;

Narconon achieved exemption from the requirement for state licensing in 1992, as a result of approval from the Commission on Accreditation of Rehabilitation Facilities. Scientology leader David Miscavige commented on the case in an interview with ABC News &quot;Nightline&quot;, saying, &quot;There are a group of people on this planet who find us to be a threat to their existence, and they will do everything in their power to stop us. And that is the mental health field. I didn&#x27;t pick a war with them.&quot;

In 2012, a paid advert in the &quot;Oklahoma Gazette&quot; contained allegations from a previously unknown group named &quot;Oklahomans for the preservation of homeland security and american values, (ohsav)&quot; . The advert referred to recent TV news stories about Narconon and Scientology, named some of Narconon&#x27;s critics in Oklahoma, and alleged those critics had &quot;subjugated [their] individuality for [their] own thirst for hatred&quot;, had an &quot;agenda of religious intolerance, racial discrimination or disdain for corporate America&quot;, and blamed them for &quot;public disinformation hate campaigns against Blacks, Jews, Muslims and Scientologists&quot;. The advertisement showed the characteristics of a dead agenting campaign.

===Investigation in Russia===
In April 2007, it was revealed that the public procurator in Moscow&#x27;s South District had begun an investigation into Narconon&#x27;s activities in Russia. The &quot;Moskovskij Komsomolets&quot; newspaper reported that legal proceedings were begun against the head of the clinic &quot;Narconon-Standard&quot; for violating bans in Russian medical practices. Russian law enforcement became interested after receiving many complaints from citizens about the high fees charged by Narconon. The Narconon office in Bolshaya Tulskaya St. was searched, and documents and unidentified medications were seized. One year later, as part of an investigation in Ulyanovsk into the Church of Scientology, police searched a Narconon office in the town of Dimitrovgrad.

===Narconon Trois-Rivières closed by Quebec health authorities===

On 17 April 2012, Quebec health officials ordered the Narconon facility in Trois-Rivières to close, and to relocate its 32 residents. After an investigation into Narconon Trois-Rivières&#x27; activities by the Centre Québécois d’Agrément (CQA), an independent body that monitors the quality of healthcare, the Mauricie Region&#x27;s Health and Social Services Agency decided not to re-certify Narconon due to concerns that its methods &quot;may represent a risk to health&quot; of patients.

The Agency&#x27;s director, Marc Latour, said that Narconon Trois-Rivières was dangerous for patients, that it violated many of the criteria governing rehabilitation centres in Quebec, and that there was no medical supervision and no scientific basis to its treatment. He added that at least four clients had been hospitalized in recent months because of methods used at the centre. Narconon Trois-Rivières issued a response, saying, &quot;People with drug problems and their families should have a right to choose the program that works for them as these days there are many good alternative programs&quot;.

The closure followed a two-year campaign by ex-Narconon patient and staff member David Love, whose negative experiences with the program prompted him to become one of its fiercest critics in Canada. While he was at Narconon Trois-Rivieres, Love reports that:

Love is one of five former Narconon patients who have filed a complaint with Quebec&#x27;s Human Rights Commission, alleging that their drug addiction was exploited by Narconon, which recruited them into the program and made them perform manual labour while taking part in it. Love also alleges that Narconon Trois-Rivieres earned around $16 million for Scientology between its opening in 2005 and its forced closure in 2012.

Narconon President Clark Carr stated that the facility closed because the province changed its stance on &quot;what kind of drug rehabilitation it would tolerate&quot; to &quot;strictly medical, drug substitution, and so forth&quot;. Narconon was informed that it had to reacquire a license, but would only be approved if its method of treatment was changed.

===Pur Detox suicide attempt===
In September 2012, Pur Detox, a Narconon offshoot, was sued in Orange County, California, for negligence, medical malpractice, and negligent supervision. William Sweeney, the plaintiff, &quot;suffered severe personal injuries&quot; after a suicide attempt, jumping from a third floor balcony at the clinic, in Dana Point. Sweeney&#x27;s complaint alleges that he was taken off his prescribed psychiatric medication at the facility, and that it was this which led to his suicide attempt.

===Arrest of Heber Jentzsch===
In December 1988, the president of the Church of Scientology International, Heber Jentzsch, was arrested in Spain after an investigation into Narconon that resulted in (later dropped) allegations that he and Scientology were defrauding Spanish citizens and running its centers with unqualified staff. The judge in the case said at a news conference after the arrests that the only god of Scientology was money, and compared the church to a pyramid scheme in which members pay increasing sums of money. The judge said that Narconon swindled its clients and lured them into Scientology. By the end of 1991, the Spanish court found there was no evidence to support prosecutors&#x27; allegations that drug rehabilitation and other programs sponsored by Scientology in Spain amounted to illicit gatherings aimed at activities such as fraud. In April 2002, the charge was formally dropped. The court also ordered that the bail bond deposited for Jentzsch&#x27;s release in 1988 be returned to Scientology along with interest, which nearly doubled the original amount.

===Slatkin fraud===
On 8 November 2006, the Associated Press reported that Narconon was one of the Scientology groups that would pay back a total of $3.5 million of illegal funds from EarthLink co-founder Reed Slatkin:

===Head of Narconon deported from Kazakhstan===
In July 2008, the head of Narconon in Kazakhstan was deported: Kazakh Justice Minister Zagipa Baliyeva announced that &quot;foreigners from the USA, Georgia, South Korea and Japan have been deported from the country by law-enforcement agencies and in line with court rulings for violating the rules regarding the stay of foreigners and carrying out missionary activities without registration. In particular, with a further ban on entering Kazakhstan for five years, the head of the Narconon public foundation affiliated with the Church of Scientology has been deported,&quot; adding, &quot;27 cases were uncovered where heads of non-traditional religious organizations violated the law on the freedom of conscience and religious organizations; in particular, materials propagating radical ideas and teachings of non-traditional religions were seized from them&quot;.

===Accusation of website graphics design/layout plagiarism===
In January 2001, Narconon came under fire when they appeared to plagiarize the entire layout and site design of the webzine Urban75.com for their websites heroinaddiction.com and cocaineaddiction.com, among others. The editor of Urban75 posted up comparisons of the copying, showing that Narconon had not even removed Urban75&#x27;s hidden JavaScript code, unique to Urban75. &quot;The Register&quot; noted the irony of this scandal, quoting a critic who wrote, &quot;Scientology has sued countless individuals and organizations putatively [sic] for &#x27;copyright violation&#x27; and the organization claims loudly that they&#x27;re at the &#x27;forefront of protecting proprietary information on the Internet&#x27;.&quot;

===Narconon Georgia closed amid investigation for insurance fraud===
In April 2013, agents of the insurance commissioner of the U.S. state of Georgia and the Gwinnett County district attorney&#x27;s office searched the group&#x27;s offices in Norcross, Georgia, questioning employees as they arrived at work and impounding more than a dozen computers and boxes full of documents. The insurance commissioner said during the investigation that, &quot;We have credible information that indicates that insurance fraud is taking place with Narconon&quot;. The family of one patient said that the group was billing insurance companies for treatments that had never been given, and the doctors for whom the costs were being billed claimed never to have met the patient.

State investigators discovered nearly $3 million of insurance fraud at Narconon Georgia; in September 2013, the facility surrendered its state license in order to avoid criminal charges.

==Lawsuits==
===California===
In March 2014, attorney Ryan Hamilton filed two civil lawsuits against Narconon with the state of California.

The first civil suit was filed on behalf of Angelo Amato of Illinois, who purchased Narconon&#x27;s Purification Rundown at Narconon Fresh Start (a.k.a. Sunshine Summit Lodge) in Warner Springs, after Amato searched the Internet for drug treatment facilities and believed claims by Scientology that purported to be from an &quot;independent consultant&quot; web site. Amato claims to have been defrauded of $31,000 and began the Narconon program only to discover that it was actually Scientology being practiced, alleging that no actual drug treatment was offered at the facility.

The second civil suit was filed on behalf of plaintiffs Christie Estrada and Branden Chavez of New Mexico, who also researched &quot;drug treatment facilities&quot; on the Internet and were allegedly deceived by Narconon Fresh Start in to paying $33,000 before the Purification Rundown process could be applied, with Narconon Fresh Start allegedly asking for $23,000 of that fee up front in cash. The defendants in this case are also Narconon Fresh Start.

The core plaintiff complaints cover a spectrum of allegations of criminal misconduct by Scientology that include insurance fraud, denial that Narconon is tied to Scientology, fraudulent claims that Narconon staff were medically trained in drug treatment, and a number of other deceptive claims.

===Nevada===
In February 2014, Hamilton filed an additional civil suit against Narconon with the state of Nevada. His clients, Michael Tarr and his mother Cathy, sued Narconon Fresh Start (doing business as Rainbow Canyon Retreat) for fraud, breach of contract and negligence. The Tarrs claimed that, while residing at Narconon to treat his former heroin addiction, Michael did not receive detoxification treatment but rather indoctrination into Scientology, and asked the court to award them punitive damages as well as a refund of Narconon&#x27;s $33,000 fees and their legal expenses.

The Tarrs&#x27; civil suit followed closely behind a previous lawsuit filed by Hamilton on behalf of David, Stacy, and Jack Welch of Texas, who also allege that Narconon Fresh Start committed breach of contract, fraud, and negligence.

In April 2014, Hamilton filed another lawsuit against Narconon Nevada, this time on behalf of Harry and Lauren Geanacopulos and their son Peter. The Geanacopulos family&#x27;s complaint argues that Narconon&#x27;s programme content and success rate were misrepresented to them and that it has no genuine medical or scientific basis. Hamilton claimed to possess a Narconon internal document showing that the program was used as a &quot;bridge&quot; to introduce clients to Scientology.

===National Association of Forensic Counselors===
In May 2014, the NAFC filed a lawsuit in Oklahoma, naming Narconon, Scientology and eighty other defendants. The NAFC is a body that provides certification to drug abuse counsellors. The filing sought an injunction to prevent Narconon from using the NAFC&#x27;s trademarks, certifications or logos; it also sought punitive damages.

The filing alleged that Narconon and the other defendants conspired to:

going on to claim that Narconon:

===Oklahoma===
On 5 June 2014, one-time Narconon employee Eric Tenorio was issued a subpoena to appear before a multi-county grand jury in Oklahoma that was investigating alleged insurance fraud and credit card fraud being committed at Narconon Arrowhead. The grand jury is empowered to hand down state and federal indictments and to subpoena current and previous employees, agents, and operators of the facility.

The grand jury investigation of Narconon Arrowhead came shortly after Tenorino filed documentation with the state of Oklahoma and with the NAFC, which resulted in NAFC filing their own civil lawsuits against 82 named defendants working for Narconon.

===Colorado===
At the Scientology facility in Fort Collins, Colorado, operating under the name &quot;A Life Worth Living&quot;, there have been numerous law enforcement call-outs, medical emergencies, and other related requests for emergency services reported under a Freedom of Information Act request made available to the public on the Scribd document server, detailing numerous recorded incidents of Scientology operatives refusing to allow patents to leave, refusing to return their property, and patients making 9-1-1 calls that are interrupted by Scientology operatives.

==Spin-offs and related groups==

Narconon also operates and markets drug rehabilitation facilities under other names, partly to hide that they are part of Scientology. There are also other Scientology-affiliated drug rehabilitation groups that are based on the Purification Rundown.
* Blu by the Sea in Emerald Coast, Florida, is the name of the former Narconon Gulf Coast.
* Droganon was active in Spain in the 1980s and was controlled by the Scientology.
* Drug Free Ambassadors is a Narconon program targeting schools and youth organizations.
*Elevate Addiction Services, a group of clinics formerly operating under the name Narconon of Northern California, broke away from Narconon in 2014/2015 after an arbitration where they agreed to no longer use the sauna and vitamin method or teach Narconon/Church of Scientology programs, and would no longer be licensed by Narconon. The name was changed to Halcyon Horizons and several other entities operating under the trade name of &quot;Elevate Addiction Services&quot;. Still owned by the same Scientologists and using much of the earlier faculty, similar practices are in use.
* Fresh Start is a pseudonym sometimes used by Narconon&#x27;s facility in Nevada.
* Get Off Drugs Naturally is a business name for Narconon&#x27;s Australian branch.
* Israel Says No to Drugs is a Scientology-affiliated organization based in Jaffa, Israel.
* Pur Detox (also Pür Detox with an umlaut) is a Scientology-affiliated clinic in Dana Point, California. The clinic has come under scrutiny due to a lawsuit by one of the former patients. The Church of Scientology was not a party to the lawsuit. 
* Rainbow Canyon Rehabilitation Center, Rainbow Canyon Retreat or just Rainbow Canyon is a Narconon center in Caliente, Nevada.
* Say No to Drugs Say Yes To Life or Yes to Life, No to Drugs is a front group for Narconon and Scientology, organizing races and street festivals to support Narconon.
* Sober Living in Orange County is the Purification Rundown operated at the Orange County Scientology Org itself.
* Suncoast Rehabilitation Center is a trade name or subsidiary of Narconon Spring Hill Inc., Florida. The center has come under scrutiny from the local authorities for their patient housing. The nearby Novus Medical Detox Center, while not directly affiliated to Scientology, is operated by the landlord of the Suncoast center.
* Teen-anon or Streetcats is a Narconon program at the Narconon Vista Bay facility.
* The Truth About Drugs and Foundation for a Drug-Free World are slogans under which Scientology and Narconon advertise their programs while concealing their Scientology origins.

Though not directly linked to Narconon, the New York Rescue Workers Detoxification Project and Second Chance Program are both Scientology-affiliated and also use the Purification Rundown.

==See also==
* Association for Better Living and Education
* Clear Body, Clear Mind
* Criminon
* Scientology front groups
* New York Rescue Workers Detoxification Project
* Purification Rundown
* Second Chance Program
* Synanon

==References==
==External links==
* Narconon International
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1557936" start="0" end="22" title="Narconon" label="Narconon International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557936" start="42" end="50" title="Narconon" label="Narconon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131036" start="57" end="68" title="Scientology" label="Scientology"/>
<link wikidata="Q216896" start="121" end="135" title="L. Ron Hubbard" label="L. Ron Hubbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184856" start="146" end="161" title="substance abuse" label="substance abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260022" start="162" end="171" title="drug rehabilitation" label="treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q12029" start="176" end="185" title="addiction" label="addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q219577" start="191" end="205" title="parent company" label="parent company"/>
<link wikidata="Q444386" start="213" end="256" title="Association for Better Living and Education" label="Association for Better Living and Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820380" start="302" end="323" title="Church of Scientology" label="Church of Scientology"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="342" end="351" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="353" end="363" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324237" start="905" end="928" title="Scientology front groups" label="Scientology front group"/>
<link wikidata="Q193583" start="1054" end="1066" title="fatty tissue" label="fatty tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261246" start="1187" end="1207" title="Purification Rundown" label="Purification Rundown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468920" start="1666" end="1674" title="quackery" label="quackery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260022" start="2135" end="2154" title="drug rehabilitation" label="drug rehabilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q216896" start="2197" end="2211" title="L. Ron Hubbard" label="L. Ron Hubbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q131036" start="2228" end="2239" title="Scientology" label="Scientology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6562211" start="2288" end="2309" title="List of Arizona state prisons" label="Arizona prison system"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="2462" end="2469" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026386" start="2710" end="2723" title="Henning Heldt" label="Henning Heldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q284451" start="2800" end="2809" title="Dianetics" label="Dianetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12029" start="2848" end="2862" title="drug addiction" label="drug addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820380" start="2921" end="2942" title="Church of Scientology" label="Church of Scientology"/>
<link wikidata="Q272436" start="3178" end="3187" title="hay fever" label="hay fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="3189" end="3195" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q170990" start="3200" end="3209" title="arthritis" label="arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q498902" start="4123" end="4133" title="drug withdrawal" label="withdrawal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28348" start="4362" end="4375" title="Nicky Hopkins" label="Nicky Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q151935" start="4388" end="4401" title="Kirstie Alley" label="Kirstie Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203927" start="4558" end="4604" title="New York Rescue Workers Detoxification Project" label="New York Rescue Workers Detoxification Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="4744" end="4748" title="9/11" label="9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261246" start="4841" end="4861" title="Purification Rundown" label="Purification Rundown"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="4901" end="4911" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593724" start="4951" end="4955" title="World Institute of Scientology Enterprises" label="WISE"/>
<link wikidata="Q17068236" start="5290" end="5333" title="International Association of Scientologists" label="International Association of Scientologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q29245" start="5450" end="5458" title="Hastings" label="Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q23293" start="5460" end="5471" title="East Sussex" label="East Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="5473" end="5480" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q810998" start="5502" end="5514" title="Battle Creek" label="Battle Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="5516" end="5524" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="5743" end="5754" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="5763" end="5778" title="Washington D.C." label="Washington D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="5780" end="5787" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="5789" end="5796" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="5798" end="5806" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="5844" end="5852" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="5854" end="5859" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="5861" end="5871" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221" start="5873" end="5878" title="Idaho" label="Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="5892" end="5898" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="5900" end="5906" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q44012" start="6031" end="6045" title="Trois-Rivières" label="Trois-Rivières"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="6047" end="6053" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="6055" end="6061" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q171" start="6112" end="6116" title="wiki" label="wiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q444386" start="6200" end="6211" title="Association for Better Living and Education" label="ABLE Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859513" start="6478" end="6485" title="Hockley, Ontario" label="Hockley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="6487" end="6494" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292243" start="6506" end="6521" title="Donald Blenkarn" label="Donald Blenkarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="7059" end="7068" title="Annapolis" label="Annapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="7070" end="7078" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="7171" end="7192" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780816" start="7246" end="7266" title="University of Albany" label="University of Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="7451" end="7459" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810214" start="8484" end="8506" title="Guardian&amp;#x27;s Office" label="Guardian&amp;#x27;s Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973373" start="9097" end="9114" title="Lemon v. Kurtzman" label="Lemon v. Kurtzman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="9372" end="9375" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9376" end="9417" title="Operation Snow White#Aftermath and trial" label="raided Scientology offices on 8 July 1977"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9515" end="9527" title="Front organization#Scientology" label="front groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q590490" start="9540" end="9550" title="code names" label="code names"/>
<link wikidata="Q773802" start="10078" end="10091" title="Boston Herald" label="Boston Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035924" start="10165" end="10187" title="World Literacy Crusade" label="World Literacy Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531567" start="10307" end="10321" title="Heber Jentzsch" label="Heber Jentzsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429802" start="10794" end="10814" title="Fair game (Scientology)" label="noisy investigations"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="10869" end="10877" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810214" start="11135" end="11160" title="Office of Special Affairs" label="Office of Special Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="11531" end="11541" title="metabolism" label="metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7218" start="11579" end="11589" title="toxicology" label="toxicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q193583" start="11629" end="11637" title="body fat" label="body fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q134658" start="12251" end="12257" title="Niacin (substance)" label="niacin"/>
<link wikidata="Q139103" start="12451" end="12474" title="San Francisco Chronicle" label="San Francisco Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261246" start="12942" end="12962" title="Purification Rundown" label="Purification Rundown"/>
<link wikidata="Q219067" start="12990" end="12998" title="exercise" label="exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q495479" start="13233" end="13259" title="Pittsburg County, Oklahoma" label="Pittsburg County, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="13839" end="13847" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q407595" start="14263" end="14273" title="metabolite" label="metabolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q212328" start="14570" end="14575" title="sebum" label="sebum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282127" start="14711" end="14737" title="disease model of addiction" label="disease model of addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="15866" end="15873" title="Sweden" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260784" start="16097" end="16107" title="deposition (law)" label="deposition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16123" end="16167" title="#Patrick Desmond, Norcross, Georgia, United States (2008)" label="death of Patrick Desmond at Narconon Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q179996" start="16278" end="16287" title="methadone" label="methadone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445303" start="16289" end="16301" title="amphetamines" label="amphetamines"/>
<link wikidata="Q191924" start="16303" end="16319" title="methamphetamines" label="methamphetamines"/>
<link wikidata="Q81225" start="16321" end="16329" title="morphine" label="morphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="16331" end="16337" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="16339" end="16346" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="16625" end="16633" title="cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q134658" start="16920" end="16926" title="Niacin (substance)" label="niacin"/>
<link wikidata="Q473420" start="17290" end="17294" title="Dose (biochemistry)" label="dose"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="17546" end="17552" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505252" start="17916" end="17924" title="overdose" label="overdose"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832983" start="18122" end="18139" title="Training routines (Scientology)" label="Training Routines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504425" start="19541" end="19558" title="systematic review" label="systematic review"/>
<link wikidata="Q969447" start="19775" end="19780" title="Wyong" label="Wyong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="19782" end="19797" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="19799" end="19808" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8049529" start="19872" end="19883" title="Yarramalong, New South Wales" label="Yarramalong"/>
<link wikidata="Q244146" start="20062" end="20072" title="Clearwater, Florida" label="Clearwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="20074" end="20081" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q494556" start="20150" end="20165" title="Pinellas County, Florida" label="Pinellas County"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155179" start="20399" end="20409" title="Emotional tone scale" label="tone scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="21278" end="21291" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q169180" start="22240" end="22249" title="ombudsman" label="ombudsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q221986" start="22407" end="22423" title="The Sunday Times (UK)" label="The Sunday Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="22543" end="22560" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q202088" start="22822" end="22836" title="Camden, London" label="Camden, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="24163" end="24171" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279182" start="24172" end="24179" title="seizure" label="seizure"/>
<link wikidata="Q862962" start="24231" end="24248" title="Grancey-sur-Ource" label="Grancey-sur-Ource"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003" start="24255" end="24260" title="Dijon" label="Dijon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5823" start="24775" end="24780" title="Ceuta" label="Ceuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646215" start="24851" end="24861" title="Cercedilla" label="Cercedilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756" start="24870" end="24889" title="Community of Madrid" label="Community of Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q28471" start="24953" end="24964" title="El Escorial" label="El Escorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q42855" start="25258" end="25264" title="Taceno" label="Taceno"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199" start="25266" end="25283" title="Province of Lecco" label="Province of Lecco"/>
<link wikidata="Q424337" start="25305" end="25325" title="acute kidney failure" label="acute kidney failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="25429" end="25441" title="heart attack" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="25491" end="25499" title="vomiting" label="vomiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="25504" end="25512" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q223102" start="26027" end="26038" title="peritonitis" label="peritonitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q159557" start="26304" end="26308" title="coma" label="coma"/>
<link wikidata="Q81672" start="26522" end="26538" title="attempted murder" label="attempted murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="26665" end="26691" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="26751" end="26757" title="heroin" label="heroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038640" start="26798" end="26812" title="wrongful death" label="wrongful death"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955494" start="26967" end="26973" title="WSB-TV" label="WSB-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q167412" start="27192" end="27212" title="Settlement (litigation)" label="settled out of court"/>
<link wikidata="Q32098" start="27318" end="27327" title="sanction (law)" label="sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="28145" end="28151" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q83871" start="28173" end="28188" title="benzodiazepines" label="benzodiazepines"/>
<link wikidata="Q913543" start="28255" end="28278" title="Watsonville, California" label="Watsonville, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="28426" end="28436" title="clinical depression" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q159232" start="29073" end="29083" title="Santa Cruz, California" label="Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q16195244" start="29271" end="29282" title="Tony Ortega" label="Tony Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29652" end="29660" title="Government of Oklahoma#The County Sheriff" label="sheriffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082198" start="29669" end="29705" title="Oklahoma Department of Mental Health and Substance Abuse Services" label="Oklahoma Department of Mental Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082342" start="29732" end="29770" title="Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation" label="Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500728" start="31542" end="31562" title="Freedom of information in the United States" label="open records request"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852377" start="31596" end="31607" title="Tulsa World" label="Tulsa World"/>
<link wikidata="Q366868" start="32010" end="32040" title="congenital adrenal hyperplasia" label="Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q422252" start="32096" end="32109" title="Dexamethasone" label="Dexamethasone"/>
<link wikidata="Q423185" start="32163" end="32172" title="cortisone" label="cortisone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151775" start="34416" end="34427" title="Tom Ivester" label="Tom Ivester"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="35094" end="35097" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437746" start="35104" end="35115" title="Rock Center" label="Rock Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458863" start="35739" end="35751" title="Leona Valley, California" label="Leona Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099140" start="36131" end="36166" title="Chilocco Indian Agricultural School" label="Chilocco Indian Agricultural School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020762" start="36184" end="36191" title="Newkirk, Oklahoma" label="Newkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="36268" end="36286" title="Indian reservation" label="Indian reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q151935" start="36569" end="36582" title="Kirstie Alley" label="Kirstie Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803203" start="36850" end="36860" title="Tim Bowles (attorney)" label="Tim Bowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="37282" end="37300" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152695" start="37581" end="37637" title="Commission on Accreditation of Rehabilitation Facilities" label="Commission on Accreditation of Rehabilitation Facilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q586084" start="37658" end="37673" title="David Miscavige" label="David Miscavige"/>
<link wikidata="Q287171" start="37717" end="37725" title="ABC News (United States)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768706" start="37732" end="37741" title="Nightline" label="Nightline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082232" start="38024" end="38040" title="Oklahoma Gazette" label="Oklahoma Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433868" start="38719" end="38732" title="dead agenting" label="dead agenting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257955" start="38814" end="38831" title="public procurator" label="public procurator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062623" start="38944" end="38966" title="Moskovskij Komsomolets" label="Moskovskij Komsomolets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627" start="39427" end="39436" title="Ulyanovsk" label="Ulyanovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q135285" start="39518" end="39530" title="Dimitrovgrad, Russia" label="Dimitrovgrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q44012" start="39675" end="39689" title="Trois-Rivières" label="Trois-Rivières"/>
<link wikidata="Q510572" start="39910" end="39918" title="Mauricie" label="Mauricie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925" start="41844" end="41869" title="Orange County, California" label="Orange County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565355" start="41887" end="41906" title="medical malpractice" label="medical malpractice"/>
<link wikidata="Q852638" start="42091" end="42101" title="Dana Point, California" label="Dana Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531567" start="42376" end="42390" title="Heber Jentzsch" label="Heber Jentzsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q214242" start="42740" end="42754" title="pyramid scheme" label="pyramid scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q162351" start="43216" end="43225" title="bail bond" label="bail bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="43407" end="43423" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q919511" start="43547" end="43556" title="EarthLink" label="EarthLink"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136491" start="43568" end="43580" title="Reed Slatkin" label="Reed Slatkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="43669" end="43679" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q379693" start="43684" end="43692" title="Deportation" label="deported"/>
<link wikidata="Q4076608" start="43718" end="43733" title="Zagipa Baliyeva" label="Zagipa Baliyeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="43780" end="43787" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="43789" end="43800" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q573756" start="44324" end="44345" title="freedom of conscience" label="freedom of conscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q164666" start="44625" end="44635" title="plagiarism" label="plagiarize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249965" start="44685" end="44696" title="Urban75" label="Urban75.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="44901" end="44911" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363733" start="44943" end="44955" title="The Register" label="The Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042366" start="45385" end="45407" title="insurance commissioner" label="insurance commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q490065" start="45445" end="45460" title="Gwinnett County, Georgia" label="Gwinnett County"/>
<link wikidata="Q653368" start="45461" end="45478" title="district attorney" label="district attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581974" start="45530" end="45547" title="Norcross, Georgia" label="Norcross, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q275038" start="45599" end="45606" title="Confiscation" label="impound"/>
<link wikidata="Q838081" start="45785" end="45800" title="insurance fraud" label="insurance fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="46317" end="46330" title="civil lawsuit" label="civil lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416266" start="46559" end="46573" title="Warner Springs" label="Warner Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417728" start="47904" end="47921" title="doing business as" label="doing business as"/>
<link wikidata="Q562566" start="47957" end="47975" title="breach of contract" label="breach of contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q375159" start="48141" end="48155" title="indoctrination" label="indoctrination"/>
<link wikidata="Q285466" start="48208" end="48224" title="punitive damages" label="punitive damages"/>
<link wikidata="Q613117" start="48287" end="48301" title="Legal fees" label="legal expenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608642" start="49600" end="49608" title="subpoena" label="subpoena"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595259" start="49641" end="49651" title="Grand juries in the United States" label="grand jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873" start="49715" end="49732" title="credit card fraud" label="credit card fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q17310301" start="49831" end="49841" title="indictment" label="indictment"/>
<link wikidata="Q490732" start="50228" end="50250" title="Fort Collins, Colorado" label="Fort Collins, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50450" end="50476" title="Freedom of information laws by country#United States" label="Freedom of Information Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467888" start="50521" end="50527" title="Scribd" label="Scribd"/>
<link wikidata="Q533806" start="50700" end="50705" title="9-1-1" label="9-1-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417728" start="51729" end="51739" title="trade name" label="trade name"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="52039" end="52048" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180294" start="52134" end="52139" title="Jaffa" label="Jaffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="52141" end="52147" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q472947" start="52185" end="52191" title="Diaeresis (diacritic)" label="umlaut"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52299" end="52336" title="#Pur Detox suicide attempt" label="lawsuit by one of the former patients"/>
<link wikidata="Q749099" start="52507" end="52523" title="Caliente, Nevada" label="Caliente, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474501" start="53247" end="53279" title="Foundation for a Drug-Free World" label="Foundation for a Drug-Free World"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203927" start="53443" end="53489" title="New York Rescue Workers Detoxification Project" label="New York Rescue Workers Detoxification Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443176" start="53494" end="53515" title="Second Chance Program" label="Second Chance Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q444386" start="53603" end="53646" title="Association for Better Living and Education" label="Association for Better Living and Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130647" start="53649" end="53671" title="Clear Body, Clear Mind" label="Clear Body, Clear Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015217" start="53674" end="53682" title="Criminon" label="Criminon"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324237" start="53685" end="53709" title="Scientology front groups" label="Scientology front groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203927" start="53712" end="53758" title="New York Rescue Workers Detoxification Project" label="New York Rescue Workers Detoxification Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261246" start="53761" end="53781" title="Purification Rundown" label="Purification Rundown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443176" start="53784" end="53805" title="Second Chance Program" label="Second Chance Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375620" start="53808" end="53815" title="Synanon" label="Synanon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58397" wikidata="Q66162" url="?curid=58397" title="Thomas Szasz">
<text>Thomas Stephen Szasz ( ; ; 15 April 1920 – 8 September 2012) was a Hungarian-American academic and psychiatrist. He served for most of his career as professor of psychiatry at the State University of New York Upstate Medical University. A distinguished lifetime fellow of the American Psychiatric Association and a life member of the American Psychoanalytic Association, he was best known as a social critic of the moral and scientific foundations of psychiatry, as what he saw as the social control aims of medicine in modern society, as well as scientism.

Szasz maintained throughout his career that he was not anti-psychiatry but rather that he opposed coercive psychiatry. He was a staunch opponent of civil commitment and involuntary psychiatric treatment, but he believed in and practiced psychiatry and psychotherapy between consenting adults.

== Life and death ==

Szasz was born on April 15, 1920, in Budapest, Hungary, the second son of Jewish parents Gyula and Lily Szász. In 1938, the family moved to the United States, where he attended the University of Cincinnati for his Bachelor of Science in physics, followed by an MD. 

Szasz completed his residency requirement at the Cincinnati General Hospital, then trained as a psychoanalyst at Chicago Institute for Psychoanalysis from 1951 to 1956. He took a position as a professor at SUNY in 1956 and received tenure in 1962, taking 24 months out for duty as a practicing psychiatrist with the U.S. Naval Reserve. 

Szasz had two daughters. His wife, Rosine, died in 1971. Szasz&#x27;s colleague Jeff Schaler described her death as a suicide.

Thomas Szasz ended his own life on September 8, 2012 after suffering a painful spinal-compression fracture from a recent fall. Szasz had previously argued for the right to die in his writings.

==Career==

Thomas Szasz was a strong critic of institutional psychiatry and was a prolific writer. According to psychiatrist Tony B. Benning, there were &quot;three major themes in Szasz&#x27;s writings: his contention that there is no such thing as mental illness, his contention that individual responsibility is never compromised in those suffering from what is generally considered as mental illness, and his perennial interest in calling attention to the political nature of psychiatric diagnosis&quot;. According to Williams and Caplan, Szasz is &quot;best known for his view that without a diagnosis of neurological disease or damage, a psychiatric diagnosis was meaningless&quot;. Though his ideas had little influence on mainstream psychiatry, many were supported by some behavioral and social scientists.

Szasz first presented his attack on &quot;mental illness&quot; as a legal term in 1958 in the &quot;Columbia Law Review&quot;. In his article he argued that mental illness was no more a fact bearing on a suspect&#x27;s guilt than is possession by the devil.

His books &quot;The Myth of Mental Illness&quot; (1961) and &quot;The Manufacture of Madness&quot; (1970) set out some of the arguments most associated with him.
In 1961, Szasz testified before a United States Senate committee, arguing that using mental hospitals to incarcerate people defined as insane violated the general assumptions of the patient–doctor relationship, and turned the doctor into a warden and keeper of a prison. 

Szasz was convinced there was a metaphorical character to mental disorders, and its uses in psychiatry were frequently injurious. He set himself a task to delegitimize legitimating agencies and authorities, and what he saw as their vast powers, enforced by psychiatrists and other mental health professionals, mental health laws, mental health courts, and mental health sentences.

Szasz was a critic of the influence of modern medicine on society, which he considered to be the secularization of religion&#x27;s hold on humankind. Criticizing scientism, he targeted psychiatry in particular, underscoring its campaigns against masturbation at the end of the 19th century, its use of medical imagery and language to describe misbehavior, its reliance on involuntary mental hospitalization to protect society, and the use of lobotomy and other interventions to treat psychosis.
Szasz consistently paid attention to the power of language in the establishment and maintenance of the social order, both in small interpersonal and in wider social, economic, and/or political spheres.

== Positions ==

===Mental illness is a myth===

In Szasz&#x27;s view, people who are said to have a mental illness only have &quot;problems in living&quot;. Diagnoses of &quot;mental illness&quot; or &quot;mental disorder&quot; are passed off as scientific but are judgments (of disdain) to support certain uses of power by authorities. In that line of thinking, schizophrenia becomes not the name of a disease entity but a judgment of extreme psychiatric and social disapprobation. Szasz called schizophrenia &quot;the sacred symbol of psychiatry&quot; because those so labeled have long provided and continue to provide justification for psychiatric theories, treatments, abuses, and reforms. 

He argued that psychiatry is a pseudoscience that parodies medicine by using medical-sounding words, and that supported by the state through various Mental Health Acts, it has become a modern secular state religion. As a vastly elaborate social control system which disguises itself under the claims of being rational, systematic and therefore scientific, it constitutes a fundamental threat to freedom and dignity.

In &quot;The Myth of Mental Illness&quot; he argued that people can only play &quot;the mental illness game&quot; if their partner and those around them play a complimentary role - a situation that would later be described as codependency.

===Separate psychiatry and the state===

Szasz believed that if we accept that &quot;mental illness&quot; is a euphemism for behaviors that are disapproved of, then the state has no right to force psychiatric &quot;treatment&quot; on these individuals. Similarly, the state should not be able to interfere in mental health practices between consenting adults (for example, by legally controlling the supply of psychotropic drugs or psychiatric medication). The medicalization of government produces a &quot;therapeutic state&quot;, designating someone as, for example, &quot;insane&quot; or as a &quot;drug addict&quot;.

In &quot;Ceremonial Chemistry&quot; (1974), he argued that the same persecution that targeted witches, Jews, gypsies, and homosexuals now targets &quot;drug addicts&quot; and &quot;insane&quot; people. Szasz argued that all these categories of people were taken as scapegoats of the community in ritual ceremonies. To underscore this continuation of religion through medicine, he even takes as an example obesity: instead of concentrating on junk food (ill-nutrition), physicians denounced hypernutrition. According to Szasz, despite their scientific appearance, the diets imposed were a moral substitute to the former fasts, and the social injunction &quot;not to be overweight&quot; is to be considered as a moral order, not as scientific advice as it claims to be. As with those thought bad (insane people), and those who took the wrong drugs (drug addicts), medicine created a category for those who had the wrong weight (obesity).

Szasz argued that psychiatrics were created in the 17th century to study and control those who erred from the medical norms of social behavior; a new specialization, &quot;drogophobia&quot;, was created in the 20th century to study and control those who erred from the medical norms of drug consumption; and then, in the 1960s, another specialization, bariatrics (from the Greek βάρος &quot;baros,&quot; for &quot;weight&quot;), was created to deal with those who erred from the medical norms concerning the weight the body should have. Thus, he underscores that in 1970 the American Society of Bariatric Physicians had 30 members, and already 450 two years later.

====The therapeutic state====

The &quot;therapeutic state&quot; is a phrase coined by Szasz in 1963. The collaboration between psychiatry and government leads to what Szasz calls the &quot;therapeutic state&quot;, a system in which disapproved actions, thoughts, and emotions are repressed (&quot;cured&quot;) through pseudomedical interventions. Thus suicide, unconventional religious beliefs, racial bigotry, unhappiness, anxiety, shyness, sexual promiscuity, shoplifting, gambling, overeating, smoking, and illegal drug use are all considered symptoms or illnesses that need to be cured. When faced with demands for measures to curtail smoking in public, binge-drinking, gambling or obesity, ministers say that &quot;we must guard against charges of nanny statism.&quot; The &quot;nanny state&quot; has turned into the &quot;therapeutic state&quot; where nanny has given way to counselor. Nanny just told people what to do; counselors also tell them what to think and what to feel. The &quot;nanny state&quot; was punitive, austere, and authoritarian, the therapeutic state is touchy-feely, supportive – and even more authoritarian.

According to Szasz, &quot;the therapeutic state swallows up everything human on the seemingly rational ground that nothing falls outside the province of health and medicine, just as the theological state had swallowed up everything human on the perfectly rational ground that nothing falls outside the province of God and religion.&quot; Faced with the problem of &quot;madness&quot;, Western individualism proved to be ill-prepared to defend the rights of the individual: modern man has no more right to be a madman than medieval man had a right to be a heretic because if once people agree that they have identified the one true God, or Good, it brings about that they have to guard members and nonmembers of the group from the temptation to worship false gods or goods. A secularization of God and the medicalization of good resulted in the post-Enlightenment version of this view: once people agree that they have identified the one true reason, it brings about that they have to guard against the temptation to worship unreason – that is, madness.

Civil libertarians warn that the marriage of the state with psychiatry could have catastrophic consequences for civilization. In the same vein as the separation of church and state, Szasz believes that a solid wall must exist between psychiatry and the state.

===Abolish involuntary commitment===

Szasz made efforts to abolish involuntary psychiatric hospitalization for over two decades, and in 1970 took a part in founding the American Association for the Abolition of Involuntary Mental Hospitalization (AAAIMH). Its founding was announced by Szasz in 1971 in the &quot;American Journal of Psychiatry&quot; and &quot;American Journal of Public Health&quot;. Until it was dissolved in 1980, the association provided legal help to psychiatric patients and published a journal, &quot;The Abolitionist&quot;.

According to Williams and Caplan, &quot;Szasz&#x27;s philosophical activism was not intended to improve the treatment of people affected by mental illness as much as to block involuntary treatment.&quot; Citing Szasz&#x27;s writings, legal reforms were enacted, and all 50 US states narrowed their criteria for involuntary commitment from the prior standard of &quot;need for treatment&quot;—causing the number of patients in public psychiatric hospitals to plummet, and the homeless population to balloon. It also exponentially increased the prison population with an estimate of 40%–80% inmates with mental illness by 2006.

Three legal decisions were key:
* &quot;Lessard v. Schmidt&quot; (1972) required states to narrow their vague commitment statutes, 
* &quot;O&#x27;Connor v. Donaldson&quot; (1975) limited commitment to imminently dangerous mentally ill persons, and 
* &quot;Rennie v. Klein&quot; (1978) established the right of patients to refuse mental treatment.

===Abolish insanity defense===

Szasz advocated for the removal of the insanity defense. Just as legal systems work on the presumption that a person is innocent until proven guilty, individuals accused of crimes should not be presumed incompetent simply because a doctor or psychiatrist labels them as such. Mental incompetence should be assessed like any other form of incompetence, i.e., by purely legal and judicial means with the right of representation and appeal by the accused.

Szasz believed that testimony about the mental competence of a defendant should not be admissible in trials. Psychiatrists testifying about the mental state of an accused person&#x27;s mind have about as much business as a priest testifying about the religious state of a person&#x27;s soul in our courts. Szasz argued that the insanity defense was a legal tactic invented to circumvent the punishments of the church, which at the time included confiscation of the property of those who committed suicide, often leaving widows and orphans destitute. Only an insane person would do such a thing to his widow and children, it was successfully argued. This is legal mercy masquerading as medicine, according to Szasz.

===Right to drugs===

According to Szasz, drug addiction is not a &quot;disease&quot; to be cured through legal drugs but a social habit. Szasz also argued in favor of a free market for drugs. He criticized the war on drugs, arguing that using drugs is in fact a victimless crime. Prohibition itself constituted the crime. He argued that the war on drugs leads states to do things that would have never been considered half a century before, such as prohibiting a person from ingesting certain substances or interfering in other countries to impede the production of certain plants, e.g. coca eradication plans, or the campaigns against opium; both are traditional plants opposed by the Western world. Although Szasz was skeptical about the merits of psychotropic medications, he favored the repeal of drug prohibition.

Szasz also drew analogies between the persecution of the drug-using minority and the persecution of Jewish and homosexual minorities.

Szasz cites former U.S. Representative James M. Hanley&#x27;s reference to drug users as &quot;vermin&quot;, using &quot;the same metaphor for condemning persons who use or sell illegal drugs that the Nazis used to justify murdering Jews by poisoned gas—namely, that the persecuted persons are not human beings, but &quot;vermin.&quot;

===Right to die===

In an analogy to birth control, Szasz argued that individuals should be able to choose when to die without interference from medicine or the state, just as they are able to choose when to conceive without outside interference. He considered suicide and the right to die to be among the most fundamental rights, but he opposed state-sanctioned euthanasia. In his 2006 book about Virginia Woolf, Szasz stated that Woolf put an end to her life by a conscious and deliberate act, her suicide being an expression of her freedom of choice.

==Citizens Commission on Human Rights==

In 1969, Szasz and the Church of Scientology co-founded the Citizens Commission on Human Rights (CCHR) to oppose involuntary psychiatric treatments. Szasz served on CCHR&#x27;s Board of Advisors as Founding Commissioner. In the keynote address at the 25th anniversary of CCHR, Szasz stated, &quot;We should all honor CCHR because it is really the organization that for the first time in human history has organized a politically, socially, internationally significant voice to combat psychiatry. This has never been done in human history before.&quot; In a 2009 interview aired by the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, Szasz explained that he was an atheist and collaborated with Scientology only out of convenience, as an organization with money who were active in this cause.

==Reception==

In the summer of 2001, Szasz took part in a Russell Tribunal on human rights in psychiatry held in Berlin between June 30 and July 2, 2001, and was part of the majority verdict which claimed that there was &quot;serious abuse of human rights in psychiatry&quot; and that psychiatry was &quot;guilty of the combination of force and unaccountability&quot;.

In 2005, Robert Evan Kendell presented a critique of Szasz&#x27;s conception of disease and the contention that mental illness is &quot;mythical&quot; as presented in &quot;The Myth of Mental Illness&quot;. Kendell argued that Szasz&#x27;s conception of disease exclusively in terms of &quot;lesion&quot;, i.e. morphological abnormality, is arbitrary and unsound, and his argument that &quot;disease or illness can only affect the body&quot; was based on Cartesian dualism which is already known to be medically inaccurate.

In 2011, Szasz published an essay in recognition of the 50th anniversary of &quot;The Myth of Mental Illness&quot;, which had been delivered as a plenary address at the 2010 International Congress of the Royal College of Psychiatrists in Edinburgh. In the same issue, a response from Edward Shorter echoed Kendell&#x27;s criticism and dismissed Szasz as largely premised on a conception of mind drawn from the psychiatry of the early-mid 20th century – namely psychoanalytic psychiatry – which does not exist in the current disciplines of psychiatry or medicine. Modern psychiatry has &quot;de facto&quot; dispensed with the idea of &quot;mental illness&quot;, i.e. the notion that psychiatric disease is mainly or entirely psychogenic and is not a part of biological psychiatry. To this extent, he said, Szasz&#x27;s critique does not address contemporary biologically-oriented psychiatry, and is irrelevant.

According to Williams and Caplan (2012), Szasz mostly influenced libertarians and the anti-psychiatry movement, with resultant devastating effects on those with severe mental illness, by promoting his &quot;non-evidence based, philosophical foundation for the practice of mental health that prioritised the views and preferences of individuals with serious mental disorders above the true interests of a person not in the grip of mental illness&quot;. Considering that mental illness greatly contributes to homelessness and incarceration in the USA, they challenge whether &quot;people with serious mental disorders who are confined to these settings [are] any better off than their pre-Szaszian predecessors who once filled asylums?&quot;

===Awards===
Szasz received significant public recognition for his work, including:
* American Humanist Association Humanist of the Year (1973)
* Award for Greatest Public Service Benefiting the Disadvantaged, an award given out annually by Jefferson Awards (1974)
* an honorary doctorate in behavioral science at Universidad Francisco Marroquín (1979)
* American Psychological Association division of Humanistic Psychology &quot;Rollo May Award&quot; (1998)
* The Center for Independent Thought established the Thomas S. Szasz Award for Outstanding Contributions to the Cause of Civil Liberties

==Writings==
===Books===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* (First published in 1976 under the name: Karl Kraus and the Soul-Doctors: A Pioneer Critic and His Criticism of Psychiatry and Psychoanalysis – Louisiana State University Press, 1976.)
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

=== Selected scholarly papers ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== See also ==
* Controversies about psychiatry
* Wrongful involuntary commitment
* Scientology front groups

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Bibliography of Szasz&#x27;s writings
* Thomas Szasz Knowledge Finder
* The Writings of Thomas S. Szasz
* Inventory of Szasz papers at Syracuse University
* Thomas S. Szasz Cybercenter for Liberty and Responsibility
* 1970 video: Concepts and Controversies in Modern Medicine: Psychiatry and Law: How are They Related? pt. 1 pt. 2 Two-part video discussion of forensic psychiatry by Szasz and Bernard L. Diamond.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q66162" start="0" end="20" title="Thomas Szasz" label="Thomas Stephen Szasz"/>
<link wikidata="Q211346" start="99" end="111" title="psychiatrist" label="psychiatrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297997" start="180" end="235" title="State University of New York Upstate Medical University" label="State University of New York Upstate Medical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q466524" start="276" end="308" title="American Psychiatric Association" label="American Psychiatric Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843014" start="334" end="369" title="American Psychoanalytic Association" label="American Psychoanalytic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508663" start="394" end="407" title="social critic" label="social critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="451" end="461" title="psychiatry" label="psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q623971" start="485" end="499" title="social control" label="social control"/>
<link wikidata="Q193626" start="547" end="556" title="scientism" label="scientism"/>
<link wikidata="Q582667" start="614" end="629" title="anti-psychiatry" label="anti-psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q694381" start="707" end="723" title="civil commitment" label="civil commitment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="912" end="920" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q153265" start="1056" end="1080" title="University of Cincinnati" label="University of Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895268" start="1191" end="1218" title="Cincinnati General Hospital" label="Cincinnati General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095658" start="1255" end="1291" title="Chicago Institute for Psychoanalysis" label="Chicago Institute for Psychoanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044946" start="1771" end="1783" title="right to die" label="right to die"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149752" start="2719" end="2738" title="Columbia Law Review" label="Columbia Law Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782082" start="2852" end="2875" title="demonic possession" label="possession by the devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071227" start="2894" end="2920" title="The Myth of Mental Illness" label="The Myth of Mental Illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q476190" start="3074" end="3104" title="United States Senate committee" label="United States Senate committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534" start="3345" end="3353" title="metaphor" label="metaphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q85502" start="3792" end="3806" title="secularization" label="secularization"/>
<link wikidata="Q193626" start="3857" end="3866" title="scientism" label="scientism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8396" start="3941" end="3953" title="masturbation" label="masturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q207684" start="4137" end="4145" title="lobotomy" label="lobotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="4179" end="4188" title="psychosis" label="psychosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="5122" end="5135" title="pseudoscience" label="pseudoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="5291" end="5305" title="state religion" label="state religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q21109" start="5734" end="5746" title="codependency" label="codependency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706669" start="6159" end="6176" title="psychotropic drug" label="psychotropic drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134368" start="6210" end="6224" title="medicalization" label="medicalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q188494" start="6465" end="6472" title="witch-hunt" label="witches"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="6480" end="6487" title="Romani people" label="gypsies"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="6776" end="6783" title="obesity" label="obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q851384" start="6813" end="6822" title="junk food" label="junk food"/>
<link wikidata="Q44602" start="6990" end="6995" title="fasting" label="fasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470093" start="7660" end="7670" title="bariatrics" label="bariatrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511637" start="8759" end="8770" title="nanny state" label="nanny state"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="9961" end="9974" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876201" start="10166" end="10184" title="Civil libertarians" label="Civil libertarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q753623" start="10316" end="10346" title="separation of church and state" label="separation of church and state"/>
<link wikidata="Q694381" start="10495" end="10534" title="Involuntary commitment" label="involuntary psychiatric hospitalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743040" start="10597" end="10673" title="American Association for the Abolition of Involuntary Mental Hospitalization" label="American Association for the Abolition of Involuntary Mental Hospitalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935368" start="10741" end="10771" title="American Journal of Psychiatry" label="American Journal of Psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744266" start="10788" end="10821" title="American Journal of Public Health" label="American Journal of Public Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q15708691" start="11452" end="11471" title="Homelessness in the United States" label="homeless population"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092097" start="11744" end="11770" title="O&amp;#x27;Connor v. Donaldson" label="O&amp;#x27;Connor v. Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313348" start="11862" end="11877" title="Rennie v. Klein" label="Rennie v. Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q705920" start="12025" end="12041" title="insanity defense" label="insanity defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q12029" start="13198" end="13212" title="drug addiction" label="drug addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q185517" start="13367" end="13379" title="war on drugs" label="war on drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026760" start="13419" end="13435" title="victimless crime" label="victimless crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139112" start="13744" end="13760" title="coca eradication" label="coca eradication"/>
<link wikidata="Q46452" start="13793" end="13798" title="opium" label="opium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551312" start="13958" end="13974" title="drug prohibition" label="drug prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138438" start="14151" end="14166" title="James M. Hanley" label="James M. Hanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="14486" end="14499" title="birth control" label="birth control"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="14710" end="14717" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044946" start="14726" end="14738" title="right to die" label="right to die"/>
<link wikidata="Q100159" start="14812" end="14822" title="euthanasia" label="euthanasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40909" start="14847" end="14861" title="Virginia Woolf" label="Virginia Woolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411057" start="14984" end="15001" title="freedom of choice" label="freedom of choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820380" start="15068" end="15089" title="Church of Scientology" label="Church of Scientology"/>
<link wikidata="Q677232" start="15105" end="15140" title="Citizens Commission on Human Rights" label="Citizens Commission on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="15630" end="15665" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Australian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15886" end="15902" title="Russell Tribunal#2001: On Human Rights in Psychiatry (Berlin)" label="Russell Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344122" start="16207" end="16226" title="Robert Evan Kendell" label="Robert Evan Kendell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252737" start="16653" end="16670" title="Dualism (philosophy of mind)" label="Cartesian dualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293632" start="17007" end="17021" title="Edward Shorter (historian)" label="Edward Shorter"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="17183" end="17197" title="Psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471453" start="17447" end="17458" title="Psychogenic disease" label="psychogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q582667" start="17720" end="17735" title="anti-psychiatry" label="anti-psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q465035" start="18461" end="18490" title="American Humanist Association" label="American Humanist Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175374" start="18616" end="18632" title="Jefferson Awards for Public Service" label="Jefferson Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3919817" start="18667" end="18685" title="behavioral science" label="behavioral science"/>
<link wikidata="Q747786" start="18689" end="18720" title="Universidad Francisco Marroquín" label="Universidad Francisco Marroquín"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18840" end="18870" title="Center for Independent Thought" label="Center for Independent Thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q23037921" start="19324" end="19354" title="Controversies about psychiatry" label="Controversies about psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q694381" start="19357" end="19388" title="Wrongful involuntary commitment" label="Wrongful involuntary commitment"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324237" start="19391" end="19415" title="Scientology front groups" label="Scientology front groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893338" start="19883" end="19901" title="Bernard L. Diamond" label="Bernard L. Diamond"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58404" wikidata="Q2516265" url="?curid=58404" title="Timeline of transportation technology">
<text>This is a timeline of transportation technology and technological developments in the culture of transportation.

==Antiquity==
*20th millennium BC – rafts used on rivers.
*7th millennium BC – Earliest known shoes.
*6th millennium BC – Dugout canoes constructed.
*4th millennium BC – The earliest vehicles may have been ox carts.
*3500 BCE – Domestication of the horse and invention of the wheel in Ancient Near East
*Toys excavated from the Indus Valley Civilisation (3010–1500 BC) include small carts.
*3000 BCE – Austronesians construct catamarans and outriggers.
** In the Mediterranean, galleys were developed about 3000 BC.
*2nd millennium BC – Cart mentioned in literature, chariot and spoked wheel invented.
*800 BC – Canal for transport constructed in Ancient China.
*408 BC – Wheelbarrow referenced in Ancient Greece.

==Middle Ages==

*5th century – Horse collar invented in China.
*6th century – Evidence of a horseshoe in the tomb of the Frankish King Childeric I, Tournai, Belgium.
*Late 7th century – First suspension bridge, Maya Bridge at Yaxchilan
*800 – The streets of Baghdad are paved with tar.
* 9th century – The sine quadrant, was invented by Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi in the 9th century at the House of Wisdom in Baghdad. The other types were the universal quadrant, the horary quadrant and the astrolabe quadrant.
*10th century – sea-going junk ships built in China.
*Late 10th century – Kamal invented in Arab world.
*1044 – Compass invented in China.
*13th century (or before) – Rocket missiles used in China. Rocket powered passenger vehicles did not appear until 1939.
*1350 – Compass dial invented by Ibn al-Shatir.
*1479–1519 – Da Vinci sketches pedalo.
*1495–1504 – The oldest extant cable railway is probably the Reisszug, a private line providing goods access to Hohensalzburg Fortress at Salzburg in Austria. This line is generally described as the oldest funicular.
*15th century – Jan Žižka built the precursor to the motorised tank, armoured wagons equipped with cannons.
*1569 – Mercator 1569 world map published.
*Late 16th century – European sailing ships become advanced enough to reliably cross oceans.

==17th century==
*1604 – The world&#x27;s first recorded overland wagonway, the Wollaton Wagonway, is built by Huntingdon Beaumont in Nottingham, England, for the transport of coal.
*1616 - The first recorded mechanical ropeway was by Croatian Fausto Veranzio who designed a bicable passenger ropeway
*1620 – Cornelius Drebbel builds the world&#x27;s first known submarine, which is propelled by oars (although there are earlier ideas for and depictions of submarines).
*1644 - Adam Wybe builds world&#x27;s first cable car on multiple supports. It was the biggest built until the end of the 19th century.
*1655 - Stephan Farffler was a Nuremberg watchmaker of the seventeenth century whose invention of a manumotive carriage in 1655 is widely considered to have been the first self-propelled wheelchair.
*1662 – Blaise Pascal invents a horse-drawn public bus which has a regular route, schedule, and fare system.
*1672 – Ferdinand Verbiest built what may have been the first steam-powered scale model car.

==18th century==
*1716 – Swedish scientist, Emanuel Swedenborg, creates the first concept of a hovering vehicle.
*1720 - Differential gear invented by Joseph Williamson.
*1731 - Sextant first implemented to accurately determine latitude.
*1733 - William Kent developed an early stroller. 
*1740 – Jacques de Vaucanson debuted his clockwork powered carriage.
*1760s - Inline skates invented.
*1761 - Marine chronometer invented as a means to accurately determine longitude.
*1769 – Nicolas-Joseph Cugnot demonstrates his &quot;fardier à vapeur&quot;, an experimental steam-driven artillery tractor
*1776 – First submarine to be propelled by screws, and the first military submarine to attempt an attack on a ship, &quot;Turtle&quot;, is built by David Bushnell. The attack fails to sink .
*1779 - The Iron Bridge built in Shropshire.
*1783 - First parachute.
*1783 – Joseph Montgolfier and Étienne Montgolfier launch the first hot air balloons triggering Balloonomania.
*1783 – Jacques Charles and Les Frères Robert (Anne-Jean Robert and Nicolas-Louis Robert) launch the first Hydrogen balloon.
*1784 – William Murdoch built a working model of a steam locomotive carriage in Redruth, England.
*1789 - The pedal powered tricycle was invented by two Frenchmen, named Blanchard and Maguier.
*1790s – Canal Mania, an intense period of canal building in England and Wales.

==19th century==
===Early 19th century===
*1801 – Richard Trevithick ran a full-sized steam &#x27;road locomotive&#x27; on the road in Camborne, England.
*1803 – Richard Trevithick built his 10-seater London Steam Carriage.
*1803 – William Symington&#x27;s &quot;Charlotte Dundas&quot;, generally considered to be the world&#x27;s first practical steamboat, makes her first voyage.
*1804 – Richard Trevithick built a prototype steam-powered railway locomotive and it ran on the Pen-y-Darren Line near Merthyr Tydfil Wales.
*1804 – Oliver Evans (claimed to have) demonstrated a steam-powered amphibious vehicle.
* 1807 – Francois Isaac de Rivaz – the De Rivaz engine, the first internal combustion engine using hydrogen as a fuel
* 1807 - The Swansea and Mumbles Railway ran the world&#x27;s first passenger horsecar tram service.
* 1807 – Robert Fulton&#x27;s &quot;North River Steamboat&quot;, the world&#x27;s first commercially successful steamboat, makes her maiden voyage.
* 1807 – Nicéphore Niépce installed his Pyréolophore internal combustion engine in a boat and powered up the river Saone in France.
*1807 – Isaac de Rivas made a hydrogen gas powered internal combustion engine and mounted it on a vehicle.
*1809 - First stone laid of first &#x27;guided bus&#x27; passenger wagonway Gloucester and Cheltenham Tramroad.
*1812 – First commercially successful self-propelled engine on land was Matthew Murray&#x27;s &quot;Salamanca&quot; on Middleton Railway using toothed wheels and rail.
*1812 – Timothy Hackworth&#x27;s &quot;Puffing Billy&quot; ran on smooth Cast Iron Rails at Wylam Colliery near Newcastle
*1814 – George Stephenson built the first practical steam-powered railway locomotive &quot;Blutcher&quot; at Killingworth Colliery. 
*1816 – The most likely originator of the Bicycle is the German, Baron Karl von Drais, who rode his 1816 machine while collecting taxes from his tenants.
* 1819 – , the first vessel to cross the Atlantic Ocean partly under steam power, arrives at Liverpool, England from Savannah, Georgia.
*1819 - Denis Johnson invents kick scooter.
*1822 – Stephenson built a locomotive and designed the railway for Hetton Colliery which is first railway not to use any horse-traction but it did have several rope hauled sections.
*1822 – First Meeting of Liverpool Manchester Railway Company Permanent Committee. 
*1825 - Stephenson&#x27;s Locomotion No. 1 runs on Stockton &amp; Darlington Railway which opens as first public railway and uses horses and self-propelled steam engines and stationary engines with ropes along a single track. No stations and no timetables as anyone could hire the track to use their own vehicle on it. 
* 1825 – Sir Goldsworthy Gurney invented a series of steam-powered passenger carriages and by 1829 completed the 120-mile journey from London to Bath, Somerset and back.
*1825 - The first suspension railway was opened at Cheshunt, England, United Kingdom on 25 June.
*1826 – Bill passed for Liverpool and Manchester Railway at second attempt and George Stephenson commences work on 35-mile twin track line permitting simultaneous travel in both directions between the 2 towns. Means of traction not specified to reduce opposition. 
*1828 – Stephenson&#x27;s &quot;Lancashire Witch&quot; runs on Bolton and Leigh Railway line - a public goods line to connect Leeds and Liverpool Canal and Manchester Bolton &amp; Bury Canal. Railway has rope hauled and self-propelled steam engines and single track.
*1829 – Rainhill Trials to find best self-propelled engine for Liverpool Manchester line are won by Robert Stephenson&#x27;s Rocket proving there is no need for horse traction or static engines on the main line. &quot;Rocket&quot; becomes basic formula for all future steam engines with boiler tubes, blast pipe, and the use of coal rather than coke. 
*1830 – Liverpool and Manchester Railway opens. First public transport system without animal traction, first public line with no rope hauled sections for main journey, first twin track, first railway between 2 large towns, first timetabled trains, first railway stations, first train faster than a mail coach, first tunnels under streets, first proper modern railway which formed the template for all subsequent railways.
*1837 - The first electric locomotive built in 1837 was a battery locomotive. It was built by chemist Robert Davidson of Aberdeen in Scotland, and it was powered by galvanic cells (batteries).
* 1838 – Isambard Kingdom Brunel&#x27;s , the first purpose-built transatlantic steamship, inaugurates the first regular transatlantic steamship service.
*1839 - An early electric boat was developed by the German inventor Moritz von Jacobi in 1839 in St Petersburg, Russia. It was a boat which carried 14 passengers at . It was successfully demonstrated to Emperor Nicholas I of Russia on the Neva River.
*1840s – Railway Mania sweeps UK and Ireland. 6,220 miles (10,010 km) of railway line were built
*1843 - Dalkey Atmospheric railway opens.
*1847 - The first steam railcar was designed by James Samuel, the Eastern Counties Railway Locomotive Engineer, built by William Bridges Adams in 1847, and trialled between Shoreditch and Cambridge on 23 October 1847.
*1849 - Sir George Cayley&#x27;s gliders achieved brief wing-borne hops from around 1849.

===Late 19th century===
*1852 – Elisha Otis invents the safety elevator.
*1853 – Sir George Cayley built and demonstrated the first heavier-than-air aircraft (a glider).
** - Quadracycle invented.
*1859 - First model railway for Napoléon, Prince Imperial.
*1859 - Gaston Planté invented the lead–acid battery, the first-ever battery that could be recharged by passing a reverse current through it.
*1860 - first urban horse railway line (a predecessor of trams), opened in Saint Petersburg.
*1862 – Étienne Lenoir made a gasoline engine automobile.
*1863 – London&#x27;s Metropolitan Railway opened to the public as the world&#x27;s first underground railway.
* 1863 – Étienne Lenoir– Hippomobile
*1867 – First modern motorcycle was invented.
*1868 – Safety bicycle invented.
*1868 – George Westinghouse invented the compressed-air brake for railway trains.
*1868 – Louis-Guillaume Perreaux&#x27;s steam velocipede, a steam engine attached to a Michaux velocipede.
*1869 - Jules Suriray, a Parisian bicycle mechanic, designed the first radial style ball bearing.
*1870 - First definite record of a kicksled.
*1874 - Midland railway introduces the first bogie.
*1875 - World&#x27;s first electric tram line operated in Sestroretsk near Saint Petersburg, Russia, invented and tested by Fyodor Pirotsky.
*1880 – Werner von Siemens builds first electric elevator.
*1881 - World&#x27;s first commercially successful electric tram, the Gross-Lichterfelde tramway in Lichterfelde near Berlin in Germany built by Werner von Siemens who contacted Pirotsky. It initially drew current from the rails, with overhead wire being installed in 1883.
*1882 - The trolleybus dates back to 29 April 1882, when Dr. Ernst Werner Siemens demonstrated his &quot;Elektromote&quot; in a Berlin suburb. This experiment continued until 13 June 1882
*1883 - Mödling and Hinterbrühl Tram, Vipenna, Austria, first electric tram powered by overhead wire.
*1884 - Thomas Parker built a practical production electric car in Wolverhampton using his own specially designed high-capacity rechargeable batteries.
*1885 – Karl Benz invents the first car powered by an internal combustion engine, he called it the Benz Patent Motorwagen.
*1887 - The first Battery electric multiple unit (battery rail car) was used on the Royal Bavarian State Railways.
*1888 - Flocken Elektrowagen built by German inventor Andreas Flocken, the first true electric car.
*1889 - The first interurban tram-train to emerge in the United States was the Newark and Granville Street Railway in Ohio, which opened in 1889.
*1889 - First introduced in 1889, battery vehicles milk floats expanded use in 1931 and by 1967 gave Britain the largest electric vehicle fleet in the world.
*1890s – Bike boom sweeps Europe and America with hundreds of bicycle manufacturers in the biggest bicycle craze to date
*1890 - The City and South London Railway (C&amp;SLR) was the first deep-level underground &quot;tube&quot; railway in the world, and the first major railway to use electric traction
*1893 - Recumbent bicycles invented.
*1893 - first moving walkway debuted at the World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition.
*1893 - The Liverpool Overhead Railway opened on 6 March 1893 with 2-car electric multiple units, the first to operate in the world. 
*1893 - Frank W. Hawley adapted an ordinary steam canal boat to a trolleyboat (named after him), which was tested on the Erie Canal in the US.
*1893 - First sidecar.
*1894 – Hildebrand &amp; Wolfmüller became the first motorcycle available to the public for purchase.
*1895 - First motorbus. In Siegerland, Germany, two passenger bus lines ran briefly, but unprofitably, in 1895 using a six-passenger motor carriage developed from the 1893 Benz Viktoria.
*1896 – Jesse W. Reno builds first escalator at Coney Island, and then reinstalls it on the Manhattan side of the Brooklyn Bridge.
*1896 - First battery powered monorail, Ontario Southern Railway (Ontario).
* 1897 – Charles Parsons&#x27; &quot;Turbinia&quot;, the first vessel to be powered by a steam turbine, makes her debut.
* 1897 – Most likely the first electric bicycle was built in 1897 by Hosea W. Libbey.
*1899 - The Lohner-Porsche Mixte Hybrid was both the world&#x27;s first hybrid vehicle, and the first four-wheel drive without a steam engine.
* 1899 – Ferdinand von Zeppelin builds the first successful airship.
*1900 – Ferdinand von Zeppelin launches the first successful airship.

==20th century==
===Early 20th century===

*1903
**Orville Wright and Wilbur Wright – Fly the first motor-driven airplane.
**Diesel engine – Tested in a canal boat by Rudolph Diesel, Adrian Bochet and Frederic Dyckhoff.
**first diesel motorship was also the first diesel–electric ship, the Russian tanker &quot;Vandal&quot; from Branobel, which was launched in 1903
*1904 - The first non-experimental trolleybus system was a seasonal municipal line installed near Nantasket Beach in 1904; the first year-round commercial line was built to open a hilly property to development just outside Los Angeles in 1910.
*1906 - Early hydrofoil used by Enrico Forlanini.
*1907 - The London Electrobus Company started running a service of battery-electric buses between London&#x27;s Victoria Station and Liverpool Street on 15 July 1907.
*1908 - the Kohlerer-funicular went into service in Bolzano. It was the first modern (enclosed) cable car in the world to carry passengers.
*1908 – First mass-produced automobile- Henry Ford develops the assembly line method of automobile manufacturing with the introduction of the Ford Model T.
*1910 - Fabre Hydravion first seaplane.
*1911 – &quot;Selandia&quot; launched – First ocean-going, diesel engine-driven ship.
*1912 - The world&#x27;s first diesel locomotive (a diesel-mechanical locomotive) was operated in the summer of 1912 on the Winterthur–Romanshorn railway in Switzerland. 
*1912 - Articulated trams, invented and first used by the Boston Elevated Railway.
*1914 - The first application of railway electric traffic light signals was by the Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul and Pacific Railroad&#x27;s use of the US&amp;S &quot;Style L&quot; colour light signal on their line through the Pacific Northwest.
*1915
**The Luftkissengleitboot Hovercraft – First hovering vehicle was created by Dagobert Müller. It could only travel on water.
**Motorized scooter invented.
**A British commission was tasked with creating a vehicle able to cross a 4 ft wide trench – the tank.
*1916 – First tank prototype, nicknamed &quot;mother&quot;, was created by Britain during World War I.
*1919 - HD-4 first hydroplane launched by Alexander Graham Bell.
*1923 - First controlled autogyro rotorcraft flight in Cierva C.4.
*1924 - The world&#x27;s first functional diesel locomotive (diesel-electric locomotive) (Eel2 original number Юэ 001/Yu-e 001) started operations, designed by a team led by Yuri Lomonosov and built 1923–1924 by Maschinenfabrik Esslingen in Germany.
*1926 – Robert H. Goddard launches the first liquid-fueled rocket.
*1928 - First Moth (dinghy) built in Inverloch.
*1932 - The first electric golf cart was custom-made in 1932, but did not gain widespread acceptance.
*1935 – First flight of the DC-3, one of the most significant transport aircraft in the history of aviation.
**Hermann Kemper built a working linear induction motor.
*1939 - 20 June - First rocket powered aircraft, the Heinkel He 176, takes flight.
*1939 – 27 August - First jet engine aircraft, the Heinkel He 178, takes flight.
*1940 - First fully articulated bus Isotta Fraschini TS40.
*1942 – V2 rocket covers a distance of .
*1943 - Traffic cone invented.
*1947 – Chuck Yeager in the Bell X1 completes the first supersonic manned flight.

===Late 20th Century===

*1950 – First Heritage railway.
*1952
**Supramar launched the first commercial high-speed craft, a hydrofoil.
**de Havilland Comet first commercial jet air liner.
*1955 – First nuclear-powered vessel, , a submarine, is launched.
*1956 – Demonstration of SR.N1, first modern hovercraft by Christopher Cockerell.
*1957
**Sputnik 1 – First artificial satellite to be launched into orbit.
**&quot;Gateway City&quot; – World&#x27;s first purpose-built container ship, enters service.
**First flight of the Boeing 707 – First commercially successful jet airliner.
*1959 – The first modern fuel cell vehicle was a modified Allis-Chalmers farm tractor, fitted with a 15 kilowatt fuel cell, around 1959.
*1961 – Vostok 1, first crewed space mission, designed by Sergey Korolyov, makes two orbits around the Earth with Yuri Gagarin.
*1962 – The first ascending-gliding parachute was developed by Pierre-Marcel Lemoigne in 1962. 
*1964 – Shinkansen first high-speed rail.
*1966 – Caspian Sea Monster ground effect vehicle introduced.
*1967 – Automatic train operation introduced on London Underground.
*1968 – Space hopper invented.
*1969
**First flight of the Boeing 747 – First commercial widebody airliner.
**NASA rocket technology, spurred on by the US/Russia Space Race – Makes the first crewed Moon landing a reality.
**Lolo ball invented.
*1971
**Salyut 1, first space station, launched by Soviet Union.
**Runcorn Busway was the world&#x27;s first bus rapid transit system.
*1973 – Stadtbahnwagen B hybrid tram developed.
*1975 – Morgantown PRT, first Personal Rapid Transit system to be installed.
*1976 – Concorde makes the world&#x27;s first commercial passenger-carrying supersonic flight.
*1977 – The first semi-automated car was developed in 1977, by Japan&#x27;s Tsukuba Mechanical Engineering Laboratory, which required specially marked streets.
*1980 – Modern guided bus passenger service introduced in Essen.
*1981
**Maiden flight of the Space Shuttle.
**The first fully Automated guideway transit driverless people mover train technology introduced on Port Island Line, Japan.
*1983 – First Automated guideway transit driverless metro, and one of the first fully driverless train technologies, Véhicule Automatique Léger introduced in Lille Metro, France.
*1984 – First commercial maglev, albeit low-speed opens in Birmingham.
*1985 – Sinclair C5, the first mass-produced electric battery velomobile launched.
*1989 – Snakeboard invented.
*1990 – First transport simulation computer game Railroad Tycoon released.
*1990 – ADtranz low floor tram world&#x27;s first completely low floor tram introduced.
*1994 – Channel Tunnel opens.
*1994 – Modern kickbike invented in Finland.
*1997 – First Maglev train prototypes are tested in Japan.
*1997 – Toyota RAV4 EV, first nickel-metal hydride batteries (NiMH) electric car. Toyota Prius first mass-produced full hybrid car.
*1997 – Nissan R&#x27;nessa, first short-run production lithium-ion battery electric car.
*1998 – First ion-propulsion spacecraft Deep Space 1 launched.
*1998 – Honda Raccoon Compo, first folding electric bicycle in Japan.
*1999 – Trikke (wiggle scooter) invented.
*2000 – Honda Step Compo, first folding electric bicycle internationally available.
*2000 – TransMilenio, first modern bus rapid transit.

==21st century==
*2001 - Germany trials capa vehicle hybrid buses in Nuremberg using an ultracapacitor to store electrical energy.
*2002 – Segway PT self-balancing personal transport was launched by inventor Dean Kamen.
*2003 - Concorde makes last passenger flight.
*2003 - First modern Ground-level power supply technology, Bordeaux tramway.
*2003 - Germany introduces capa vehicle trams in Mannheim.
*2003 - NE Train trials first hybrid train to use lithium-ion batteries.
*2004 – First commercial high speed Maglev train starts operation between Shanghai and its airport.
*2004 - First modern urban transit aerial cable car Metrocable (Medellín).
*2008 - Tesla Roadster, first mass production lithium-ion battery electric car.
*2009 - Škoda 15 T world&#x27;s first completely low-floor tram with articulated bogies introduced.
*2010s - Mobile apps and online platforms for finding, planning, offering and booking affordable public transport such as buses as well as carsharing, bicycle sharing and carpooling emerge and are becoming popular along with associated transportation infrastructure networks (examples: BlaBlaCar, Flixbus)
*2010 – ULTra (rapid transit), the first modern commercial Personal Rapid Transit system to be installed. Started operations at Heathrow Airport.
*2010 - IKAROS spacecraft launched with solar sail propulsion.
*2013 - Self-balancing scooter invented.
*2015 - In March, China South Rail Corporation (CSR) demonstrated the world&#x27;s first hydrogen fuel cell vehicle tramcar at an assembly facility in Qingdao.
*2015 - Navya SAS launch first autonomous bus, Navya Autonom Shuttle at Sheba Medical Center, Israel.
*2016 - First hydrogen fuel cell powered passenger aircraft flight DLR HY4.
*2017 - First 100% low-floor tram Ground-level power supply technology, &quot;TramWave&quot;, opening of Zhuhai tram China.
*2018 - First driverless trams in Potsdam, Germany tested.
*2018 - First mass-produced hydrogen fuel cell car, Toyota Mirai.
*2018 - First electroaerodynamic thrust winged Ion-propelled aircraft test flight of MIT EAD Airframe Version 2 using ionic wind.
*2018 – First commercial hydrogen-powered passenger train, Alstom Coradia Lint, launches in Lower Saxony, Germany. 
*2019 - The Autonomous Rail Rapid Transit opens in China.
*~2016-2021 – Various first advanced trials of various types of autonomous delivery vehicles.

=== 2020s ===

==== Transportation technologies in society ====
*2020 – The COVID-19 pandemic, partly due to lockdowns, temporarily drastically reduces the use of surface (including public) and air transport technologies. Cycling is an exception to this and increased during the pandemic, along with bike-sales.

*2022 – A study for the first time attempts to assess and quantify complete societal costs of cars (i.e. car-use, etc.) by quantifying externalities.
*2022 – A study estimates the air pollution impacts on climate change and the ozone layer from rocket launches and re-entry of reusable components and debris in 2019 and from a theoretical future space industry extrapolated from the &quot;billionaire space race&quot;. It concludes that substantial effects from routine space tourism should &quot;motivate regulation&quot;.
*2023 – A study outlines challenges of aviation decarbonization by 2050 whose identified factors mainly are future demand, continuous efficiency improvements, new short-haul engines, higher SAF (biofuel) production (including measures that affect their competitiveness and deployment), removal to compensate for non- forcing, and related policy-options. With constant air transport demand and aircraft efficiency, decarbonizing aviation would require nearly five times the 2019 worldwide biofuel production, competing with other hard-to-decarbonize sectors and land-use (or food security).&lt;ref name=&quot;10.1038/s41893-022-01046-9&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;
* 2024 – An analysis of Outer London&#x27;s Mini-Hollands active transport infrastructures indicates Low Traffic Neighbourhoods are highly effective and cost-efficient measures in terms of health economic benefits.
* 2024 – A global review of harms from personal car automobility finds cars have killed 60–80 million people since their invention, with automobility causing roughly every 34th death, and summarises interventions that are ready for implementation to reduce the, largely crash-linked or pollution-mediated, deaths from automobility-centrism and dependency.

==== Sustainable transport ====

*2020 – First commercial flight of a hydrogen fuel cell plane.
*2020 – Google Maps begins including bike shares in its widely used route planning functionality.
*Early 2020s – Researchers investigate safe ways of public transport during the COVID-19 pandemic.
* – The first rail line entirely run by hydrogen-powered trains debuts in Germany. The state company owning the railway later switches to electric models since they are &quot;cheaper to operate&quot;. Two other hydrogen trains have been reported as of 2023: Mireo Plus H by Siemens in Germany (under development) and an urban train by the Railway Rolling Stock Corporation in China.
*2023 – The first test-runs of a superconducting maglev test line, called a hyperloop, are carried out in Datong, China (50 km/h of ~1,000 km/h). Hyperloop One conducted the world&#x27;s first test carrying passengers in pods, reaching a speed of 172 km/h in Los Angeles in 2020, but reportedly abandoned the goal of transporting humans as of 2023.
*2023 – A comeback of sleeping trains in Europe is reported as demand for more comfortable travel modes than overnight buses and sustainable transport rises. A new generation of such trains is released.

==== Autonomous vehicles ====
Milestones in autonomous sustainable / public transport vehicles are also listed in this section.
*2020 - CR400BF-C &#x27;Fuxing Hao&#x27;, a variant of CR400 Fuxing series, running on Beijing–Zhangjiakou intercity railway is the world first high-speed rail service capable of driverless automation in commercial operations. The specific Grade of Automation (GoA) was not announced.
*Early 2020s - Multiple electric, autonomous buses open for public transport – albeit with a local professional driving-assistant – are being launched around the world after the first such bus started operating for the general public in a Swiss town in 2018.
*2021 – The pilot project of the &quot;world&#x27;s first automated, driverless train&quot; is launched in the city of Hamburg, Germany. The conventional, standard-track, non-metro train technology could, according to reports, theoretically be implemented for rail transport worldwide and is reported to also be substantially more energy efficient.
*2021 – The world&#x27;s first urban autonomous vessels, Roboats, are deployed in the canals of Amsterdam, Netherlands. The ships developed by three institutions could carry up to five people, collect waste, deliver goods, and provide &quot;on-demand infrastructure&quot;.
*2021 – The first autonomous cargo ship, MV &quot;Yara Birkeland&quot; is launched in Norway. The fully electric ship is expected to substantially reduce the need for truck journeys.

==See also==

* 2025 in science and technology
* 2025 in aviation
* 2025 in rail transport
* Maritime timeline
* Timeline of automobiles
*Timeline of aviation
*Timeline of historic inventions
*History of the bicycle
*History of the electric vehicle
*Timeline of motorized bicycle history
*Timeline of railway history
*History of rapid transit
*Timeline of spaceflight
*Timeline of three longest spans
*Ufology

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
*
* Berger, Michael L. &quot;The automobile in American history and culture: a reference guide&quot; (Greenwood, 2001).
* Condit, Carl W. &quot;The railroad and the city: a technological and urbanistic history of Cincinnati&quot; (The Ohio State University Press, 1977) online.
* Eckermann, Erik. &quot;World history of the automobile&quot; (SAE International, 2001).
* Gkoumas, Konstantinos, and Anastasios Tsakalidis. &quot;A framework for the taxonomy and assessment of new and emerging transport technologies and trends.&quot; &quot;Transport&quot; 34.4 (2019): 455–466. online
* Gourvish, Terry. &quot;What kind of railway history did we get? Forty years of research.&quot; &quot; Journal of Transport History&quot; 14.2 (1993): 111–125.
* Horner, Craig. &quot;The Emergence of Bicycling and Automobility in Britain&quot; (Bloomsbury Academic, 2021) online review
* Kellermann, Robin, Tobias Biehle, and Liliann Fischer. &quot;Drones for parcel and passenger transportation: A literature review.&quot; &quot;Transportation Research Interdisciplinary Perspectives&quot; 4 (2020): 100088. online
* Knowles, Richard D., Fiona Ferbrache, and Alexandros Nikitas. &quot;Transport&#x27;s historical, contemporary and future role in shaping urban development: Re-evaluating transit oriented development.&quot; &quot;Cities&quot; 99 (2020): 102607. online
* Matthews, Jodie. &quot;Canals in nineteenth-century literary history.&quot; in &quot;Transport and Its Place in History&quot; (Routledge, 2020) pp. 136–150.
* Parissien, Steven. &quot;The life of the automobile: the complete history of the motor car&quot; (Macmillan, 2014).
* Schivelbusch, Wolfgang. &quot;The railway journey: The industrialization of time and space in the nineteenth century&quot; (Univ of California Press, 2014).
* Takatsu, Toshiji. &quot;The history and future of high-speed railways in Japan.&quot; &quot;Japan Railway &amp; Transport Review&quot; 48 (2007): 6-21. online</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q186117" start="10" end="18" title="timeline" label="timeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="22" end="31" title="transport" label="transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q863970" start="150" end="170" title="Riverboat" label="rafts used on rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q22676" start="208" end="212" title="shoe" label="shoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q596073" start="236" end="249" title="Dugout canoes" label="Dugout canoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190777" start="320" end="328" title="bullock cart" label="ox carts"/>
<link wikidata="Q468739" start="342" end="368" title="Domestication of the horse" label="Domestication of the horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q446" start="390" end="395" title="wheel" label="wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q269678" start="399" end="416" title="Ancient Near East" label="Ancient Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="442" end="467" title="Indus Valley Civilisation" label="Indus Valley Civilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="516" end="529" title="Austronesians" label="Austronesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q190403" start="540" end="550" title="catamarans" label="catamarans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562991" start="555" end="565" title="outriggers" label="outriggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="577" end="590" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q188924" start="592" end="598" title="galley" label="galley"/>
<link wikidata="Q234668" start="651" end="655" title="Cart" label="Cart"/>
<link wikidata="Q203788" start="681" end="688" title="chariot" label="chariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q845671" start="693" end="705" title="spoked wheel" label="spoked wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="726" end="731" title="Canal" label="Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="761" end="774" title="Ancient China" label="Ancient China"/>
<link wikidata="Q175334" start="786" end="797" title="Wheelbarrow" label="Wheelbarrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="812" end="826" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q152523" start="861" end="873" title="Horse collar" label="Horse collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q192130" start="922" end="931" title="horseshoe" label="horseshoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q193869" start="965" end="976" title="Childeric I" label="Childeric I"/>
<link wikidata="Q173219" start="978" end="985" title="Tournai" label="Tournai"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="987" end="994" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796672" start="1041" end="1065" title="Maya Bridge at Yaxchilan" label="Maya Bridge at Yaxchilan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="1088" end="1095" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q186209" start="1111" end="1114" title="tar" label="tar"/>
<link wikidata="Q841280" start="1141" end="1149" title="quadrant (instrument)" label="quadrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9038" start="1167" end="1197" title="Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi" label="Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33018" start="1224" end="1239" title="House of Wisdom" label="House of Wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q205011" start="1371" end="1381" title="Junk (ship)" label="junk ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q674415" start="1419" end="1424" title="Kamal (navigation)" label="Kamal"/>
<link wikidata="Q34735" start="1457" end="1464" title="Compass" label="Compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1477" end="1482" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q41291" start="1512" end="1518" title="Rocket" label="Rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q34735" start="1612" end="1624" title="Compass dial" label="Compass dial"/>
<link wikidata="Q718169" start="1637" end="1650" title="Ibn al-Shatir" label="Ibn al-Shatir"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="1665" end="1673" title="Da Vinci" label="Da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335189" start="1683" end="1689" title="pedalo" label="pedalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15089865" start="1722" end="1735" title="cable railway" label="cable railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303616" start="1752" end="1760" title="Reisszug" label="Reisszug"/>
<link wikidata="Q679292" start="1803" end="1825" title="Hohensalzburg Fortress" label="Hohensalzburg Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q34713" start="1829" end="1837" title="Salzburg" label="Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q142031" start="1897" end="1906" title="funicular" label="funicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q215968" start="1924" end="1933" title="Jan Žižka" label="Jan Žižka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818052" start="2024" end="2047" title="Mercator 1569 world map" label="Mercator 1569 world map"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="2080" end="2086" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959671" start="2219" end="2227" title="wagonway" label="wagonway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030330" start="2233" end="2250" title="Wollaton Wagonway" label="Wollaton Wagonway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5945103" start="2264" end="2283" title="Huntingdon Beaumont" label="Huntingdon Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="2287" end="2306" title="Nottingham, England" label="Nottingham, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="2388" end="2395" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q251738" start="2397" end="2412" title="Fausto Veranzio" label="Fausto Veranzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q365463" start="2462" end="2479" title="Cornelius Drebbel" label="Cornelius Drebbel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="2516" end="2525" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q351206" start="2631" end="2640" title="Adam Wybe" label="Adam Wybe"/>
<link wikidata="Q191931" start="2946" end="2956" title="wheelchair" label="wheelchair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290" start="2966" end="2979" title="Blaise Pascal" label="Blaise Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638" start="3009" end="3012" title="bus" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q378277" start="3075" end="3093" title="Ferdinand Verbiest" label="Ferdinand Verbiest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335161" start="3149" end="3158" title="model car" label="model car"/>
<link wikidata="Q185832" start="3205" end="3223" title="Emanuel Swedenborg" label="Emanuel Swedenborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q193137" start="3282" end="3299" title="Differential gear" label="Differential gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q179430" start="3339" end="3346" title="Sextant" label="Sextant"/>
<link wikidata="Q445433" start="3407" end="3419" title="William Kent" label="William Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q55304203" start="3439" end="3447" title="stroller" label="stroller"/>
<link wikidata="Q454589" start="3458" end="3478" title="Jacques de Vaucanson" label="Jacques de Vaucanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q616765" start="3528" end="3540" title="Inline skate" label="Inline skate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307829" start="3560" end="3578" title="Marine chronometer" label="Marine chronometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q210730" start="3642" end="3663" title="Nicolas-Joseph Cugnot" label="Nicolas-Joseph Cugnot"/>
<link wikidata="Q758540" start="3874" end="3892" title="American Turtle" label="&amp;quot;Turtle&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q258935" start="3906" end="3920" title="David Bushnell" label="David Bushnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q99200" start="3957" end="3972" title="The Iron Bridge" label="The Iron Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q482816" start="4008" end="4017" title="parachute" label="parachute"/>
<link wikidata="Q193751" start="4027" end="4069" title="Montgolfier brothers" label="Joseph Montgolfier and Étienne Montgolfier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551574" start="4087" end="4102" title="hot air balloon" label="hot air balloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851880" start="4115" end="4128" title="Balloonomania" label="Balloonomania"/>
<link wikidata="Q332105" start="4138" end="4153" title="Jacques Charles" label="Jacques Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5931812" start="4158" end="4219" title="Robert brothers" label="Les Frères Robert (Anne-Jean Robert and Nicolas-Louis Robert)"/>
<link wikidata="Q183951" start="4237" end="4253" title="Balloon (aircraft)" label="Hydrogen balloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q451444" start="4263" end="4278" title="William Murdoch" label="William Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q171043" start="4306" end="4322" title="steam locomotive" label="steam locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010210" start="4335" end="4351" title="Redruth" label="Redruth, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q536135" start="4379" end="4387" title="tricycle" label="tricycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936125" start="4457" end="4468" title="Canal Mania" label="Canal Mania"/>
<link wikidata="Q217157" start="4579" end="4597" title="Richard Trevithick" label="Richard Trevithick"/>
<link wikidata="Q16249928" start="4627" end="4642" title="History of steam road vehicles" label="road locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774403" start="4664" end="4681" title="Camborne" label="Camborne, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670814" start="4730" end="4751" title="London Steam Carriage" label="London Steam Carriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q984209" start="4761" end="4778" title="William Symington" label="William Symington"/>
<link wikidata="Q461588" start="4792" end="4808" title="Charlotte Dundas" label="Charlotte Dundas"/>
<link wikidata="Q178193" start="4876" end="4885" title="steamboat" label="steamboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q93301" start="4970" end="4988" title="railway locomotive" label="railway locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020205" start="5060" end="5072" title="Oliver Evans" label="Oliver Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q474698" start="5120" end="5138" title="amphibious vehicle" label="amphibious vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q124068" start="5149" end="5172" title="Francois Isaac de Rivaz" label="Francois Isaac de Rivaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244717" start="5179" end="5194" title="De Rivaz engine" label="De Rivaz engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383838" start="5271" end="5298" title="Swansea and Mumbles Railway" label="Swansea and Mumbles Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q832003" start="5336" end="5344" title="horsecar" label="horsecar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="5345" end="5349" title="tram" label="tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q192496" start="5368" end="5381" title="Robert Fulton" label="Robert Fulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785439" start="5395" end="5416" title="North River Steamboat" label="North River Steamboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q188342" start="5516" end="5532" title="Nicéphore Niépce" label="Nicéphore Niépce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395446" start="5547" end="5559" title="Pyréolophore" label="Pyréolophore"/>
<link wikidata="Q187834" start="5622" end="5627" title="Saone" label="Saone"/>
<link wikidata="Q124068" start="5647" end="5661" title="Isaac de Rivas" label="Isaac de Rivas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244717" start="5669" end="5716" title="De Rivaz engine" label="hydrogen gas powered internal combustion engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q836547" start="5786" end="5796" title="guided bus" label="guided bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959671" start="5813" end="5821" title="wagonway" label="wagonway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572089" start="5822" end="5856" title="Gloucester and Cheltenham Tramroad" label="Gloucester and Cheltenham Tramroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299773" start="5930" end="5944" title="Matthew Murray" label="Matthew Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032225" start="5952" end="5973" title="Salamanca (locomotive)" label="&amp;quot;Salamanca&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931930" start="5977" end="5994" title="Middleton Railway" label="Middleton Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q321176" start="6034" end="6051" title="Timothy Hackworth" label="Timothy Hackworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q735464" start="6065" end="6078" title="Puffing Billy (locomotive)" label="Puffing Billy"/>
<link wikidata="Q133614" start="6156" end="6173" title="George Stephenson" label="George Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11442" start="6323" end="6330" title="Bicycle" label="Bicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q77122" start="6352" end="6366" title="Karl von Drais" label="Karl von Drais"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="6476" end="6490" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="6528" end="6546" title="Liverpool, England" label="Liverpool, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q83813" start="6552" end="6569" title="Savannah, Georgia" label="Savannah, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q502057" start="6601" end="6613" title="kick scooter" label="kick scooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q738131" start="6907" end="6923" title="Locomotion No. 1" label="Locomotion No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q375044" start="6932" end="6965" title="Stockton &amp;amp; Darlington Railway" label="Stockton &amp;amp; Darlington Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q458154" start="7210" end="7232" title="Goldsworthy Gurney" label="Sir Goldsworthy Gurney"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7254" end="7287" title="Goldsworthy Gurney#Gurney&amp;#x27;s steam carriage" label="steam-powered passenger carriages"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="7346" end="7360" title="Bath, Somerset" label="Bath, Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q339401" start="7389" end="7407" title="suspension railway" label="suspension railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q19790" start="7422" end="7430" title="Cheshunt" label="Cheshunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398696" start="7492" end="7524" title="Liverpool and Manchester Railway" label="Liverpool and Manchester Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483054" start="7765" end="7781" title="Lancashire Witch" label="Lancashire Witch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940244" start="7796" end="7820" title="Bolton and Leigh Railway" label="Bolton and Leigh Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424148" start="7859" end="7884" title="Leeds and Liverpool Canal" label="Leeds and Liverpool Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747281" start="7889" end="7923" title="Manchester Bolton &amp;amp; Bury Canal" label="Manchester Bolton &amp;amp; Bury Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144114" start="8008" end="8023" title="Rainhill Trials" label="Rainhill Trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q777026" start="8107" end="8131" title="Stephenson&amp;#x27;s Rocket" label="Stephenson&amp;#x27;s Rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096523" start="8360" end="8392" title="Opening of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway" label="Liverpool and Manchester Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q912357" start="8650" end="8660" title="mail coach" label="mail coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q625151" start="8792" end="8811" title="electric locomotive" label="electric locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q625151" start="8832" end="8850" title="battery locomotive" label="battery locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156853" start="8876" end="8891" title="Robert Davidson (inventor)" label="Robert Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="8895" end="8903" title="Aberdeen" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="8907" end="8915" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q209440" start="8939" end="8952" title="galvanic cell" label="galvanic cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q207380" start="8976" end="8999" title="Isambard Kingdom Brunel" label="Isambard Kingdom Brunel"/>
<link wikidata="Q60579" start="9189" end="9206" title="Moritz von Jacobi" label="Moritz von Jacobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="9218" end="9231" title="St Petersburg" label="St Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="9233" end="9239" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130734" start="9332" end="9352" title="Nicholas I of Russia" label="Nicholas I of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q645" start="9360" end="9370" title="Neva River" label="Neva River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072191" start="9381" end="9394" title="Railway Mania" label="Railway Mania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3701059" start="9477" end="9503" title="Dalkey Atmospheric Railway" label="Dalkey Atmospheric railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q752392" start="9535" end="9542" title="railcar" label="railcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6142736" start="9559" end="9571" title="James Samuel" label="James Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q696947" start="9577" end="9601" title="Eastern Counties Railway" label="Eastern Counties Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578132" start="9632" end="9653" title="William Bridges Adams" label="William Bridges Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q319362" start="9737" end="9754" title="Sir George Cayley" label="Sir George Cayley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165278" start="9762" end="9768" title="Glider (aircraft)" label="glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q171413" start="9852" end="9863" title="Elisha Otis" label="Elisha Otis"/>
<link wikidata="Q319362" start="9905" end="9918" title="George Cayley" label="George Cayley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165278" start="9981" end="9987" title="glider aircraft" label="glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754713" start="9995" end="10006" title="Quadracycle" label="Quadracycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q623272" start="10031" end="10044" title="model railway" label="model railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q221549" start="10049" end="10074" title="Napoléon, Prince Imperial" label="Napoléon, Prince Imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q250936" start="10084" end="10097" title="Gaston Planté" label="Gaston Planté"/>
<link wikidata="Q337724" start="10111" end="10128" title="lead–acid battery" label="lead–acid battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="10293" end="10309" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q12935" start="10319" end="10333" title="Étienne Lenoir" label="Étienne Lenoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="10357" end="10367" title="automobile" label="automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q935025" start="10391" end="10411" title="Metropolitan Railway" label="Metropolitan Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q12935" start="10489" end="10503" title="Étienne Lenoir" label="Étienne Lenoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q906560" start="10505" end="10516" title="Hippomobile (car)" label="Hippomobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104214" start="10538" end="10548" title="History of the motorcycle" label="motorcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281298" start="10571" end="10585" title="Safety bicycle" label="Safety bicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q262367" start="10604" end="10623" title="George Westinghouse" label="George Westinghouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196198" start="10637" end="10657" title="air brake (rail)" label="compressed-air brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q347416" start="10686" end="10710" title="Louis-Guillaume Perreaux" label="Louis-Guillaume Perreaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715277" start="10718" end="10734" title="Michaux-Perreaux steam velocipede" label="steam velocipede"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351389" start="10765" end="10772" title="Pierre Michaux" label="Michaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q595658" start="10773" end="10783" title="velocipede" label="velocipede"/>
<link wikidata="Q6306032" start="10793" end="10806" title="Jules Suriray" label="Jules Suriray"/>
<link wikidata="Q233053" start="10819" end="10835" title="bicycle mechanic" label="bicycle mechanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432170" start="10869" end="10881" title="ball bearing" label="ball bearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538190" start="10918" end="10926" title="kicksled" label="kicksled"/>
<link wikidata="Q217421" start="10973" end="10978" title="bogie" label="bogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="11007" end="11020" title="electric tram" label="electric tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q194084" start="11038" end="11049" title="Sestroretsk" label="Sestroretsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="11055" end="11071" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353851" start="11104" end="11119" title="Fyodor Pirotsky" label="Fyodor Pirotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q58577" start="11129" end="11147" title="Werner von Siemens" label="Werner von Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="11231" end="11244" title="electric tram" label="electric tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287860" start="11250" end="11276" title="Gross-Lichterfelde tramway" label="Gross-Lichterfelde tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q155211" start="11280" end="11292" title="Lichterfelde (Berlin)" label="Lichterfelde"/>
<link wikidata="Q58577" start="11325" end="11343" title="Werner von Siemens" label="Werner von Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q110701" start="11415" end="11428" title="Overhead line" label="overhead wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639" start="11466" end="11476" title="trolleybus" label="trolleybus"/>
<link wikidata="Q58577" start="11515" end="11535" title="Ernst Werner von Siemens" label="Ernst Werner Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q260878" start="11559" end="11570" title="Elektromote" label="Elektromote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868445" start="11650" end="11678" title="Mödling and Hinterbrühl Tram" label="Mödling and Hinterbrühl Tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="11704" end="11717" title="electric tram" label="electric tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q110701" start="11729" end="11742" title="overhead wire" label="overhead wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q20739384" start="11752" end="11765" title="Thomas Parker (inventor)" label="Thomas Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q193692" start="11795" end="11807" title="electric car" label="electric car"/>
<link wikidata="Q40224" start="11904" end="11913" title="Karl Benz" label="Karl Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="11950" end="11976" title="internal combustion engine" label="internal combustion engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q326248" start="11995" end="12017" title="Benz Patent Motorwagen" label="Benz Patent Motorwagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q902403" start="12037" end="12067" title="Battery electric multiple unit" label="Battery electric multiple unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q564937" start="12103" end="12132" title="Royal Bavarian State Railways" label="Royal Bavarian State Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664428" start="12252" end="12262" title="interurban" label="interurban"/>
<link wikidata="Q844054" start="12263" end="12273" title="tram-train" label="tram-train"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076882" start="12414" end="12429" title="battery vehicle" label="battery vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935273" start="12431" end="12441" title="milk float" label="milk float"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907353" start="12547" end="12556" title="Bike boom" label="Bike boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094056" start="12671" end="12700" title="City and South London Railway" label="City and South London Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284242" start="12824" end="12841" title="Railway electrification in Great Britain" label="electric traction"/>
<link wikidata="Q750483" start="12850" end="12867" title="Recumbent bicycle" label="Recumbent bicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q847580" start="12893" end="12907" title="moving walkway" label="moving walkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q285406" start="12923" end="12956" title="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition" label="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q386424" start="12970" end="12996" title="Liverpool Overhead Railway" label="Liverpool Overhead Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q483373" start="13031" end="13053" title="electric multiple unit" label="electric multiple unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q21718902" start="13158" end="13169" title="trolleyboat" label="trolleyboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051405" start="13249" end="13256" title="sidecar" label="sidecar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618291" start="13266" end="13293" title="Hildebrand &amp;amp; Wolfmüller" label="Hildebrand &amp;amp; Wolfmüller"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13305" end="13321" title="Motorcycle history#First commercial products" label="first motorcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q580471" start="13387" end="13397" title="Siegerland" label="Siegerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q256469" start="13532" end="13545" title="Benz Viktoria" label="Benz Viktoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q346015" start="13555" end="13568" title="Jesse W. Reno" label="Jesse W. Reno"/>
<link wikidata="Q15003" start="13582" end="13591" title="escalator" label="escalator"/>
<link wikidata="Q628201" start="13595" end="13607" title="Coney Island" label="Coney Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q125006" start="13661" end="13676" title="Brooklyn Bridge" label="Brooklyn Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q187934" start="13708" end="13716" title="monorail" label="monorail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094907" start="13718" end="13752" title="Ontario Southern Railway (Ontario)" label="Ontario Southern Railway (Ontario)"/>
<link wikidata="Q150910" start="13763" end="13778" title="Charles Algernon Parsons" label="Charles Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188138" start="13791" end="13799" title="Turbinia" label="Turbinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189859" start="13843" end="13856" title="steam turbine" label="steam turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q924724" start="13906" end="13922" title="electric bicycle" label="electric bicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q214833" start="14063" end="14079" title="four-wheel drive" label="four-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q75780" start="14113" end="14135" title="Ferdinand von Zeppelin" label="Ferdinand von Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q133585" start="14164" end="14171" title="airship" label="airship"/>
<link wikidata="Q75780" start="14181" end="14203" title="Ferdinand von Zeppelin" label="Ferdinand von Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146890" start="14213" end="14222" title="LZ 1" label="the first"/>
<link wikidata="Q133585" start="14234" end="14241" title="airship" label="airship"/>
<link wikidata="Q35820" start="14295" end="14327" title="Wright brothers" label="Orville Wright and Wilbur Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q197" start="14357" end="14365" title="airplane" label="airplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="14369" end="14382" title="Diesel engine" label="Diesel engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12674" start="14411" end="14425" title="Rudolph Diesel" label="Rudolph Diesel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14427" end="14440" title="Adrian Bochet" label="Adrian Bochet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14445" end="14462" title="Frederic Dyckhoff" label="Frederic Dyckhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q402092" start="14479" end="14488" title="motorship" label="motorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q351940" start="14555" end="14561" title="Vandal (tanker)" label="Vandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306052" start="14573" end="14581" title="Branobel" label="Branobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639" start="14645" end="14655" title="trolleybus" label="trolleybus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414193" start="14708" end="14723" title="Hull, MA" label="Nantasket Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="14833" end="14844" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q130268556" start="14868" end="14877" title="hydrofoil" label="hydrofoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q939768" start="14886" end="14902" title="Enrico Forlanini" label="Enrico Forlanini"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996862" start="14916" end="14941" title="London Electrobus Company" label="London Electrobus Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q23925184" start="14971" end="14991" title="battery-electric bus" label="battery-electric bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6526" start="15123" end="15130" title="Bolzano" label="Bolzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409250" start="15167" end="15176" title="Aerial lift" label="cable car"/>
<link wikidata="Q8768" start="15251" end="15261" title="Henry Ford" label="Henry Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q182323" start="15353" end="15365" title="Model T" label="Ford Model T"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390682" start="15375" end="15390" title="Fabre Hydravion" label="Fabre Hydravion"/>
<link wikidata="Q285930" start="15421" end="15429" title="Selandia" label="Selandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="15466" end="15479" title="diesel engine" label="diesel engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q34336" start="15524" end="15541" title="diesel locomotive" label="diesel locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q803489" start="15617" end="15646" title="Winterthur–Romanshorn railway" label="Winterthur–Romanshorn railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411533" start="15672" end="15683" title="Articulated vehicle" label="Articulated"/>
<link wikidata="Q894561" start="15722" end="15745" title="Boston Elevated Railway" label="Boston Elevated Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004" start="15797" end="15810" title="traffic light" label="traffic light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071804" start="15830" end="15879" title="Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul and Pacific Railroad" label="Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul and Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q185757" start="16024" end="16034" title="Hovercraft" label="Hovercraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399970" start="16125" end="16142" title="Motorized scooter" label="Motorized scooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="16346" end="16357" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5629157" start="16367" end="16371" title="HD-4" label="HD-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q122714" start="16378" end="16388" title="hydroplane (boat)" label="hydroplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q34286" start="16401" end="16422" title="Alexander Graham Bell" label="Alexander Graham Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q208708" start="16449" end="16457" title="autogyro" label="autogyro"/>
<link wikidata="Q949801" start="16458" end="16468" title="rotorcraft" label="rotorcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119710" start="16479" end="16489" title="Cierva C.4" label="Cierva C.4"/>
<link wikidata="Q34336" start="16533" end="16550" title="diesel locomotive" label="diesel locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671238" start="16581" end="16585" title="Russian locomotive class E el-2" label="Eel2"/>
<link wikidata="Q481582" start="16665" end="16679" title="Yuri Lomonosov" label="Yuri Lomonosov"/>
<link wikidata="Q314543" start="16703" end="16728" title="Maschinenfabrik Esslingen" label="Maschinenfabrik Esslingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q182546" start="16749" end="16766" title="Robert H. Goddard" label="Robert H. Goddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q860308" start="16786" end="16806" title="bipropellant rocket" label="liquid-fueled rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419417" start="16822" end="16835" title="Moth (dinghy)" label="Moth (dinghy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037996" start="16845" end="16854" title="Inverloch, Victoria" label="Inverloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431095" start="16883" end="16892" title="golf cart" label="golf cart"/>
<link wikidata="Q190211" start="16986" end="16990" title="DC-3" label="DC-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q69994" start="17069" end="17083" title="Hermann Kemper" label="Hermann Kemper"/>
<link wikidata="Q16928416" start="17100" end="17122" title="linear induction motor" label="linear induction motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q704025" start="17177" end="17191" title="Heinkel He 176" label="Heinkel He 176"/>
<link wikidata="Q178777" start="17233" end="17243" title="jet engine" label="jet engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q161540" start="17258" end="17272" title="Heinkel He 178" label="Heinkel He 178"/>
<link wikidata="Q174640" start="17355" end="17357" title="V-2 rocket" label="V2"/>
<link wikidata="Q41291" start="17358" end="17364" title="rocket" label="rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q694547" start="17396" end="17408" title="Traffic cone" label="Traffic cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q271939" start="17427" end="17439" title="Chuck Yeager" label="Chuck Yeager"/>
<link wikidata="Q223365" start="17447" end="17454" title="Bell X1" label="Bell X1"/>
<link wikidata="Q221337" start="17475" end="17485" title="supersonic" label="supersonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q420962" start="17541" end="17557" title="Heritage railway" label="Heritage railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617851" start="17606" end="17622" title="high-speed craft" label="high-speed craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q130268556" start="17626" end="17635" title="hydrofoil" label="hydrofoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q26159" start="17639" end="17657" title="de Havilland Comet" label="de Havilland Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142489" start="17704" end="17726" title="nuclear marine propulsion" label="nuclear-powered vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392766" start="17781" end="17786" title="SR.N1" label="SR.N1"/>
<link wikidata="Q469938" start="17815" end="17836" title="Christopher Cockerell" label="Christopher Cockerell"/>
<link wikidata="Q80811" start="17846" end="17855" title="Sputnik 1" label="Sputnik 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q17210" start="17974" end="17988" title="container ship" label="container ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394" start="18028" end="18038" title="Boeing 707" label="Boeing 707"/>
<link wikidata="Q180253" start="18110" end="18119" title="fuel cell" label="fuel cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806882" start="18143" end="18157" title="Allis-Chalmers" label="Allis-Chalmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q182524" start="18230" end="18238" title="Vostok 1" label="Vostok 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q170842" start="18280" end="18295" title="Sergey Korolyov" label="Sergey Korolyov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327" start="18336" end="18348" title="Yuri Gagarin" label="Yuri Gagarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q164338" start="18454" end="18464" title="Shinkansen" label="Shinkansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q211382" start="18471" end="18486" title="high-speed rail" label="high-speed rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411851" start="18496" end="18515" title="Caspian Sea Monster" label="Caspian Sea Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q309398" start="18516" end="18537" title="ground effect vehicle" label="ground effect vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q787208" start="18558" end="18583" title="Automatic train operation" label="Automatic train operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="18598" end="18616" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652427" start="18626" end="18638" title="Space hopper" label="Space hopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q179" start="18677" end="18687" title="Boeing 747" label="Boeing 747"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932" start="18780" end="18790" title="Space Race" label="Space Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q43653" start="18809" end="18828" title="Apollo 11" label="crewed Moon landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669010" start="18842" end="18851" title="Lolo ball" label="Lolo ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q211761" start="18870" end="18878" title="Salyut 1" label="Salyut 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q25956" start="18886" end="18899" title="space station" label="space station"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="18913" end="18925" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q130235853" start="18929" end="18943" title="Runcorn Busway" label="Runcorn Busway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878855" start="18971" end="18988" title="bus rapid transit" label="bus rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q315137" start="19005" end="19021" title="Stadtbahnwagen B" label="Stadtbahnwagen B"/>
<link wikidata="Q115755619" start="19022" end="19028" title="semi-metro" label="hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="19029" end="19033" title="tram" label="tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375714" start="19053" end="19067" title="Morgantown PRT" label="Morgantown PRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q912996" start="19075" end="19097" title="Personal Rapid Transit" label="Personal Rapid Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505" start="19130" end="19138" title="Concorde" label="Concorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q741490" start="19235" end="19253" title="self driving car" label="semi-automated car"/>
<link wikidata="Q836547" start="19392" end="19402" title="guided bus" label="guided bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066" start="19435" end="19440" title="Essen" label="Essen"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="19471" end="19484" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826456" start="19504" end="19530" title="Automated guideway transit" label="Automated guideway transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q639030" start="19542" end="19554" title="people mover" label="people mover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230715" start="19586" end="19602" title="Port Island Line" label="Port Island Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826456" start="19625" end="19651" title="Automated guideway transit" label="Automated guideway transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144784" start="19728" end="19754" title="Véhicule Automatique Léger" label="Véhicule Automatique Léger"/>
<link wikidata="Q610729" start="19769" end="19780" title="Lille Metro" label="Lille Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429206" start="19869" end="19880" title="Sinclair C5" label="Sinclair C5"/>
<link wikidata="Q892572" start="19923" end="19933" title="velomobile" label="velomobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440401" start="19952" end="19962" title="Snakeboard" label="Snakeboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758779" start="20022" end="20037" title="Railroad Tycoon" label="Railroad Tycoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456582" start="20056" end="20078" title="ADtranz low floor tram" label="ADtranz low floor tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q10257" start="20144" end="20158" title="Channel Tunnel" label="Channel Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3411677" start="20181" end="20189" title="kickbike" label="kickbike"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20225" end="20231" title="Shinkansen#Maglev (Chuo Shinkansen)" label="Maglev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655621" start="20278" end="20292" title="Toyota RAV4 EV" label="Toyota RAV4 EV"/>
<link wikidata="Q308567" start="20300" end="20330" title="nickel-metal hydride batteries" label="nickel-metal hydride batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q213115" start="20352" end="20364" title="Toyota Prius" label="Toyota Prius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260338" start="20410" end="20429" title="Nissan R&amp;#x27;nessa" label="Nissan R&amp;#x27;nessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822895" start="20458" end="20477" title="lithium-ion battery" label="lithium-ion battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q49502" start="20532" end="20544" title="Deep Space 1" label="Deep Space 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137570" start="20590" end="20614" title="folding bicycle" label="folding electric bicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074099" start="20633" end="20639" title="Trikke" label="Trikke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137570" start="20699" end="20723" title="folding bicycle" label="folding electric bicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q429748" start="20759" end="20771" title="TransMilenio" label="TransMilenio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878855" start="20786" end="20803" title="bus rapid transit" label="bus rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034458" start="20846" end="20858" title="capa vehicle" label="capa vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q214893" start="20945" end="20954" title="Segway PT" label="Segway PT"/>
<link wikidata="Q720457" start="21014" end="21024" title="Dean Kamen" label="Dean Kamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312102" start="21093" end="21118" title="Ground-level power supply" label="Ground-level power supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q606304" start="21131" end="21147" title="Bordeaux tramway" label="Bordeaux tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034458" start="21176" end="21188" title="capa vehicle" label="capa vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658611" start="21216" end="21224" title="NE Train" label="NE Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141157" start="21238" end="21250" title="hybrid train" label="hybrid train"/>
<link wikidata="Q769591" start="21289" end="21329" title="Shanghai Maglev Train" label="First commercial high speed Maglev train"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307447" start="21433" end="21454" title="Metrocable (Medellín)" label="Metrocable (Medellín)"/>
<link wikidata="Q210893" start="21464" end="21478" title="Tesla Roadster (2008)" label="Tesla Roadster"/>
<link wikidata="Q391888" start="21544" end="21554" title="Škoda 15 T" label="Škoda 15 T"/>
<link wikidata="Q620615" start="21645" end="21655" title="Mobile app" label="Mobile app"/>
<link wikidata="Q847201" start="21775" end="21785" title="carsharing" label="carsharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358919" start="21787" end="21802" title="bicycle sharing system" label="bicycle sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q749649" start="21807" end="21814" title="carpool" label="carpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905238" start="21922" end="21931" title="BlaBlaCar" label="BlaBlaCar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881378" start="21933" end="21940" title="Flixbus" label="Flixbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547230" start="21950" end="21971" title="ULTra (rapid transit)" label="ULTra (rapid transit)"/>
<link wikidata="Q912996" start="22001" end="22023" title="Personal Rapid Transit" label="Personal Rapid Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="22070" end="22086" title="Heathrow Airport" label="Heathrow Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q609059" start="22096" end="22102" title="IKAROS" label="IKAROS"/>
<link wikidata="Q368891" start="22128" end="22138" title="solar sail" label="solar sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q21161871" start="22159" end="22181" title="Self-balancing scooter" label="Self-balancing scooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q997617" start="22210" end="22238" title="CSR Corporation Limited" label="China South Rail Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q909558" start="22290" end="22307" title="fuel cell vehicle" label="fuel cell vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q27429798" start="22360" end="22369" title="Navya SAS" label="Navya SAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915012" start="22424" end="22444" title="Sheba Medical Center" label="Sheba Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q180253" start="22468" end="22486" title="hydrogen fuel cell" label="hydrogen fuel cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q28541528" start="22521" end="22528" title="DLR HY4" label="DLR HY4"/>
<link wikidata="Q5063597" start="22549" end="22563" title="low-floor tram" label="low-floor tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312102" start="22564" end="22589" title="Ground-level power supply" label="Ground-level power supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q17060111" start="22635" end="22646" title="Trams in Zhuhai" label="Zhuhai tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q481551" start="22679" end="22695" title="trams in Potsdam" label="trams in Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353760" start="22765" end="22777" title="Toyota Mirai" label="Toyota Mirai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145895" start="22826" end="22848" title="Ion-propelled aircraft" label="Ion-propelled aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q60754873" start="22864" end="22890" title="MIT EAD Airframe Version 2" label="MIT EAD Airframe Version 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q124403" start="22897" end="22907" title="ionic wind" label="ionic wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261849" start="22934" end="22966" title="Hydrail" label="hydrogen-powered passenger train"/>
<link wikidata="Q351337" start="22968" end="22987" title="Alstom Coradia Lint" label="Alstom Coradia Lint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197" start="23001" end="23013" title="Lower Saxony" label="Lower Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="23015" end="23022" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370857" start="23037" end="23066" title="Autonomous Rail Rapid Transit" label="Autonomous Rail Rapid Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="23254" end="23271" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q87866152" start="23287" end="23296" title="COVID-19 lockdown" label="lockdowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q90630881" start="23360" end="23366" title="Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q87625383" start="23372" end="23375" title="Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on aviation" label="air"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23400" end="23431" title="Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the environment#Cycling" label="Cycling is an exception to this"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23558" end="23575" title="Effects of the car on societies#Public or external costs" label="complete societal"/>
<link wikidata="Q786949" start="23576" end="23581" title="Economics of car use" label="costs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="23585" end="23588" title="car" label="car"/>
<link wikidata="Q275372" start="23626" end="23639" title="externality" label="externalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="23671" end="23684" title="air pollution" label="air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q275450" start="23792" end="23798" title="space debris" label="debris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729047" start="23837" end="23851" title="space industry" label="space industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324025" start="23880" end="23902" title="billionaire space race" label="billionaire space race"/>
<link wikidata="Q49390" start="23961" end="23974" title="space tourism" label="space tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434707" start="23997" end="24007" title="space law" label="regulation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24054" end="24078" title="Environmental effects of aviation#Mitigation" label="aviation decarbonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q120212142" start="24123" end="24136" title="Air travel demand reduction" label="future demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507145" start="24149" end="24159" title="fuel economy in aircraft" label="efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828692" start="24205" end="24218" title="sustainable aviation fuel" label="SAF (biofuel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q56298528" start="24301" end="24308" title="CO2 removal" label="removal"/>
<link wikidata="Q128991" start="24503" end="24510" title="biofuel" label="biofuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229911" start="24589" end="24602" title="food security" label="food security"/>
<link wikidata="Q97356765" start="24716" end="24729" title="Mini-Hollands" label="Mini-Hollands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4010939" start="24730" end="24746" title="Active mobility" label="active transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q107389319" start="24773" end="24798" title="Low Traffic Neighbourhood" label="Low Traffic Neighbourhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q31218" start="24861" end="24876" title="Health economics" label="health economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215004" start="24915" end="24951" title="Societal impacts of cars" label="harms from personal car automobility"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25002" end="25017" title="History of the automobile#Eras of invention" label="their invention"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115079" start="25024" end="25036" title="Technology and society" label="automobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q16879561" start="25053" end="25069" title="List of causes of death by rate" label="every 34th death"/>
<link wikidata="Q786773" start="25231" end="25241" title="Car dependency" label="dependency"/>
<link wikidata="Q452617" start="25314" end="25338" title="Hydrogen-powered aircraft" label="hydrogen fuel cell plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q12013" start="25348" end="25359" title="Google Maps" label="Google Maps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358919" start="25377" end="25388" title="Bicycle-sharing system" label="bike shares"/>
<link wikidata="Q350882" start="25408" end="25422" title="Journey planner" label="route planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q90630881" start="25490" end="25535" title="Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport" label="public transport during the COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261849" start="25577" end="25600" title="Hydrail" label="hydrogen-powered trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q388201" start="25675" end="25683" title="Railway electrification" label="electric"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25795" end="25807" title="Siemens Mireo#Mireo Plus H" label="Mireo Plus H"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="25811" end="25818" title="Siemens" label="Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q160047" start="25969" end="25975" title="maglev" label="maglev"/>
<link wikidata="Q13156052" start="25996" end="26005" title="hyperloop" label="hyperloop"/>
<link wikidata="Q72877" start="26026" end="26032" title="Datong" label="Datong"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605534" start="26066" end="26079" title="Hyperloop One" label="Hyperloop One"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26291" end="26306" title="Sleeping car#Night trains today" label="sleeping trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364310" start="26398" end="26419" title="sustainable transport" label="sustainable transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q22100858" start="26625" end="26635" title="Fuxing Hao" label="Fuxing Hao"/>
<link wikidata="Q10883161" start="26688" end="26725" title="Beijing–Zhangjiakou intercity railway" label="Beijing–Zhangjiakou intercity railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569610" start="26920" end="26934" title="autonomous bus" label="autonomous bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q787208" start="27203" end="27230" title="self-driving train" label="automated, driverless train"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="27264" end="27271" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q380170" start="27476" end="27492" title="Energy conservation" label="energy efficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q4419860" start="27531" end="27549" title="Unmanned surface vehicle" label="autonomous vessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q48739833" start="27551" end="27557" title="Roboat" label="Roboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q340013" start="27580" end="27599" title="canals of Amsterdam" label="canals of Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q180388" start="27687" end="27700" title="waste management" label="collect waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826854" start="27702" end="27715" title="Autonomous logistics" label="deliver goods"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27785" end="27806" title="Unmanned surface vehicle#Cargo" label="autonomous cargo ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q39659506" start="27808" end="27837" title="MV Yara Birkeland" label="MV &amp;quot;Yara Birkeland&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326749" start="27871" end="27884" title="Electric boat" label="electric ship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27967" end="27997" title="2025 in science and technology" label="2025 in science and technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q131607880" start="28000" end="28016" title="2025 in aviation" label="2025 in aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q65117369" start="28019" end="28041" title="2025 in rail transport" label="2025 in rail transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765896" start="28044" end="28061" title="Maritime timeline" label="Maritime timeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806114" start="28064" end="28087" title="Timeline of automobiles" label="Timeline of automobiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088229" start="28089" end="28109" title="Timeline of aviation" label="Timeline of aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088283" start="28111" end="28142" title="Timeline of historic inventions" label="Timeline of historic inventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059831" start="28144" end="28166" title="History of the bicycle" label="History of the bicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355707" start="28168" end="28199" title="History of the electric vehicle" label="History of the electric vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806115" start="28201" end="28238" title="Timeline of motorized bicycle history" label="Timeline of motorized bicycle history"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137487" start="28240" end="28267" title="Timeline of railway history" label="Timeline of railway history"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868627" start="28269" end="28293" title="History of rapid transit" label="History of rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446867" start="28295" end="28318" title="Timeline of spaceflight" label="Timeline of spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806461" start="28320" end="28351" title="Timeline of three longest spans" label="Timeline of three longest spans"/>
<link wikidata="Q219611" start="28353" end="28360" title="Ufology" label="Ufology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58406" wikidata="Q565911" url="?curid=58406" title="Anne of Green Gables">
<text>Anne of Green Gables is a 1908 novel by Canadian author Lucy Maud Montgomery (published as L. M. Montgomery). Written for all ages, it has been considered a classic children&#x27;s novel since the mid-20th century. Set in the late 19th century, the novel recounts the adventures of an 11-year-old orphan girl Anne Shirley sent by mistake to two middle-aged siblings, Matthew and Marilla Cuthbert, who had originally intended to adopt a boy to help them on their farm in the fictional town of Avonlea in Prince Edward Island, Canada. The novel recounts how Anne makes her way through life with the Cuthberts, in school, and within the town.

Since its publication, &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot; has been translated into at least 36 languages and has sold more than 50 million copies, making it one of the best-selling books worldwide to date in any language, and is taught to students around the world. It was the first of many novels; Montgomery wrote numerous sequels. In 2008, an authorized prequel&quot;, Before Green Gables&quot; by Budge Wilson was published on the occasion of the 100th anniversary of the series. 

The book has been adapted as films, television films, and animated and live-action television series. Musicals and plays have also been created, with productions annually in Canada, Europe and Japan.

== Source ==

In writing the novel, Montgomery was inspired by notes she had made as a young girl about two siblings who were mistakenly sent an orphan girl instead of the boy they had requested, yet decided to keep her. She drew upon her childhood experiences in rural Prince Edward Island, Canada. Montgomery used a photograph of Evelyn Nesbit, which she had clipped from New York&#x27;s &quot;Metropolitan Magazine&quot; and put on the wall of her bedroom as the model for the face of Anne Shirley and a reminder of her &quot;youthful idealism and spirituality.&quot;

Montgomery was inspired by the &quot;formula Ann&quot; orphan stories (called such because they followed such a predictable formula) that were popular at the time, but distinguished her character by spelling her name with an extra &quot;e&quot;. She based other characters, such as Gilbert Blythe, in part on people she knew. She said she wrote the novel in the twilight of the day while sitting at her window and overlooking the fields of Cavendish.

== Summary ==
Anne Shirley, a young orphan from the fictional community of Bolingbroke, Nova Scotia (based upon the real community of New London, Prince Edward Island), is sent to live with Marilla and Matthew Cuthbert, unmarried siblings in their fifties and sixties, after a childhood spent in strangers&#x27; homes and orphanages. Marilla and Matthew had originally sought to adopt a boy from the orphanage to help Matthew run their farm at Green Gables, which is set in the fictional town of Avonlea (based on Cavendish, Prince Edward Island). Through a misunderstanding, the orphanage sends Anne instead.

Anne is fanciful, imaginative, eager to please, and dramatic. She is also adamant her name should always be spelled with an &quot;e&quot; at the end. However, she is defensive about her appearance, despising her red hair, freckles, and pale, thin frame, but liking her nose. She is talkative, especially when it comes to describing her fantasies and dreams. At first, stern Marilla says Anne must return to the orphanage, but after much observation and consideration, along with kind, quiet Matthew&#x27;s encouragement, Marilla decides to let her stay.

Anne takes much joy in life and adapts quickly, thriving in the close-knit farming village. Her imagination and talkativeness soon brighten up Green Gables.
The book recounts Anne&#x27;s struggles and joys in settling into Green Gables (the first real home she&#x27;s ever known): the country school where she quickly excels in her studies; her friendship with Diana Barry, the girl living next door (her best or &quot;bosom friend&quot; as Anne fondly calls her); her budding literary ambitions; and her rivalry with her classmate Gilbert Blythe, who teases her about her red hair. For that, he earns her instant hatred, although he apologizes several times. As time passes, however, Anne realizes she no longer hates Gilbert, but her pride and stubbornness keep her from speaking to him.

The book also follows Anne&#x27;s adventures in Avonlea. Episodes include playtime with her friends Diana, calm, placid Jane Andrews, and beautiful, boy-crazy Ruby Gillis. She has run-ins with the unpleasant Pye sisters, Gertie and Josie, and frequent domestic &quot;scrapes&quot; such as dyeing her hair green while intending to dye it black, and accidentally getting Diana drunk by giving her what she thinks is raspberry cordial but which turns out to be currant wine.

At sixteen, Anne goes to Queen&#x27;s Academy to earn a teaching license, along with Gilbert, Ruby, Josie, Jane, and several other students, excluding Diana, much to Anne&#x27;s dismay. She obtains her license in one year instead of the usual two and wins the Avery Scholarship awarded to the top student in English. This scholarship would allow her to pursue a Bachelor of Arts (B.A.) degree at the fictional Redmond College (based on the real Dalhousie College) on the mainland in Nova Scotia.

Near the end of the book, however, tragedy strikes when Matthew dies of a heart attack after learning that all of his and Marilla&#x27;s money has been lost in a bank failure. Out of devotion to Marilla and Green Gables, Anne gives up the scholarship to stay at home and help Marilla, whose eyesight is failing. She plans to teach at the Carmody school, the nearest school available, and return to Green Gables on weekends. In an act of friendship, Gilbert Blythe gives up his teaching position at the Avonlea School in favor of Anne, to work at the White Sands School instead, knowing that Anne wants to stay close to Marilla after Matthew&#x27;s death. After this kind act, Anne and Gilbert&#x27;s friendship is cemented, and Anne looks forward to what life will bring next.

== Characters ==
=== The Green Gables household ===
* Anne Shirley: An imaginative, talkative, red-haired orphan who comes to live with Matthew and Marilla Cuthbert at age 11. Anne is highly sensitive and dislikes the colour of her hair. Anne&#x27;s bleak early childhood was spent being shuttled from orphanage to foster homes, caring for younger children. She is excited to finally have a real home at Green Gables.
* Marilla Cuthbert: Matthew&#x27;s sister, an austere but fair woman who has the &quot;glimmerings of a sense of humour.&quot; Her life has been colourless and without joy until the arrival of Anne. She tries to instill discipline in the child but grows to love Anne&#x27;s vivacity and joy.
* Matthew Cuthbert: Marilla&#x27;s brother, a shy, kind man who takes a liking to Anne from the start. The two become fast friends and he is the first person to ever show Anne unconditional love. Although Marilla has primary responsibility for rearing Anne, Matthew has no qualms about &quot;spoiling&quot; her and indulging her with pretty clothes and fancy shoes.

=== Anne&#x27;s friends/classmates ===
* Diana Barry: Anne&#x27;s best friend and a kindred spirit. Anne and Diana become best friends from the moment they meet. She is the only girl of Anne&#x27;s age who lives close to Green Gables. Anne admires Diana for being pretty with black hair and flawless complexion and for her amiable disposition. Diana lacks Anne&#x27;s vivid imagination but is a loyal friend.
* Gilbert Blythe: A handsome, smart, and witty classmate, two years older than Anne, who has a crush on her. Unaware of Anne&#x27;s sensitivity about her red hair, he tries to get her attention by holding her braid and calling her &quot;Carrots&quot; in the classroom, and she breaks a slate over his head. Despite his attempts at an apology, Anne&#x27;s anger and stubbornness prevent her from speaking to him for several years. By the end of the book, however, they apologise and become good friends.
* Ruby Gillis: Another of Anne&#x27;s friends. Having several &quot;grown-up&quot; sisters, Ruby loves to share her knowledge of beaux with her friends. She is pretty and blonde, but rather empty-headed and prone to hysterics.
* Jane Andrews: One of Anne&#x27;s friends from school, she is plain and sensible. She does well enough academically to join Anne&#x27;s class at Queen&#x27;s.
* Josie Pye: A classmate generally disliked by the other girls (as are her siblings), Josie is vain, dishonest, sharp-tongued, and jealous of Anne&#x27;s popularity.
* Prissy Andrews: Another school companion of Anne&#x27;s, who is assumed to be in a relationship with the teacher, Mr. Phillips.

=== Avonlea&#x27;s locals ===
* Mrs. Rachel Lynde: A neighbour of Matthew and Marilla, Mrs. Lynde is a noted busybody but is also industrious and charitable. Although she and Anne start off on the wrong foot due to Mrs. Lynde&#x27;s blunt criticism and Anne&#x27;s short temper, they soon become quite close. Mrs. Lynde is married to Thomas Lynde, who is mentioned several times but never appears, and has raised ten children.
* Mr. Reginald Phillips: Anne&#x27;s first teacher at Avonlea, Mr. Phillips is unpopular with students. In Anne&#x27;s case, he continually misspells her name (without the &quot;E&quot;) and punishes only her among the twelve pupils who arrive late, resulting in Anne&#x27;s refusal to attend school for several weeks. Once, he punished Anne for losing her temper with Gilbert Blythe. He is described as lacking discipline, and &quot;courts&quot; one of his older pupils, Prissy Andrews, openly.
* Miss Muriel Stacy: Anne&#x27;s energetic replacement teacher. Her warm and sympathetic nature appeals to her students, but some of Avonlea&#x27;s more old-fashioned parents disapprove of her teaching methods. Miss Stacy is another &quot;kindred spirit,&quot; whom Anne views as a mentor. Miss Stacy encourages Anne to develop her character and intellect and helps prepare her for the entrance exam at Queen&#x27;s Academy.
* Mr. Ben and Mrs. Amaya Allan: The minister and his wife also befriend Anne, with Mrs. Allan becoming particularly close. She is described as pretty and is a &quot;kindred spirit.&quot;
* Mr. George Barry and Mrs. Barry: Diana&#x27;s parents. Mr. Barry is unseen save for late in the book when he drives Anne and Diana to Charlottetown. He is a farmer. Near the end of the book, he offers to rent some tracts to help out Anne and Marilla, after Matthew&#x27;s death. Mrs. Barry is a strict parent. After Anne accidentally gets Diana drunk, Mrs. Barry forbids Diana to have anything to do with Anne. This sanction is repealed after Anne saves Diana&#x27;s younger sister, Minnie May.
* Minnie May Barry: Diana&#x27;s baby sister, whose life is saved by Anne when she becomes infected with croup.

=== Others ===
* Miss Josephine Barry: Diana&#x27;s wealthy great-aunt from Charlottetown. She is initially severe, but is quickly charmed and entertained by Anne&#x27;s imagination, and invites her and Diana to tea. She refers to Anne as &quot;the Anne-girl&quot; and even sends Anne beaded slippers as a Christmas present.
* Mrs. Heather Hammond: Anne lives with her for a portion of her pre-Green-Gables life and cares for Mrs. Hammond&#x27;s three sets of twins. Anne is sent to the Hopetown orphan asylum when Mrs. Hammond is forced to break up her home after her husband&#x27;s sudden death.

==Publication history==
&quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot; was first published by L.C. Page &amp; Co. of Boston on June 13, 1908. The book quickly became a best-seller, selling over 19,000 copies in the first five months. Since then, over 50 million copies have been sold worldwide. A full scan of the first edition, first impression is provided by the L. M. Montgomery Institute.

Montgomery&#x27;s original manuscript is preserved by the Confederation Centre of the Arts, in Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island. Since 2022, the Centre has hosted a project in which digital images of the entire manuscript can be examined online. A transcript of the manuscript was published by Nimbus Publishing in 2019.

Montgomery&#x27;s original typescript and the corrected proofs are lost.

The first edition has errors in the text. Critical editions will identify corrections that have been applied to the text by the editor. The choice of corrections depends on the editor and varies across editions. As an example, the &quot;Penguin Classics&quot; edition, edited by Benjamin Lefebvre, lists the following corrections:

== Related works ==
Based on the popularity of her first book, Montgomery wrote a series of sequels to continue the story of her heroine Anne Shirley.

The prequel, &quot;Before Green Gables&quot; (2008), was written by Budge Wilson with the authorization of the heirs of L. M. Montgomery.

== Tourism and merchandising ==

The Green Gables farmhouse is located in Cavendish, Prince Edward Island. Many tourist attractions on Prince Edward Island have been developed based on the fictional Anne, and provincial license plates once bore her image. Balsam Hollow, the forest that inspired the Haunted Woods and Campbell Pond, the body of water which inspired The Lake of Shining Waters, both described in the book, are located in the vicinity. In addition, the Confederation Centre of the Arts has featured the wildly successful Anne of Green Gables musical on its mainstage every summer for over five decades, until 2020 and the Covid pandemic. The Anne of Green Gables Museum is located in Park Corner, PEI, in a home that inspired L. M. Montgomery.

The province and tourist facilities have highlighted the local connections to the internationally popular novels. &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot; has been translated into 36 languages. &quot;Tourism by &quot;Anne&quot; fans is an important part of the Island economy&quot;. Merchants offer items based on the novels.

In 2019, Canadian publishing company Bradan Press crowdfunded a Scottish-Gaelic translation of &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot;, titled Anna Ruadh, through the crowdfunding website Kickstarter. The book, released in 2020, is the first Scottish-Gaelic translation of &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot;.

The novel has been popular in Japan, where it is known as &quot;Red-haired Anne&quot; (), and where it has been included in the national school curriculum since 1952. &#x27;Anne&#x27; is revered as &quot;an icon&quot; in Japan, especially since 1979 when this story was broadcast as anime, &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot;. Japanese couples travel to Prince Edward Island to have civil wedding ceremonies on the grounds of the Green Gables farm. Some Japanese girls arrive as tourists with red-dyed hair styled in pigtails, to look like Anne. In 2014, the Asadora &#x27;Hanako to Anne&#x27;, which was about Hanako Muraoka, the first person to translate Anne into Japanese, was broadcast and Anne became popular among old and young alike.

A replica of the Green Gables house in Cavendish is located in the theme park Canadian World in Ashibetsu, Hokkaido, Japan. The park was a less expensive alternative for Japanese tourists instead of traveling to P.E.I. The park hosted performances featuring actresses playing Anne and Diana. The theme park is open during the summer season with free admission, though there are no longer staff or interpreters.

The Avonlea theme park near Cavendish and the Cavendish Figurines shop have trappings so that tourists may dress like the book&#x27;s characters for photos. Souvenir shops throughout Prince Edward Island offer numerous foods and products based on details of the &#x27;Anne Shirley&#x27; novels. Straw hats for girls with sewn-in red braids are common, as are bottles of raspberry cordial soda. 


== Legacy and honours ==
;Buildings
* The popularity of the books and subsequent film adaptations is credited with inspiring the design and naming of buildings &quot;Green Gables&quot;. An example still standing is an apartment block called &quot;Green Gables&quot; built in the 1930s, in New Farm, Queensland, Australia.
;Museum
* Bala&#x27;s Museum, located in Bala, Ontario, Canada, is a house museum established in 1992 and dedicated to Lucy M. Montgomery information and heritage. The house was a tourist home owned by Fanny Pike when Montgomery and her family stayed there on a summer vacation in 1922. That visit to the region inspired the novel &quot;The Blue Castle&quot; (1926). The town is named Deerwood in the novel; this was Montgomery&#x27;s only narrative setting outside Atlantic Canada.
;Postage stamps
* On May 15, 1975, Canada Post issued &quot;Lucy Maud Montgomery, Anne of Green Gables&quot; designed by Peter Swan and typographed by Bernard N.J. Reilander. The 8¢ stamps are perforated 13 and were printed by Ashton-Potter Limited.
* In 2008, Canada Post issued two postage stamps and a souvenir sheet honouring Anne and the &quot;Green Gables&quot; house.
;Reading lists
* In 2003, &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot; was ranked number 41 in The Big Read, a BBC survey of the British public to determine the &quot;nation&#x27;s best-loved novel&quot; (not children&#x27;s novel).
* In 2012, it was ranked number nine among all-time children&#x27;s novels in a survey published by &quot;School Library Journal&quot;, a monthly with primarily U.S. audience.

==Adaptations== 

=== Films===
The first filmed appearance of Anne Shirley was in the 1919 silent film, &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot;, in which the role was played by Mary Miles Minter. The film was directed by William Desmond Taylor. As of 2011, no prints of this silent film adaptation are known to survive. The 1919 film version moved the story from Prince Edward Island to New England, which one American critic—unaware that the novel was set in Canada—praised for &quot;the genuine New England atmosphere called for by the story&quot;. Montgomery herself was infuriated with the film for changing Anne from a Canadian to an American, writing in her diary:

It was a pretty little play well photographed, but I think if I hadn&#x27;t already known it was from my book, that I would never had recognized it. The landscape and folks were &#x27;New England&#x27;, never P.E Island...A skunk and an American flag were introduced - both equally unknown in PE Island. I could have shrieked with rage over the latter. Such crass, blatant Yankeeism!.

Montgomery disapproved of Minter&#x27;s performance, writing she had portrayed &quot;a sweet, sugary heroine utterly unlike my gingerly Anne&quot;, and complained about a scene where Shirley waved about a shotgun as something as her Anne would never do.

In the 1934 adaptation of the novel, Anne was portrayed by Dawn O&#x27;Day, who legally changed her name to &quot;Anne Shirley.&quot; She reprised the role in &quot;Anne of Windy Poplars&quot;, a 1940 film adaptation. Montgomery liked the 1934 film more than the 1919 film, not least because now the book&#x27;s dialogue could be portrayed on the silver screen and that two scenes were filmed on location in Prince Edward Island (though the rest of the film was shot in California), but still charged that neither the 1919 nor 1934 versions of &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot; quite got her book right. Writing about the 1934 version of &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot;, Montgomery wrote in her diary that it was a &quot;thousand times&quot; better than the 1919 version, but still it: &quot;was so entirely different from &quot;my&quot; vision of the scenes and the people that it did not seem like &quot;my&quot; book at all&quot;. The British scholar Faye Hammill wrote that 1934 film version stripped Anne of the &quot;Canadian and feminist&quot; aspects that the Anne of the books possessed, stating that there was something about Anne that Hollywood cannot get right. Hammill observed that the idea that Anne was entirely cheerful is a product of the film and television versions as the Anne of the books has to deal with loss, rejection, cruel authority figures, and loneliness.

====List====
* &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot; (1919), a silent film adapted to the screen by Frances Marion, directed by William Desmond Taylor, and starring Mary Miles Minter as Anne; this is considered a lost film.
* &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot; (1934), directed by George Nichols Jr. and starring Dawn O&#x27;Day as Anne Shirley; after filming, O&#x27;Day changed her screen name to Anne Shirley.
* &quot;Anne of Windy Poplars&quot; (1940), directed by Jack Hively, is a black &amp; white &quot;talkie&quot; starring Dawn O&#x27;Day as Anne Shirley, now billed as &quot;Anne Shirley&quot;.
*&quot;Akage no An: Green Gables e no Michi&quot; (1989, released in 2010) &quot;Red-haired Anne: Road to Green Gables -&quot; anime, directed by Isao Takahata. A 100-minute theatrical movie compilation of the first six episodes of the animated television series &quot;Akage no An,&quot; edited together by Takahata in 1989. The film went unreleased until July 17, 2010, when it was screened at the Ghibli Museum.

=== Radio productions ===
* &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot; (1941), a British radio drama produced and broadcast by BBC Home Service Basic, adapted into four parts by Muriel Levy, and starring Cherry Cottrell as Anne.
* &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot; (1944), a recreation of the 1941 BBC Radio drama, produced and broadcast by BBC Home Service Basic.
* &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot; (1954), a Canadian radio drama produced and broadcast by CBC Radio, adapted into 13 parts by Andrew Allen and starring Toby Tarnow as Anne.
* &quot;Anna zo Zeleného domu&quot; (1966), a Slovak radio drama produced and broadcast by Czechoslovak Radio, starring Anna Bučinská as Anne.
* &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot; (1971), a British radio drama produced and broadcast by BBC Radio 4, adapted into 13 parts by Cristina Sellors, and read by Ann Murray.
* &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot; (1997), a British radio drama produced and broadcast by BBC Radio 4, dramatized into five parts by Marcy Kahan and starred Barbara Barnes as Anne.
* &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot; (2004), a &quot;Focus on the Family Radio Theatre&quot; production with Mae Whitman portraying Anne.

=== Stage productions ===
* &quot;Anne of Green Gables: The Musical&quot;, performed annually in the summer, at Charlottetown Festival, since 1965, this is Canada&#x27;s longest-running main stage musical production, and has had a total audience of more than 2 million. &quot;Anne of Green Gables – The Musical&quot; was composed by Canadians Don Harron and Norman Campbell, with lyrics by Elaine Campbell and Mavor Moore. The production has been performed before Queen Elizabeth II and it has toured across Canada, the United States, Europe, and Japan. In 1969, it had a run in London&#x27;s West End. The Charlottetown Festival production performed at the 1970 World&#x27;s Fair in Osaka, Japan. Walter Learning directed and organized a successful national tour of the musical in Japan in 1991.
* The Guild in Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, hosts &quot;Anne and Gilbert, The Musical&quot;. Written by Nancy White, Bob Johnston, and Jeff Hochhauser, the production is based on Montgomery&#x27;s sequels featuring Anne Shirley.
* &quot;The Nine Lives of L.M. Montgomery&quot;, a musical adapted from Montgomery&#x27;s novel and her life, opened at Kings Playhouse in Georgetown, Prince Edward Island on June 20, 2008, the 100th anniversary of the book&#x27;s publication. With book and lyrics by Adam-Michael James and music by Emmy-nominated composer Leo Marchildon, the musical depicts events from Montgomery&#x27;s life and features characters and heroines from all of her novels. Anne figures prominently and is shown from age 12 into her 40s. Gilbert Blythe also appears. The show&#x27;s second production was at the Carrefour Theatre in Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island and opened July 11, 2009. In both years, the musical was nominated for The Prince Edward Island Museum and Heritage Foundation&#x27;s Wendell Boyle Award. In July 2010, a concert version of the show toured Prince Edward Island, with four performances at Green Gables.
* Theatreworks USA, a New York-based children&#x27;s theatre company, produced an &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot; musical in 2006 at the Lucille Lortel Theatre. A revived production, with musical contributions from Gretchen Cryer, is planned to tour grade-schools.
* The Peterborough Players, based in Peterborough, New Hampshire, staged an adaptation by Joseph Robinette of &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot; in August 2009.
* &quot;Anne and Gilbert&quot; is a musical adaptation of the books &quot;Anne of Avonlea&quot; and &quot;Anne of the Island&quot;. It depicts the relationship of Anne and Gilbert during their years as teachers and college students, and their return to Avonlea.
* &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot;, adapted by Julia Britton and Robert Chuter performed as a site-specific production at Rippon Lea, Melbourne, Australia December - February, 1996–97.
*A &quot;folk-rock&quot; adaptation entitled &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot; by Matte O&#x27;Brien and Matt Vinson was premiered at the 2018 Finger Lakes Musical Theatre Festival, with a subsequent 2020 concept album and a 2022 production at Goodspeed Opera House.

=== Television films and episodic series (animated) ===

* &quot;Akage no An&quot; (1979; &quot;Red-Haired Anne&quot;), an animated television series, part of Nippon Animation&#x27;s &quot;World Masterpiece Theater&quot;, produced in Japan and directed by Isao Takahata.
* &quot;Anne of Green Gables: The Animated Series&quot; (2001), a PBS Kids animated series for older children ages eight to twelve, created by Sullivan Entertainment Inc.
* &quot;Anne: Journey to Green Gables&quot; (2005), an animated video film produced by Sullivan Entertainment and the prequel to &quot;Anne of Green Gables: The Animated Series&quot; (2001–2002)
* &quot;Kon&#x27;nichiwa Anne: Before Green Gables&quot; (2009), part of the &quot;World Masterpiece Theater&quot;, this prequel to &quot;Akage no An&quot; is based on Budge Wilson&#x27;s authorized prequel &quot;Before Green Gables&quot; (2008).
* &quot;Anne Shirley&quot; (2025), an animated television series adaptation produced in Japan by The Answer Studio and directed by Hiroshi Kawamata.

=== Television films and episodic series (live-action) ===
* &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot; (1952), a BBC television series starring Carole Lorimer as Anne. Broadcast live, no recordings are thought to have ever existed, as it was made before telerecording was practiced by the BBC.
* &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot; (1956), a made-for-television musical version directed by Norman Campbell and starring Toby Tarnow as Anne.
* &quot;Anne de Green Gables&quot; (1957), a French-Canadian television film directed by Jacques Gauthier, starring Mireille Lachance as Anne Shirley.
* &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot; (1958), a recreation of the 1956 film directed by Don Harron, starring Kathy Willard as Anne.
* &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot; (1972), a British made-for-television 5-part mini-series directed by Joan Craft, starring Kim Braden as Anne.
** &quot;Anne of Avonlea&quot; (1975), a British made-for-television 4-part mini-series sequel directed by Joan Craft, starring Kim Braden as Anne.
*&quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot; (1985), a CBC four-hour television mini series directed by Kevin Sullivan with Megan Follows as Anne; widely considered the definitive version to date.
** &quot;Anne of Green Gables: The Sequel&quot; (1987), a sequel to the 1985 miniseries which aired on CBC and the Disney Channel as &quot;Anne of Avonlea: The Continuing Story of Anne of Green Gables&quot;. Follows reprises her role.
** &quot;Road to Avonlea&quot; (1990–1996) shown on CBC, a live-action television spin-off series based upon characters and episodes from several of L.M. Montgomery&#x27;s other books. Anne herself never appears but other characters from the previous two films are included, and the series is set within the same continuity as Sullivan&#x27;s 1980s miniseries. 
** &quot;Anne of Green Gables: The Continuing Story&quot; (2000), a sequel to the 1985 television miniseries not based on the novels. Follows reprises Anne Shirley once again.
** &quot;Anne of Green Gables: A New Beginning&quot; (2008), a prequel to the 1985 television miniseries not based on the novels. Hannah Endicott-Douglas plays young Anne, and Barbara Hershey plays Anne as an adult.
* &quot;L.M. Montgomery&#x27;s Anne of Green Gables&quot; (2016), a 90-minute made-for-television adaptation of the book by Breakthrough Films &amp; Television, adapted by Susan Coyne, directed by John Kent Harrison, and stars Ella Ballentine as Anne, Sara Botsford as Marilla Cuthbert, and Martin Sheen as Matthew Cuthbert. It was followed by &quot;Anne of Green Gables: The Good Stars&quot; and &quot;Anne of Green Gables: Fire &amp; Dew&quot; (both in 2017).
* &quot;Anne with an E&quot; (2017–2019), a Canadian joint CBC-Netflix episodic drama that developed the subtext of trauma in the novel through original storylines. It was adapted by Moira Walley-Beckett, and stars Amybeth McNulty as Anne Shirley, Geraldine James as Marilla Cuthbert, R. H. Thomson as Matthew Cuthbert, and Lucas Jade Zumann as Gilbert Blythe.

=== Web productions ===
* &quot;Green Gables Fables&quot; (2014–2016), an American-Canadian web series which conveys the story in the form of Tumblr posts, tweets, vlogs, and other social media. It is a modern adaptation of &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot; and &quot;Anne of the Island&quot;, with many of its elements changed to better suit 21st-century culture. Mandy Harmon portrays the main character, Anne Shirley.
* &quot;Project Green Gables&quot; (2015–2016), a Finnish web series and a modern adaptation of &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot;, which conveys the story in the form of vlogs. Laura Eklund Nhaga plays Anne Shirley.

=== Comics ===
* &quot;Akage no An&quot; (1984), a three volume manga adaptation of the original novel by Keiko Sugimoto and published by Kodansha
* Yumiko Igarashi adapted the first three novels across five volumes in 1997-1998 for Kumon Publishing.
* &quot;Rainbow Valley&quot; (2003), a two volume manga adaptation of the seventh novel in the series by Chieko Hara for Kodansha.
* &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot; (2013), a manga adaptation of the original novel was created by Mako Takami and published by Shogakukan in Japan as part of their World Masterpiece Collection.
* &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot; (2010-2014), a four-issue adaptation by CW Cooke and Giancarlo Malagutti was published by TidalWave Productions. It was later collected in a trade paperback in 2014.
* &quot;Anne of Green Gables: A Graphic Novel&quot; (2017) was published by Andrews McMeel Publishing, with adaptation work by Mariah Marsden and illustrations from Brenna Thummler.
* &quot;Anne of West Philly&quot; (2022) a modernized retelling by Ivy Noelle Weir with illustrations from Myisha Haynes, published by Hachette Book Group.
* &quot;Anne: An Adaptation of Anne of Green Gables (Sort Of)&quot; (2022), a modernized retelling by Kathleen Gros published by HarperCollins.
* &quot;Anne Shirley&quot; (2025), a manga adaptation of the anime series by The Answer Studio was announced in December 2024. The manga is illustrated by Akane Hoshikubo and began serialization in Enterbrain&#x27;s &quot;B&#x27;s Log Comic&quot; online magazine on January 5, 2025.

== Parodies ==
As one of the most familiar characters in Canadian literature, &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot; has been parodied by several Canadian comedy troupes, including CODCO (&quot;Anne of Green Gut&quot;) and The Frantics (&quot;Fran of the Fundy&quot;).

== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* authorized by the heirs of L. M. Montgomery.
* 
* Critical edition, edited by Wendy E. Barry, Margaret Anne Doody, and Mary E. Doody Jones.
* Critical edition, edited by Cecily Devereux.
* Critical edition, edited by Elizabeth Waterston and Mary Henley Rubio.
* Critical edition, edited by Benjamin Lefebvre.
* Edited by Carolyn Strom Collins.
* 

== External links ==

** 
* 
* Scan of the first edition, first impression of &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot;, L.M. Montgomery Institute, University of Prince Edward Island
* The original manuscript of &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot;, digitally scanned and with extensive notes
* &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot; Centenary
* L. M. Montgomery Institute, University of Prince Edward Island
* &quot;L.M. Montgomery Research Centre&quot;, University of Guelph Library Archival &amp; Special Collections.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q273034" start="56" end="76" title="Lucy Maud Montgomery" label="Lucy Maud Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q771213" start="309" end="321" title="Anne Shirley" label="Anne Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q180472" start="428" end="433" title="adopt" label="adopt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978" start="503" end="523" title="Prince Edward Island" label="Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="525" end="531" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076527" start="807" end="825" title="List of best-selling books" label="best-selling books"/>
<link wikidata="Q506240" start="1161" end="1176" title="television film" label="television film"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="1307" end="1313" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="1318" end="1323" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978" start="1596" end="1616" title="Prince Edward Island" label="Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q434304" start="1658" end="1671" title="Evelyn Nesbit" label="Evelyn Nesbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q15401772" start="1722" end="1743" title="Metropolitan Magazine (New York)" label="Metropolitan Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560816" start="2180" end="2194" title="Gilbert Blythe" label="Gilbert Blythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943286" start="2338" end="2347" title="Cavendish, Prince Edward Island" label="Cavendish"/>
<link wikidata="Q771213" start="2364" end="2376" title="Anne Shirley" label="Anne Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="2438" end="2449" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338975" start="2484" end="2516" title="New London, Prince Edward Island" label="New London, Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109932" start="2794" end="2806" title="Green Gables (Prince Edward Island)" label="Green Gables"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943286" start="2864" end="2895" title="Cavendish, Prince Edward Island" label="Cavendish, Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560816" start="4048" end="4062" title="Gilbert Blythe" label="Gilbert Blythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q579321" start="5225" end="5242" title="Dalhousie University" label="Dalhousie College"/>
<link wikidata="Q771213" start="6109" end="6121" title="Anne Shirley" label="Anne Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560816" start="7543" end="7557" title="Gilbert Blythe" label="Gilbert Blythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q836356" start="10865" end="10870" title="croup" label="croup"/>
<link wikidata="Q15998861" start="11552" end="11571" title="Louis Coues Page" label="L.C. Page &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="11575" end="11581" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159778" start="11910" end="11942" title="Confederation Centre of the Arts" label="Confederation Centre of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q385502" start="12754" end="12773" title="Before Green Gables" label="Before Green Gables"/>
<link wikidata="Q510921" start="12803" end="12815" title="Budge Wilson" label="Budge Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109932" start="12911" end="12923" title="Green Gables (Prince Edward Island)" label="Green Gables"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943286" start="12948" end="12979" title="Cavendish, Prince Edward Island" label="Cavendish, Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978" start="13009" end="13029" title="Prince Edward Island" label="Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159778" start="13342" end="13374" title="Confederation Centre of the Arts" label="Confederation Centre of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768925" start="13410" end="13438" title="Anne of Green Gables (musical)" label="Anne of Green Gables musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="14017" end="14032" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish-Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34755" start="14134" end="14145" title="Kickstarter" label="Kickstarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="14537" end="14542" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q514043" start="14550" end="14570" title="Anne of Green Gables (anime)" label="Anne of Green Gables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138628" start="14810" end="14817" title="Asadora" label="Asadora"/>
<link wikidata="Q15094683" start="14824" end="14838" title="Hanako to Anne" label="Hanako to Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523207" start="14862" end="14876" title="Hanako Muraoka" label="Hanako Muraoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q725311" start="15090" end="15109" title="Ashibetsu, Hokkaido" label="Ashibetsu, Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849646" start="16135" end="16153" title="Bala&amp;#x27;s Museum" label="Bala&amp;#x27;s Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q804569" start="16166" end="16179" title="Bala, Ontario" label="Bala, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718738" start="16462" end="16477" title="The Blue Castle" label="The Blue Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q246972" start="16591" end="16606" title="Atlantic Canada" label="Atlantic Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032001" start="16643" end="16654" title="Canada Post" label="Canada Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029416" start="16888" end="16981" title="Canada Post stamp releases (2005–2009)" label="two postage stamps and a souvenir sheet honouring Anne and the &amp;quot;Green Gables&amp;quot; house"/>
<link wikidata="Q775274" start="17066" end="17078" title="The Big Read" label="The Big Read"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="17082" end="17085" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143675" start="17310" end="17332" title="School Library Journal" label="School Library Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q565949" start="17485" end="17517" title="Anne of Green Gables (1919 film)" label="&amp;quot;Anne of Green Gables&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q259495" start="17551" end="17568" title="Mary Miles Minter" label="Mary Miles Minter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365430" start="17595" end="17617" title="William Desmond Taylor" label="William Desmond Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q384524" start="18694" end="18709" title="Anne of Green Gables (1934 film)" label="1934 adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q265021" start="18746" end="18761" title="Anne Shirley (actress)" label="Dawn O&amp;#x27;Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q82685630" start="19641" end="19653" title="Faye Hammill" label="Faye Hammill"/>
<link wikidata="Q565949" start="20095" end="20115" title="Anne of Green Gables (1919 film)" label="Anne of Green Gables"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="20132" end="20143" title="silent film" label="silent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q463883" start="20169" end="20183" title="Frances Marion" label="Frances Marion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365430" start="20197" end="20219" title="William Desmond Taylor" label="William Desmond Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q259495" start="20234" end="20251" title="Mary Miles Minter" label="Mary Miles Minter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268687" start="20282" end="20291" title="lost film" label="lost film"/>
<link wikidata="Q384524" start="20301" end="20321" title="Anne of Green Gables (1934 film)" label="Anne of Green Gables"/>
<link wikidata="Q265021" start="20380" end="20395" title="Anne Shirley (actress)" label="Dawn O&amp;#x27;Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055303" start="20451" end="20462" title="Stage name" label="screen name"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099158" start="20488" end="20509" title="Anne of Windy Poplars (film)" label="Anne of Windy Poplars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157211" start="20536" end="20547" title="Jack Hively" label="Jack Hively"/>
<link wikidata="Q514043" start="20680" end="20716" title="Anne of Green Gables (1979 TV series)" label="Akage no An: Green Gables e no Michi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="20800" end="20805" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q178713" start="20819" end="20832" title="Takahata Isao" label="Isao Takahata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="20909" end="20935" title="Anime" label="animated television series"/>
<link wikidata="Q947907" start="21072" end="21085" title="Ghibli Museum" label="Ghibli Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q13940" start="21534" end="21543" title="CBC Radio" label="CBC Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811894" start="21596" end="21607" title="Toby Tarnow" label="Toby Tarnow"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="21851" end="21862" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435085" start="22164" end="22183" title="Focus on the Family" label="Focus on the Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q232307" start="22220" end="22231" title="Mae Whitman" label="Mae Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22284" end="22317" title="Anne of Green Gables: The Musical" label="Anne of Green Gables: The Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086255" start="22362" end="22384" title="Charlottetown Festival" label="Charlottetown Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036029" start="22593" end="22603" title="Don Harron" label="Don Harron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3343754" start="22608" end="22623" title="Norman Campbell (director)" label="Norman Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363246" start="22660" end="22671" title="Mavor Moore" label="Mavor Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="22714" end="22732" title="Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="22829" end="22835" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="22843" end="22851" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119956" start="22908" end="22930" title="1970 World&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="1970 World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q35765" start="22934" end="22946" title="Osaka, Japan" label="Osaka, Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q946835" start="22948" end="22963" title="Walter Learning" label="Walter Learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6963076" start="23159" end="23170" title="Nancy White (singer-songwriter)" label="Nancy White"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086648" start="23423" end="23455" title="Georgetown, Prince Edward Island" label="Georgetown, Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="23584" end="23588" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524026" start="23608" end="23622" title="Leo Marchildon" label="Leo Marchildon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2127" start="23899" end="23934" title="Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island" label="Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777556" start="24205" end="24221" title="Theatreworks USA" label="Theatreworks USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6697298" start="24341" end="24363" title="Lucille Lortel Theatre" label="Lucille Lortel Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607691" start="24419" end="24433" title="Gretchen Cryer" label="Gretchen Cryer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021395" start="24506" end="24533" title="Peterborough, New Hampshire" label="Peterborough, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6306236" start="24937" end="24950" title="Julia Britton" label="Julia Britton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342927" start="24955" end="24968" title="Robert Chuter" label="Robert Chuter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583618" start="25318" end="25339" title="Goodspeed Opera House" label="Goodspeed Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q514043" start="25407" end="25418" title="Anne of Green Gables (1979 TV series)" label="Akage no An"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051884" start="25501" end="25517" title="Nippon Animation" label="Nippon Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197782" start="25531" end="25556" title="World Masterpiece Theater" label="World Masterpiece Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q178713" start="25598" end="25611" title="Isao Takahata" label="Isao Takahata"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25621" end="25662" title="Anne of Green Gables: The Animated Series" label="Anne of Green Gables: The Animated Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245159" start="25679" end="25687" title="PBS Kids" label="PBS Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397567" start="25756" end="25778" title="Sullivan Entertainment" label="Sullivan Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25792" end="25821" title="Anne of Green Gables: The Animated Series#Anne: Journey to Green Gables film" label="Anne: Journey to Green Gables"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397567" start="25871" end="25893" title="Sullivan Entertainment" label="Sullivan Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25919" end="25960" title="Anne of Green Gables: The Animated Series" label="Anne of Green Gables: The Animated Series"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25987" end="26029" title="Kon&amp;#x27;nichiwa Anne: Before Green Gables" label="Kon&amp;#x27;nichiwa Anne: Before Green Gables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197782" start="26062" end="26087" title="World Masterpiece Theater" label="World Masterpiece Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q514043" start="26117" end="26128" title="Anne of Green Gables (anime)" label="Akage no An"/>
<link wikidata="Q510921" start="26147" end="26159" title="Budge Wilson" label="Budge Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q385502" start="26192" end="26211" title="Before Green Gables" label="Before Green Gables"/>
<link wikidata="Q131292174" start="26234" end="26246" title="Anne Shirley (2025 TV series)" label="Anne Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630352" start="26621" end="26634" title="Kinescope" label="telerecording"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768924" start="26669" end="26689" title="Anne of Green Gables (1956 film)" label="Anne of Green Gables"/>
<link wikidata="Q3343754" start="26754" end="26769" title="Norman Campbell (director)" label="Norman Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811894" start="26783" end="26794" title="Toby Tarnow" label="Toby Tarnow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036029" start="27040" end="27050" title="Don Harron" label="Don Harron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768923" start="27092" end="27112" title="Anne of Green Gables (miniseries)" label="Anne of Green Gables"/>
<link wikidata="Q568813" start="27209" end="27219" title="Kim Braden" label="Kim Braden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768920" start="27238" end="27253" title="Anne of Avonlea (1975 film)" label="Anne of Avonlea"/>
<link wikidata="Q568813" start="27357" end="27367" title="Kim Braden" label="Kim Braden"/>
<link wikidata="Q264901" start="27384" end="27404" title="Anne of Green Gables (1985 film)" label="Anne of Green Gables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022955" start="27421" end="27424" title="CBC Television" label="CBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397567" start="27470" end="27484" title="Kevin Sullivan (director)" label="Kevin Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q271533" start="27490" end="27503" title="Megan Follows" label="Megan Follows"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27572" end="27604" title="Anne of Green Gables: The Sequel" label="Anne of Green Gables: The Sequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q178837" start="27678" end="27692" title="Disney Channel" label="Disney Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071675" start="27807" end="27822" title="Road to Avonlea" label="Road to Avonlea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022955" start="27850" end="27853" title="CBC Television" label="CBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q273034" start="27947" end="27969" title="Lucy Maud Montgomery" label="L.M. Montgomery&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28169" end="28211" title="Anne of Green Gables: The Continuing Story" label="Anne of Green Gables: The Continuing Story"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28345" end="28382" title="Anne of Green Gables: A New Beginning" label="Anne of Green Gables: A New Beginning"/>
<link wikidata="Q15651000" start="28466" end="28489" title="Hannah Endicott-Douglas" label="Hannah Endicott-Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q229042" start="28512" end="28527" title="Barbara Hershey" label="Barbara Hershey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23647107" start="28560" end="28603" title="L.M. Montgomery&amp;#x27;s Anne of Green Gables" label="L.M. Montgomery&amp;#x27;s Anne of Green Gables"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959677" start="28676" end="28711" title="Breakthrough Films &amp;amp; Television" label="Breakthrough Films &amp;amp; Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647707" start="28724" end="28735" title="Susan Coyne" label="Susan Coyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181863" start="28749" end="28767" title="John Kent Harrison" label="John Kent Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q17149942" start="28779" end="28794" title="Ella Ballentine" label="Ella Ballentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q467753" start="28804" end="28817" title="Sara Botsford" label="Sara Botsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q184572" start="28843" end="28855" title="Martin Sheen" label="Martin Sheen"/>
<link wikidata="Q28091065" start="29022" end="29036" title="Anne with an E" label="Anne with an E"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="29058" end="29066" title="Canada" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206858" start="29085" end="29099" title="Episodic storytelling" label="episodic drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q13560657" start="29197" end="29217" title="Moira Walley-Beckett" label="Moira Walley-Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q28114598" start="29229" end="29244" title="Amybeth McNulty" label="Amybeth McNulty"/>
<link wikidata="Q771213" start="29248" end="29260" title="Anne Shirley" label="Anne Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q440926" start="29262" end="29277" title="Geraldine James" label="Geraldine James"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414936" start="29299" end="29312" title="R. H. Thomson" label="R. H. Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q29224281" start="29338" end="29355" title="Lucas Jade Zumann" label="Lucas Jade Zumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560816" start="29359" end="29373" title="Gilbert Blythe" label="Gilbert Blythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q384060" start="29518" end="29524" title="Tumblr" label="Tumblr"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="29532" end="29538" title="Twitter" label="tweets"/>
<link wikidata="Q674926" start="29540" end="29544" title="vlog" label="vlog"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="29557" end="29569" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352419" start="29643" end="29661" title="Anne of the Island" label="Anne of the Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="30076" end="30081" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q726081" start="30150" end="30158" title="Kodansha" label="Kodansha"/>
<link wikidata="Q437849" start="30161" end="30176" title="Yumiko Igarashi" label="Yumiko Igarashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q142054" start="30245" end="30261" title="Kumon Publishing" label="Kumon Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q785697" start="30522" end="30532" title="Shogakukan" label="Shogakukan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887790" start="30714" end="30735" title="TidalWave Productions" label="TidalWave Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243552" start="30765" end="30780" title="Trade paperback (comics)" label="trade paperback"/>
<link wikidata="Q4759092" start="30866" end="30891" title="Andrews McMeel Publishing" label="Andrews McMeel Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567078" start="31107" end="31126" title="Hachette Book Group" label="Hachette Book Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="31257" end="31270" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperCollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q131292174" start="31280" end="31292" title="Anne Shirley (2025 TV series)" label="Anne Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q306334" start="31470" end="31480" title="Enterbrain" label="Enterbrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190686" start="31494" end="31512" title="B&amp;#x27;s Log" label="B&amp;#x27;s Log Comic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981405" start="31731" end="31736" title="CODCO" label="CODCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735170" start="31773" end="31785" title="The Frantics (comedy)" label="The Frantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q181857" start="31805" end="31810" title="Bay of Fundy" label="Fundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030305" start="32348" end="32382" title="University of Prince Edward Island" label="University of Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030305" start="32564" end="32598" title="University of Prince Edward Island" label="University of Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q795988" start="32646" end="32666" title="University of Guelph" label="University of Guelph"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58407" wikidata="Q841895" url="?curid=58407" title="Natural Resources Defense Council">
<text>The Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) is a United States–based 501(c)(3) non-profit international environmental advocacy group, with its headquarters in New York City and offices in Washington, D.C., San Francisco, Los Angeles, Chicago, Bozeman, India, and Beijing. The group was founded in 1970 in opposition to a hydroelectric power plant in New York.

As of 2019, the NRDC had over three million members, with online activities nationwide, and a staff of about 700 lawyers, scientists and other policy experts.

==History==
NRDC was founded in 1970. Its establishment was partially an outgrowth of the &quot;Scenic Hudson Preservation Conference v. Federal Power Commission&quot;, the Storm King case. The case centered on Con Ed&#x27;s plan to build the world&#x27;s largest hydroelectric facility at Storm King Mountain in New York&#x27;s Hudson Valley. The proposed facility would have pumped vast amounts of water from the Hudson River to a reservoir and released it through turbines to generate electricity at peak demand.

A dozen concerned citizens organized the Scenic Hudson Preservation Conference in opposition to the project, citing its environmental impact, and the group, represented by Whitney North Seymour Jr., his law partner Stephen Duggan, and David Sive, sued the Federal Power Commission and successfully achieved a ruling that groups such as Scenic Hudson and other environmentalist groups had the standing to challenge the FPC&#x27;s administrative rulings. Realizing that continued environmentalist litigation would require a nationally organized, professionalized group of lawyers and scientists, Duggan, Seymour, and Sive obtained funding from the Ford Foundation and joined forces with Gus Speth and three other recent Yale Law School graduates of the class of 1969: Richard Ayres, Edward Strohbehn Jr., and John Bryson.

John H. Adams was the group&#x27;s first staff member and Duggan its founding chairman; Seymour, Laurance Rockefeller, and others served as members of the board.

In September 1979 The Ford Foundation pulled funding for the NRDC alongside the Environmental Defense Fund after Henry Ford II said groups receiving foundation money were &quot;antibusiness&quot; and &quot;biting the hand that feeds them.&quot; The NRDC had recently challenged the FDA&#x27;s interim approval for Coca-Cola&#x27;s first plastic bottle made of acrylonitrile/styrene. The FDA reported that test animals exposed to acrylonitrile had &quot;significantly lowered body weight and other adverse effects, including lesions in the central nervous system and growths in the ear ducts.&quot; and suspended its approval. 

=== Position on nuclear power ===
In the 1970s, NRDC sought to block expansion of the Indian Point nuclear power plant in New York. It has historically until the plant&#x27;s closure in 2021, sought to close the plant. NRDC has also sought to close the Diablo Canyon nuclear plant in California. In 2018, the NRDC took no position on legislative proposals in New Jersey to subsidize three of its nuclear reactors. NRDC has argued that nuclear power is not a viable energy source to mitigate climate change, arguing that it poses public health and safety risks through nuclear waste and nuclear proliferation. In 2014, NRDC president Frances Beinecke said that the NRDC could not support nuclear power because it would lose donations.

=== Position on solar power ===
In 2012, NRDC sued the federal government to stop the 663.5-megawatt Calico solar station in the Mojave Desert in California. NRDC said the solar plant would imperil protected wildlife. In 2022, NRDC supported proposals to subsidize rooftop solar power generation.

=== Position on hydropower ===
NRDC&#x27;s position on hydropower is that it is not a renewable energy source. When Indian Point was scheduled for closure, NRDC held no position on a proposal to build a transmission line to Quebec to access excess hydropower while arguing, &quot;we certainly would not be on board where [hydropower] gobbles up the space we think should be covered by true renewables&quot;.

==Programs==
NRDC states the purpose of its work is &quot;safeguard the earth—its people, its plants and animals, and the natural systems on which all life depends,&quot; and to &quot;ensure the rights of all people to the air, the water and the wild, and to prevent special interests from undermining public interests.&quot; Their stated areas of work include: &quot;climate change, communities, energy, food, health, oceans, water, the wild&quot;.

As a legal advocacy group, the NRDC works to accomplish environmental goals by operating within the legal system to reduce pollution and protect natural resources through litigation, and by working with professionals in science, law, and policy at the national and international level. The NRDC&#x27;s Center for Campaigns &amp; Organizing (CC&amp;O) also oversees the NRDC Action Fund, a separate 501(c)(4) nonprofit organization which engages in political and electoral activities.

NRDC published &quot;onEarth&quot;, a quarterly magazine that dealt with environmental challenges, through 2016. It was founded in 1979 as &quot;The Amicus Journal&quot;. As &quot;Amicus&quot;, it won the George Polk Award in 1983 for special interest reporting.

==Staff==
The council&#x27;s first president was John H. Adams, who served until 2006. He was replaced by Frances Beinecke, who served as president from 2006 to 2015. The third president was Rhea Suh, who served from 2015 to 2019.

In 2020, Gina McCarthy served as the CEO and president. She previously served as the head of the Environmental Protection Agency in the Obama administration and became White House National Climate Advisor in the Biden administration in 2021. In 2021, NRDC selected Manish Bapna, formerly of the World Resources Institute, as their new president and CEO. At their web site NRDC state they have about 700 employees including scientists, lawyers, and policy advocates.

==Legislation==
&quot;NRDC v. U.S. EPA&quot; (1973), with David Schoenbrod caused the United States Environmental Protection Agency to begin reducing tetraethyl lead in gasoline sooner than they were going to.

NRDC opposed the Water Rights Protection Act, a bill that would prevent federal agencies from requiring certain entities to relinquish their water rights to the United States in order to use public lands.

NRDC supported the EPS Service Parts Act of 2014 (H.R. 5057; 113th Congress), a bill that would exempt certain external power supplies from complying with standards set forth in a final rule published by the United States Department of Energy in February 2014.

==Effect on administrative law==
NRDC has been involved in the following Supreme Court cases interpreting United States administrative law.

* &quot;Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Corp. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc.&quot;, , which held that courts could not impose additional procedural requirements on administrative agencies beyond that required by the agency&#x27;s organic statute or the Administrative Procedure Act.
* &quot;Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc.&quot;, , which gave administrative agencies broad discretion to interpret statute to make policy changes if Congressional intent was unclear. 
* &quot;Baltimore Gas &amp; Elec. Co. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc.&quot;, is a United States Supreme Court decision which held to be valid a Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) rule that the permanent storage of nuclear waste should be assumed to have no environmental impact during the licensing of nuclear power plants.

== See also ==

* Anti-nuclear movement
* Biodiversity
* Building Codes Assistance Project
* Environmental impact of mining
* Environmental movement
* Environmental Protection Agency
* Global warming
* Green building in the United States
* Green politics
* Opposition to Pebble Mine
* United States Green Building Council
* &quot;Winter v. Natural Resources Defense Council&quot;, concerning the balance of possible harm and government interest when issuing preliminary injunctions

==References==
==Further reading==

* Hardback edition.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q841895" start="4" end="37" title="Natural Resources Defense Council" label="Natural Resources Defense Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q841895" start="39" end="43" title="Natural Resources Defense Council" label="NRDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q18325436" start="70" end="79" title="501(c)(3) organization" label="501(c)(3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="80" end="90" title="non-profit" label="non-profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670725" start="105" end="133" title="environmental advocacy group" label="environmental advocacy group"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="160" end="173" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="189" end="205" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="207" end="220" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="222" end="233" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="235" end="242" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q569678" start="244" end="251" title="Bozeman, Montana" label="Bozeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="253" end="258" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="264" end="271" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="322" end="335" title="Hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933455" start="618" end="683" title="Scenic Hudson Preservation Conference v. Federal Power Commission" label="Scenic Hudson Preservation Conference v. Federal Power Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127536" start="733" end="739" title="Con Ed" label="Con Ed"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="786" end="799" title="hydroelectric" label="hydroelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620138" start="812" end="831" title="Storm King Mountain (New York)" label="Storm King Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140235" start="851" end="864" title="Hudson Valley" label="Hudson Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="937" end="949" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393666" start="1025" end="1036" title="peak demand" label="peak demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092908" start="1080" end="1117" title="Scenic Hudson Preservation Conference" label="Scenic Hudson Preservation Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996730" start="1211" end="1236" title="Whitney North Seymour Jr." label="Whitney North Seymour Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5239839" start="1274" end="1284" title="David Sive" label="David Sive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067871" start="1295" end="1319" title="Federal Power Commission" label="Federal Power Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q683979" start="1431" end="1439" title="standing (law)" label="standing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313036" start="1685" end="1700" title="Ford Foundation" label="Ford Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135054" start="1724" end="1733" title="James Gustave Speth" label="Gus Speth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143289" start="1757" end="1772" title="Yale Law School" label="Yale Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365901" start="1846" end="1857" title="John Bryson" label="John Bryson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6236693" start="1860" end="1873" title="John H. Adams (environmentalist)" label="John H. Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q932272" start="1957" end="1977" title="Laurance Rockefeller" label="Laurance Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345899" start="2103" end="2129" title="Environmental Defense Fund" label="Environmental Defense Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q516858" start="2136" end="2149" title="Henry Ford II" label="Henry Ford II"/>
<link wikidata="Q342968" start="2452" end="2465" title="acrylonitrile" label="acrylonitrile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516614" start="2737" end="2749" title="Indian Point Energy Center" label="Indian Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516546" start="2904" end="2931" title="Diablo Canyon Power Plant" label="Diablo Canyon nuclear plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478521" start="3284" end="3300" title="Frances Beinecke" label="Frances Beinecke"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="3770" end="3786" title="renewable energy" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="4461" end="4475" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q431603" start="4555" end="4569" title="advocacy group" label="advocacy group"/>
<link wikidata="Q240625" start="4942" end="4974" title="501(c)4" label="501(c)(4) nonprofit organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q845188" start="5234" end="5251" title="George Polk Awards" label="George Polk Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6236693" start="5342" end="5355" title="John H. Adams (environmentalist)" label="John H. Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478521" start="5399" end="5415" title="Frances Beinecke" label="Frances Beinecke"/>
<link wikidata="Q104535904" start="5484" end="5492" title="Rhea Suh" label="Rhea Suh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562899" start="5534" end="5547" title="Gina McCarthy" label="Gina McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="5622" end="5653" title="Environmental Protection Agency" label="Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q976978" start="5820" end="5845" title="World Resources Institute" label="World Resources Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q105918133" start="6050" end="6066" title="David Schoenbrod" label="David Schoenbrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="6078" end="6123" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6142" end="6157" title="Tetraethyllead#Phaseout and ban" label="tetraethyl lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089294" start="6220" end="6247" title="Water Rights Protection Act" label="Water Rights Protection Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034648" start="6394" end="6406" title="public lands" label="public lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q18148403" start="6428" end="6485" title="EPS Service Parts Act of 2014 (H.R. 5057; 113th Congress)" label="EPS Service Parts Act of 2014 (H.R. 5057; 113th Congress)"/>
<link wikidata="Q887369" start="6520" end="6543" title="external power supply" label="external power supplies"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="6617" end="6651" title="United States Department of Energy" label="United States Department of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="6744" end="6757" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039568" start="6777" end="6809" title="United States administrative law" label="United States administrative law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921797" start="6820" end="6897" title="Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Corp. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc." label="Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Corp. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q25344901" start="7074" end="7102" title="Administrative Procedure Act (United States)" label="Administrative Procedure Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071348" start="7112" end="7175" title="Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc." label="Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="7250" end="7257" title="statute" label="statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852861" start="7327" end="7399" title="Baltimore Gas &amp;amp; Elec. Co. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc." label="Baltimore Gas &amp;amp; Elec. Co. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1320326" start="7474" end="7503" title="Nuclear Regulatory Commission" label="Nuclear Regulatory Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q17072227" start="7620" end="7629" title="Nuclear licensing" label="licensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q134447" start="7633" end="7652" title="nuclear power plant" label="nuclear power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q574580" start="7674" end="7695" title="Anti-nuclear movement" label="Anti-nuclear movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="7698" end="7710" title="Biodiversity" label="Biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986472" start="7713" end="7746" title="Building Codes Assistance Project" label="Building Codes Assistance Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381247" start="7749" end="7779" title="Environmental impact of mining" label="Environmental impact of mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q8189417" start="7782" end="7804" title="Environmental movement" label="Environmental movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="7807" end="7838" title="Environmental Protection Agency" label="Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="7841" end="7855" title="Global warming" label="Global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603479" start="7858" end="7893" title="Green building in the United States" label="Green building in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661415" start="7896" end="7910" title="Green politics" label="Green politics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7913" end="7938" title="Pebble Mine#Reactions" label="Opposition to Pebble Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q783582" start="7941" end="7977" title="United States Green Building Council" label="United States Green Building Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026415" start="7986" end="8029" title="Winter v. Natural Resources Defense Council" label="Winter v. Natural Resources Defense Council"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58410" wikidata="Q35820" url="?curid=58410" title="Wright brothers">
<text>The Wright brothers, Orville Wright (August 19, 1871 – January 30, 1948) and Wilbur Wright (April 16, 1867 – May 30, 1912), were American aviation pioneers generally credited with inventing, building, and flying the world&#x27;s first successful airplane. They made the first controlled, sustained flight of an engine-powered, heavier-than-air aircraft with the &quot;Wright Flyer&quot; on December 17, 1903, four miles (6 km) south of Kitty Hawk, North Carolina, at what is now known as Kill Devil Hills. In 1904 the Wright brothers developed the &quot;Wright Flyer II&quot;, which made longer-duration flights including the first circle, followed in 1905 by the first truly practical fixed-wing aircraft, the &quot;Wright Flyer III&quot;.

The brothers&#x27; breakthrough invention was their creation of a three-axis control system, which enabled the pilot to steer the aircraft effectively and to maintain its equilibrium. Their system of aircraft controls made fixed-wing powered flight possible and remains standard on airplanes of all kinds. Their first U.S. patent did not claim invention of a flying machine, but rather a system of aerodynamic control that manipulated a flying machine&#x27;s surfaces. From the beginning of their aeronautical work, Wilbur and Orville focused on developing a reliable method of pilot control as the key to solving &quot;the flying problem&quot;. This approach differed significantly from other experimenters of the time who put more emphasis on developing powerful engines. Using a small home-built wind tunnel, the Wrights also collected more accurate data than any before, enabling them to design more efficient wings and propellers.

The brothers gained the mechanical skills essential to their success by working for years in their Dayton, Ohio-based shop with printing presses, bicycles, motors, and other machinery. Their work with bicycles, in particular, influenced their belief that an unstable vehicle such as a flying machine could be controlled and balanced with practice. This was a trend, as many other aviation pioneers were also dedicated cyclists and involved in the bicycle business in various ways. From 1900 until their first powered flights in late 1903, the brothers conducted extensive glider tests that also developed their skills as pilots. Their shop mechanic Charles Taylor became an important part of the team, building their first airplane engine in close collaboration with the brothers.

The Wright brothers&#x27; status as inventors of the airplane has been subject to numerous counter-claims. Much controversy persists over the many competing claims of early aviators. Edward Roach, historian for the Dayton Aviation Heritage National Historical Park, argues that the Wrights were excellent self-taught engineers who could run a small company well, but did not have the business skills or temperament necessary to dominate the rapidly growing aviation industry at the time.

==Childhood==
Wilbur and Orville Wright were two of seven children born to Milton Wright (1828–1917), a clergyman of English and Dutch ancestry, and Susan Catherine Koerner (1831–1889), of German and Swiss ancestry. Milton Wright&#x27;s mother, Catherine Reeder, was descended from the progenitor of the Vanderbilt family – one of America&#x27;s richest families – and the Huguenot Gano family of New Rochelle, New York. Wilbur and Orville were the 3rd great nephews of John Gano, the Revolutionary War Brigade Chaplain, who allegedly baptized President George Washington. Through John Gano they were 5th cousins 1 time removed of billionaire and aviator Howard Hughes. Wilbur was born near Millville, Indiana, in 1867; Orville in Dayton, Ohio, in 1871.

The brothers never married. The other Wright siblings were Reuchlin (1861–1920), Lorin (1862–1939), Katharine (1874–1929), and twins Otis and Ida (born 1870, died in infancy). The direct paternal ancestry goes back to a Samuel Wright (b. 1606 in Essex, England) who sailed to America and settled in Massachusetts in 1636.

None of the Wright children had middle names. Instead, their father tried hard to give them distinctive first names. Wilbur was named for Willbur Fisk and Orville for Orville Dewey, both clergymen that Milton Wright admired. They were &quot;Will&quot; and &quot;Orv&quot; to their friends and in Dayton, their neighbors knew them simply as &quot;the Bishop&#x27;s kids&quot;, or &quot;the Bishop&#x27;s boys&quot;.

Because of their father&#x27;s position as a bishop in the Church of the United Brethren in Christ, he traveled often and the Wrights frequently moved – twelve times before finally returning permanently to Dayton in 1884. In elementary school, Orville was given to mischief and was once expelled. In 1878, when the family lived in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, their father brought home a toy helicopter for his two younger sons. The device was based on an invention of French aeronautical pioneer Alphonse Pénaud. Made of paper, bamboo and cork with a rubber band to twirl its rotor, it was about long. Wilbur and Orville played with it until it broke, and then built their own. In later years, they pointed to their experience with the toy as the spark of their interest in flying.

==Early career and research==

Both brothers attended high school, but did not receive diplomas. The family&#x27;s abrupt move in 1884 from Richmond, Indiana, to Dayton, Ohio, where the family had lived during the 1870s, prevented Wilbur from receiving his diploma after finishing four years of high school. The diploma was awarded posthumously to Wilbur on April 16, 1994, which would have been his 127th birthday. In late 1885 or early 1886, while playing an ice-skating game with friends Wilbur was struck in the face by a hockey stick by Oliver Crook Haugh, who later became a serial killer. Wilbur lost his front teeth. He had been vigorous and athletic until then, and although his injuries did not appear especially severe, he became withdrawn. He had planned to attend Yale. Instead, he spent the next few years largely housebound. During this time he cared for his mother, who was terminally ill with tuberculosis, read extensively in his father&#x27;s library and ably assisted his father during times of controversy within the Brethren Church, but also expressed unease over his own lack of ambition.

Orville dropped out of high school after his junior year to start a printing business in 1889, having designed and built his own printing press with Wilbur&#x27;s help. Wilbur joined the print shop, and in March the brothers launched a weekly newspaper, the &quot;West Side News&quot;. Subsequent issues listed Orville as publisher and Wilbur as editor on the masthead. In April 1890 they converted the paper to a daily, &quot;The Evening Item&quot;, but it lasted only four months. They then focused on commercial printing. One of their clients was Orville&#x27;s friend and classmate, Paul Laurence Dunbar, who rose to international acclaim as a ground-breaking African-American poet and writer. For a brief period the Wrights printed the &quot;Dayton Tattler&quot;, a weekly newspaper that Dunbar edited.
Capitalizing on the national bicycle craze (spurred by the invention of the safety bicycle and its substantial advantages over the penny-farthing design), in December 1892 the brothers opened a repair and sales shop (the Wright Cycle Exchange, later the Wright Cycle Company) and in 1896 began manufacturing their own brand. They used this endeavor to fund their growing interest in flight. In the early or mid-1890s they saw newspaper or magazine articles and probably photographs of the dramatic glides by Otto Lilienthal in Germany.

1896 brought three important aeronautical events. In May, Smithsonian Institution Secretary Samuel Langley successfully flew an unmanned steam-powered fixed-wing model aircraft. In mid-year, Chicago engineer and aviation authority Octave Chanute brought together several men who tested various types of gliders over the sand dunes along the shore of Lake Michigan. In August, Lilienthal was killed in the plunge of his glider. These events lodged in the minds of the brothers, especially Lilienthal&#x27;s death. The Wright brothers later cited his death as the point when their serious interest in flight research began.

Wilbur said, &quot;Lilienthal was without question the greatest of the precursors, and the world owes to him a great debt.&quot; In May 1899 Wilbur wrote a letter to the Smithsonian Institution requesting information and publications about aeronautics. Drawing on the work of Sir George Cayley, Chanute, Lilienthal, Leonardo da Vinci, and Langley, they began their mechanical aeronautical experimentation that year.

The Wright brothers always presented a unified image to the public, sharing equally in the credit for their invention. Biographers note that Wilbur took the initiative in 1899 and 1900, writing of &quot;my&quot; machine and &quot;my&quot; plans before Orville became deeply involved when the first person singular became the plural &quot;we&quot; and &quot;our&quot;. Author James Tobin asserts, &quot;it is impossible to imagine Orville, bright as he was, supplying the driving force that started their work and kept it going from the back room of a store in Ohio to conferences with capitalists, presidents, and kings. Will did that. He was the leader, from the beginning to the end.&quot;

===Ideas about control===
Despite Lilienthal&#x27;s fate, the brothers favored his strategy: to practice gliding in order to master the art of control before attempting motor-driven flight. The death of British aeronaut Percy Pilcher in another hang gliding crash in October 1899 only reinforced their opinion that a reliable method of pilot control was the key to successful – and safe – flight. At the outset of their experiments they regarded control as the unsolved third part of &quot;the flying problem&quot;. The other two parts – wings and engines – they believed were already sufficiently promising.

The Wright brothers&#x27; plan thus differed sharply from more experienced practitioners of the day, notably Ader, Maxim, and Langley, who all built powerful engines, attached them to airframes equipped with untested control devices, and expected to take to the air with no previous flying experience. Although agreeing with Lilienthal&#x27;s idea of practice, the Wrights saw that his method of balance and control by shifting his body weight was inadequate. They were determined to find something better.

On the basis of observation, Wilbur concluded that birds changed the angle of the ends of their wings to make their bodies roll right or left. The brothers decided this would also be a good way for a flying machine to turn – to &quot;bank&quot; or &quot;lean&quot; into the turn just like a bird – and just like a person riding a bicycle, an experience with which they were thoroughly familiar. Equally important, they hoped this method would enable recovery when the wind tilted the machine to one side (lateral balance). They puzzled over how to achieve the same effect with man-made wings and eventually discovered wing-warping when Wilbur idly twisted a long inner-tube box at the bicycle shop.

Other aeronautical investigators regarded flight as if it were not so different from surface locomotion, except the surface would be elevated. They thought in terms of a ship&#x27;s rudder for steering, while the flying machine remained essentially level in the air, as did a train or an automobile or a ship at the surface. The idea of deliberately leaning, or rolling, to one side either seemed undesirable or did not enter their thinking. Some of these other investigators, including Langley and Chanute, sought the elusive ideal of &quot;inherent stability&quot;, believing the pilot of a flying machine would not be able to react quickly enough to wind disturbances to use mechanical controls effectively. The Wright brothers, in contrast, wanted the pilot to have absolute control. For that reason, their early designs made no concessions toward built-in stability (such as dihedral wings). They deliberately designed their 1903 first powered flyer with anhedral (drooping) wings, which are inherently unstable, but less susceptible to upset by gusty cross winds.

==Flights==
===Toward flight===

On July 27, 1899, the brothers put wing warping to the test by building and flying a biplane kite with a wingspan, and a curved wing with a chord. When the wings were warped, or twisted, the trailing edge that was warped down produced more lift than the opposite wing, causing a rolling motion. The warping was controlled by four lines between kite and crossed sticks held by the kite flyer. In return, the kite was under lateral control.

In 1900 the brothers went to Kitty Hawk, North Carolina, to begin their manned gliding experiments. In his reply to Wilbur&#x27;s first letter, Octave Chanute had suggested the mid-Atlantic coast for its regular breezes and soft sandy landing surface. Wilbur also requested and examined U.S. Weather Bureau data, and decided on Kitty Hawk after receiving information from the government meteorologist stationed there.

Kitty Hawk, although remote, was closer to Dayton than other places Chanute had suggested, including California and Florida. The spot also gave them privacy from reporters, who had turned the 1896 Chanute experiments at Lake Michigan into something of a circus. Chanute visited them in camp each season from 1901 to 1903 and saw gliding experiments, but not the powered flights.

===Gliders===
The the design of their kite and full-size gliders on work done in the 1890s by other aviation pioneers. They adopted the basic design of the Chanute-Herring biplane hang glider (&quot;double-decker&quot; as the Wrights called it), which flew well in the 1896 experiments near Chicago, and used aeronautical data on lift that Otto Lilienthal had published. The Wrights designed the wings with camber, a curvature of the top surface.

The brothers did not discover this principle, but took advantage of it. The better lift of a cambered surface compared to a flat one was first discussed scientifically by Sir George Cayley. Lilienthal, whose work the Wrights carefully studied, used cambered wings in his gliders, proving in flight the advantage over flat surfaces.
The wooden uprights between the wings of the Wright glider were braced by wires in their own version of Chanute&#x27;s modified Pratt truss, a bridge-building design he used for his biplane glider (initially built as a triplane). The Wrights mounted the horizontal elevator in front of the wings rather than behind, apparently believing this feature would help to avoid, or protect them from, a nosedive and crash like the one that killed Lilienthal. Wilbur incorrectly believed a tail was not necessary, and their first two gliders did not have one.

According to some Wright biographers, Wilbur probably did all the gliding until 1902, perhaps to exercise his authority as older brother and to protect Orville from harm as he did not want to have to explain to their father, Bishop Wright, if Orville got injured.

* (This airfoil caused severe stability problems; the Wrights modified the camber on-site.)

====1900====

The brothers flew the glider for only a few days in the early autumn of 1900 at Kitty Hawk. In the first tests, probably on October 3, Wilbur was aboard while the glider flew as a kite not far above the ground with men below holding tether ropes. Most of the kite tests were unpiloted, with sandbags or chains and even a local boy as ballast.

They tested wing-warping using control ropes from the ground. The glider was also tested unmanned while suspended from a small homemade tower. Wilbur, but not Orville, made about a dozen free glides on only a single day, October 20. For those tests the brothers trekked four miles (6km) south to the Kill Devil Hills, a group of sand dunes up to high (where they made camp in each of the next three years). Although the glider&#x27;s lift was less than expected, the brothers were encouraged because the craft&#x27;s front elevator worked well and they had no accidents. However, the small number of free glides meant they were not able to give wing-warping a true test.

The pilot lay flat on the lower wing, as planned, to reduce aerodynamic drag. As a glide ended, the pilot was supposed to lower himself to a vertical position through an opening in the wing and land on his feet with his arms wrapped over the framework. Within a few glides, however, they discovered the pilot could remain prone on the wing, headfirst, without undue danger when landing. They made all their flights in that position for the next five years.

====1901====

Before returning to Kitty Hawk in the summer of 1901, Wilbur published two articles, &quot;The Angle of Incidence&quot; in &quot;The Aeronautical Journal&quot;, and &quot;The Horizontal Position During Gliding Flight&quot; in &quot;Illustrierte Aeronautische Mitteilungen&quot;. The brothers brought all of the material they thought was needed to be self-sufficient at Kitty Hawk. Besides living in tents once again, they built a combination workshop and hangar. Measuring long by wide, the ends opened upward for easy glider access.

Hoping to improve lift, they built the 1901 glider with a much larger wing area and made dozens of flights in July and August for distances of . The glider stalled a few times, but the parachute effect of the forward elevator allowed Wilbur to make a safe flat landing, instead of a nose-dive. These incidents wedded the Wrights even more strongly to the &quot;canard&quot; design, which they did not give up until 1910. The glider, however, delivered two major disappointments. It produced only about one-third the lift calculated and sometimes pointed opposite the intended direction of a turn – a problem later known as adverse yaw – when Wilbur used the wing-warping control. On the trip home a deeply dejected Wilbur remarked to Orville that man would not fly in a thousand years.

The poor lift of the gliders led the Wrights to question the accuracy of Lilienthal&#x27;s data, as well as the &quot;Smeaton coefficient&quot; of air pressure, a value which had been in use for over 100 years and was part of the accepted equation for lift.
The Wrights used this equation to calculate the amount of lift that a wing would produce. Over the years a wide variety of values had been measured for the Smeaton coefficient; Chanute identified up to 50 of them. Wilbur knew that Langley, for example, had used a lower number than the traditional one. Intent on confirming the correct Smeaton value, Wilbur performed his own calculations using measurements collected during kite and free flights of the 1901 glider. His results correctly showed that the coefficient was very close to 0.0033 (similar to the number Langley used), not the traditional 0.0054, which would significantly exaggerate predicted lift.

The brothers decided to find out if Lilienthal&#x27;s data for lift coefficients were correct. They devised an experimental apparatus which consisted of a freely rotating bicycle wheel mounted horizontally in front of the handlebars of a bicycle. The brothers took turns pedaling the bicycle vigorously, creating air flow over the horizontal wheel. Attached vertically to the wheel were an airfoil and a flat plate mounted 90° away. As air passed by the airfoil, the lift it generated, if unopposed, would cause the wheel to rotate.

The flat plate was oriented so its drag would push the wheel in the opposite direction of the airfoil. The airfoil and flat plate were made in specific sizes such that, according to Lilienthal&#x27;s measurements, the lift generated by the airfoil would exactly counterbalance the drag generated by the flat plate and the wheel would not turn. However, when the brothers tested the device, the wheel &quot;did&quot; turn. The experiment confirmed their suspicion that either the standard Smeaton coefficient or Lilienthal&#x27;s coefficients of lift and drag – or all of them – were in error.

They then built a six-foot (1.8 m) wind tunnel in their shop, and between October and December 1901 conducted systematic tests on dozens of miniature wings. The &quot;balances&quot; they devised and mounted inside the tunnel to hold the wings looked crude, made of bicycle spokes and scrap metal, but were &quot;as critical to the ultimate success of the Wright brothers as were the gliders.&quot; The devices allowed the brothers to balance lift against drag and accurately calculate the performance of each wing. They could also see which wings worked well as they looked through the viewing window in the top of the tunnel. The tests yielded a trove of valuable data never before known and showed that the poor lift of the 1900 and 1901 gliders was entirely due to an incorrect Smeaton value, and that Lilienthal&#x27;s published data were fairly accurate for the tests he had done.

Before the detailed wind tunnel tests, Wilbur traveled to Chicago at Chanute&#x27;s invitation to give a lecture to the Western Society of Engineers on September 18, 1901. He presented a thorough report about the 1900–1901 glider experiments and complemented his talk with a lantern slide show of photographs. Wilbur&#x27;s speech was the first public account of the brothers&#x27; experiments. A report was published in the &quot;Journal&quot; of the society, which was then separately published as an offprint titled &quot;Some Aeronautical Experiments&quot; in a 300 copy printing.

====1902====
Lilienthal had made &quot;whirling arm&quot; tests on only a few wing shapes, and the Wrights mistakenly assumed the data would apply to their wings, which had a different shape. The Wrights took a huge step forward and made basic wind tunnel tests on 200 scale-model wings of many shapes and airfoil curves, followed by detailed tests on 38 of them. An important discovery was the benefit of longer narrower wings: in aeronautical terms, wings with a larger aspect ratio (wingspan divided by chord – the wing&#x27;s front-to-back dimension). Such shapes offered much better lift-to-drag ratio than the stubbier wings the brothers had tried so far. With this knowledge, and a more accurate Smeaton number, the Wrights designed their 1902 glider.

The wind tunnel tests, made from October to December 1901, were described by biographer Fred Howard as &quot;the most crucial and fruitful aeronautical experiments ever conducted in so short a time with so few materials and at so little expense&quot;. In their September 1908 &quot;Century Magazine&quot; article, the Wrights explained, &quot;The calculations on which all flying machines had been based were unreliable, and ... every experiment was simply groping in the dark ... We cast it all aside and decided to rely entirely upon our own investigations.&quot;

The 1902 glider wing had a flatter airfoil, with the camber reduced to a ratio of 1-in-24, in contrast to the previous thicker wing. The larger aspect ratio was achieved by increasing the wingspan and shortening the chord. The glider also had a new structural feature: A fixed, rear vertical rudder, which the brothers hoped would eliminate turning problems. However, the 1902 glider encountered trouble in crosswinds and steep banked turns, when it sometimes spiraled into the ground – a phenomenon the brothers called &quot;well digging&quot;. According to Combs, &quot;They knew that when the earlier 1901 glider banked, it would begin to slide sideways through the air, and if the side motion was left uncorrected, or took place too quickly, the glider would go into an uncontrolled pivoting motion. Now, with vertical fins added to correct this, the glider again went into a pivoting motion, but in the opposite direction, with the nose swinging downward.&quot;

Orville apparently visualized that the fixed rudder resisted the effect of corrective wing-warping when attempting to level off from a turn. He wrote in his diary that on the night of October 2, &quot;I studied out a new vertical rudder&quot;. The brothers then decided to make the rear rudder movable to solve the problem. They hinged the rudder and connected it to the pilot&#x27;s warping &quot;cradle&quot;, so a single movement by the pilot simultaneously controlled wing-warping and rudder deflection. The apparatus made the trailing edge of the rudder turn away from whichever end of the wings had more drag (and lift) due to warping. The opposing pressure produced by turning the rudder enabled corrective wing-warping to reliably restore level flight after a turn or a wind disturbance. Furthermore, when the glider banked into a turn, rudder pressure overcame the effect of differential drag and pointed the nose of the aircraft in the direction of the turn, eliminating adverse yaw.

In short, the Wrights discovered the true purpose of the movable vertical rudder. Its role was not to change the direction of flight, as a rudder does in sailing, but rather, to aim or align the aircraft correctly during banking turns and when leveling off from turns and wind disturbances. The actual turn – the change in direction – was done with roll control using wing-warping. The principles remained the same when ailerons superseded wing-warping.
With their new method, the Wrights achieved true control in turns for the first time on October 9, a major milestone. From September 20 until the last weeks of October, they flew over a thousand flights. The longest duration was up to 26 seconds, and the longest distance more than . Having demonstrated lift, control, and stability, the brothers now turned their focus to the problem of power.

Thus did three-axis control evolve: wing-warping for roll (lateral motion), forward elevator for pitch (up and down) and rear rudder for yaw (side to side). On March 23, 1903, the Wrights applied for their famous patent for a &quot;Flying Machine&quot;, based on their successful 1902 glider. Some aviation historians believe that applying the system of three-axis flight control on the 1902 glider was equal to, or even more significant, than the addition of power to the 1903 Flyer. Peter Jakab of the Smithsonian asserts that perfection of the 1902 glider essentially represents invention of the airplane.

===Adding power===
In addition to developing the lift equation, the brothers also developed the equation for drag. It is of the same form as the lift equation, except the coefficient of drag replaces the coefficient of lift, computing drag instead of lift. They used this equation to answer the question, &quot;Is there enough power in the engine to produce a thrust adequate to overcome the drag of the total frame ...,&quot; in the words of Combs. The Wrights then &quot;... measured the pull in pounds on various parts of their aircraft, including the pull on each of the wings of the biplane in level position in known wind velocities ... They also devised a formula for power-to-weight ratio and propeller efficiency that would answer whether or not they could supply to the propellers the power necessary to deliver the thrust to maintain flight ... they even computed the thrust of their propellers to within 1 percent of the thrust actually delivered ...&quot;
In 1903 the brothers built the powered &quot;Wright Flyer&quot;, using their preferred material for construction, spruce, a strong and lightweight wood, and Pride of the West muslin for surface coverings. They also designed and carved their own wooden propellers, and had a purpose-built gasoline engine fabricated in their bicycle shop. They thought propeller design would be a simple matter and intended to adapt data from shipbuilding. However, their library research disclosed no established formulae for either marine or air propellers, and they found themselves with no sure starting point. They discussed and argued the question, sometimes heatedly, until they concluded that an aeronautical propeller is essentially a wing rotating in the vertical plane. On that basis, they used data from more wind tunnel tests to design their propellers. The finished blades were just over eight feet long, made of three laminations of glued spruce. The Wrights decided on twin &quot;pusher&quot; propellers (counter-rotating to cancel torque), which would act on a greater quantity of air than a single relatively slow propeller and not disturb airflow over the leading edge of the wings.

Wilbur made a March 1903 entry in his notebook indicating the prototype propeller was 66% efficient. Modern wind tunnel tests on reproduction 1903 propellers show they were more than 75% efficient under the conditions of the first flights, &quot;a remarkable feat&quot;, and actually had a peak efficiency of 82%. The Wrights wrote to several engine manufacturers, but none could meet their need for a sufficiently light-weight powerplant. They turned to their shop mechanic, Charlie Taylor, who built an engine in just six weeks in close consultation with the brothers.
To keep the weight down the engine block was cast from aluminum, a rare practice at the time. The Wright/Taylor engine had a primitive version of a carburetor, and had no fuel pump. Gasoline was gravity-fed from the fuel tank mounted on a wing strut into a chamber next to the cylinders where it was mixed with air: The fuel-air mixture was then vaporized by heat from the crankcase, forcing it into the cylinders.

The propeller drive chains, resembling those of bicycles, were supplied by a manufacturer of heavy-duty automobile chains. The &quot;Flyer&quot; cost less than a thousand dollars, in contrast to more than $50,000 in government funds given to Samuel Langley for his man-carrying Great Aerodrome. In 1903 $1,000 was . The &quot;Wright Flyer&quot; had a wingspan of , weighed , and had a , engine.

On June 24, 1903, Wilbur made a second presentation in Chicago to the Western Society of Engineers. He gave details about their 1902 experiments and glider flights, but avoided any mention of their plans for powered flight.

===First powered flight===
In camp at Kill Devil Hills, the Wrights endured weeks of delays caused by broken propeller shafts during engine tests. After the shafts were replaced (requiring two trips back to Dayton), Wilbur won a coin toss and made a three-second flight attempt on December 14, 1903, stalling after takeoff and causing minor damage to the &quot;Flyer&quot;. Because December 13, 1903, was a Sunday, the brothers did not make any attempts that day, even though the weather was good, so their first powered test flight happened on the 121st anniversary of the first hot air balloon test flight that the Montgolfier brothers had made on December 14, 1782. In a message to their family, Wilbur referred to the trial as having &quot;only partial success&quot;, stating &quot;the power is ample, and but for a trifling error due to lack of experience with this machine and this method of starting, the machine would undoubtedly have flown beautifully.&quot;

Following repairs, the Wrights finally took to the air on December 17, 1903, making two flights each from level ground into a freezing headwind gusting to . The first flight, by Orville at 10:35 am, of in 12 seconds, at a speed of only over the ground, was recorded in a famous photograph. The next two flights covered approximately , by Wilbur and Orville respectively. Their altitude was about above the ground. The following is Orville Wright&#x27;s account of the final flight of the day:

Five people witnessed the flights: Adam Etheridge, John T. Daniels (who snapped the famous &quot;first flight&quot; photo using Orville&#x27;s pre-positioned camera), and Will Dough, all of the U.S. government coastal lifesaving crew; area businessman W.C. Brinkley; and Johnny Moore, a teenaged boy who lived in the area.
After the men hauled the &quot;Flyer&quot; back from its fourth flight, a powerful gust of wind flipped it over several times, despite the crew&#x27;s attempt to hold it down. Severely damaged, the &quot;Wright Flyer&quot; never flew again. The brothers shipped the airplane home, and years later Orville restored it, lending it to several U.S. locations for display, then to the Science Museum in London (see Smithsonian dispute below), before it was finally installed in 1948 in the Smithsonian Institution, its current residence.

The Wrights sent a telegram about the flights to their father, requesting that he &quot;inform press&quot;. However, the &quot;Dayton Journal&quot; refused to publish the story, saying the flights were too short to be important. Meanwhile, against the brothers&#x27; wishes, a telegraph operator leaked their message to a Virginia newspaper, which concocted a highly inaccurate news article that was reprinted the next day in several newspapers elsewhere, including Dayton.

The Wrights issued their own factual statement to the press in January. Nevertheless, the flights did not create public excitement – if people even knew about them – and the news soon faded. In Paris, however, Aero Club of France members, already stimulated by Chanute&#x27;s reports of Wright gliding successes, took the news more seriously and increased their efforts to catch up to the brothers.

An analysis in 1985 by Professor Fred E.C. Culick and Henry R. Jex demonstrated that the 1903 &quot;Wright Flyer&quot; was so unstable as to be almost unmanageable by anyone but the Wrights, who had trained themselves in the 1902 glider. In a recreation attempt on the event&#x27;s 100th anniversary on December 17, 2003, Kevin Kochersberger, piloting an exact replica, failed in his effort to match the success that the Wright brothers had achieved with their piloting skill.

===Establishing legitimacy===

In 1904 the Wrights built the Wright Flyer II. They decided to avoid the expense of travel and bringing supplies to the Outer Banks and set up an airfield at Huffman Prairie, a cow pasture eight miles (13km) northeast of Dayton. The Wrights referred to the airfield as Simms Station in their flying school brochure. They received permission to use the field rent-free from owner and bank president Torrance Huffman.

They invited reporters to their first flight attempt of the year on May 23, on the condition that no photographs be taken. Engine troubles and slack winds prevented any flying, and they could manage only a very short hop a few days later with fewer reporters present. Library of Congress historian Fred Howard noted some speculation that the brothers had intentionally failed to fly in order to cause reporters to lose interest in their experiments. Whether that is true is not known, but after their poor showing local newspapers virtually ignored them for the next year and a half.

The Wrights were glad to be free from the distraction of reporters. The absence of newsmen also reduced the chance of competitors learning their methods. After the Kitty Hawk powered flights, the Wrights made a decision to begin withdrawing from the bicycle business so they could concentrate on creating and marketing a practical airplane. This was financially risky, since they were neither wealthy nor government-funded (unlike other experimenters such as Ader, Maxim, Langley, and Santos-Dumont). The Wright brothers did not have the luxury of being able to give away their invention: It had to be their livelihood. Thus, their secrecy intensified, encouraged by advice from their patent attorney, Henry Toulmin, not to reveal details of their machine.
At Huffman Prairie, lighter winds made takeoffs harder, and they had to use a longer starting rail than the rail used at Kitty Hawk. The first flights in 1904 revealed problems with longitudinal stability, solved by adding ballast and lengthening the supports for the elevator. During the spring and summer they suffered many hard landings, often damaging the aircraft and causing minor injuries. On August 13, making an unassisted takeoff, Wilbur finally exceeded their best Kitty Hawk effort with a flight of .
They then decided to use a weight-powered catapult to make takeoffs easier and tried it for the first time on September 7.
On September 20, 1904, Wilbur flew the first complete circle in history by a manned heavier-than-air powered machine, covering in about a minute and a half. Their two best flights were November 9 by Wilbur and December 1 by Orville, each exceeding five minutes and covering nearly three miles in almost four circles.
By the end of the year the brothers had accumulated about 50 minutes in the air in 105 flights over the rather soggy pasture, which, remarkably, is virtually unchanged today from its original condition and is now part of Dayton Aviation Heritage National Historical Park, adjacent to Wright-Patterson Air Force Base.

The Wrights scrapped the battered and much-repaired aircraft, but saved the engine, and in 1905 built a new airplane, the &quot;Flyer III&quot;. Nevertheless, at first this &quot;Flyer&quot; offered the same marginal performance as the first two. Its maiden flight was on June 23 and the first few flights were no longer than 10 seconds. After Orville suffered a bone-jarring and potentially fatal crash on July 14, they rebuilt the &quot;Flyer&quot; with the forward elevator and rear rudder both enlarged and placed several feet farther away from the wings. They also installed a separate control for the rear rudder instead of linking it to the wing-warping &quot;cradle&quot; as before.

Each of the three axes – pitch, roll, and yaw – now had its own independent control. These modifications greatly improved stability and control, enabling a series of six dramatic &quot;long flights&quot; ranging from 17 to 38 minutes and around the three-quarter mile course over Huffman Prairie between September 26 and October 5. Wilbur made the last and longest flight, in 38 minutes and 3 seconds, ending with a safe landing when the fuel ran out. The flight was seen by several invited friends, their father Milton, and neighboring farmers.

Reporters showed up the next day (only their second appearance at the field since May the previous year), but the brothers declined to fly. The long flights convinced the Wrights they had achieved their goal of creating a flying machine of &quot;practical utility&quot; which they could offer to sell.

The only photos of the flights of 1904–1905 were taken by the brothers. (A few photos were damaged in the Great Dayton Flood of 1913, but most survived intact.) In 1904 Ohio beekeeping businessman Amos Root, a technology enthusiast, saw a few flights including the first circle. Articles he wrote for his beekeeping magazine were the only published eyewitness reports of the Huffman Prairie flights, except for the unimpressive early hop local newsmen saw. Root offered a report to &quot;Scientific American&quot; magazine, but the editor turned it down. As a result, the news was not widely known outside Ohio, and was often met with skepticism. The Paris edition of the &quot;Herald Tribune&quot; headlined a 1906 article on the Wrights &quot;Flyers or liars?&quot;.

In years to come, Dayton newspapers would proudly celebrate the hometown Wright brothers as national heroes, but the local reporters somehow missed one of the most important stories in history as it was happening a few miles from their doorstep. J.M. Cox, who published the &quot;Dayton Daily News&quot; at that time, expressed the attitude of newspapermen – and the public – in those days when he admitted years later: &quot;Frankly, none of us believed it.&quot;
A few newspapers published articles about the long flights, but no reporters or photographers had been there. The lack of splashy eyewitness press coverage was a major reason for disbelief in Washington, DC, and Europe, and in journals like &quot;Scientific American&quot;, whose editors doubted the &quot;alleged experiments&quot; and asked how U.S. newspapers, &quot;alert as they are, allowed these sensational performances to escape their notice.&quot;

In October 1904, the brothers were visited by the first of many important Europeans they would befriend in coming years, Colonel J.E. Capper, later superintendent of the Royal Balloon Factory. Capper and his wife were visiting the United States to investigate the aeronautical exhibits at the St. Louis World Fair, but had been given a letter of introduction to both Chanute and the Wrights by Patrick Alexander. Capper was very favorably impressed by the Wrights, who showed him photographs of their aircraft in flight.

The Wright brothers were certainly complicit in the lack of attention they received. Fearful of competitors stealing their ideas, and still without a patent, they flew on only one more day after October 5. From then on, they refused to fly anywhere unless they had a firm contract to sell their aircraft. They wrote to the U.S. government, then to Britain, France and Germany with an offer to sell a flying machine, but were rebuffed because they insisted on a signed contract before giving a demonstration. They were unwilling even to show their photographs of the airborne Flyer.

The American military, having recently spent $50,000 on the Langley Aerodrome – a product of the nation&#x27;s foremost scientist – only to see it plunge twice into the Potomac River &quot;like a handful of mortar&quot;, was particularly unreceptive to the claims of two unknown bicycle makers from Ohio. Thus, doubted or scorned, the Wright brothers continued their work in semi-obscurity, while other aviation pioneers like Santos-Dumont, Henri Farman, Léon Delagrange, and American Glenn Curtiss entered the limelight.

==European skepticism==
In 1906, skeptics in the European aviation community had converted the press to an anti-Wright brothers stance. European newspapers, especially those in France, were openly derisive, calling them &quot;bluffeurs&quot; (bluffers). Ernest Archdeacon, founder of the Aéro-Club de France, was publicly scornful of the brothers&#x27; claims despite published reports; specifically, he wrote several articles and, in 1906, stated that &quot;the French would make the first public demonstration of powered flight.&quot;
The Paris edition of the &quot;New York Herald&quot; summed up Europe&#x27;s opinion of the Wright brothers in an editorial on February 10, 1906: &quot;The Wrights have flown or they have not flown. They possess a machine or they do not possess one. They are in fact either fliers or liars. It is difficult to fly. It&#x27;s easy to say, &#x27;We have flown&#x27;.&quot;

In 1908, after the Wrights&#x27; first flights in France, Archdeacon publicly admitted he had done them an injustice.

==Contracts and return to Kitty Hawk==
The brothers contacted the United States Department of War, the British War Office and a French syndicate on October 19, 1905. The U.S. Board of Ordnance and Fortification replied on October 24, 1905, specifying they would take no further action &quot;until a machine is produced which by actual operation is shown to be able to produce horizontal flight and to carry an operator.&quot; In May 1908, Orville wrote:
The brothers turned their attention to Europe, especially France, where enthusiasm for aviation ran high, and journeyed there for the first time in 1907 for face-to-face talks with government officials and businessmen. They also met with aviation representatives in Germany and Britain. Before traveling, Orville shipped a newly built Model A Flyer to France in anticipation of demonstration flights. In France, Wilbur met Frank P. Lahm, a lieutenant in the U.S. Army Aeronautical Division. Writing to his superiors, Lahm smoothed the way for Wilbur to give an in-person presentation to the U.S. Board of Ordnance and Fortification in Washington, DC, when he returned to the U.S. This time, the Board was favorably impressed, in contrast to its previous indifference.

With further input from the Wrights, the U.S. Army Signal Corps issued &quot;Specification 486&quot; in December 1907, inviting bids for construction of a flying machine under military contract. The Wrights submitted their bid in January, and were awarded a contract on February 8, 1908. Then on March 23, 1908, the brothers had a contract to form the French company La Compagnie Générale de Navigation Aérienne. This French syndicate included Lazare Weiller, Henri Deutsch de la Meurthe, Hart O. Berg, and Charles Ranlett Flint.

In May they went back to Kitty Hawk with their 1905 Flyer to practice for their contracted demonstration flights. Their privacy was lost when several correspondents arrived on the scene. The brothers&#x27; contracts required them to fly with a passenger, so they modified the 1905 Flyer by installing two upright seats with dual control levers. Charlie Furnas, a mechanic from Dayton, became the first fixed-wing aircraft passenger on separate flights with both brothers on May 14, 1908. Later, Wilbur over-controlled the front elevator and crashed into the sand at about . He emerged with bruises and hurt ribs, but the accident ended the practice flights.

===Return to glider flights===
In October 1911, Orville Wright returned to the Outer Banks again, to conduct safety and stabilization tests with a new glider. On October 24, he soared for 9 minutes and 45 seconds, a record that held for almost 10 years, when gliding as a sport began in the 1920s.

==Public showing==

The brothers&#x27; contracts with the U.S. Army and a French syndicate depended on successful public flight demonstrations that met certain conditions. The brothers had to divide their efforts. Wilbur sailed for Europe; Orville would fly near Washington, DC.

Facing much skepticism in the French aeronautical community and outright scorn by some newspapers that called him a &quot;bluffeur&quot;, Wilbur began official public demonstrations on August 8, 1908, at the Hunaudières horse racing track near the town of Le Mans, France. His first flight lasted only 1 minute 45 seconds, but his ability to effortlessly make banking turns and fly a circle amazed and stunned onlookers, including several pioneer French aviators, among them Louis Blériot. In the following days, Wilbur made a series of technically challenging flights, including figure-eights, demonstrating his skills as a pilot and the capability of his flying machine, which far surpassed those of all other pioneering aircraft and pilots of the day.
The French public was thrilled by Wilbur&#x27;s feats and flocked to the field by the thousands, and the Wright brothers instantly became world-famous. Former doubters issued apologies and effusive praise. &quot;L&#x27;Aérophile&quot; editor Georges Besançon wrote that the flights &quot;have completely dissipated all doubts. Not one of the former detractors of the Wrights dare question, today, the previous experiments of the men who were truly the first to fly ...&quot; Leading French aviation promoter Ernest Archdeacon wrote, &quot;For a long time, the Wright brothers have been accused in Europe of bluff ... They are today hallowed in France, and I feel an intense pleasure ... to make amends.&quot;

On October 7, 1908, Edith Berg, the wife of the brothers&#x27; European business agent, became the first American woman passenger when she flew with Wilbur – one of many passengers who rode with him that autumn, including Griffith Brewer and Charles Rolls. Wilbur also became acquainted with Léon Bollée and his family. Bollée was the owner of an automobile factory where Wilbur would assemble the Flyer and where he would be provided with hired assistance. Bollée and his wife would fly that autumn with Wilbur. Madame Carlotta Bollée had been in the latter stages of pregnancy when Wilbur arrived in Le Mans in June 1908 to assemble the Flyer. She was fluent in Greek, French and English and translated the technical discussions between Wright and her husband. Wilbur promised her that he would make his first European flight the day her baby was born which he did, August 8, 1908. He became Elizabeth Bollée&#x27;s godfather.

Orville followed his brother&#x27;s success by demonstrating another nearly identical Flyer to the United States Army at Fort Myer, Virginia, starting on September 3, 1908. On September 9, he made the first hour-long flight, lasting 62 minutes and 15 seconds. On the same day he took up Frank P. Lahm as a passenger, and then Major George Squier three days later.
On September 17, Army lieutenant Thomas Selfridge rode along as his passenger, serving as an official observer. A few minutes into the flight at an altitude of about , a propeller split and shattered, sending the &quot;Flyer&quot; out of control. Selfridge suffered a fractured skull in the crash and died that evening in the nearby Army hospital, becoming the first airplane crash fatality. Orville was badly injured, suffering a broken left leg and four broken ribs. Twelve years later, after he suffered increasingly severe pains, X-rays revealed the accident had also caused three hip bone fractures and a dislocated hip.

The brothers&#x27; sister Katharine, a school teacher, rushed from Dayton to Virginia and stayed by Orville&#x27;s side for the seven weeks of his hospitalization. She helped negotiate a one-year extension of the Army contract. A friend visiting Orville in the hospital asked, &quot;Has it got your nerve?&quot; &quot;Nerve?&quot; repeated Orville, slightly puzzled. &quot;Oh, do you mean will I be &quot;afraid&quot; to fly again? The only thing I&#x27;m afraid of is that I can&#x27;t get well soon enough to finish those tests next year.&quot;

Deeply shocked and upset by the accident, Wilbur determined to make even more impressive flight demonstrations; in the ensuing days and weeks he set new records for altitude and duration. On September 28, Wilbur won the Commission of Aviation prize, and then on December 31, the Coupe Michelin. In January 1909 Orville and Katharine joined him in France, and for a time they were the three most famous people in the world, sought after by royalty, the rich, reporters, and the public. The kings of Great Britain, Spain, and Italy came to see Wilbur fly.
All three Wrights relocated to Pau, where Wilbur made many more public flights in nearby Pont Long. Wilbur gave rides to a procession of officers, journalists, and statesmen, including his sister Katharine on March 17, 1909. The brothers established the world&#x27;s first flying school to meet the French syndicate requirements to train three French pilots (Charles de Lambert, Paul Tissandier, and Paul-Nicolas Lucas-Girardville). In April the Wrights went to Rome where Wilbur assembled another &quot;Flyer&quot;. At Centocelle, Wilbur made demonstrations flights, and trained three Italian military pilots (Mario Calderara, Umbert Savoia, and Guido Castagneris). A Universal cameraman flew as a passenger, and filmed the first motion pictures from an airplane.

After their return to the U.S. on May 13, 1909, the brothers and Katharine were invited to the White House where on June 10, President Taft bestowed awards upon them. Dayton followed up with a lavish two-day homecoming celebration on June 17 and 18. On July 27, 1909 Orville, with Wilbur assisting on the ground, completed the proving flights for the U.S. Army. The flights met the requirements that the aircraft carry two persons while remaining aloft for an hour and achieve an average speed of at least .

President Taft, his cabinet, and members of Congress were part of the viewing crowd of 10,000. Following the successful flights, the Army awarded the Wrights $25,000, plus $2500 for each mile per hour they exceeded 40 miles per hour. Orville and Katharine then traveled to Germany, where Orville made demonstration flights at Tempelhof in September 1909, including a flight with the Crown Prince of Germany as a passenger.

On October 4, 1909, Wilbur made a flight seen by about a million people in Manhattan during the Hudson-Fulton Celebration in New York City. He took off from Governors Island, flew north over the Hudson River to Grant&#x27;s Tomb and returned to Governors Island. The aircraft was equipped with an unusual accessory for the flight: a canoe attached to the underside framework as a flotation device in case of a ditching. On October 8 in College Park, Maryland, Wilbur began pilot training for Army officers Frank P. Lahm and Frederick E. Humphreys, joined later that month by Benjamin Foulois.

===Family flights===
On May 25, 1910, back at Huffman Prairie, Orville piloted two unique flights. First, he took off on a six-minute flight with Wilbur as his passenger, the only time the Wright brothers ever flew together. They received permission from their father to make the flight. They had always promised Milton they would never fly together to avoid the chance of a double tragedy and to ensure one brother would remain to continue their experiments. Next, Orville took his 82-year-old father on a nearly 7-minute flight, the only powered aerial excursion of Milton Wright&#x27;s life. The aircraft rose to about while the elderly Wright called to his son, &quot;Higher, Orville, higher!&quot;.

==Patent war==
The Wright brothers wrote their 1903 patent application themselves, but it was rejected. In January 1904, they hired Ohio patent attorney Henry Toulmin, and on May 22, 1906, they were granted U.S. Patent 821393 for &quot;new and useful Improvements in Flying Machines&quot;.

The patent illustrates a non-powered flying machine – namely, the 1902 glider. The patent&#x27;s importance lies in its claim of a new and useful method of &quot;controlling&quot; a flying machine, powered or not. The technique of wing-warping is described, but the patent explicitly states that other methods instead of wing-warping could be used for adjusting the outer portions of a machine&#x27;s wings to different angles on the right and left sides to achieve lateral (roll) control.

The concept of varying the angle presented to the air near the wingtips, by any suitable method, is central to the patent. The patent also describes the steerable rear vertical rudder and its innovative use in combination with wing-warping, enabling the airplane to make a &quot;coordinated turn&quot;, a technique that prevents hazardous &quot;adverse yaw&quot;, the problem Wilbur had when trying to turn the 1901 glider. Finally, the patent describes the forward elevator, used for ascending and descending.

In March 1904, the Wright Brothers applied for French and German patents. The French patent was granted on July 1, 1904. According to Combs, regarding the U.S. patent, &quot;... by 1906 the drawings in the Wright patents were available to anyone who wanted badly enough to get them. And they gave proof – in vivid, technical detail – of how to get into the air.&quot;

===Lawsuits begin===
Glenn Curtiss and other early aviators devised ailerons to emulate lateral control described in the patent and demonstrated by the Wrights in their public flights.
Soon after the historic July 4, 1908, one-kilometer flight by Curtiss in the AEA June Bug, the Wrights warned him not to infringe their patent by profiting from flying or selling aircraft that used ailerons.

Orville wrote Curtiss, &quot;Claim 14 of our patent no. 821,393, specifically covers the combination which we are informed you are using. If it is your desire to enter the exhibition business, we would be glad to take up the matter of a license to operate under our patent for that purpose.&quot;

Curtiss was at the time a member of the Aerial Experiment Association (AEA), headed by Alexander Graham Bell, where in 1908 he had helped reinvent wingtip ailerons for their Aerodrome No. 2, known as the AEA White Wing

Curtiss refused to pay license fees to the Wrights and sold an airplane equipped with ailerons to the Aeronautic Society of New York in 1909. The Wrights filed a lawsuit, beginning a years-long legal conflict. They also sued foreign aviators who flew at U.S. exhibitions, including the leading French aviator Louis Paulhan. The Curtiss people derisively suggested that if someone jumped in the air and waved his arms, the Wrights would sue.

European companies which bought foreign patents the Wrights had received sued other manufacturers in their countries. Those lawsuits were only partly successful. Despite a pro-Wright ruling in France, legal maneuvering dragged on until the patent expired in 1917. A German court ruled the patent invalid because of prior disclosure in speeches by Wilbur Wright in 1901, and Chanute in 1903. In the U.S. the Wrights made an agreement with the Aero Club of America to license airshows which the Club approved, freeing participating pilots from a legal threat. Promoters of approved shows paid fees to the Wrights. The Wright brothers won their initial case against Curtiss in February 1913 when a judge ruled that ailerons were covered under the patent. The Curtiss company appealed the decision.

From 1910 until his death from typhoid fever in 1912, Wilbur took the leading role in the patent struggle, travelling incessantly to consult with lawyers and testify in what he felt was a moral cause, particularly against Curtiss, who was creating a large company to manufacture aircraft. The Wrights&#x27; preoccupation with the legal issue stifled their work on new designs, and by 1911 Wright airplanes were considered inferior to those of European makers. Indeed, aviation development in the U.S. was suppressed to such an extent that, when the U.S. entered World War I in April 1917, no acceptable American-designed airplanes were available, and American forces were compelled to use French machines. Orville and Katharine Wright believed Curtiss was partly responsible for Wilbur&#x27;s premature death, which occurred in the wake of his exhausting travels and the stress of the legal battle.

===Victory and cooperation===
In January 1914, a U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the verdict against the Curtiss company, which continued to avoid penalties through legal tactics. Orville apparently felt vindicated by the decision, and much to the frustration of company executives, he did not push vigorously for further legal action to ensure a manufacturing monopoly. In fact, he was planning to sell the company and departed in 1915. In 1917, with World War I underway, the U.S. government pressured the industry to form a cross-licensing organization, the Manufacturers Aircraft Association, to which member companies paid a blanket fee for the use of aviation patents, including the original and subsequent Wright patents. The &quot;patent war&quot; ended, although side issues lingered in the courts until the 1920s. The Wright Aeronautical Corporation (successor to the Wright-Martin Company), and the Curtiss Aeroplane company, merged in 1929 to form the Curtiss-Wright Corporation, which remains in business today producing high-tech components for the aerospace industry.

Aviation historian C.H. Gibbs-Smith stated a number of times that the Wrights&#x27; legal victory would have been &quot;doubtful&quot; if an 1868 patent of &quot;a prior but lost invention&quot; by M.P.W. Boulton of the U.K. had been known in the period 1903–1906. The patent, titled &quot;Aërial Locomotion &amp;c,&quot; described several engine improvements and conceptual designs and included a technical description and drawings of an aileron control system and an optional feature intended to function as an autopilot. In fact, this patent was well known to participants in the Wright-Curtiss lawsuit. A U.S. federal judge who reviewed previous inventions and patents and upheld the Wright patent against the Curtiss company reached the opposite conclusion of Gibbs-Smith, saying the Boulton patent &quot;is not anticipatory&quot;.

===Public reactions===
The lawsuits damaged the public image of the Wright brothers, who were generally regarded before this as heroes. Critics said the brothers were greedy and unfair, and compared their actions unfavorably to European inventors, who worked more openly. Supporters said the brothers were protecting their interests and were justified in expecting fair compensation for the years of work leading to their successful invention. Their 10-year friendship with Octave Chanute, already strained by tension over how much credit, if any, he might deserve for their success, collapsed after he publicly criticized their actions.

==In business==
The Wright Company was incorporated on November 22, 1909. The brothers sold their patents to the company for $100,000 and also received one-third of the shares in a million dollar stock issue and a 10 percent royalty on every airplane sold. With Wilbur as president and Orville as vice president, the company set up a factory in Dayton and a flying school / test flight field at Huffman Prairie; the headquarters office was in New York City.

In mid-1910, the Wrights changed the design of the &quot;Wright Flyer&quot;, moving the horizontal elevator from the front to the back and adding wheels although keeping the skids as part of the undercarriage unit. It had become apparent by then that a rear elevator would make an airplane easier to control, especially as higher speeds grew more common. The new version was designated the &quot;Model B&quot;, although the original canard design was never referred to as the &quot;Model A&quot; by the Wrights. However, the U.S. Army Signal Corps which bought the airplane did call it &quot;Wright type A&quot;.

There were not many customers for airplanes, so in the spring of 1910 the Wrights hired and trained a team of salaried exhibition pilots to show off their machines and win prize money for the company – despite Wilbur&#x27;s disdain for what he called &quot;the mountebank business&quot;. The team debuted at the Indianapolis Speedway on June 13. Before the year was over, pilots Ralph Johnstone and Arch Hoxsey died in air show crashes, and in November 1911 the brothers disbanded the team on which nine men had served (four other former team members died in crashes afterward).
The Wright Company transported the first known commercial air cargo on November 7, 1910, by flying two bolts of dress silk from Dayton to Columbus, Ohio, for the Morehouse-Martens Department Store, which paid a $5,000 fee. Company pilot Phil Parmelee made the flight – which was more an exercise in advertising than a simple delivery – in an hour and six minutes with the cargo strapped in the passenger&#x27;s seat. The silk was cut into small pieces and sold as souvenirs.

In 1910 the Wrights advertised for a person to undertake &quot;plane sewing&quot;, which was corrected by the Dayton newspaper that published it to &quot;plain sewing&quot;. Ida Holdgreve, a dress maker, applied for the role and became head seamstress at the Wright Company Factory, sewing the fabric &quot;for the wings, stabilizers, rudders, fins and I don&#x27;t know what all&quot; of the planes produced there. She was trained in how to cut and sew the fabric to stretch it tight over the frame so it wouldn&#x27;t rip by Duval La Chapelle, who was Wilbur&#x27;s mechanic in France.

Between 1910 and 1916 the Wright Brothers Flying School at Huffman Prairie trained 115 pilots who were instructed by Orville and his assistants. Several trainees became famous, including Henry &quot;Hap&quot; Arnold, who rose to Five-Star General, commanded U.S. Army Air Forces in World War II, and became the first head of the U.S. Air Force; Calbraith Perry Rodgers, who made the first coast-to-coast flight in 1911 (with many stops and crashes) in a Wright Model EX named the &quot;Vin Fiz&quot; (after the sponsor&#x27;s grape soft drink); and Eddie Stinson, founder of the Stinson Aircraft Company.

===Army accidents===
In 1912–1913 a series of fatal crashes of Wright airplanes bought by the U.S. Army called into question their safety and design. The death toll reached 11 by 1913, half of them in the Wright model C. All six model C Army airplanes crashed. They had a tendency to nose dive, but Orville insisted that stalls were caused by pilot error. He cooperated with the Army to equip the airplanes with a rudimentary flight indicator to help the pilot avoid climbing too steeply. A government investigation said the Wright model C was &quot;dynamically unsuited for flying&quot;, and the American military ended its use of airplanes with &quot;pusher&quot; type propellers, including models made by both the Wright and Curtiss companies, in which the engine was located behind the pilot and likely to crush him in a crash. Orville resisted the switch to manufacturing &quot;tractor-type&quot; propeller aircraft, worried that a design change could threaten the Wright patent infringement case against Curtiss.

==Smithsonian feud==
S.P. Langley, secretary of the Smithsonian Institution from 1887 until his death in 1906, experimented for years with model flying machines and successfully flew unmanned powered fixed-wing model aircraft in 1896 and 1903. Two tests of his manned full-size motor-driven Aerodrome in October and December 1903, however, were complete failures. Nevertheless, the Smithsonian later proudly displayed the Aerodrome in its museum as the first heavier-than-air craft &quot;capable&quot; of manned powered flight, relegating the Wright brothers&#x27; invention to secondary status and triggering a decades-long feud with Orville Wright, whose brother had received help from the Smithsonian when beginning his own quest for flight.

The Smithsonian based its claim for the Aerodrome on short test flights Glenn Curtiss and his team made with it in 1914. The Smithsonian had allowed Curtiss to make major modifications to the craft before attempting to fly it.

The Smithsonian hoped to salvage Langley&#x27;s aeronautical reputation by proving the Aerodrome could fly; Curtiss wanted to prove the same thing to defeat the Wrights&#x27; patent lawsuits against him. The tests had no effect on the patent battle, but the Smithsonian made the most of them, honoring the Aerodrome in its museum and publications. The Institution did not reveal the extensive Curtiss modifications, but Orville Wright learned of them from his brother Lorin and a close friend of his and Wilbur&#x27;s, Griffith Brewer, who both witnessed and photographed some of the tests.

Orville repeatedly objected to misrepresentation of the Aerodrome, but the Smithsonian was unyielding. Orville responded by lending the restored 1903 Kitty Hawk Flyer to the London Science Museum in 1928, refusing to donate it to the Smithsonian while the Institution &quot;perverted&quot; the history of the flying machine. Orville would never see his invention again, as he died before its return to the United States.

Charles Lindbergh attempted to mediate the dispute, to no avail. In 1942, after years of bad publicity, and encouraged by Wright biographer F.C. Kelly, the Smithsonian finally relented by publishing, for the first time, a list of the Aerodrome modifications and recanting the misleading statements it had published about the 1914 tests. Orville then privately requested the British museum to return the &quot;Flyer&quot;, but the airplane remained in protective storage for the duration of World War II; it finally came home after Orville&#x27;s death.

On November 23, 1948, the executors of Orville&#x27;s estate signed an agreement for the Smithsonian to purchase the Flyer for one dollar. At the insistence of the executors, the agreement also included strict conditions for display of the airplane.

The agreement reads, in part:

If this agreement is not fulfilled, the &quot;Flyer&quot; can be reclaimed by the heir of the Wright brothers. Some aviation enthusiasts, particularly those who promote the legacy of Gustave Whitehead, have accused the Smithsonian of refusing to investigate claims of earlier flights. After a ceremony in the Smithsonian museum, the &quot;Flyer&quot; went on public display on December 17, 1948, the 45th anniversary of the only day it was flown successfully. The Wright brothers&#x27; nephew Milton (Lorin&#x27;s son), who had seen gliders and the Flyer under construction in the bicycle shop when he was a boy, gave a brief speech and formally transferred the airplane to the Smithsonian, which displayed it with the accompanying label:

==Later years==
===Wilbur===
Both Wilbur and Orville were lifelong bachelors. Wilbur once quipped that he &quot;did not have time for both a wife and an airplane&quot;. The 1909 short silent film &quot;Wilbur Wright und seine Flugmaschine&quot; (which translates to &quot;Wilbur Wright and his Flying Machine&quot;) is considered to be the first use of motion picture aerial photography as filmed from a heavier-than-air aircraft. Following a brief training flight he gave to a German pilot in Berlin in June 1911, Wilbur never flew again. He gradually became occupied with business matters for the Wright Company and dealing with different lawsuits. Upon dealing with the patent lawsuits, which had put great strain on both brothers, Wilbur had written in a letter to a French friend:
Wilbur spent the next year before his death traveling, where he spent a full six months in Europe attending to various business and legal matters. Wilbur urged American cities to emulate the European – particularly Parisian – philosophy of apportioning generous public space near every important public building. He was also constantly back and forth between New York, Washington, and Dayton. All of the stresses were taking a toll on Wilbur physically. Orville would remark that he would &quot;come home white&quot;.

It was decided by the family that a new and far grander house would be built, using the money that the Wrights had earned through their inventions and business. Called affectionately Hawthorn Hill, building had begun in the Dayton suburb of Oakwood, Ohio, while Wilbur was in Europe. Katharine and Orville oversaw the project in his absence. Wilbur&#x27;s one known expression upon the design of the house was that he have a room and bathroom of his own. The brothers hired Schenck and Williams, an architectural firm, to design the house, along with input from both Wilbur and Orville. Wilbur did not live to see its completion in 1914.

He became ill on a business trip to Boston in April 1912. The illness is sometimes attributed to eating bad shellfish at a banquet. After returning to Dayton in early May 1912, worn down in mind and body, he fell ill again and was diagnosed with typhoid fever. He lingered on, his symptoms relapsing and remitting for many days. Wilbur died, at age 45, at the Wright family home on May 30. His father wrote about Wilbur in his diary: &quot;A short life, full of consequences. An unfailing intellect, imperturbable temper, great self-reliance and as great modesty, seeing the right clearly, pursuing it steadfastly, he lived and died.&quot;

===Orville===

Orville succeeded to the presidency of the Wright Company upon Wilbur&#x27;s death. He won the prestigious Collier Trophy in 1914 for development of his automatic stabilizer on the brothers&#x27; Wright Model E. Sharing Wilbur&#x27;s distaste for business but not his brother&#x27;s executive skills, Orville sold the company in 1915. The Wright Company then became part of Wright-Martin in 1916.

After 42 years living at their residence on 7 Hawthorn Street, Orville, Katharine, and their father, Milton, moved to Hawthorn Hill in spring 1914. Milton died in his sleep on April 3, 1917, at age 88. Up until his death, Milton had been very active, preoccupied with reading, writing articles for religious publications and enjoying his morning walks. He had also marched in a Dayton Woman&#x27;s Suffrage Parade, along with Orville and Katharine.

Orville made his last flight as a pilot in 1918 in a 1911 Model B. He retired from business and became an elder statesman of aviation, serving on various official boards and committees, including the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), and Aeronautical Chamber of Commerce (ACCA).

Katharine married Henry Haskell of Kansas City, a former Oberlin classmate, in 1926. Orville was furious and inconsolable, feeling he had been betrayed by his sister Katharine. He refused to attend the wedding or even communicate with her. He finally agreed to see her, apparently at Lorin&#x27;s insistence, just before she died of pneumonia on March 3, 1929.

Orville Wright served in the NACA for 28 years. In 1930, he received the first Daniel Guggenheim Medal established in 1928 by the Daniel Guggenheim Fund for the Promotion of Aeronautics. In 1936, he was elected a member of the National Academy of Sciences. In 1939, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt issued a presidential proclamation which designated the anniversary of Orville&#x27;s birthday as National Aviation Day, a national observation that celebrates the development of aviation.

On April 19, 1944, the second production Lockheed Constellation, piloted by Howard Hughes and TWA president Jack Frye, flew from Burbank, California, to Washington, D.C., in 6 hours and 57 minutes (2,300 mi, 330.9 mph). On the return trip, the airliner stopped at Wright Field to give Orville Wright his last airplane flight, more than 40 years after his historic first flight. He may even have briefly handled the controls. He commented that the wingspan of the Constellation was longer than the distance of his first flight.
Orville&#x27;s last major project was supervising the reclamation and preservation of the 1905 &quot;Wright Flyer III&quot;, which historians describe as the first practical airplane.

Orville expressed sadness in an interview years later about the death and destruction brought about by the bombers of World War II:
Orville died at age 76 on January 30, 1948, over 35 years after his brother, following his second heart attack, having lived from the horse-and-buggy age to the dawn of supersonic flight. Both brothers are buried in the family plot at Woodland Cemetery, Dayton, Ohio. John T. Daniels, the Coast Guardsman who took their famous first flight photo, died the day after Orville.

==Competing claims==

First powered flight claims are made for Clément Ader, Gustave Whitehead, Richard Pearse, and Karl Jatho for their variously documented tests in years prior to and including 1903. Claims that the first true flight occurred after 1903 are made for Traian Vuia and Alberto Santos-Dumont. Supporters of the post-Wright pioneers argue that techniques used by the Wright brothers disqualify them as first to make successful airplane flights. Those techniques were: A launch rail; skids instead of wheels; a headwind at takeoff; and a catapult after 1903. Supporters of the Wright brothers argue that proven, repeated, controlled, and sustained flights by the brothers entitle them to credit as inventors of the airplane, regardless of those techniques.

The aviation historian C.H. Gibbs-Smith was a supporter of the Wrights&#x27; claim to primacy in flight. He wrote that a barn door can be made to &quot;fly&quot; for a short distance if enough energy is applied to it; he determined that the very limited flight experiments of Ader, Vuia, and others were &quot;powered hops&quot; instead of fully controlled flights.

==State rivalry==
The U.S. states of Ohio and North Carolina both take credit for the Wright brothers and their world-changing inventions—Ohio because the brothers developed and built their designs in Dayton, and North Carolina because Kitty Hawk was the site of the Wrights&#x27; first powered flight. With a spirit of friendly rivalry, Ohio adopted the slogan &quot;Birthplace of Aviation&quot; (later &quot;Birthplace of Aviation Pioneers&quot;, recognizing not only the Wrights, but also astronauts John Glenn and Neil Armstrong, both Ohio natives). The slogan appears on Ohio license plates. North Carolina uses the slogan &quot;First in Flight&quot; on its license plates.

The site of the first flights in North Carolina is preserved as Wright Brothers National Memorial, while their Ohio facilities are part of Dayton Aviation Heritage National Historical Park. As the positions of both states can be factually defended, and each played a significant role in the history of flight, neither state has an exclusive claim to the Wrights&#x27; accomplishment.
Notwithstanding the competition between those two states, in 1937 the Wrights&#x27; last bicycle shop and home were moved from Dayton, Ohio to Greenfield Village in Dearborn, Michigan, where they remain.

==Commemorations==
In addition to appearing on both the front and back of the official United States pilot certification, the Wright brothers and their airplane have been commemorated on several U. S. postage stamps, including:

==Wright Brothers Field==

NASA named the first Martian airfield for the &quot;Ingenuity&quot; helicopter &quot;Wright Brothers Field&quot;. The miniature helicopter arrived on Mars on February 18, 2021, attached to the &quot;Perseverance&quot; rover. A small piece of wing fabric from the 1903 &quot;Wright Flyer&quot; was attached to a cable underneath &quot;Ingenuity&#x27;s&quot; solar panel. In 1969, Neil Armstrong carried a similar &quot;Wright Flyer&quot; artifact to the Moon in the Lunar Module &quot;Eagle&quot; during Apollo 11. &quot;Ingenuity&quot; flew five times from Wright Brothers Field between April 19 and May 7, 2021, then departed for other areas, making a total of 72 flights.

==See also==

* &quot;History by Contract&quot; (1978 book)
* History of aviation
* John Joseph Montgomery
* List of covers of &quot;Time&quot; magazine (1920s)
* List of firsts in aviation
* National Aviation Heritage Area
* &quot;The Winds of Kitty Hawk&quot; (1978 film)
* &quot;The Wright Brothers&quot; (1971 film)
* &quot;The Wright Brothers&quot; (2015 book)
* WRGT-TV (MyNetworkTV affiliate)
* Wright Brothers Day
* Wright Brothers flights of 1909
* Wright Brothers Medal
* Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy
* Wright Field
==Notes==
== References ==
==Further reading==

* Anderson, John D. &quot;Inventing Flight: The Wright Brothers and Their Predecessors&quot;. Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2004. .
* Ash, Russell. &quot;The Wright Brothers&quot;. London: Wayland, 1974. .
*Chmiel, Louis. &quot;Ohio, Home of the Wright Brothers: Birthplace of Aviation&quot;, 2013. 
* Ciampaglia, Giuseppe. &quot;Il soggiorno romano dei Fratelli Wright&quot;. &quot;La Strenna dei Romanisti&quot;, 1992.
* Ciampaglia, Giuseppe. &quot;I Fratelli Wright e le loro macchine volanti&quot;. Roma: IBN Editore, 1993.
* Combs, Harry with Martin Caidin. &quot;Kill Devil Hill: Discovering the Secret of the Wright Brothers&quot;. Denver, Colorado: Ternstyle Press Ltd, 1979. .
* Cragg, Dan, Sgt.Maj, USA (Ret.), ed. &quot;The Guide to Military Installations&quot;. Harrisburg, Pennsylvania: Stackpole Books, 1983. .
* Howard, Fred, &quot;Wilbur And Orville: A biography of the Wright brothers&quot;. New York: Ballantine Books, 1988. .
* Howard, Fred, &quot;Wilbur And Orville: A Biography of the Wright Brothers&quot;. Mineola: Dover Publications, Inc., 1998. 
* Kelly, Fred C., ed. &quot;Miracle At Kitty Hawk, The Letters of Wilbur &amp; Orville Wright&quot;. New York: Da Capo Press, 2002. .
* Kelly, Fred C. &quot;The Wright Brothers: A Biography Authorized by Orville Wright&quot;. Mineola, New York: Dover Publications, originally published in 1943, 1989. .
* Langewiesche, Wolfgang. &quot;Stick and Rudder: An Explanation of the Art of Flying&quot;. New York: McGraw-Hill, Copyright 1944 and 1972. .
* 
* McFarland, Marvin W., ed. &quot;The Papers of Wilbur and Orville Wright: Including the Chanute-Wright Letters and the Papers of Octave Chanute&quot;. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001, originally published in 1953. .
* McPherson, Stephanie Sammartino and Joseph Sammartino Gardner. &quot;Wilbur &amp; Orville Wright: Taking Flight&quot;. Minneapolis, Minnesota, Carolrhoda, Inc., 2004. .
* Mortimer, Gavin. &quot;Chasing Icarus: The Seventeen Days in 1910 That Forever Changed American Aviation&quot;. New York: Walker, 2009. .
* Tobin, James. &quot;To Conquer The Air: The Wright Brothers and the Great Race for Flight&quot;. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster, 2004. .
* Walsh, John E. &quot;One Day at Kitty Hawk: The Untold Story of the Wright Brothers&quot;. New York: Ty Crowell Co, 1975. .
* Winchester, Jim, ed. &quot;Wright Flyer&quot;. &quot;Biplanes, Triplanes and Seaplanes&quot; (The Aviation Factfile). Rochester, Kent, UK: Grange Books plc, 2004. .
* Wright, Orville. &quot;How We Invented the Airplane&quot;. Mineola, New York: Dover Publications, 1988. .
* Yenne, Bill, &quot;Lockheed&quot;. Greenwich, Connecticut: Bison Books, 1987. .
==External links==

* 
* 
* Original Letters From The Wright Brothers: The First Flight Shapell Manuscript Foundation
* To Fly Is Everything Articles, photos, historical texts
* The Wright Experience Articles and photos about construction of replica gliders and airplanes 
* &quot;What Dreams We Have&quot; E-book by National Park Service historian
* FirstFlight: flight simulation, videos and experiments
* &quot;Scientific American&quot; magazine (December 2003 Issue) The Equivocal Success of the Wright Brothers
* PBS &quot;Nova&quot;: The Wright Brothers&#x27; Flying Machines
* &quot;Wright Flyer III (1905)&quot; at ASME.org
* FAI NEWS: &quot;100 Years Ago, the Dream of Icarus Became Reality&quot;
* Wright Brothers, &quot;National Park Service&quot;
* 
* Orville Wright Personal Manuscripts
*Guide to Postcards on Wright&#x27;s Airplane Ascension at Le Mans 1908 at the University of Chicago Special Collections Research Center
*Orville Wright Letter at The Museum of Flight Digital Collections.

===Biographical===
* Wright Brothers Aeroplane Company virtual museum
*Pictures, letters and other sources from National Archives
* Wright Brothers Collection (MS-1) at Wright State University
* Wright Brothers Collection (MS-001) at Dayton Metro Library
* C-SPAN &quot;Q&amp;A&quot; interview with David McCullough on The Wright Brothers, May 31, 2015

===Patents===
* – &quot;Flying machine&quot;– O. &amp; W. Wright (Also in HTML)

===Museums===
* The Wright Brothers – The Invention of the Aerial Age Smithsonian Institution
* Smithsonian Stories of the Wright flights
* Wilbur Wright Birthplace Museum
* Wright Aeronautical Engineering Collection The Franklin Institute
* Wright-Dunbar Interpretive Center and the Wright Cycle Company 

===Image collections===
* Wright Brothers Negatives in Library of Congress Prints &amp; Photographs Online Catalog
* Outer Banks of NC Wright Photographs: 1900–1911(Sourced from Library of Congress)
* Photographs and Movies about the invention of the fixed-wing aircraft compiled by Gary Bradshaw from Mississippi State University
* The FLYING MACHINES website - Many pictures of early flying machines and a comprehensive chronology of flight attempts(archived)
* Wright Brothers Collection digital images at Wright State University
* &quot;New Scientist&quot; magazine, Scientific Firsts: Print of Wright Flyer in France 1907(archived) from Immediart
* Wilbur&#x27;s world famous Model A Flyer &quot;France&quot; sits in a hall of honor on display in a Paris museum after Wilbur donated it to the French. Its whereabouts afterwards are unknown. Sharing space with the Wright A is a Bleriot VI or VII, an Antoinette and a Voisin on flickr
* Wright Brothers&#x27; Newspapers at Dayton Metro Library
* Manny Gorin Wright Brothers Glass Plate Negatives Collection at The Museum of Flight Digital Collections
* The video of the official test flight of the Wright Brothers&#x27; military airplane at Fort Myer, Virginia, on July 27, 1909 available online in the National Archives Catalog</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q35820" start="4" end="19" title="Wright brothers" label="Wright brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q35820" start="21" end="35" title="Wright brothers" label="Orville Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q35820" start="77" end="90" title="Wright brothers" label="Wilbur Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q765633" start="138" end="146" title="aviation" label="aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q197" start="246" end="254" title="airplane" label="airplane"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="327" end="352" title="Aircraft#Heavier-than-air – aerodynes" label="heavier-than-air aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q688605" start="368" end="380" title="Wright Flyer" label="Wright Flyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q628311" start="436" end="462" title="Kitty Hawk, North Carolina" label="Kitty Hawk, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029051" start="488" end="504" title="Kill Devil Hills, North Carolina" label="Kill Devil Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642573" start="554" end="569" title="Wright Flyer II" label="Wright Flyer II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875704" start="686" end="705" title="fixed-wing aircraft" label="fixed-wing aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973387" start="717" end="733" title="Wright Flyer III" label="Wright Flyer III"/>
<link wikidata="Q360475" start="808" end="833" title="Flight dynamics (aircraft)" label="three-axis control system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11481471" start="942" end="959" title="Aircraft flight control system" label="aircraft controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q743004" start="976" end="990" title="powered flight" label="powered flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q193010" start="1541" end="1552" title="wind tunnel" label="wind tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34739" start="1778" end="1790" title="Dayton, Ohio" label="Dayton, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2251" end="2263" title="Glider (aircraft)#19th century" label="glider tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266562" start="2328" end="2342" title="Charlie Taylor (mechanic)" label="Charles Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206011" start="2608" end="2642" title="Claims to the first powered flight" label="competing claims of early aviators"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243505" start="2676" end="2725" title="Dayton Aviation Heritage National Historical Park" label="Dayton Aviation Heritage National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861541" start="3025" end="3038" title="Milton Wright (bishop)" label="Milton Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="3067" end="3074" title="English American" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058496" start="3079" end="3084" title="Dutch American" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q70207028" start="3099" end="3122" title="Susan Catherine Koerner Wright" label="Susan Catherine Koerner"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="3139" end="3145" title="German American" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q637979" start="3150" end="3155" title="Swiss American" label="Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q284829" start="3254" end="3271" title="Vanderbilt family" label="Vanderbilt family"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="3323" end="3331" title="Huguenot" label="Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q744948" start="3347" end="3369" title="New Rochelle, New York" label="New Rochelle, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6234814" start="3420" end="3429" title="John Gano" label="John Gano"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="3435" end="3452" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="3494" end="3503" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="3504" end="3521" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062083" start="3581" end="3592" title="billionaire" label="billionaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095549" start="3597" end="3604" title="aviator" label="aviator"/>
<link wikidata="Q189081" start="3605" end="3618" title="Howard Hughes" label="Howard Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056235" start="3641" end="3659" title="Millville, Henry County, Indiana" label="Millville, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q34739" start="3681" end="3693" title="Dayton, Ohio" label="Dayton, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376247" start="3805" end="3814" title="Katharine Wright" label="Katharine"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="3951" end="3956" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261283" start="3993" end="4025" title="Puritan migration to New England (1620–40)" label="settled in Massachusetts in 1636"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003528" start="4166" end="4178" title="Willbur Fisk" label="Willbur Fisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105228" start="4195" end="4208" title="Orville Dewey" label="Orville Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="4215" end="4224" title="clergymen" label="clergymen"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="4489" end="4495" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742801" start="4503" end="4542" title="Church of the United Brethren in Christ" label="Church of the United Brethren in Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q486439" start="4775" end="4793" title="Cedar Rapids, Iowa" label="Cedar Rapids, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q919950" start="4932" end="4947" title="Alphonse Pénaud" label="Alphonse Pénaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q548664" start="5359" end="5376" title="Richmond, Indiana" label="Richmond, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q34739" start="5381" end="5387" title="Dayton" label="Dayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118062" start="6225" end="6245" title="Church of the United Brethren in Christ (New Constitution)" label="times of controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q974678" start="6919" end="6939" title="Paul Laurence Dunbar" label="Paul Laurence Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7169" end="7182" title="Bike boom#1890s" label="bicycle craze"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281298" start="7216" end="7230" title="safety bicycle" label="safety bicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554036" start="7271" end="7285" title="penny-farthing" label="penny-farthing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038202" start="7394" end="7414" title="Wright Cycle Company" label="Wright Cycle Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q57162" start="7648" end="7663" title="Otto Lilienthal" label="Otto Lilienthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="7735" end="7758" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q357961" start="7769" end="7783" title="Samuel Langley" label="Samuel Langley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351565" start="7908" end="7922" title="Octave Chanute" label="Octave Chanute"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="8466" end="8493" title="the Smithsonian Institution" label="the Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q319362" start="8576" end="8593" title="Sir George Cayley" label="Sir George Cayley"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="8616" end="8633" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q104867920" start="9092" end="9103" title="James Tobin (author)" label="James Tobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930595" start="9630" end="9643" title="Percy Pilcher" label="Percy Pilcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q313078" start="10129" end="10133" title="Clément Ader" label="Ader"/>
<link wikidata="Q315601" start="10135" end="10140" title="Hiram Maxim" label="Maxim"/>
<link wikidata="Q357961" start="10146" end="10153" title="Samuel Pierpont Langley" label="Langley"/>
<link wikidata="Q13417140" start="11146" end="11158" title="wing-warping" label="wing-warping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972636" start="12108" end="12116" title="Dihedral (aircraft)" label="dihedral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12188" end="12196" title="Dihedral (aircraft)#Anhedral" label="anhedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q13417140" start="12367" end="12379" title="wing warping" label="wing warping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384332" start="12472" end="12477" title="chord (aeronautics)" label="chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q628311" start="12801" end="12811" title="Kitty Hawk, North Carolina" label="Kitty Hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066823" start="13064" end="13078" title="National Weather Service" label="Weather Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q194433" start="13901" end="13905" title="lift (force)" label="lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q57162" start="13911" end="13926" title="Otto Lilienthal" label="Otto Lilienthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021159" start="13978" end="13984" title="camber (aerodynamics)" label="camber"/>
<link wikidata="Q319362" start="14190" end="14207" title="George Cayley" label="Sir George Cayley"/>
<link wikidata="Q158218" start="14479" end="14490" title="Pratt truss" label="Pratt truss"/>
<link wikidata="Q252451" start="14616" end="14624" title="elevator (aircraft)" label="elevator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029051" start="15919" end="15935" title="Kill Devil Hills" label="Kill Devil Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q826939" start="17659" end="17665" title="Canard (aeronautics)" label="canard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825714" start="17921" end="17932" title="adverse yaw" label="adverse yaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q460922" start="18203" end="18210" title="John Smeaton" label="Smeaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="21078" end="21085" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988307" start="21140" end="21168" title="Western Society of Engineers" label="Western Society of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q654393" start="21295" end="21302" title="Magic lantern" label="lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498959" start="21875" end="21886" title="scale-model" label="scale-model"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698744" start="21912" end="21919" title="airfoil" label="airfoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420076" start="22078" end="22090" title="aspect ratio" label="aspect ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384332" start="22112" end="22117" title="Chord (aircraft)" label="chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q845727" start="22194" end="22212" title="lift-to-drag ratio" label="lift-to-drag ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021159" start="22986" end="22992" title="camber (aerodynamics)" label="camber"/>
<link wikidata="Q15492857" start="23492" end="23497" title="Harry B. Combs" label="Combs"/>
<link wikidata="Q509379" start="25316" end="25324" title="ailerons" label="ailerons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459269" start="25755" end="25773" title="flight dynamics" label="three-axis control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778961" start="26527" end="26546" title="coefficient of drag" label="coefficient of drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q760106" start="26560" end="26579" title="lift coefficient" label="coefficient of lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q533668" start="26716" end="26722" title="thrust" label="thrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642768" start="27031" end="27052" title="power-to-weight ratio" label="power-to-weight ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q688605" start="27370" end="27382" title="Wright Flyer" label="Wright Flyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q26782" start="27439" end="27445" title="spruce" label="spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q725457" start="27500" end="27506" title="muslin" label="muslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700567" start="28303" end="28309" title="Pusher configuration" label="pusher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266562" start="28986" end="29000" title="Charlie Taylor (mechanic)" label="Charlie Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q953477" start="29109" end="29121" title="engine block" label="engine block"/>
<link wikidata="Q165435" start="29229" end="29239" title="carburetor" label="carburetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570062" start="29252" end="29261" title="fuel pump" label="fuel pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="29276" end="29283" title="gravitation" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q178895" start="29401" end="29417" title="fuel-air ratio" label="fuel-air mixture"/>
<link wikidata="Q9394185" start="29511" end="29523" title="roller chain" label="drive chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q357961" start="29739" end="29753" title="Samuel Pierpont Langley" label="Samuel Langley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4042598" start="29775" end="29790" title="Langley Aerodrome" label="Great Aerodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029051" start="30156" end="30172" title="Kill Devil Hills" label="Kill Devil Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q825367" start="30347" end="30356" title="coin flipping" label="coin toss"/>
<link wikidata="Q132" start="30525" end="30531" title="Sunday" label="Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30735" end="30755" title="Montgolfier brothers#Early experiments" label="Montgolfier brothers"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31358" end="31375" title=":File:First flight2.jpg" label="famous photograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259960" start="31632" end="31647" title="John T. Daniels" label="John T. Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q674773" start="32284" end="32298" title="Science Museum, London" label="Science Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="32385" end="32412" title="the Smithsonian Institution" label="the Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642573" start="33852" end="33867" title="Wright Flyer II" label="Wright Flyer II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11326651" start="33980" end="33995" title="Huffman Prairie" label="Huffman Prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q313078" start="35283" end="35287" title="Clément Ader" label="Ader"/>
<link wikidata="Q315601" start="35289" end="35294" title="Hiram Stevens Maxim" label="Maxim"/>
<link wikidata="Q357961" start="35296" end="35303" title="Samuel Pierpont Langley" label="Langley"/>
<link wikidata="Q313211" start="35309" end="35322" title="Alberto Santos-Dumont" label="Santos-Dumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q15996367" start="35526" end="35539" title="Harry Aubrey Toulmin Sr." label="Henry Toulmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243505" start="36755" end="36804" title="Dayton Aviation Heritage National Historical Park" label="Dayton Aviation Heritage National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q730187" start="36818" end="36849" title="Wright-Patterson Air Force Base" label="Wright-Patterson Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599044" start="38500" end="38518" title="Great Dayton Flood" label="Great Dayton Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747949" start="38591" end="38600" title="Amos Root" label="Amos Root"/>
<link wikidata="Q39379" start="38882" end="38901" title="Scientific American" label="Scientific American"/>
<link wikidata="Q100294968" start="39072" end="39086" title="International Herald Tribune" label="Herald Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q440117" start="39410" end="39418" title="James M. Cox" label="J.M. Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243517" start="39444" end="39461" title="Dayton Daily News" label="Dayton Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225085" start="40208" end="40227" title="John Capper" label="Colonel J.E. Capper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419175" start="40257" end="40278" title="Royal Aircraft Establishment" label="Royal Balloon Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520847" start="40380" end="40400" title="Louisiana Purchase Exposition" label="St. Louis World Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2058053" start="40481" end="40498" title="Patrick Young Alexander" label="Patrick Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q4042598" start="41252" end="41269" title="Langley Aerodrome" label="Langley Aerodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q22401" start="41633" end="41645" title="Henri Farman" label="Henri Farman"/>
<link wikidata="Q968411" start="41647" end="41662" title="Léon Delagrange" label="Léon Delagrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q454544" start="41677" end="41690" title="Glenn Curtiss" label="Glenn Curtiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q962352" start="41969" end="41986" title="Ernest Archdeacon" label="Ernest Archdeacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478857" start="42003" end="42022" title="Aéro-Club de France" label="Aéro-Club de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q924673" start="42283" end="42298" title="New York Herald" label="New York Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143596" start="42809" end="42840" title="United States Department of War" label="United States Department of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="42846" end="42864" title="British War Office" label="British War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q751970" start="43532" end="43539" title="Wright Model A" label="Model A"/>
<link wikidata="Q15487516" start="43620" end="43633" title="Frank P. Lahm" label="Frank P. Lahm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606002" start="43665" end="43686" title="Aeronautical Division, U.S. Signal Corps" label="Aeronautical Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q736213" start="44007" end="44029" title="Signal Corps (United States Army)" label="U.S. Army Signal Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q166295" start="44410" end="44424" title="Lazare Weiller" label="Lazare Weiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345595" start="44426" end="44453" title="Henri Deutsch de la Meurthe" label="Henri Deutsch de la Meurthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q94288453" start="44455" end="44467" title="Hart O. Berg" label="Hart O. Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960084" start="44473" end="44494" title="Charles Ranlett Flint" label="Charles Ranlett Flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973387" start="44842" end="44856" title="Charles Furnas" label="Charlie Furnas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179324" start="45301" end="45313" title="Wright Glider" label="a new glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q624161" start="45415" end="45422" title="gliding" label="gliding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476" start="45991" end="45998" title="Le Mans" label="Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5396" start="46210" end="46223" title="Louis Blériot" label="Louis Blériot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202784" start="46702" end="46718" title="L&amp;#x27;Aérophile" label="L&amp;#x27;Aérophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608871" start="47422" end="47437" title="Griffith Brewer" label="Griffith Brewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q313074" start="47442" end="47455" title="Charles Rolls" label="Charles Rolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q354106" start="47492" end="47503" title="Léon Bollée" label="Léon Bollée"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="48229" end="48247" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748478" start="48251" end="48260" title="Fort Myer" label="Fort Myer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15487516" start="48417" end="48430" title="Frank P. Lahm" label="Frank P. Lahm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543082" start="48462" end="48475" title="George Squier" label="George Squier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346216" start="48527" end="48543" title="Thomas Selfridge" label="Thomas Selfridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q20682340" start="49948" end="49962" title="Coupe Michelin" label="Coupe Michelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q132671" start="50254" end="50257" title="Pau, Pyrénées-Atlantiques" label="Pau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960625" start="50582" end="50600" title="Charles de Lambert (aviator)" label="Charles de Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q661224" start="50602" end="50617" title="Paul Tissandier" label="Paul Tissandier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914901" start="50743" end="50753" title="Centocelle Airport" label="Centocelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="50892" end="50901" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="51114" end="51128" title="William Howard Taft" label="President Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q9686" start="51824" end="51833" title="Berlin Tempelhof Airport" label="Tempelhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q57621" start="51881" end="51904" title="Wilhelm, German Crown Prince" label="Crown Prince of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="51997" end="52006" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996084" start="52018" end="52043" title="Hudson-Fulton Celebration" label="Hudson-Fulton Celebration"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="52047" end="52060" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190547" start="52079" end="52095" title="Governors Island" label="Governors Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="52117" end="52129" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025105" start="52133" end="52150" title="Grant&amp;#x27;s Tomb" label="Grant&amp;#x27;s Tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q17164719" start="52332" end="52340" title="ditching" label="ditching"/>
<link wikidata="Q668676" start="52358" end="52380" title="College Park, Maryland" label="College Park, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497694" start="52446" end="52468" title="Frederick E. Humphreys" label="Frederick E. Humphreys"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888601" start="52497" end="52513" title="Benjamin Foulois" label="Benjamin Foulois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022019" start="53273" end="53291" title="patent application" label="patent application"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825714" start="54348" end="54359" title="adverse yaw" label="adverse yaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q454544" start="54905" end="54918" title="Glenn Curtiss" label="Glenn Curtiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q509379" start="54952" end="54959" title="aileron" label="aileron"/>
<link wikidata="Q290954" start="55146" end="55158" title="AEA June Bug" label="AEA June Bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q381120" start="55616" end="55645" title="Aerial Experiment Association" label="Aerial Experiment Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q34286" start="55663" end="55684" title="Alexander Graham Bell" label="Alexander Graham Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819131" start="55780" end="55794" title="AEA White Wing" label="AEA White Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q715184" start="56105" end="56118" title="Louis Paulhan" label="Louis Paulhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688121" start="56680" end="56700" title="Aero Club of America" label="Aero Club of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="57065" end="57078" title="typhoid fever" label="typhoid fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745451" start="57579" end="57607" title="American entry into World War I" label="the U.S. entered World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641851" start="57983" end="58012" title="United States courts of appeals" label="U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q910039" start="58466" end="58481" title="cross-licensing" label="cross-licensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144530" start="58678" end="58688" title="patent war" label="patent war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971987" start="58767" end="58798" title="Wright Aeronautical Corporation" label="Wright Aeronautical Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138291" start="58903" end="58929" title="Curtiss-Wright Corporation" label="Curtiss-Wright Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064665" start="59042" end="59058" title="Charles Harvard Gibbs-Smith" label="C.H. Gibbs-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q14946825" start="59221" end="59235" title="Matthew Piers Watt Boulton" label="M.P.W. Boulton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59462" end="59484" title="Aircraft flight control system#Primary controls" label="aileron control system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59536" end="59545" title="Autopilot#Modern autopilots" label="autopilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778150" start="60520" end="60534" title="Wright Company" label="Wright Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987286" start="60858" end="60871" title="Wright Flying School" label="flying school"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038210" start="61675" end="61679" title="Wright Exhibition Team" label="team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430956" start="61834" end="61844" title="Charlatan" label="mountebank"/>
<link wikidata="Q172732" start="61885" end="61906" title="Indianapolis Speedway" label="Indianapolis Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287724" start="61952" end="61967" title="Ralph Johnstone" label="Ralph Johnstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786365" start="61972" end="61983" title="Arch Hoxsey" label="Arch Hoxsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184174" start="62389" end="62402" title="Philip Orin Parmelee" label="Phil Parmelee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987286" start="63243" end="63272" title="Wright Brothers Flying School" label="Wright Brothers Flying School"/>
<link wikidata="Q436102" start="63404" end="63432" title="Henry H. Arnold" label="Henry &amp;quot;Hap&amp;quot; Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933644" start="63562" end="63585" title="Calbraith Perry Rodgers" label="Calbraith Perry Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7931323" start="63703" end="63710" title="Vin Fiz Flyer" label="Vin Fiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862799" start="63724" end="63742" title="Armour and Company" label="the sponsor&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345458" start="63766" end="63779" title="Edward Stinson" label="Eddie Stinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350255" start="63796" end="63820" title="Stinson Aircraft Company" label="Stinson Aircraft Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831650" start="64706" end="64718" title="Tractor configuration" label="tractor-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q357961" start="64864" end="64876" title="Samuel Pierpont Langley" label="S.P. Langley"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="64891" end="64918" title="the Smithsonian Institution" label="the Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q674773" start="66583" end="66604" title="London Science Museum" label="London Science Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618" start="66831" end="66848" title="Charles Lindbergh" label="Charles Lindbergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5494745" start="66971" end="66981" title="Fred C. Kelly" label="F.C. Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="66987" end="66998" title="The Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q61361" start="67850" end="67867" title="Gustave Whitehead" label="Gustave Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747495" start="68609" end="68645" title="Wilbur Wright und seine Flugmaschine" label="Wilbur Wright und seine Flugmaschine"/>
<link wikidata="Q191839" start="68775" end="68793" title="aerial photography" label="aerial photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685496" start="69895" end="69908" title="Hawthorn Hill" label="Hawthorn Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735558" start="69953" end="69966" title="Oakwood, Montgomery County, Ohio" label="Oakwood, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7431143" start="70186" end="70206" title="Schenck and Williams" label="Schenck and Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109489" start="71114" end="71128" title="Collier Trophy" label="Collier Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4021052" start="71203" end="71217" title="Wright Model E" label="Wright Model E"/>
<link wikidata="Q492062" start="71381" end="71394" title="Wright-Martin" label="Wright-Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q618604" start="72055" end="72098" title="National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics" label="National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q618604" start="72544" end="72548" title="National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics" label="NACA"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="72742" end="72770" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="72791" end="72816" title="Franklin Delano Roosevelt" label="Franklin Delano Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970849" start="72915" end="72936" title="National Aviation Day" label="National Aviation Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934708" start="72940" end="72960" title="Holidays of the United States" label="national observation"/>
<link wikidata="Q677122" start="73048" end="73070" title="Lockheed Constellation" label="Lockheed Constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189081" start="73083" end="73096" title="Howard Hughes" label="Howard Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q527341" start="73101" end="73104" title="Trans World Airlines" label="TWA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112617" start="73115" end="73124" title="Jack Frye" label="Jack Frye"/>
<link wikidata="Q39561" start="73136" end="73155" title="Burbank, California" label="Burbank, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q730187" start="73271" end="73283" title="Wright-Patterson Air Force Base" label="Wright Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973387" start="73635" end="73651" title="Wright Flyer III" label="Wright Flyer III"/>
<link wikidata="Q221337" start="74020" end="74030" title="supersonic" label="supersonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032819" start="74086" end="74117" title="Woodland Cemetery, Dayton, Ohio" label="Woodland Cemetery, Dayton, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259960" start="74119" end="74134" title="John T. Daniels" label="John T. Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q313078" start="74290" end="74302" title="Clément Ader" label="Clément Ader"/>
<link wikidata="Q61361" start="74304" end="74321" title="Gustave Whitehead" label="Gustave Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969133" start="74323" end="74337" title="Richard Pearse" label="Richard Pearse"/>
<link wikidata="Q77090" start="74343" end="74353" title="Karl Jatho" label="Karl Jatho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354864" start="74496" end="74507" title="Traian Vuia" label="Traian Vuia"/>
<link wikidata="Q313211" start="74512" end="74533" title="Alberto Santos-Dumont" label="Alberto Santos-Dumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064665" start="75021" end="75037" title="Charles Harvard Gibbs-Smith" label="C.H. Gibbs-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="75402" end="75406" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="75411" end="75425" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q34739" start="75566" end="75572" title="Dayton, Ohio" label="Dayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q628311" start="75601" end="75611" title="Kitty Hawk, North Carolina" label="Kitty Hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q182642" start="75868" end="75878" title="John Glenn" label="John Glenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615" start="75883" end="75897" title="Neil Armstrong" label="Neil Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391676" start="75941" end="75960" title="Vehicle registration plates of Ohio" label="Ohio license plates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038747" start="76109" end="76142" title="Wright Brothers National Memorial" label="Wright Brothers National Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243505" start="76184" end="76233" title="Dayton Aviation Heritage National Historical Park" label="Dayton Aviation Heritage National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q34739" start="76556" end="76568" title="Dayton, Ohio" label="Dayton, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521242" start="76572" end="76590" title="Greenfield Village" label="Greenfield Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q430464" start="76594" end="76612" title="Dearborn, Michigan" label="Dearborn, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273128" start="76721" end="76754" title="Pilot certification in the United States" label="United States pilot certification"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="76890" end="76894" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q48814715" start="76942" end="76951" title="Ingenuity (helicopter)" label="Ingenuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q87749354" start="77083" end="77107" title="Perseverance (rover)" label="&amp;quot;Perseverance&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q688605" start="77164" end="77176" title="Wright Flyer" label="Wright Flyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615" start="77269" end="77283" title="Neil Armstrong" label="Neil Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q28101302" start="77355" end="77385" title="Lunar Module Eagle" label="Lunar Module &amp;quot;Eagle&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q43653" start="77393" end="77402" title="Apollo 11" label="Apollo 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q112044134" start="77552" end="77562" title="List of Ingenuity flights" label="72 flights"/>
<link wikidata="Q16512155" start="77587" end="77606" title="History by Contract" label="History by Contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q471043" start="77627" end="77646" title="History of aviation" label="History of aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111121" start="77649" end="77671" title="John Joseph Montgomery" label="John Joseph Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633147" start="77674" end="77725" title="List of covers of Time magazine (1920s)" label="List of covers of &amp;quot;Time&amp;quot; magazine (1920s)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12733267" start="77728" end="77754" title="List of firsts in aviation" label="List of firsts in aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970852" start="77757" end="77788" title="National Aviation Heritage Area" label="National Aviation Heritage Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775107" start="77797" end="77820" title="The Winds of Kitty Hawk" label="The Winds of Kitty Hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457948" start="77841" end="77872" title="The Wright Brothers (film)" label="&amp;quot;The Wright Brothers&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q26964815" start="77893" end="77912" title="The Wright Brothers (book)" label="The Wright Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955028" start="77933" end="77940" title="WRGT-TV" label="WRGT-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148579" start="77942" end="77953" title="MyNetworkTV" label="MyNetworkTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038182" start="77967" end="77986" title="Wright Brothers Day" label="Wright Brothers Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038189" start="77989" end="78020" title="Wright Brothers flights of 1909" label="Wright Brothers flights of 1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038188" start="78023" end="78044" title="Wright Brothers Medal" label="Wright Brothers Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038186" start="78047" end="78078" title="Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy" label="Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553382" start="78081" end="78093" title="Wright Field" label="Wright Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645059" start="78257" end="78287" title="Johns Hopkins University Press" label="Johns Hopkins University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381333" start="78299" end="78311" title="Russell Ash" label="Ash, Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137023" start="79481" end="79499" title="Dover Publications" label="Dover Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030089" start="79541" end="79563" title="Wolfgang Langewiesche" label="Langewiesche, Wolfgang"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="81562" end="81583" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939211" start="82881" end="82909" title="Mississippi State University" label="Mississippi State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002085" start="83088" end="83111" title="Wright State University" label="Wright State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q103204" start="83511" end="83517" title="flickr" label="flickr"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243554" start="83556" end="83576" title="Dayton Metro Library" label="Dayton Metro Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q518155" start="83836" end="83853" title="NARA" label="National Archives"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58412" wikidata="Q424372" url="?curid=58412" title="Daminozide">
<text>Daminozide, also known as aminozide, Alar, Kylar, SADH, B-995, B-nine, and DMASA, is an organic compound which acts as a plant growth regulator. It was produced in the U.S. by the Uniroyal Chemical Company, Inc., (now integrated into the Chemtura Corporation), which registered daminozide for use on fruits intended for human consumption in 1963. It was primarily used on apples until 1989, when the manufacturer voluntarily withdrew it after the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency proposed banning it based on concerns about cancer risks to consumers. In addition to apples and ornamental plants, Uniroyal also registered daminozide for use on cherries, peaches, pears, Concord grapes, tomato transplants, and peanut vines. 

When used on fruit trees, daminozide affects flower bud initiation, fruit maturity, fruit firmness and coloring, preharvest drop and market quality of fruit at time of harvest and during storage. When consumed by mammals, daminozide is catabolised into succinic acid (a non-toxic general intermediate in primary metabolism) and 1,1-dimethylhydrazine (UDMH, a compound with a history of studies associating it with carcinogenic activity in animal models relevant to humans). Breakdown into these two compounds also occurs when the sprayed chemical residue remains on stored fruit, especially with higher temperatures and over longer time periods. 

In 1989, the EPA outlawed daminozide on U.S. food crops, but still allowed it for non-food crops like ornamental plants. As of August 2022, daminozide appeared as severely restricted in its exports on the list of pesticides whose shipments were ineligible for export credit insurance under the Export–Import Bank of the United States.

==Chemistry==

While described by the FDA as an amino acid derivative, daminozide is more formally and correctly described as a dicarboxylic acid monohydrazide. It is the product of the condensation of succinic acid with 2,2-dimethylhydrazine, and in its pure form is a high-melting temperature water-soluble white crystalline solid.

==Modes of action==

Daminozide is classified as a plant growth regulator, a chemical sprayed on fruit to regulate their growth. When used on fruit trees, it affects flower bud initiation, fruit maturity, fruit firmness and coloring, and preharvest drop, which together make harvest easier and keep fruit from falling off the trees before they ripen; it also improves quality of fruit at time of harvest and during storage.

=== Carcinogenicity of daminozide degradation products ===
When daminozide residue on fruit is consumed by mammalian species, it is catabolised into two chemical components, succinic acid (a non-toxic general intermediate in primary metabolism), and 1, 1-dimethylhydrazine (&quot;unsymmetrical dimethylhydrazine&quot;, UDMH). Degradation into these products also occurs when the sprayed chemical residue remains on stored fruit, increasing with time and elevated temperature. UDMH has had a history of studies associating it with carcinogenic activity in animal models relevant to humans, beginning in the 1960s.

==U.S. campaign to ban Alar==
In 1985, the EPA studied daminozide&#x27;s effects on mice and hamsters, concluding that it was a &quot;probable human carcinogen&quot; with a dietary risk possibly as high as one cancer for every thousand people exposed, and proposed banning its use on food crops. They submitted the proposal to the Scientific Advisory Panel (SAP), which concluded that the tests were inadequate to determine the carcinogenicity of the tested substances.

Later, in May 1989, Democrats Joseph Lieberman (D-CT) and Harry Reid (D-NV) held a press conference in which the pesticide program at the FDA was accused of being &quot;riddled with pro-industry bias&quot;, charging that 7 of 8 SAP members had worked as &quot;consultants for the &#x27;chemical industry&#x27;&quot; — that the worst of them, after serving on the SAP (see below), had &quot;later broke[n] conflict-of-interest laws&quot;, with career university academic toxicologists Wendell Kilgore and Christopher Wilkinson (29 years, UCal-Davis and 22 years, Cornell) being singled out as &quot;possible violators of the [FDA] ethics code&quot;, with invitation to the &quot;EP[A] inspector general [IG] to investigate&quot;. Marshall Elliot, writing for the &quot;News &amp; Views&quot; section of the AAAS publication, &quot;Science&quot;, noted that these Senators&#x27; public scolding of SAP members—which was prompted by the FDA&#x27;s &quot;waffling on Alar&quot;—led to the investigation of just these two academics by that agency&#x27;s IG, and of forwarding of Kilgore&#x27;s file to the U.S. Justice Department for review. Marshall further noted that the event was being seen, in the months following, more for its forcing clarification of rules regardinghow much the government [can limit its]... more than 100,000 advisors, including scientists... who deal with issues ranging from biomedicine to arms control... [quotes spliced to clarify advisor roles] involvement with industry without isolating itself from the expertise it seeks, than for unearthing formal wrongdoing in the Alar case (wherein, after reversal of an earlier, similar conviction on appeal, no charges were ultimately brought). In particular, the Senators alleged that Kilgore had a financial connection to Uniroyal, with Wilkinson and the other five being accused of having more general financial ties to the chemical industry; notably, the key formal contention was of possible violation of FDA ethics rules regarding limits to the &quot;kind of consulting jobs that can be accepted &quot;after&quot; leaving an advisory panel&quot; [emphasis in original source].

The next year, the EPA retracted its proposed ban on Alar and required farmers to reduce its use by 50%. The American Academy of Pediatrics urged EPA to ban daminozide, and some manufacturers and supermarket chains announced they would not accept Alar-treated apples.

In a 1989 NYT opinion by Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) trustee John B. Oakes, regarding a two-year NRDC study peer-reviewed by an independent panel, Oakes presented the report&#x27;s argument that children ingesting daminozide in legally permissible quantities were at &quot;intolerable risk&quot; (from it and a wide variety of other potentially harmful chemicals); by their estimate, Oakes said, the &quot;average pre-schooler&#x27;s exposure to this carcinogen... result[s] in a cancer risk &#x27;240 times greater than the cancer risk considered acceptable by E.P.A. following a full lifetime of exposure.&#x27;&quot; In February, 1989, the CBS television program &quot;60 Minutes&quot; broadcast a story about Alar that featured the NRDC report highlighting problems with the chemical.

Later in 1989, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) decided to ban Alar on the grounds that &quot;long-term exposure&quot; posed &quot;unacceptable risks to public health.&quot; However, in June 1989—before the EPA&#x27;s preliminary decision to ban all food uses of Alar went into effect—Uniroyal, Alar&#x27;s sole manufacturer, agreed to halt voluntarily all domestic sales of Alar for food uses. Hence, the consequences of CBS broadcast were swift and severe; as Percival, Schroeder, Miller, and Leape note in review of legal aspects in their &quot;Environmental Regulation&quot; text,&quot;[t]he denouement... came quickly. Alar was removed from the apple market by its manufacturer, not because of regulatory requirements imposed by the EPA, but because of consumer pressure&quot;in particular, the &quot;rapid decline in apple consumption that followed the &quot;60 Minutes&quot; report&quot; As the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; noted at that time, Alar&#x27;s export was not prohibited, such that Uniroyal could continue its sales in about 70 countries, which led critics to note that Americans still faced exposure (via imported fruit and juice). However, as of August 2022, daminozide/alar was appearing as a &quot;severely restricted&quot; entry on the &quot;List of Banned and Severely Restricted Pesticides Under the Prior Informed Consent (PIC) Program&quot; of the Export-Import Bank of the United States, making its shipments ineligible for export credit insurance.

===Backlash===
In November 1990, Washington apple growers filed a lawsuit in Yakima County Superior Court against CBS, NRDC and Fenton Communications (hired by NRDC to publicize their report on Alar) claiming that unfair business practices (product disparagement in particular) cost them $100 million. The suit was moved from state to federal court at the request of CBS. U.S. District Judge William Fremming Nielsen ruled in 1993 that the apple growers had not proved their case, and it was subsequently dismissed by the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit.
Elizabeth Whelan and her organization, the American Council on Science and Health (ACSH), which had received $25,000 from Alar&#x27;s manufacturer, stated that Alar and its breakdown product UDMH had not been shown to be carcinogenic. During a 1990 speech at Hillsdale College, Whelan said that groups like the NRDC were ignoring a basic principle of toxicology: the dose makes the poison. &quot;It is an egregious departure from science and logic when a substance is labeled &#x27;cancer-causing&#x27; based on a response in a single animal study using high doses of a test material&quot;, she said.

==Current views==

Taken together, the complexity of the problem of assigning risk to this agent—the debate over assumptions concerning risks from early-in-life exposure, the principal role of a decomposition product rather than the agent itself in determining its long-term toxicity, the generation of that product both abiotically and through metabolism after consumption, as well as challenges in determining appropriate &quot;subpopulations for study, representative parameters of the potency distribution, and corrections for bioassay length&quot;—have had as a consequence that disagreement and controversy remain about the safety of daminozide and the appropriateness of responses to it in its history.
Consumers Union did its own analyses and estimated that the human lifetime cancer risk was 5 cases per million, as compared to the previously reported figure of 50 per million. (The EPA had argued for a level of lifetime cancer risk of 1 per million to be the highest acceptable, in this type of case.) On the other hand, representatives of the California Department of Health Services are on record as of 1991 stating that &quot;the plausible estimates of risk, derived from conservative, reasonable assumptions, exceed those developed by EPA and NRDC&quot;. As late as 1995, results continued to appear (e.g., from a medium-term carcinogenicity assay approved for use by the ICH)—supporting &quot;in&quot;significant levels of &quot;carcinogenicity of daminozide, alone or in combination with... 1,1-dimethylhydrazine&quot;.

As of 2005, daminozide remained classified as a probable human carcinogen by the EPA, and listed as a known carcinogen under California&#x27;s Prop 65.

==References==
==Further reading==
* This is a formal response of Edward Groth III of the Consumers Union, reflecting the back-and-forth debate on this matter, at the highest levels of American science. See also the original Koshland editorial, and other responses on the pages following this. 
* This article is &quot;Science&quot;&#x27;s formal reporting, months after, regarding the Lieberman-Reid hearings into the ethics and ties of the EPA SAP to the chemical manufacturing industry, a hearing which resulted in institutional reviews of the rules (but no formal charges against any SAP member).
* This extensive self-published work (this the first of a four-part series) is an attempt on the part of a former NRDC staffer to correct what she perceives to be the false narrative that has emerged, that pulling Alar from the market was an overreaction based on incomplete or poor science.

==External links==
*FDA Report RISK COMMUNICATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE pdf
*EPA: Daminozide (Alar) Pesticide Canceled for Food Uses</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q424372" start="0" end="11" title="Daminozide" label="Daminozide,"/>
<link wikidata="Q424372" start="26" end="35" title="Daminozide" label="aminozide"/>
<link wikidata="Q424372" start="37" end="41" title="Daminozide" label="Alar"/>
<link wikidata="Q424372" start="43" end="48" title="Daminozide" label="Kylar"/>
<link wikidata="Q424372" start="50" end="54" title="Daminozide" label="SADH"/>
<link wikidata="Q424372" start="56" end="61" title="Daminozide" label="B-995"/>
<link wikidata="Q424372" start="63" end="69" title="Daminozide" label="B-nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q424372" start="75" end="80" title="Daminozide" label="DMASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11351" start="88" end="95" title="Organic chemistry" label="organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11173" start="96" end="104" title="Chemical compound" label="compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q192949" start="121" end="143" title="plant growth regulator" label="plant growth regulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="168" end="172" title="United States" label="U.S."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="180" end="211" title="Uniroyal Chemical Company" label="Uniroyal Chemical Company, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q5090664" start="238" end="258" title="Chemtura Corporation" label="Chemtura Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="372" end="377" title="apple" label="apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="447" end="483" title="U.S. Environmental Protection Agency" label="U.S. Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q196" start="647" end="655" title="cherry" label="cherries"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189" start="657" end="662" title="peach" label="peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q434" start="666" end="670" title="pear" label="pear"/>
<link wikidata="Q10978" start="681" end="686" title="grape" label="grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="689" end="695" title="tomato" label="tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q37383" start="713" end="719" title="peanut" label="peanut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="942" end="948" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q21130714" start="965" end="976" title="catabolism" label="catabolised"/>
<link wikidata="Q213050" start="982" end="995" title="succinic acid" label="succinic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="1033" end="1051" title="primary metabolism" label="primary metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q161296" start="1057" end="1078" title="1,1-dimethylhydrazine" label="1,1-dimethylhydrazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q187661" start="1143" end="1155" title="Carcinogen" label="carcinogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384697" start="1671" end="1710" title="Export–Import Bank of the United States" label="Export–Import Bank of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q422050" start="1841" end="1858" title="dicarboxylic acid" label="dicarboxylic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q419637" start="1863" end="1872" title="hydrazide" label="hydrazide"/>
<link wikidata="Q213050" start="1915" end="1928" title="succinic acid" label="succinic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q58447" start="1946" end="1955" title="hydrazine" label="hydrazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192949" start="2099" end="2121" title="plant growth regulator" label="plant growth regulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q79529" start="2125" end="2133" title="chemical" label="chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="2145" end="2150" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="2580" end="2586" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q21130714" start="2605" end="2616" title="catabolism" label="catabolised"/>
<link wikidata="Q213050" start="2647" end="2660" title="succinic acid" label="succinic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="2698" end="2716" title="primary metabolism" label="primary metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q161296" start="2723" end="2797" title="unsymmetrical dimethylhydrazine" label="1, 1-dimethylhydrazine (&amp;quot;unsymmetrical dimethylhydrazine&amp;quot;, UDMH)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433737" start="3418" end="3443" title="Scientific Advisory Panel" label="Scientific Advisory Panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q187661" start="3515" end="3525" title="carcinogen" label="carcinogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q129421" start="4095" end="4105" title="University of California-Davis" label="UCal-Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="4120" end="4127" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell"/>
<link wikidata="Q40358" start="4364" end="4368" title="American Association for the Advancement of Science" label="AAAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="4659" end="4682" title="U.S. Justice Department" label="U.S. Justice Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q463305" start="5819" end="5849" title="American Academy of Pediatrics" label="American Academy of Pediatrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="5989" end="5992" title="The New York Times" label="NYT"/>
<link wikidata="Q841895" start="6004" end="6037" title="Natural Resources Defense Council" label="Natural Resources Defense Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="6635" end="6638" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q247869" start="6664" end="6674" title="60 Minutes" label="60 Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="7218" end="7221" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="7704" end="7719" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384697" start="8170" end="8209" title="Export-Import Bank of the United States" label="Export-Import Bank of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="8306" end="8316" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q156629" start="8350" end="8378" title="Yakima County, Washington" label="Yakima County Superior Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q841895" start="8392" end="8396" title="Natural Resources Defense Council" label="NRDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443615" start="8401" end="8422" title="Fenton Communications" label="Fenton Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="8514" end="8535" title="defamation" label="product disparagement"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009432" start="8665" end="8689" title="William Fremming Nielsen" label="William Fremming Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358778" start="8795" end="8847" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit" label="United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q18131035" start="8849" end="8865" title="Elizabeth Whelan" label="Elizabeth Whelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743553" start="8892" end="8930" title="American Council on Science and Health" label="American Council on Science and Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q161296" start="9040" end="9044" title="UDMH" label="UDMH"/>
<link wikidata="Q5763774" start="9108" end="9125" title="Hillsdale College" label="Hillsdale College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776985" start="9212" end="9237" title="the dose makes the poison" label="the dose makes the poison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957782" start="10161" end="10176" title="Consumers Union" label="Consumers Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666462" start="10838" end="10841" title="International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use" label="ICH"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="11114" end="11124" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869829" start="11132" end="11139" title="California Proposition 65 (1986)" label="Prop 65"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58413" wikidata="Q1384332" url="?curid=58413" title="Chord (aeronautics)">
<text>In aeronautics, the chord is an imaginary straight line segment joining the leading edge and trailing edge of an aerofoil cross section parallel to the direction of the airflow. The chord length is the distance between the trailing edge and the leading edge. The point on the leading edge used to define the main chord may be the surface point of minimum radius. For a turbine aerofoil, the chord may be defined by the line between points where the front and rear of a 2-dimensional blade section would touch a flat surface when laid convex-side up.

The wing, horizontal stabilizer, vertical stabilizer and propeller/rotor blades of an aircraft are all based on aerofoil sections, and the term &quot;chord&quot; or &quot;chord length&quot; is also used to describe their width. The chord of a wing, stabilizer and propeller is determined by measuring the distance between leading and trailing edges in the direction of the airflow. (If a wing has a rectangular planform, rather than tapered or swept, then the chord is simply the width of the wing measured in the direction of airflow.) The term &quot;chord&quot; is also applied to the width of wing flaps, ailerons and rudder on an aircraft.

Many wings are not rectangular, so they have different chords at different positions. Usually, the chord length is greatest where the wing joins the aircraft&#x27;s fuselage (called the root chord) and decreases along the wing toward the wing&#x27;s tip (the tip chord). Most jet aircraft use a tapered swept wing design. To provide a characteristic figure that can be compared among various wing shapes, the [[Chord (aeronautics)#Mean aerodynamic chord|mean aerodynamic chord]] (abbreviated MAC) is used, although it is complex to calculate. The mean aerodynamic chord is used for calculating pitching moments.

A chord may also be defined for compressor and turbine aerofoils in gas turbine engines such as turbojet, turboprop, or turbofan engines for aircraft propulsion.

==Standard mean chord==
Standard mean chord (SMC) is defined as wing area divided by wing span:

:formula_1

where &quot;S&quot; is the wing area and &quot;b&quot; is the span of the wing. Thus, the SMC is the chord of a rectangular wing with the same area and span as those of the given wing. This is a purely geometric figure and is rarely used in aerodynamics.

==Mean aerodynamic chord==
Mean aerodynamic chord (MAC) is defined as:

:formula_2formula_3

where &quot;y&quot; is the coordinate along the wing span and &quot;c&quot; is the chord at the coordinate &quot;y&quot;. Other terms are as for SMC.

The MAC is a two-dimensional representation of the whole wing. The pressure distribution over the entire wing can be reduced to a single lift force on and a moment around the aerodynamic center of the MAC. Therefore, not only the length but also the position of MAC is often important. In particular, the position of center of gravity (CG) of an aircraft is usually measured relative to the MAC, as the percentage of the distance from the leading edge of MAC to CG with respect to MAC itself.

Note that the figure to the right implies that the MAC occurs at a point where leading or trailing edge sweep changes. That is just a coincidence. In general, this is not the case. Any shape other than a simple trapezoid requires evaluation of the above integral.

The ratio of the length (or &quot;span&quot;) of a rectangular-planform wing to its chord is known as the aspect ratio, an important indicator of the lift-induced drag the wing will create. (For wings with planforms that are not rectangular, the aspect ratio is calculated as the square of the span divided by the wing planform area.) Wings with higher aspect ratios will have less induced drag than wings with lower aspect ratios. Induced drag is most significant at low airspeeds. This is why gliders have long slender wings.

==Tapered wing==

Knowing the area (Sw), taper ratio (formula_4) and the span (b) of the wing, the chord at any position on the span can be calculated by the formula:

:formula_5
where

formula_6

==References==
==External links==
* Aerodynamics for Students 
** wayback machine:
* Finding the Mean Aerodynamic Chord (MAC)
* Image based Mean Aerodynamic Chord (MAC) calculator</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8421" start="3" end="14" title="aeronautics" label="aeronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384332" start="20" end="25" title="Chord (aeronautics)" label="chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q166154" start="42" end="63" title="straight line segment" label="straight line segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754137" start="76" end="88" title="leading edge" label="leading edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q975211" start="93" end="106" title="trailing edge" label="trailing edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698744" start="113" end="121" title="Airfoil" label="aerofoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384332" start="182" end="194" title="Chord (aeronautics)" label="chord length"/>
<link wikidata="Q161358" start="555" end="559" title="wing" label="wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096168" start="561" end="582" title="horizontal stabilizer" label="horizontal stabilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080767" start="584" end="603" title="vertical stabilizer" label="vertical stabilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q922654" start="608" end="617" title="Propeller (aircraft)" label="propeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992500" start="962" end="970" title="planform (aeronautics)" label="planform"/>
<link wikidata="Q18407944" start="1147" end="1157" title="Flap (aircraft)" label="wing flaps"/>
<link wikidata="Q509379" start="1159" end="1167" title="ailerons" label="ailerons"/>
<link wikidata="Q209760" start="1172" end="1178" title="rudder" label="rudder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110579" start="1361" end="1369" title="fuselage" label="fuselage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384332" start="1382" end="1392" title="Chord (aeronautics)" label="root chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384332" start="1455" end="1464" title="Chord (aeronautics)" label="tip chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684542" start="1491" end="1498" title="Tapering (mathematics)" label="tapered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929294" start="1499" end="1509" title="swept wing" label="swept wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384332" start="1605" end="1674" title="Chord (aeronautics)" label="[[Chord (aeronautics)#Mean aerodynamic chord|mean aerodynamic chord]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384332" start="1688" end="1691" title="Chord (aeronautics)" label="MAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q193470" start="1877" end="1888" title="gas turbine" label="gas turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q723916" start="1905" end="1913" title="turbojet" label="turbojet"/>
<link wikidata="Q309027" start="1915" end="1924" title="turboprop" label="turboprop"/>
<link wikidata="Q654051" start="1929" end="1937" title="turbofan" label="turbofan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8424" start="2322" end="2334" title="aerodynamics" label="aerodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229549" start="2756" end="2774" title="aerodynamic center" label="aerodynamic center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945123" start="2898" end="2915" title="center of gravity" label="center of gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545619" start="3446" end="3458" title="aspect ratio (wing)" label="aspect ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662148" start="3490" end="3507" title="lift-induced drag" label="lift-induced drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165278" start="3835" end="3841" title="Glider aircraft" label="glider"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58418" wikidata="Q168041" url="?curid=58418" title="Zbigniew Brzezinski">
<text>Zbigniew Kazimierz Brzeziński (, ; March 28, 1928 – May 26, 2017), known as Zbig, was a Polish-American diplomat and political scientist. He served as a counselor to Lyndon B. Johnson from 1966 to 1968 and was Jimmy Carter&#x27;s National Security Advisor from 1977 to 1981. As a scholar, Brzezinski belonged to the realist school of international relations, standing in the geopolitical tradition of Halford Mackinder and Nicholas J. Spykman, while elements of liberal idealism have also been identified in his outlook. Brzezinski was the primary organizer of The Trilateral Commission.

Major foreign policy events during his time in office included the normalization of relations with the People&#x27;s Republic of China (and the severing of ties with the Republic of China on Taiwan); the signing of the second Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty (SALT II) with the Soviet Union; the brokering of the Camp David Accords between Egypt and Israel; the overthrow of the US-friendly Mohammad Reza Pahlavi and the start of the Iranian Revolution; the United States&#x27; encouragement of dissidents in Eastern Europe and championing of human rights in order to undermine the influence of the Soviet Union; supporting the Afghan mujahideen against the Soviet-backed Democratic Republic of Afghanistan and, ultimately, Soviet troops during the Soviet–Afghan War; and the signing of the Torrijos–Carter Treaties relinquishing U.S. control of the Panama Canal after 1999.

Brzezinski&#x27;s personal views have been described as &quot;progressive&quot;, &quot;international&quot;, political liberal, and strongly anti-communist. He was an advocate for anti-Soviet containment, for human rights organizations, and for &quot;cultivating a strong West&quot;. He has been praised for his ability to see &quot;the big picture&quot;. Critics described him as hawkish or a &quot;foreign policy hardliner&quot; on some issues, such as Poland–Russia relations.

Brzezinski served as the Robert E. Osgood Professor of American Foreign Policy at Johns Hopkins University&#x27;s School of Advanced International Studies, a scholar at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, and a member of various boards and councils. He frequently appeared as an expert on the PBS program &quot;The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer&quot;, ABC News&#x27; &quot;This Week with Christiane Amanpour&quot;, and MSNBC&#x27;s &quot;Morning Joe&quot;, where his daughter, Mika Brzezinski, is co-anchor. He supported the Prague Process. His elder son, Ian, is a foreign policy expert, and his younger son, Mark, is the current United States Ambassador to Poland and previously served as the United States Ambassador to Sweden from 2011 to 2015.

==Early years==

Zbigniew Brzezinski was born in Warsaw, Poland, on March 28, 1928 into a Roman Catholic family originally from Brzeżany, Tarnopol Voivodeship (then part of Poland, currently in Ukraine). The town of Brzeżany is thought to be the source of the family name. Brzezinski&#x27;s parents were Leonia (&quot;née&quot; Roman) Brzezińska and Tadeusz Brzeziński, a Polish diplomat who was posted to Germany from 1931 to 1935; Zbigniew Brzezinski thus spent some of his earliest years witnessing the rise of the Nazis. From 1936 to 1938, Tadeusz Brzeziński was posted to the Soviet Union during Joseph Stalin&#x27;s Great Purge, and was later praised by Israel for his work helping Jews escape from the Nazis.

In 1938, Tadeusz Brzeziński was posted to Montreal as a consul general. The Brzezinski family lived near the Polish Consulate-General, on Stanley Street. In 1939, the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact was agreed to by Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union; subsequently the two powers invaded Poland. The 1945 Yalta Conference among the Allies allotted Poland to the Soviet sphere of influence. The Second World War had a profound effect on Brzezinski, who stated in an interview: &quot;The extraordinary violence that was perpetrated against Poland did affect my perception of the world, and made me much more sensitive to the fact that a great deal of world politics is a fundamental struggle.&quot;

==Academia==
After attending Loyola College in Montreal, Brzezinski entered McGill University in 1945 to obtain both his Bachelor and Master of Arts degrees (received in 1949 and 1950 respectively). His Master&#x27;s thesis focused on the various nationalities within the Soviet Union. Brzezinski&#x27;s plan for pursuing further studies in the United Kingdom in preparation for a diplomatic career in Canada fell through, principally because he was ruled ineligible for a scholarship he had won that was only open to British subjects. Brzezinski then attended Harvard University to work on a doctorate with Merle Fainsod, focusing on the Soviet Union and the relationship between the October Revolution, Vladimir Lenin&#x27;s state, and the actions of Joseph Stalin. He received his Ph.D. in 1953; the same year, he traveled to Munich and met Jan Nowak-Jezioranski, head of the Polish desk of Radio Free Europe. He later collaborated with Carl J. Friedrich to develop the concept of totalitarianism as a way to characterize more accurately and powerfully, and to criticize the Soviets in 1956.

Brzezinski was on the faculty of Harvard University from 1953 to 1960, and of Columbia University from 1960 to 1972 where he headed the Research Institute on Communist Affairs. He was Senior Research Professor of International Relations at the Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies at Johns Hopkins University in Washington, D.C.
For historical background on major events during this period, see:
* History of Poland: Gomułka&#x27;s road to socialism (1956–70), and
* 1956 Hungarian Revolution.

As a Harvard professor, he argued against Dwight Eisenhower&#x27;s and John Foster Dulles&#x27;s policy of rollback, saying that antagonism would push Eastern Europe further toward the Soviets. The Polish protests followed by the Polish October and the Hungarian Revolution in 1956 lent some support to Brzezinski&#x27;s idea that the Eastern Europeans could gradually counter Soviet domination. In 1957, he visited Poland for the first time since he left as a child, and his visit reaffirmed his judgement that splits within the Eastern bloc were profound. He developed ideas that he called &quot;peaceful engagement&quot;. Brzezinski became a naturalized American citizen in 1958.

Very soon after Harvard awarded an associate professorship in 1959 to Henry Kissinger instead of to him, Brzezinski moved to New York City to teach at Columbia University. Here he wrote &quot;Soviet Bloc: Unity and Conflict&quot;, which focused on Eastern Europe since the beginning of the Cold War. He also taught future Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, who like Brzezinski&#x27;s wife Emilie was of Czech descent, and whom he also mentored during her early years in Washington. He also became a member of the Council on Foreign Relations in New York and joined the Bilderberg Group.

During the 1960 U.S. presidential elections, Brzezinski was an advisor to the John F. Kennedy campaign, urging a non-antagonistic policy toward Eastern European governments. Seeing the Soviet Union as having entered a period of stagnation, both economic and political, Brzezinski predicted a future breakup of the Soviet Union along lines of nationality (expanding on his master&#x27;s thesis).

As a scholar, he developed his thoughts over the years, fashioning fundamental theories on international relations and geostrategy. During the 1950s he worked on the theory of totalitarianism. His thought in the 1960s focused on wider Western understanding of disunity in the Soviet Bloc, as well as developing the thesis of intensified degeneration of the Soviet Union. During the 1970s he proposed that the Soviet system was incapable of evolving beyond the industrial phase into the &quot;technetronic&quot; age.

Brzezinski continued to argue for and support détente for the next few years, publishing &quot;Peaceful Engagement in Eastern Europe&quot; in &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot;, and he continued to support non-antagonistic policies after the Cuban Missile Crisis on the grounds that such policies might disabuse Eastern European nations of their fear of an aggressive Germany, and pacify Western Europeans fearful of a superpower compromise along the lines of the Yalta Conference. In a 1962 book Brzezinski argued against the possibility of a Sino-Soviet split, saying their alignment was &quot;not splitting and is not likely to split.&quot;
In 1964, Brzezinski supported Lyndon Johnson&#x27;s presidential campaign and the Great Society and civil rights policies, while on the other hand he saw Soviet leadership as having been purged of any creativity following the ousting of Khrushchev. Through Jan Nowak-Jezioranski, Brzezinski met with Adam Michnik, future Polish Solidarity activist.

Brzezinski continued to support engagement with Eastern European governments, while warning against De Gaulle&#x27;s vision of a &quot;Europe from the Atlantic to the Urals.&quot; He also supported the Vietnam War. In 1966, Brzezinski was appointed to the Policy Planning Council of the U.S. Department of State (President Johnson&#x27;s October 7, 1966, &quot;Bridge Building&quot; speech was a product of Brzezinski&#x27;s influence). In 1968, Brzezinski resigned from the council in protest of President Johnson&#x27;s expansion of the war. Next, he became a foreign policy advisor to Vice President Hubert Humphrey.
For historical background on events during this period, see:
* Six-Day War;
* Prague Spring, and
* Socialism with a human face;
* Tet offensive.

The Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia further reinforced Brzezinski&#x27;s criticisms of the right&#x27;s aggressive stance toward Eastern European governments. His service to the Johnson administration, and his fact-finding trip to Vietnam, made him an enemy of the New Left.

For the 1968 U.S. presidential campaign, Brzezinski was chairman of the Humphrey&#x27;s Foreign Policy Task Force.

Brzezinski called for a pan-European conference, an idea that would eventually find fruition in 1973 as the Conference for Security and Co-operation in Europe. Meanwhile, he became a leading critic of both the Nixon-Kissinger détente condominium, as well as George McGovern&#x27;s pacifism.

==The Trilateral Commission==

In his 1970 piece &quot;Between Two Ages: America&#x27;s Role in the Technetronic Era&quot;, Brzezinski argued that a coordinated policy among developed nations was necessary in order to counter global instability erupting from increasing economic inequality. Out of this thesis, Brzezinski co-founded the Trilateral Commission with David Rockefeller, serving as director from 1973 to 1976. The Trilateral Commission is a group of prominent political and business leaders and academics primarily from the United States, Western Europe and Japan. Its purpose was to strengthen relations among the three most industrially advanced regions of the capitalist world. In 1974, Brzezinski selected Georgia Governor Jimmy Carter as a member.

==Advisor to President Carter==

Carter announced his candidacy for the 1976 presidential campaign to a skeptical media and proclaimed himself an &quot;eager student&quot; of Brzezinski. Brzezinski became Carter&#x27;s principal foreign policy advisor by late 1975. He became an outspoken critic of the Nixon-Kissinger over-reliance on détente, a situation preferred by the Soviet Union, favoring the Helsinki process instead, which focused on human rights, international law and peaceful engagement in Eastern Europe. Brzezinski was considered to be the Democrats&#x27; response to Republican Henry Kissinger. Carter engaged his incumbent opponent for the presidency, Gerald Ford, in foreign policy debates by contrasting the Trilateral vision with Ford&#x27;s détente.

After his victory in 1976, Carter made Brzezinski National Security Advisor. Earlier that year, major labor riots broke out in Poland, laying the foundations for Solidarity. Brzezinski began by emphasizing the &quot;Basket III&quot; human rights in the Helsinki Final Act, which inspired Charter 77 in Czechoslovakia shortly thereafter.

Brzezinski assisted with writing parts of Carter&#x27;s inaugural address, and this served his purpose of sending a positive message to Soviet dissidents. The Soviet Union and Western European leaders both complained that this kind of rhetoric ran against the &quot;code of détente&quot; that Nixon and Kissinger had established. Brzezinski ran up against members of his own Democratic Party who disagreed with this interpretation of détente, including Secretary of State Cyrus Vance. Vance argued for less emphasis on human rights in order to gain Soviet agreement to Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT), whereas Brzezinski favored doing both at the same time. Brzezinski then ordered Radio Free Europe transmitters to increase the power and area of their broadcasts, a provocative reversal of Nixon-Kissinger policies. West German chancellor Helmut Schmidt objected to Brzezinski&#x27;s agenda, even calling for the removal of Radio Free Europe from German soil.

The State Department was alarmed by Brzezinski&#x27;s support for dissidents in East Germany and objected to his suggestion that Carter&#x27;s first overseas visit be to Poland. He visited Warsaw and met with Cardinal Stefan Wyszynski (against the objection of the U.S. Ambassador to Poland), recognizing the Roman Catholic Church as the legitimate opposition to communist rule in Poland.

By 1978, Brzezinski and Vance were more and more at odds over the direction of Carter&#x27;s foreign policy. Vance sought to continue the style of détente engineered by Nixon-Kissinger, with a focus on arms control. Brzezinski believed that détente emboldened the Soviets in Angola and the Middle East, and so he argued for increased military strength and an emphasis on human rights. Vance, the State Department, and the media criticized Brzezinski publicly as seeking to revive the Cold War. Brzezinski advised Carter in 1978 to engage the People&#x27;s Republic of China and traveled to Beijing to lay the groundwork for the normalization of relations between the two countries. This also resulted in the severing of ties with the United States&#x27; longtime anti-Communist ally the Republic of China (Taiwan).

For historical background on this period of history, see:
* Iranian Revolution;
* Soviet invasion of Afghanistan; and
* Solidarity.

1979 saw two major strategically important events: the overthrow of U.S. ally the Shah of Iran, and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. The Iranian Revolution precipitated the Iran hostage crisis, which would last for the rest of Carter&#x27;s presidency. Brzezinski anticipated the Soviet invasion, and, with the support of Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, and the People&#x27;s Republic of China, he created a strategy to undermine the Soviet presence. Using this atmosphere of insecurity, Brzezinski led the United States toward a new arms buildup and the development of the Rapid Deployment Forces—policies that are both more generally associated with Reagan&#x27;s presidency now.

In 1979, the Soviets intervened in the Second Yemenite War. The Soviet backing of South Yemen constituted a &quot;smaller shock&quot;, in tandem with tensions that were rising due to the Iranian Revolution. This played a role in shifting Carter&#x27;s viewpoint on the Soviet Union to a more assertive one, a shift that finalized with the Soviet-Afghan War.

Brzezinski constantly urged either the restoration of the Shah of Iran to power or a military takeover, whatever the short-term costs in terms of values.

On November 9, 1979, Brzezinski was awakened at 3 am by a phone call with a startling message: The Soviets had just launched 250 nuclear weapons at the United States. Minutes later, Brzezinski received another call: The early-warning system actually showed 2,000 missiles heading toward the United States. As Brzezinski prepared to phone President Jimmy Carter to plan a full-scale response, he received a third call: It was a false alarm. An early warning training tape generating indications of a large-scale Soviet nuclear attack had somehow transferred to the actual early warning network, which triggered an all-too-real scramble.

Brzezinski, acting under a lame duck Carter presidency—but encouraged that Solidarity in Poland had vindicated his style of engagement with Eastern Europe—took a hard-line stance against what seemed like an imminent Soviet invasion of Poland. He even made a midnight phone call to Pope John Paul II (whose visit to Poland in 1979 had foreshadowed the emergence of Solidarity) warning him in advance. The U.S. stance was a significant change from previous reactions to Soviet repression in Hungary in 1956 and Czechoslovakia in 1968.

Brzezinski developed the Carter Doctrine, which committed the U.S. to use military force in defense of the Persian Gulf. In 1981 President Carter presented Brzezinski with the Presidential Medal of Freedom.

==National Security Advisor==


President Carter chose Brzezinski for the position of National Security Adviser (NSA) because he wanted an assertive intellectual at his side to provide him with day-to-day advice and guidance on foreign policy decisions. Brzezinski would preside over a reorganized National Security Council (NSC) structure, fashioned to ensure that the NSA would be only one of many players in the foreign policy process.

Initially, Carter reduced the NSC staff by one-half, and decreased the number of standing NSC committees from eight to two. All issues referred to the NSC were reviewed by one of the two new committees, either the Policy Review Committee (PRC) or the Special Coordinating Committee (SCC). The PRC focused on specific issues, and its chairmanship rotated. The SCC was always chaired by Brzezinski, a circumstance he had to negotiate with Carter to achieve. Carter believed that by making the NSA chairman of only one of the two committees, he would prevent the NSC from being the overwhelming influence on foreign policy decisions it had been under Kissinger&#x27;s chairmanship during the Nixon administration.

The SCC was charged with considering issues that cut across several departments, including oversight of intelligence activities, arms control evaluation, and crisis management. Much of the SCC&#x27;s time during the Carter years was spent on SALT issues. The Council held few formal meetings, convening only 10 times, compared with 125 meetings during the eight years of the Nixon and Ford administrations. Instead, Carter used frequent, informal meetings as a decision-making device—typically his Friday breakfasts—usually attended by the Vice President, the secretaries of State and Defense, Brzezinski, and the chief domestic adviser.

No agendas were prepared and no formal records were kept of these meetings, sometimes resulting in differing interpretations of the decisions actually agreed upon. Brzezinski was careful, in managing his own weekly luncheons with secretaries Vance and Brown in preparation for NSC discussions, to maintain a complete set of notes. Brzezinski also sent weekly reports to the President on major foreign policy undertakings and problems, with recommendations for courses of action. President Carter enjoyed these reports and frequently annotated them with his own views. Brzezinski and the NSC used these presidential notes (159 of them) as the basis for NSC actions.

From the beginning, Brzezinski made sure that the new NSC institutional relationships would assure him a major voice in the shaping of foreign policy. While he knew that Carter would not want him to be another Kissinger, Brzezinski also felt confident that the President did not want Secretary of State Vance to become another Dulles and would want his own input on key foreign policy decisions. Brzezinski&#x27;s power gradually expanded into the operational area during the Carter Presidency. He increasingly assumed the role of a presidential emissary. In 1978, for example, Brzezinski traveled to Beijing to lay the groundwork for normalizing U.S.–PRC relations.

Like Kissinger before him, Brzezinski maintained his own personal relationship with Soviet Ambassador to the United States Anatoly Dobrynin. Brzezinski had NSC staffers monitor State Department cable traffic through the Situation Room and call back to the State Department if the President preferred to revise or take issue with outgoing State Department instructions. He also appointed his own press spokesman, and his frequent press briefings and appearances on television interview shows made him a prominent public figure, although perhaps not nearly as much as Kissinger had been under Nixon.

The Soviet military invasion of Afghanistan in December 1979 significantly damaged the already tenuous relationship between Vance and Brzezinski. Vance felt that Brzezinski&#x27;s linkage of SALT to other Soviet activities and the MX, together with the growing domestic criticisms in the United States of the SALT II Accord, convinced Brezhnev to decide on military intervention in Afghanistan. Brzezinski, however, later recounted that he advanced proposals to maintain Afghanistan&#x27;s independence but was frustrated by the Department of State&#x27;s opposition. An NSC working group on Afghanistan wrote several reports on the deteriorating situation in 1979, but Carter ignored them until the Soviet intervention destroyed his illusions. Only then did he decide to abandon SALT II ratification and pursue the anti-Soviet policies that Brzezinski proposed.

The Iranian revolution was the last straw for the disintegrating relationship between Vance and Brzezinski. As the upheaval developed, the two advanced fundamentally different positions. Brzezinski wanted to control the revolution and increasingly suggested military action to prevent Ayatollah Khomeini from coming to power, while Vance wanted to come to terms with the new Islamic Republic of Iran. As a consequence, Carter failed to develop a coherent approach to the Iranian situation. Vance&#x27;s resignation following the unsuccessful mission to rescue the American hostages in March 1980, undertaken over his objections, was the final result of the deep disagreement between Brzezinski and Vance.

===Major policies===
During the 1960s, Brzezinski articulated the strategy of peaceful engagement for undermining the Soviet bloc, and while serving on the State Department Policy Planning Council, persuaded President Lyndon B. Johnson to adopt (in October 1966) peaceful engagement as U.S. strategy, placing détente ahead of German reunification and thus reversing prior U.S. priorities.

During the 1970s and 1980s, at the height of his political involvement, Brzezinski participated in the formation of the Trilateral Commission in order to more closely cement U.S.–Japanese–European relations. As the three most economically advanced sectors of the world, the people of the three regions could be brought together in cooperation that would give them a more cohesive stance against the communist world.

While serving in the White House, Brzezinski emphasized the centrality of human rights as a means of placing the Soviet Union on the ideological defensive. With Jimmy Carter in Camp David, he assisted in the attainment of the Egypt–Israel peace treaty.

====Afghanistan====
Communists under the leadership of Nur Muhammad Taraki seized power in Afghanistan on April 27, 1978. The new regime—divided between Taraki&#x27;s extremist Khalq faction and the more moderate Parcham—signed a treaty of friendship with the Soviet Union in December of that year. Taraki&#x27;s efforts to improve secular education and redistribute land were accompanied by mass executions (including of many conservative religious leaders) and political oppression unprecedented in Afghan history, igniting a revolt by mujahideen rebels.

Following a general uprising in April 1979, Taraki was deposed by Khalq rival Hafizullah Amin in September. Amin was considered a &quot;brutal psychopath&quot; by foreign observers; even the Soviets were alarmed by the brutality of the Afghan communists, and suspected Amin of being an agent of the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), although that was not the case. By December, Amin&#x27;s government had lost control of much of the country, prompting the Soviet Union to invade Afghanistan, execute Amin, and install Parcham leader Babrak Karmal as president.

President Carter was surprised by the invasion, as the consensus of the U.S. intelligence community during 1978 and 1979—reiterated as late as September 29, 1979—was that &quot;Moscow would not intervene in force even if it appeared likely that the Khalq government was about to collapse.&quot; Indeed, Carter&#x27;s diary entries from November 1979 until the Soviet invasion in late December contain only two short references to Afghanistan, and are instead preoccupied with the ongoing hostage crisis in Iran. In the West, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan was considered a threat to global security and the oil supplies of the Persian Gulf.

Moreover, the failure to accurately predict Soviet intentions caused American officials to reappraise the Soviet threat to both Iran and Pakistan, although it is now known that those fears were overblown. For example, U.S. intelligence closely followed Soviet exercises for an invasion of Iran throughout 1980, while an earlier warning from Brzezinski that &quot;if the Soviets came to dominate Afghanistan, they could promote a separate Baluchistan  ... [thus] dismembering Pakistan and Iran&quot; took on new urgency.

These concerns were a major factor in the unrequited efforts of both the Carter and Reagan administrations to improve relations with Iran, and resulted in massive aid to Pakistan&#x27;s Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq. Zia&#x27;s ties with the U.S. had been strained during Carter&#x27;s presidency due to Pakistan&#x27;s nuclear program and the execution of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto in April 1979, but Carter told Brzezinski and Secretary of State Cyrus Vance as early as January 1979 that it was vital to &quot;repair our relationships with Pakistan&quot; in light of the unrest in Iran.

One initiative Carter authorized to achieve this goal was a collaboration between the CIA and Pakistan&#x27;s Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI); through the ISI, the CIA began providing some $695,000 worth of non-lethal assistance to the mujahideen on July 3, 1979—several months prior to the Soviet invasion. The modest scope of this early collaboration was likely influenced by the understanding, later recounted by CIA official Robert Gates, &quot;that a substantial U.S. covert aid program&quot; might have &quot;raise[d] the stakes&quot; thereby causing &quot;the Soviets to intervene more directly and vigorously than otherwise intended&quot;. The first shipment of U.S.weapons intended for the mujahideen reached Pakistan on January 10, 1980, shortly following the Soviet invasion.

In the aftermath of the invasion, Carter was determined to respond vigorously to what he considered a dangerous provocation. In a televised speech, he announced sanctions on the Soviet Union, promised renewed aid to Pakistan, and committed the U.S. to the Persian Gulf&#x27;s defense. The thrust of U.S. policy for the duration of the war was determined by Carter in early 1980: Carter initiated a program to arm the mujahideen through Pakistan&#x27;s ISI and secured a pledge from Saudi Arabia to match U.S. funding for this purpose. U.S. support for the mujahideen accelerated under Carter&#x27;s successor, Ronald Reagan, at a final cost to U.S. taxpayers of some $3 billion. The Soviets were unable to quell the insurgency and withdrew from Afghanistan in 1989, precipitating the dissolution of the Soviet Union itself.

However, the decision to route U.S. aid through Pakistan led to massive fraud, as weapons sent to Karachi were frequently sold on the local market rather than delivered to the Afghan rebels; Karachi soon &quot;became one of the most violent cities in the world&quot;. Pakistan also controlled which rebels received assistance: of the seven mujahideen groups supported by Zia&#x27;s government, four espoused Islamic fundamentalist beliefs—and these fundamentalists received most of the funding. Years later, in a 1997 CNN/National Security Archive interview, Brzezinski detailed the strategy taken by the Carter administration against the Soviets in 1979:

We immediately launched a twofold process when we heard that the Soviets had entered Afghanistan. The first involved direct reactions and sanctions focused on the Soviet Union, and both the State Department and the National Security Council prepared long lists of sanctions to be adopted, of steps to be taken to increase the international costs to the Soviet Union of their actions. And the second course of action led to my going to Pakistan a month or so after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, for the purpose of coordinating with the Pakistanis a joint response, the purpose of which would be to make the Soviets bleed for as much and as long as is possible; and we engaged in that effort in a collaborative sense with the Saudis, the Egyptians, the British, the Chinese, and we started providing weapons to the Mujaheddin, from various sources again—for example, some Soviet arms from the Egyptians and the Chinese. We even got Soviet arms from the Czechoslovak communist government, since it was obviously susceptible to material incentives; and at some point we started buying arms for the Mujaheddin from the Soviet army in Afghanistan, because that army was increasingly corrupt.

=====&quot;Afghan Trap&quot; theory=====
Following the September 11 attacks, a theory that Brzezinski intentionally provoked the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in December 1979 was widely repeated. Some adherents of this theory thus blamed Brzezinski (and the Carter administration) for events subsequent to the Soviet invasion, including the decades-long Afghanistan conflict (1978–present), the September 11 attacks, and the 2016 Orlando nightclub shooting. A 2020 review of declassified U.S. documents by Conor Tobin in the journal &quot;Diplomatic History&quot; contends that this theory—referred to as the &quot;Afghan Trap&quot; theory by the author—is a misrepresentation of the historical record based almost entirely on a &quot;caricature&quot; of Brzezinski as an anti-communist fanatic, a disputed statement attributed to Brzezinski by a &quot;Le Nouvel Observateur&quot; journalist in 1998 (which was &quot;repeatedly den[ied]&quot; by Brzezinski himself), &quot;and the circumstantial fact that U.S. support antedated the invasion.&quot; In addition to Tobin, several academic or journalistic sources have questioned the veracity of aspects of the &quot;Afghan Trap&quot; theory, as have at least two former high-ranking Carter administration officials.

While it is true that the March 1979 Herat uprising in Afghanistan and a desire to rebuild strained U.S. relations with Pakistani leader Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq in light of the Iranian Revolution prompted Carter to sign presidential findings in July 1979 permitting the CIA to spend $695,000 on non-military assistance (e.g., &quot;cash, medical equipment, and radio transmitters&quot;) to Afghan mujahideen insurgents (and on a propaganda campaign targeting the Soviet-backed leadership of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan or DRA), internal deliberations show that &quot;U.S. policies were almost wholly reactive ... to the Soviets&#x27; escalating military presence&quot; with policymakers rejecting &quot;a &quot;substantial&quot; covert aid program&quot; (including lethal provisions) &quot;to avoid provoking Moscow.&quot; (The Soviet military and political presence in Afghanistan steadily increased throughout 1979, including &quot;tens of millions of dollars in military aid provided by Moscow to the DRA.&quot;)

According to Tobin, Brzezinski went to considerable lengths to dissuade the Soviets from invading Afghanistan, urging the Carter administration to publicize information regarding the growing Soviet military role in Afghanistan&#x27;s nascent civil war and to explicitly warn the Soviets of severe sanctions in the event of an invasion; when his warnings were watered-down by the State Department under the leadership of Secretary of State Cyrus Vance, Brzezinski leaked information to a journalist, resulting in an August 1979 article in &quot;The New York Times&quot; headlined &quot;U.S. Is Indirectly Pressing Russians to Halt Afghanistan Intervention.&quot; (Ironically, Soviet general Valentin Varennikov complained in 1995 that American officials had never made Afghanistan&#x27;s strategic significance clear to their Soviet counterparts prior to December 1979, speculating—in line with the &quot;Afghan Trap&quot; theory—that this omission may have been deliberate as the U.S. &quot;had an interest in us getting stuck in Afghanistan, and paying the greatest possible price for that.&quot;) Furthermore, Brzezinski attempted to discretely negotiate a withdrawal of Soviet troops with Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin during 1980, privately conceding that the country would likely remain within the Soviet sphere of influence following a diplomatic settlement, as he had little confidence in the mujahideen&#x27;s ability to inflict a military defeat on the Red Army.

Carter administration officials Robert Gates and Vice President Walter Mondale criticized the &quot;Afghan Trap&quot; theory between 2010 and 2012, the former stating that it had &quot;no basis in fact&quot; and the latter calling it &quot;a huge, unwarranted leap&quot;. Tobin concludes: &quot;The small-scale covert program that developed &quot;in response&quot; to the increasing Soviet influence was part of a contingency plan &quot;if&quot; the Soviets did intervene militarily, as Washington would be in a better position to make it difficult for them to consolidate their position, but not designed to induce an intervention.&quot; Historian Robert Rakove wrote, the notion of a U.S. effort to entrap the Soviet Union in Afghanistan has been &quot;methodically and effectively refuted by Conor Tobin&quot;. Steve Coll had previously stated in 2004 that &quot;[c]ontemporary memos—particularly those written in the first days after the Soviet invasion—make clear that while Brzezinski was determined to confront the Soviets in Afghanistan through covert action, he was also very worried the Soviets would prevail. ... Given this evidence and the enormous political and security costs that the invasion imposed on the Carter administration, any claim that Brzezinski lured the Soviets into Afghanistan warrants deep skepticism.&quot; Coll&#x27;s &quot;specific debunking of the Brzezinski &quot;Nouvel Observateur&quot; interview&quot; was cited by the National Security Archive in 2019. In 2016, Justin Vaïsse referred to &quot;[t]he thesis according to which a trap was set having been dismissed&quot; as &quot;[s]uch a position would not be compatible with the archives&quot;. Elisabeth Leake, writing in 2022, agreed that &quot;the original provision was certainly inadequate to force a Soviet armed intervention. Instead it adhered to broader US practices of providing limited covert support to anti-communist forces worldwide.&quot;

====Iran====

In November 1979, revolutionary students stormed the Embassy of the United States, Tehran and took American diplomats hostage. Brzezinski argued against Secretary of State Cyrus Vance&#x27;s proposed diplomatic solutions to the Iran hostage crisis, insisting they &quot;would deliver Iran to the Soviets.&quot; Vance, struggling with gout, went to Florida on Thursday, April 10, 1980, for a long weekend.

On Friday, Brzezinski held a newly scheduled meeting of the National Security Council and authorized Operation Eagle Claw, a military expedition into Tehran to rescue the hostages. Deputy Secretary Warren Christopher, who attended the meeting in Vance&#x27;s place, did not inform Vance. Furious, Vance handed in his resignation on principle, calling Brzezinski &quot;evil&quot;.

President Carter aborted the operation after three of the eight helicopters he had sent into the Dasht-e Kavir desert crashed, and a fourth then collided with a transport plane, causing a fire that killed eight servicemen. The hostages were ultimately released on the day of the first inauguration of Ronald Reagan, after 444 days in captivity.

Along with Kissinger and David Rockefeller, Brzezinski played a role in convincing Carter to admit the exiled Shah into the U.S.

Brzezinski has compared complaints by US officials about Iran&#x27;s alleged nuclear ambitions to similar statements made before the Iraq war began: &quot;I think the administration, the President and the Vice President particularly, are trying to hype the atmosphere, and that is reminiscent of what preceded the war in Iraq.&quot;

====China====

Shortly after taking office in 1977, President Carter again reaffirmed the United States&#x27; position of upholding the Shanghai Communiqué. In May 1978, Brzezinski overcame concerns from the State Department and traveled to Beijing, where he began talks that seven months later led to full diplomatic relations. The United States and People&#x27;s Republic of China announced on December 15, 1978, that the two governments would establish diplomatic relations on January 1, 1979. This required that the United States sever relations with the Republic of China on Taiwan. Consolidating U.S. gains in befriending Communist China was a major priority stressed by Brzezinski during his time as National Security Advisor.

Brzezinski &quot;denied reports that he encouraged China to support the genocidal dictator Pol Pot in Cambodia, because Pol Pot&#x27;s Khmer Rouge were the enemies of communist Vietnam.&quot; However, following the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia which toppled the Khmer Rouge, Brzezinski prevailed in having the administration refuse to recognize the new Cambodian government due to its support by the Soviet Union.

The most important strategic aspect of the new U.S.–Chinese relationship was in its effect on the Cold War. China was no longer considered part of a larger Sino-Soviet bloc but instead a third pole of power due to the Sino-Soviet Split, helping the United States against the Soviet Union.

In the Joint Communiqué on the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations dated January 1, 1979, the United States transferred diplomatic recognition from Taipei to Beijing. The United States reiterated the Shanghai Communiqué&#x27;s acknowledgment of the PRC position that there is only one China and that Taiwan is a part of China; Beijing acknowledged that the United States would continue to carry on commercial, cultural, and other unofficial contacts with Taiwan. The Taiwan Relations Act made the necessary changes in U.S. law to permit unofficial relations with Taiwan to continue.

In addition the severing relations with the Republic of China, the Carter administration also agreed to unilaterally pull out of the Sino-American Mutual Defense Treaty, withdraw U.S. military personnel from Taiwan, and gradually reduce arms sales to the Republic of China. There was widespread opposition in Congress, notably from Republicans, due to the Republic of China&#x27;s status as an anti-Communist ally in the Cold War. In &quot;Goldwater v. Carter&quot;, Barry Goldwater made a failed attempt to stop Carter from terminating the mutual defense treaty.

====Arab-Israeli conflict====
On October 10, 2007, Brzezinski along with other influential signatories sent a letter to President George W. Bush and Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice titled &quot;Failure Risks Devastating Consequences.&quot; The letter was partly an advice and a warning of the failure of an upcoming U.S.-sponsored Middle East conference scheduled for November 2007 between representatives of Israelis and Palestinians. The letter also suggested to engage in &quot;a genuine dialogue with Hamas&quot; rather than to isolate it further.
====Ending Soviet détente====

Presidential Directive 18 on U.S. National Security, signed early in Carter&#x27;s term, signaled a fundamental reassessment of the value of détente, and set the United States on a course to quietly end Kissinger&#x27;s strategy.

Zbigniew Brzezinski played a major role in organizing Jimmy Carter&#x27;s policies on the Soviet Union as a grand strategy. Brzezinski was a liberal Democrat and a committed anti-communist, favoring social justice while seeing world events in substantially Cold War terms. Additionally, according to &quot;Foreign Policy&quot;, &quot;Brzezinski’s outlook was anti-Soviet, but he also insisted, like George Kennan before him, on the necessity of cultivating a strong West.&quot;

Brzezinski stated that human rights could be used to put the Soviet Union ideologically on the defensive:

:I felt strongly that in the U.S.-Soviet competition the appeal of America as a free society could become an important asset, and I saw in human rights an opportunity to put the Soviet Union ideologically on the defensive...by actively pursuing this&#x27; commitment we could mobilize far greater global support and focus global attention on the glaring internal weaknesses of the Soviet system.

Brzezinski&#x27;s policy on Iran was thoroughly connected to the Soviet Union, because it was observed that each coup and revolution in 1979 had advanced Soviet power towards the Persian Gulf. Brzezinski advised President Carter that the United States&#x27;s &quot;greatest vulnerability&quot; lay on an arc &quot;stretching from Chittagong through Islamabad to Aden.&quot; This played a role in the Carter Doctrine.

====Nuclear strategy====

Presidential Directive 59, &quot;Nuclear Employment Policy&quot;, dramatically changed U.S. targeting of nuclear weapons aimed at the Soviet Union. Implemented with the aid of Defense Secretary Harold Brown, this directive officially set the United States on a countervailing strategy.

====Arms control====
Zbigniew Brzezinski utilized the United States&#x27; need to stability and progress in political relations with the Soviet Union to spur on the call for a new strategic arms treaty. On April 5, 1979, Brzezinski made a speech at the Chicago Council on Foreign Relations where he stated that competition between the two powers and the nuclear arms race would not simply end because of the accord. According to him, the projected strategic arms treaty that would intend to impose limits on power such as missiles and bombers through the year 1989, would be what contributes to the progress and confidence in Soviet-American relations.

He aimed to frame his arms control policy in a way that portrayed it as favorable to create, ensure, and maintain Soviet-American relations. Leading up to the presidential election in 1980, the Carter administration set sight on confronting Ronald Reagan on arms control agreements with Moscow. On this issue, Brzezinski believed that to continue moving safely ahead with talks to control atomic arms with Moscow, despite Soviet troops holding position in Afghanistan, the United States needed to remain firm in containing Soviet expansionism.

Overall, Zbigniew Brzezinski’s arms control views leaned skeptical and mistrusting of Soviet motives in general and emphasized the central importance of the East-West competition. On the other hand, other officials such as the Secretary of State Cyrus Vance worked to pave a way for a wider US-Soviet relationship. Arms control in Brzezinski’s terms would take any opportunity to halt or reduce the momentum of the Soviet buildup.
==After power==
Brzezinski left office concerned about the internal division within the Democratic party, arguing that the dovish McGovernite wing would send the Democrats into permanent minority. Ronald Reagan invited him to stay on as his National Security Adviser, but Brzezinski declined, feeling that the new president needed a fresh perspective on which to build his foreign policy. He had mixed relations with the Reagan administration. On the one hand, he supported it as an alternative to the Democrats&#x27; pacifism. On the other hand, he also criticized it as seeing foreign policy in overly black-and-white terms.

By the 1980s, Brzezinski argued that the general crisis of the Soviet Union foreshadowed communism&#x27;s end.

He remained involved in Polish affairs, critical of the imposition of martial law in Poland in 1981, and more so of the Western European acquiescence to its imposition in the name of stability. Brzezinski briefed U.S. vice president George H. W. Bush before his 1987 trip to Poland that aided in the revival of the Solidarity movement.

In 1985, under the Reagan administration, Brzezinski served as a member of the President&#x27;s Chemical Warfare Commission. From 1987 to 1988, he worked on the U.S. National Security Council–Defense Department Commission on Integrated Long-Term Strategy. From 1987 to 1989 he also served on the President&#x27;s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board.

In 1988, Brzezinski was co-chairman of the Bush National Security Advisory Task Force, endorsing Bush for president, and breaking with the Democratic party. Brzezinski published &quot;The Grand Failure&quot; the same year, predicting the failure of Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev&#x27;s reforms, and the collapse of the Soviet Union in a few more decades. He said there were five possibilities for the Soviet Union: successful pluralization, protracted crisis, renewed stagnation, coup (by the KGB or Soviet military), or the explicit collapse of the Communist regime. He called collapse &quot;at this stage a much more remote possibility&quot; than protracted crisis.

He also predicted that the chance of some form of communism existing in the Soviet Union in 2017 was a little more than 50% and that when the end did come it would be &quot;most likely turbulent&quot;. Conflicts such as Nagorno-Karabakh crisis and Soviet attempts to reinstate its authority in Lithuania and other republics were much less violent than Brzezinski and other observers anticipated. In the event, the Soviet system collapsed totally after the abortive August coup of 1991 launched against Gorbachev failed.

In 1989, the Communists failed to mobilize support in Poland, and Solidarity swept the general elections. Later the same year, Brzezinski toured Russia and visited a memorial to the Katyn Massacre. This served as an opportunity for him to ask the Soviet government to acknowledge the truth about the event, for which he received a standing ovation in the Soviet Academy of Sciences. Ten days later, the Berlin Wall fell, and Soviet-supported governments in Eastern Europe began to totter. Strobe Talbott, one of Brzezinski&#x27;s long-time critics, conducted an interview with him for &quot;TIME&quot; magazine entitled &quot;Vindication of a Hardliner&quot;.

In 1990, Brzezinski warned against post–Cold War euphoria. He publicly opposed the Gulf War, arguing that the United States would squander the international goodwill it had accumulated by defeating the Soviet Union, and that it could trigger wide resentment throughout the Arab world. He expanded upon these views in his 1992 work &quot;Out of Control&quot;.

Brzezinski was prominently critical of the Clinton administration&#x27;s hesitation to intervene against the Serb forces in the Bosnian war. He also began to speak out against Russia&#x27;s First Chechen War, forming the American Committee for Peace in Chechnya. Wary of a move toward the reinvigoration of Russian power, Brzezinski negatively viewed the succession of former KGB agent Vladimir Putin after Boris Yeltsin. In this vein, he became one of the foremost advocates of NATO expansion. He wrote in 1998 that &quot;Without Ukraine, Russia ceases to be a Eurasian empire.&quot; In 1997 he advocated for a &quot;loosely confederated Russia — composed of a European Russia, a Siberian Republic, and a Far Eastern Republic&quot; as a &quot;decentralized Russia would be less susceptible to imperial mobilization&quot;. He later came out in support of the 1999 NATO bombing of Serbia during the Kosovo war.

==Later years==

After his role as National Security Adviser came to a close, Brzezinski returned to teaching, but remained an influential voice in international relations. Polish politician Radek Sikorski wrote that to Poles, Brzezinski was considered &quot;our statesman&quot; and his was one of the most revered voices in Poland: &quot;During the decades when Poland was stuck against her will behind the Iron Curtain, he and the Polish pope were the two most important voices for a free Poland abroad. After liberation, he acted as an adviser and champion of the new democracies on their way to rejoining Western institutions.&quot;

Though he rose to national prominence as a member of the Carter administration, Brzezinski avoided partisan politics and sometimes later voted Republican. In the 1988 election, he endorsed George H. W. Bush for president over Democrat Michael Dukakis.

Brzezinski argued against the 2003 invasion of Iraq and was outspoken in the then-unpopular opinion that the invasion would be a mistake. As recalled by David Ignatius, &quot;Brzezinski paid a cost in the insular, self-reinforcing world of Washington foreign policy opinion, until it became clear to nearly everyone that he (joined in this Iraq War opposition by Scowcroft) had been right.&quot; He later called President George W. Bush&#x27;s foreign policy &quot;catastrophic.&quot;

Brzezinski was a leading critic of the George W. Bush administration&#x27;s conduct of the War on Terror. In 2004, Brzezinski wrote &quot;The Choice&quot;, which expanded upon his earlier work,&quot;The Grand Chessboard&quot; (1997), and sharply criticized George W. Bush&#x27;s foreign policy. In 2007, in a column in &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, Brzezinski excoriated the Bush administration, arguing that their post-9/11 actions had damaged the reputation of the United States &quot;infinitely greater than any wild dreams entertained by the fanatical perpetrators of the 9/11 attacks&quot; and destroyed any chance of uniting the world to defeat extremism and terrorism. He later stated that he had &quot;visceral contempt&quot; for British Prime Minister Tony Blair, who supported Bush&#x27;s actions in Iraq. In September 2007, he defended the book &quot;The Israel Lobby and U.S. Foreign Policy&quot; by John Mearsheimer.

In August 2007, Brzezinski endorsed Democratic presidential candidate Barack Obama. He stated that Obama &quot;recognizes that the challenge is a new face, a new sense of direction, a new definition of America&#x27;s role in the world&quot; and that &quot;What makes Obama attractive to me is that he understands that we live in a very different world where we have to relate to a variety of cultures and people.&quot; In September 2007 during a speech on the Iraq war, Obama introduced Brzezinski as &quot;one of our most outstanding thinkers,&quot; but some pro-Israel commentators questioned his criticism of the Israel lobby in the United States.

In a September 2009 interview with &quot;The Daily Beast&quot;, Brzezinski replied to a question about how aggressive President Obama should be in insisting Israel not conduct an air strike on Iran, saying: &quot;We are not exactly impotent little babies. They have to fly over our airspace in Iraq. Are we just going to sit there and watch?&quot; This was interpreted by some supporters of Israel as supporting the downing of Israeli jets by the United States in order to prevent an attack on Iran.

On October 1, 2009, Brzezinski delivered the Waldo Family Lecture on International Relations at Old Dominion University in Norfolk, Virginia. In 2011, Brzezinski supported the NATO intervention against the forces of Muammar Gaddafi in the Libyan Civil War, calling non-intervention &quot;morally dubious&quot; and &quot;politically questionable&quot;.

In early 2012, Brzezinski expressed disappointment and said he was confused by some of Obama&#x27;s actions, such as the decision to send 2,500 U.S. troops to Australia, but supported him for re-election.
On March 3, 2014, between the February 22 ousting of Ukraine President Viktor Yanukovych and the March 16, Crimean referendum, Brzezinski authored an op-ed piece for &quot;The Washington Post&quot; entitled &quot;What is to be done? Putin&#x27;s aggression in Ukraine needs a response.&quot; He led with a link on Russian aggression; he compared Russian President Vladimir Putin&#x27;s &quot;thuggish tactics in seizing Crimea&quot; and &quot;thinly camouflaged invasion&quot; to Adolf Hitler&#x27;s occupation of the Sudetenland in 1938, and characterized Putin as a cartoon Benito Mussolini, but stopped well short of advocating that the U.S. go to war. Rather, he suggested that NATO should be put on high alert and recommended &quot;to avert miscalculations&quot;. He explicitly stated that reassurances be given to &quot;Russia that it is not seeking to draw Ukraine into NATO.&quot;

According to Ignatius and Sikorski, Brzezinski was &quot;deeply troubled&quot; by the election of Donald Trump as president of the United States and worried over the future. Two days after the election, on November 10, 2016, Brzezinski warned of &quot;coming turmoil in the nation and the world&quot; in a brief speech after he was awarded the Medal for Distinguished Public Service from the Department of Defense. On May 4, 2017, he sent out his final Tweet, saying, &quot;Sophisticated US leadership is the &quot;sine qua non&quot; of a stable world order. However, we lack the former while the latter is getting worse.&quot;

Piotr Pietrzak argued that &quot;Brzezinski never trusted Putin and saw him as the post-Soviet man, a product of Soviet imperialist indoctrination, who felt deeply humiliated by how the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact collapsed, but he predicted the escalation of the situation in the East long before Putin took power and much earlier than most of us, possibly because his geopolitical insights were strongly influenced by the work of Alfred Thayer Mahan, Halford J. Mackinder, Nickolas J. Spykman, and Friedrich Ratzel.&quot;.

Pietrzak also suggested that &quot;Although Zbigniew Brzezinski is dead, his work is very much alive; the Biden administration follows Brzezinski’s geostrategic blueprint, which supports Ukraine militarily, logistically, diplomatically, and politically. Zbigniew Brzezinski’s son Mark Brzezinski serves as the United States Ambassador to Poland and helps his superiors implement his father’s geostrategic vision on the ground thanks to which the Ukrainian army is still standing and is capable of not only repelling the Russian offensive but actually launching a successful counter-offensive. The question is what constitutes the Brzezinski Doctrine today? Would Brzezinski see Ukraine as a potential NATO member or a frozen buffer zone between the transatlantic community and an increasingly assertive, hawkish, and unpredictable Russian giant?&quot;.

==Personal life==
Brzezinski was married to Czech-American sculptor Emilie Benes (grand-niece of the second Czechoslovak president, Edvard Beneš), with whom he had three children. His elder son, Ian Brzezinski (b. 1963), is a Senior Fellow in the International Security Program and is on the Atlantic Council&#x27;s Strategic Advisors Group. Ian also served as Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Europe and NATO (2001–2005) and was a principal at Booz Allen Hamilton. His younger son, Mark Brzezinski (b. 1965), is a lawyer who served on President Clinton&#x27;s National Security Council as an expert on Russia and Southeastern Europe, and has served as the U.S. ambassador to Sweden (2011–2015) and Poland (from 2022). His daughter, Mika Brzezinski (b. 1967), is a television news presenter and co-host of MSNBC&#x27;s weekday morning program, &quot;Morning Joe&quot;, where she provides regular commentary and reads the news headlines for the program. 

==Public life==
Brzezinski was a past member of the Atlantic Council and the National Endowment for Democracy. At the time of his death, he was a member of the Council on Foreign Relations and the International Honorary Council of the European Academy of Diplomacy.

He was also referred to by the nickname &quot;Zbig&quot;.

==Film appearances==
Brzezinski appeared as himself in several documentary films and TV series, such as: the 1997 film &quot;Eternal Memory: Voices from the Great Terror&quot;, directed by David Pultz; Episodes 17 (&quot;Good Guys, Bad Guys&quot;), 19 (&quot;Freeze&quot;) and 20 (&quot;Soldiers of God&quot;) of the 1998 CNN series &quot;Cold War&quot; produced by Jeremy Isaacs; the 2009 documentary &quot;Back Door Channels: The Price of Peace&quot;; and the 2014 Polish biographical film &quot;Strateg&quot; (&quot;The Strategist&quot;) directed by Katarzyna Kolenda-Zaleska and produced by TVN. The 2014 Polish film &quot;Jack Strong&quot; features Krzysztof Pieczyński as Brzezinski.

==Death==
Brzezinski died at Inova Fairfax Hospital in Falls Church, Virginia, on May 26, 2017, at the age of 89. His funeral was held June 9 at the Cathedral of St. Matthew in Washington, D.C. Former President Carter and former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright were among those who gave eulogies, while attendees included international diplomats and emissaries; journalists Carl Bernstein, Chuck Todd and David Ignatius; 100-year-old Gen. Edward Rowny; former National Security Adviser Susan E. Rice; and former National Security Advisor, Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster.

&quot;If I could choose my seatmate, it would be Dr. Brzezinski,&quot; Carter said of his international flights on Air Force One. Former National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger, aged 94, was unable to attend, but a note he sent during the eulogy said: &quot;The world is an emptier place without Zbig pushing the limits of his insights.&quot;

==Honors==
* Presidential Medal of Freedom, 1981
* Grand Cross of the Order of Tomáš Garrigue Masaryk, 1998
* Order of the White Eagle, 1995
* Second Class of the Cross of the President of the Slovak Republic, 2002
* Grand Officer of the Order of the Star of Romania, 2006
* Honorary citizenship of the City of Gdańsk, 2002
* Grand Officer of the Order of the Three Stars, 2007

===Honorary degrees===

==Works==
===Major works by Brzezinski===
* Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1956. .
* . Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1967. .
* &quot;Between Two Ages: America&#x27;s Role in the Technetronic Era&quot;. New York: Viking Press, 1970. .
* New York: Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 1983. .
* &quot;Game Plan: A Geostrategic Framework for the Conduct of the U.S.-Soviet Contest&quot;. Boston: Atlantic Monthly Press, 1986. .
* . New York: Collier Books, 1990. .
* . New York: Collier Books, 1993. .
* &quot;The Grand Chessboard: American Primacy and Its Geostrategic Imperatives&quot;. New York: Basic Books, 1997. . Translated and published in nineteen languages.
* . New York: Basic Books, 2004. .
* &quot;Second Chance: Three Presidents and the Crisis of American Superpower&quot;. New York: Basic Books, 2007. .
* . New York: Basic Books, 2008. .
* . New York: Basic Books, 2012. .

===Other books and monographs===
* &quot;Russo-Soviet Nationalism&quot; (thesis). Montreal, Quebec: McGill University (1950).
* &quot;Political Control in the Soviet Army: A Study on Reports by Former Soviet Officers&quot;. Studies on the USSR, no. 6. New York: Research Program on the USSR (1954). .
* , with Carl J. Friedrich. Cambridge: Harvard University Press (1956). .
* . New York: Praeger (1962).
* , with Samuel Huntington. New York: Viking Press (April 1963). .
* . Atlantic Policy Studies, New York: McGraw-Hill (1965).
* &quot;International Politics in the Technetronic Era&quot;. Volume 1 of Research Papers series, Tokyo Jōchi Daigaku Institute of International Relations. Sofia University Press (1971). 34 p.
* . New York: Harper and Row (1972). .
* &quot;American Security in an Interdependent World&quot;, with P. Edward Haley. Rowman &amp; Littlefield (September 1988). .
* &quot;&quot;, with Marin Strmecki. Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press (September 1988). .
* &quot;The Soviet Political System: Transformation or Degeneration&quot;. Irvington Publishers (August 1993). .
* &quot;Zbigniew Brzeziński, Bibliografia i Rysunki&quot; [&quot;Zbigniew Brzezinski, Bibliography and Drawings&quot;]. Łódź: Correspondance des arts (1993).
* , with Paige Sullivan. Armonk: M. E. Sharpe (1996). .
* Washington, DC: Center for Strategic &amp; International Studies (December 2000). .

===Book contributions===
* (August 7, 1995). In: , by the writers and editors of &quot;The New Republic&quot;. Edited by Nader Mousavizadeh. Afterword by Leon Wieseltier. New York: BasicBooks (1996), .

===Selected articles and essays===
* &quot;Peaceful Engagement in Eastern Europe&quot;, with William Griffith. &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot;, vol. 39, no. 4 (Spring 1961), p. 647. . .
* &quot;Cincinnatus and the Apparatchik&quot;, with Samuel P. Huntington. &quot;World Politics&quot;, vol. 16, no. 1 (October 1963), pp. 52–78. . .
* &quot;The Implications of Change for United States Foreign Policy.&quot; &quot;Department of State Bulletin&quot;, vol. LVII (57), no. 1462 [8255] (July 3, 1967), pp. 19–23. U.S. Department of State.
* &quot;U.S. Foreign Policy: The Search for Focus.&quot; &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot;, vol. 51, no. 4 (July 1973), pp. 708–727. . .
* &quot;A Geostrategy for Eurasia.&quot; &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot;, vol. 76, no. 5 (September/October 1997), pp. 50–64.
* &quot;Russia Would Gain by Losing Chechnya.&quot; &quot;New York Times&quot; (November 1999), p. A35.
* &quot;Balancing the East, Upgrading the West; U.S. Grand Strategy in an Age of Upheaval.&quot; &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot;, vol. 91, no. 1 (January/February 2012), pp. 97–104.
* &quot;Toward a Global Realignment.&quot; &quot;American Interest&quot;, vol. 11, no. 6 (July/August 2016). Full issue.

===Reports===
* , with David Owen, Michael Stewart, Carol Hansen, and Saburo Okita. Trilateral Commission (June 1984). .
* , with Brent Scowcroft and Richard W. Murphy. Council on Foreign Relations Press (July 1997). .
* &quot;The United States and the Persian Gulf&quot;, with Anthony Lake, F. Gregory, and III Gause. Council on Foreign Relations Press (December 2001). .
* &quot;Iran: Time for a New Approach&quot;, with Robert M. Gates. Council on Foreign Relations Press (February 2003). .

== Explanatory notes ==
== Citations ==
==Further reading==
* Andrianopoulos, Gerry Argyris (June 1991). &quot;Kissinger and Brzezinski: The NSC and the Struggle for Control of U.S. National Security Policy&quot;. Palgrave Macmillan. .
* Avner, Yehuda (2010). &quot;The Prime Ministers: An Intimate Narrative of Israeli Leadership&quot;. The Toby Press. .
* Firestone, Thomas (Winter 1988). &quot;Four Sovietologists: A Primer.&quot; &quot;The National Interest&quot;, no. 14. pp. 102–107. . on the ideas of Zbigniew Brzezinski, Stephen F. Cohen Jerry F. Hough, and Richard Pipes.
* Gati, Charles, ed. (2013), &quot;Zbig: The Strategy and Statecraft of Zbigniew Brzezinski&quot;. Johns Hopkins University Press. .
* Lubowski, Andrzej (2013). &quot;Zbig: The Man Who Cracked the Kremlin&quot;.
* Thacker, Innes (1980). &quot;Ideological Control and the Depoliticisation of Language.&quot; &quot;Cencrastus&quot;, no. 2 (Spring 1980), pp. 30–33. .
* Vaughan, Patrick (1999). &quot;Beyond Benign Neglect: Zbigniew Brzezinski and the Polish Crisis of 1980.&quot; &quot;Polish Review&quot;, no. 1. pp. 3–28.
* Vaïsse, Justin (2018). &quot;Zbigniew Brzezinski: America&#x27;s Grand Strategist&quot;. scholarly biography
* Wallis, Christopher (2018). &quot;The Thinker, The Doer and The Decider Zbigniew Brzezinski, Cyrus Vance and the Bureaucratic Wars of the Carter Administration&quot; (PhD Thesis). Northumbria University.
* Ziolkowska-Boehm, Aleksandra (2018). &quot;Father and Son: Tadeusz and Zbigniew Brzeziński&quot; (chapter). In: &quot;Untold Stories of Polish Heroes from World War II&quot;. Hamilton Books. .

==External links==

* 
* 
* Neal Conan. &quot;Brzezinski discusses his participation in the 1978 Camp David&quot;. &quot;Talk of the Nation&quot;, NPR, September 16, 2003.
* ISSF Roundtable 7-4, Zbig: The Strategy and Statecraft of Zbigniew Brzezinski, 2014 (Proceedings).
* &quot;The Strategic Mind of Zbigniew Brzezinski&quot;, by John Bernell White, Jr.
* Brzezinski formulating a New Foreign Policy Approach toward Russia at the Center for Strategic &amp; International Studies.
* &quot;Iran: The Crescent of Crisis&quot; . &quot;Time&quot;, January 1979.
* Keynote Address – Inaugural Forum of the Brzezinski Chair </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q168041" start="0" end="29" title="Zbigniew Brzezinski" label="Zbigniew Kazimierz Brzeziński"/>
<link wikidata="Q168041" start="76" end="80" title="Zbigniew Brzezinski" label="Zbig"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="117" end="136" title="political scientist" label="political scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="166" end="183" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="210" end="222" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414246" start="230" end="255" title="United States National Security Advisor" label="National Security Advisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q471183" start="316" end="357" title="Realism (international relations)" label="realist school of international relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q299938" start="401" end="418" title="Halford Mackinder" label="Halford Mackinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342011" start="423" end="442" title="Nicholas J. Spykman" label="Nicholas J. Spykman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745901" start="462" end="478" title="Idealism in international relations" label="liberal idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q218868" start="561" end="586" title="The Trilateral Commission" label="The Trilateral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280045" start="673" end="723" title="Sino-American relations" label="relations with the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876358" start="759" end="786" title="Republic of China on Taiwan" label="Republic of China on Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q623994" start="815" end="847" title="Strategic Arms Limitation Talks" label="Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="867" end="879" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q309204" start="902" end="920" title="Camp David Accords" label="Camp David Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q128245" start="980" end="1001" title="Mohammad Reza Pahlavi" label="Mohammad Reza Pahlavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="1023" end="1041" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Iranian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585785" start="1202" end="1212" title="Operation Cyclone" label="supporting"/>
<link wikidata="Q21000730" start="1217" end="1234" title="Afghan mujahideen" label="Afghan mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q476757" start="1261" end="1295" title="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan" label="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="1338" end="1355" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet–Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q277343" start="1380" end="1404" title="Torrijos–Carter Treaties" label="Torrijos–Carter Treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="1439" end="1451" title="Panama Canal" label="Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="1605" end="1619" title="anti-communist" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q83834" start="1644" end="1655" title="anti-Soviet" label="anti-Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q29071" start="1656" end="1667" title="containment" label="containment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863792" start="1673" end="1699" title="human rights organizations" label="human rights organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q93637" start="1919" end="1942" title="Poland–Russia relations" label="Poland–Russia relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="2027" end="2051" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352632" start="2059" end="2099" title="Johns Hopkins SAIS" label="School of Advanced International Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053614" start="2118" end="2164" title="Center for Strategic and International Studies" label="Center for Strategic and International Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="2254" end="2257" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7118447" start="2272" end="2300" title="The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer" label="The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q287171" start="2308" end="2316" title="ABC News (United States)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q112674" start="2329" end="2363" title="This Week with Christiane Amanpour" label="This Week with Christiane Amanpour"/>
<link wikidata="Q13973" start="2375" end="2380" title="MSNBC" label="MSNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324221" start="2394" end="2405" title="Morning Joe" label="Morning Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q449013" start="2433" end="2448" title="Mika Brzezinski" label="Mika Brzezinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q685432" start="2481" end="2495" title="Prague Declaration on European Conscience and Communism" label="Prague Process"/>
<link wikidata="Q5981051" start="2512" end="2515" title="Ian Brzezinski" label="Ian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588921" start="2566" end="2570" title="Mark Brzezinski" label="Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889358" start="2587" end="2621" title="United States Ambassador to Poland" label="United States Ambassador to Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889384" start="2651" end="2685" title="United States Ambassador to Sweden" label="United States Ambassador to Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="2755" end="2761" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q793424" start="2834" end="2842" title="Berezhany" label="Brzeżany"/>
<link wikidata="Q401499" start="2844" end="2864" title="Tarnopol Voivodeship" label="Tarnopol Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030244" start="3056" end="3074" title="Tadeusz Brzeziński" label="Tadeusz Brzeziński"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="3224" end="3229" title="Nazis" label="Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3287" end="3299" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="3307" end="3320" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q187650" start="3328" end="3339" title="Great Purge" label="Great Purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="3366" end="3372" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="3465" end="3473" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450086" start="3561" end="3575" title="Stanley Street (Montreal)" label="Stanley Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="3590" end="3613" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact" label="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="3631" end="3643" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="3694" end="3708" title="Invasion of Poland" label="invaded Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q161227" start="3719" end="3735" title="Yalta Conference" label="Yalta Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="3746" end="3752" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3808" end="3824" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875548" start="4141" end="4155" title="Loyola High School (Montreal)" label="Loyola College"/>
<link wikidata="Q201492" start="4188" end="4205" title="McGill University" label="McGill University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4246" end="4260" title="Master&amp;#x27;s degree#MA, MS, MSc" label="Master of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="4673" end="4691" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819677" start="4720" end="4733" title="Merle Fainsod" label="Merle Fainsod"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="4797" end="4815" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="4817" end="4831" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="4865" end="4878" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q835577" start="4956" end="4977" title="Jan Nowak-Jezioranski" label="Jan Nowak-Jezioranski"/>
<link wikidata="Q485500" start="5006" end="5023" title="Radio Free Europe" label="Radio Free Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q77442" start="5052" end="5069" title="Carl Joachim Friedrich" label="Carl J. Friedrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="5096" end="5111" title="totalitarianism" label="totalitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="5241" end="5259" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="5286" end="5305" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352632" start="5452" end="5506" title="Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies" label="Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="5510" end="5534" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="5538" end="5554" title="Washington D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5624" end="5685" title="History of Poland (1945–89)#Gomułka&amp;#x27;s road to socialism (1956–70)" label="History of Poland: Gomułka&amp;#x27;s road to socialism (1956–70)"/>
<link wikidata="Q164348" start="5693" end="5718" title="1956 Hungarian Revolution" label="1956 Hungarian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="5763" end="5780" title="Dwight Eisenhower" label="Dwight Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q223677" start="5792" end="5810" title="John Foster Dulles" label="John Foster Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678782" start="5828" end="5836" title="rollback" label="rollback"/>
<link wikidata="Q52967" start="5919" end="5934" title="Poznań 1956 protests" label="Polish protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547540" start="5951" end="5965" title="Polish October" label="Polish October"/>
<link wikidata="Q164348" start="5974" end="5994" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1956" label="Hungarian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="6251" end="6263" title="Eastern bloc" label="Eastern bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="6475" end="6490" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="6695" end="6703" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q174438" start="6746" end="6764" title="Madeleine Albright" label="Madeleine Albright"/>
<link wikidata="Q170217" start="6812" end="6817" title="Czechs" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="6922" end="6950" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q184937" start="6978" end="6994" title="Bilderberg Group" label="Bilderberg Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q699590" start="7008" end="7039" title="1960 U.S. presidential election" label="1960 U.S. presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="7075" end="7090" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q159385" start="7512" end="7523" title="Geopolitics" label="geostrategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="7569" end="7584" title="totalitarianism" label="totalitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="7669" end="7680" title="Soviet Bloc" label="Soviet Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q155705" start="7956" end="7963" title="détente" label="détente"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135577" start="8058" end="8073" title="Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="8145" end="8165" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q161227" start="8367" end="8383" title="Yalta Conference" label="Yalta Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q506079" start="8447" end="8464" title="Sino-Soviet split" label="Sino-Soviet split"/>
<link wikidata="Q699646" start="8577" end="8620" title="1964 U.S. presidential election" label="Lyndon Johnson&amp;#x27;s presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191264" start="8629" end="8642" title="Great Society" label="Great Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="8647" end="8668" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="civil rights policies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8773" end="8794" title="Nikita Khrushchev#Life in retirement" label="ousting of Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q163714" start="8847" end="8859" title="Adam Michnik" label="Adam Michnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003" start="8875" end="8885" title="Solidarity (Polish trade union)" label="Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="8997" end="9006" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="De Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="9048" end="9056" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35600" start="9064" end="9069" title="Urals" label="Urals"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="9099" end="9110" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367987" start="9153" end="9176" title="Policy Planning Staff (United States)" label="Policy Planning Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="9184" end="9208" title="U.S. Department of State" label="U.S. Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q209989" start="9500" end="9515" title="Hubert Humphrey" label="Hubert Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="9580" end="9591" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q162401" start="9595" end="9608" title="Prague Spring" label="Prague Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084040" start="9616" end="9643" title="Socialism with a human face" label="Socialism with a human face"/>
<link wikidata="Q82542" start="9647" end="9660" title="Tet offensive" label="Tet offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773668" start="9667" end="9700" title="Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia" label="Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9930" end="9938" title="New Left#The American New Left" label="New Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q693742" start="9949" end="9980" title="1968 U.S. presidential election" label="1968 U.S. presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q11859074" start="10165" end="10215" title="Conference for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Conference for Security and Co-operation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="10267" end="10272" title="Richard Nixon" label="Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="10273" end="10282" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q331742" start="10315" end="10330" title="George McGovern" label="George McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="10338" end="10346" title="pacifism" label="pacifism"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="10523" end="10539" title="developed nation" label="developed nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055020" start="10619" end="10638" title="economic inequality" label="economic inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q218868" start="10686" end="10707" title="Trilateral Commission" label="Trilateral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q11239" start="10713" end="10730" title="David Rockefeller" label="David Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="11071" end="11078" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="11088" end="11100" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q699693" start="11187" end="11213" title="1976 United States presidential election" label="1976 presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q318161" start="11516" end="11532" title="Helsinki Accords" label="Helsinki process"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394526" start="11573" end="11590" title="international law" label="international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="11698" end="11708" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="11709" end="11724" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="11784" end="11795" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414246" start="11937" end="11962" title="National Security Advisor (United States)" label="National Security Advisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003" start="12049" end="12059" title="Solidarity (Polish trade union)" label="Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q318161" start="12140" end="12158" title="Helsinki Accords" label="Helsinki Final Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q729362" start="12175" end="12185" title="Charter 77" label="Charter 77"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="12189" end="12203" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="12600" end="12616" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q296661" start="12697" end="12708" title="Cyrus Vance" label="Cyrus Vance"/>
<link wikidata="Q623994" start="12794" end="12825" title="Strategic Arms Limitation Talks" label="Strategic Arms Limitation Talks"/>
<link wikidata="Q485500" start="12914" end="12931" title="Radio Free Europe" label="Radio Free Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2516" start="13072" end="13086" title="Helmut Schmidt" label="Helmut Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="13383" end="13389" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="13403" end="13411" title="Cardinal (Catholicism)" label="Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q165522" start="13412" end="13428" title="Stefan Wyszynski" label="Stefan Wyszynski"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="13503" end="13524" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q364056" start="13786" end="13798" title="arms control" label="arms control"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="14460" end="14478" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Iranian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="14482" end="14512" title="Soviet invasion of Afghanistan" label="Soviet invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003" start="14520" end="14530" title="Solidarity (Polish trade union)" label="Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q128245" start="14615" end="14627" title="Mohammad Reza Pahlavi" label="Shah of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="14637" end="14667" title="Soviet invasion of Afghanistan" label="Soviet invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="14673" end="14691" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Iranian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q589673" start="14709" end="14728" title="Iran hostage crisis" label="Iran hostage crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294155" start="15102" end="15125" title="Rapid Deployment Forces" label="Rapid Deployment Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q12207418" start="15250" end="15269" title="Yemenite War of 1979" label="Second Yemenite War"/>
<link wikidata="Q199841" start="15293" end="15304" title="South Yemen" label="South Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="16643" end="16660" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q864211" start="16921" end="16936" title="Carter Doctrine" label="Carter Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="17003" end="17015" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144" start="17072" end="17101" title="Presidential Medal of Freedom" label="Presidential Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17795" end="17825" title="Special Coordinating Committee" label="Special Coordinating Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280045" start="20208" end="20226" title="Sino-American relations" label="U.S.–PRC relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q487723" start="20352" end="20368" title="Anatoly Dobrynin" label="Anatoly Dobrynin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27493" start="21403" end="21416" title="working group" label="working group"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="21696" end="21714" title="Iranian revolution" label="Iranian revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q38823" start="21977" end="21995" title="Ayatollah Khomeini" label="Ayatollah Khomeini"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="22616" end="22633" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q155705" start="22707" end="22714" title="détente" label="détente"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="22724" end="22744" title="German reunification" label="German reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q309204" start="23382" end="23392" title="Camp David Accords (1978)" label="Camp David"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129412" start="23431" end="23456" title="Egypt–Israel peace treaty" label="Egypt–Israel peace treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q299559" start="23514" end="23533" title="Nur Muhammad Taraki" label="Nur Muhammad Taraki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341539" start="23534" end="23561" title="Saur Revolution" label="seized power in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773370" start="23636" end="23641" title="Khalq" label="Khalq"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273348" start="23672" end="23679" title="Parcham" label="Parcham"/>
<link wikidata="Q21000730" start="23997" end="24007" title="Afghan mujahideen" label="mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q63831" start="24095" end="24110" title="Hafizullah Amin" label="Hafizullah Amin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="24321" end="24348" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="24495" end="24513" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="invade Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q63827" start="24556" end="24569" title="Babrak Karmal" label="Babrak Karmal"/>
<link wikidata="Q589673" start="25073" end="25095" title="Iran hostage crisis" label="hostage crisis in Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="25216" end="25228" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q181103" start="25669" end="25680" title="Balochistan" label="Baluchistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824547" start="25825" end="25831" title="Presidency of Jimmy Carter" label="Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824573" start="25836" end="25858" title="Presidency of Ronald Reagan" label="Reagan administrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q200499" start="25938" end="25957" title="Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq" label="Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq"/>
<link wikidata="Q131355" start="26099" end="26118" title="Zulfikar Ali Bhutto" label="Zulfikar Ali Bhutto"/>
<link wikidata="Q296661" start="26184" end="26195" title="Cyrus Vance" label="Cyrus Vance"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="26309" end="26323" title="Iranian Revolution" label="unrest in Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q274564" start="26436" end="26463" title="Inter-Services Intelligence" label="Inter-Services Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q212979" start="26757" end="26769" title="Robert Gates" label="Robert Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585785" start="27512" end="27571" title="Operation Cyclone" label="a program to arm the mujahideen through Pakistan&amp;#x27;s ISI"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="27726" end="27739" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q509561" start="27847" end="27872" title="Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan" label="withdrew from Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="27900" end="27931" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8660" start="28039" end="28046" title="Karachi" label="Karachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q21000730" start="28275" end="28298" title="Afghan mujahideen" label="seven mujahideen groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="28459" end="28462" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q649857" start="28463" end="28488" title="National Security Archive" label="National Security Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="28788" end="28804" title="United States Department of State" label="State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q851756" start="28813" end="28838" title="United States National Security Council" label="National Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="29555" end="29567" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="29846" end="29866" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519107" start="30147" end="30182" title="Afghanistan conflict (1978–present)" label="Afghanistan conflict (1978–present)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="30188" end="30208" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q24561572" start="30223" end="30249" title="Orlando nightclub shooting" label="Orlando nightclub shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q15716472" start="30332" end="30350" title="Diplomatic History (journal)" label="Diplomatic History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044328" start="30646" end="30667" title="L&amp;#x27;Obs" label="Le Nouvel Observateur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578716" start="31091" end="31110" title="1979 Herat uprising" label="1979 Herat uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q6316730" start="31150" end="31173" title="Pakistan–United States relations" label="strained U.S. relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q200499" start="31196" end="31215" title="Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq" label="Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="31232" end="31250" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Iranian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q21000730" start="31445" end="31462" title="Afghan mujahideen" label="Afghan mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q476757" start="31550" end="31584" title="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan" label="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="32462" end="32478" title="United States Department of State" label="State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q296661" start="32522" end="32533" title="Cyrus Vance" label="Cyrus Vance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="32627" end="32645" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q710007" start="32773" end="32792" title="Valentin Varennikov" label="Valentin Varennikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530175" start="33275" end="33292" title="List of ambassadors of Russia to the United States" label="Soviet ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q487723" start="33293" end="33309" title="Anatoly Dobrynin" label="Anatoly Dobrynin"/>
<link wikidata="Q212979" start="33593" end="33605" title="Robert Gates" label="Robert Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q49216" start="33625" end="33639" title="Walter Mondale" label="Walter Mondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q128771" start="34375" end="34385" title="Steve Coll" label="Steve Coll"/>
<link wikidata="Q649857" start="35019" end="35044" title="National Security Archive" label="National Security Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3190508" start="35063" end="35076" title="Justin Vaïsse" label="Justin Vaïsse"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="35538" end="35551" title="Iranian Revolution" label="revolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369972" start="35573" end="35609" title="Embassy of the United States, Tehran" label="Embassy of the United States, Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q296661" start="35692" end="35703" title="Cyrus Vance" label="Cyrus Vance"/>
<link wikidata="Q589673" start="35748" end="35767" title="Iran hostage crisis" label="Iran hostage crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q133087" start="35854" end="35858" title="gout" label="gout"/>
<link wikidata="Q851756" start="35986" end="36011" title="United States National Security Council" label="National Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q612739" start="36027" end="36047" title="Operation Eagle Claw" label="Operation Eagle Claw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="36076" end="36082" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q294358" start="36124" end="36142" title="Warren Christopher" label="Warren Christopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q272514" start="36404" end="36417" title="Dasht-e Kavir" label="Dasht-e Kavir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401697" start="36586" end="36621" title="first inauguration of Ronald Reagan" label="first inauguration of Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="36916" end="36924" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq war"/>
<link wikidata="Q874682" start="37253" end="37272" title="Shanghai Communiqué" label="Shanghai Communiqué"/>
<link wikidata="Q19839848" start="37876" end="37883" title="Allegations of United States support for the Khmer Rouge" label="reports"/>
<link wikidata="Q39464" start="37943" end="37950" title="Pol Pot" label="Pol Pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="37954" end="37962" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="37987" end="37998" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q635533" start="38067" end="38098" title="Cambodian–Vietnamese War" label="Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q867778" start="38204" end="38228" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Kampuchea" label="new Cambodian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q506079" start="38488" end="38505" title="Sino-Soviet Split" label="Sino-Soviet Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269155" start="38567" end="38628" title="Joint Communiqué on the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations" label="Joint Communiqué on the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867" start="38710" end="38716" title="Taipei" label="Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q476667" start="39029" end="39049" title="Taiwan Relations Act" label="Taiwan Relations Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q692218" start="39080" end="39088" title="U.S. law" label="U.S. law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7524749" start="39279" end="39314" title="Sino-American Mutual Defense Treaty" label="Sino-American Mutual Defense Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="39455" end="39463" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="39540" end="39554" title="anti-Communist" label="anti-Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580387" start="39586" end="39605" title="Goldwater v. Carter" label="Goldwater v. Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q319129" start="39613" end="39628" title="Barry Goldwater" label="Barry Goldwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="39841" end="39855" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q47216" start="39879" end="39895" title="Condoleezza Rice" label="Condoleezza Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q875556" start="40124" end="40132" title="Israelis" label="Israelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q201190" start="40137" end="40149" title="Palestinians" label="Palestinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q38799" start="40220" end="40225" title="Hamas" label="Hamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q155705" start="40439" end="40446" title="détente" label="détente"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063573" start="40835" end="40849" title="Foreign Policy" label="Foreign Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q156058" start="40928" end="40941" title="George F. Kennan" label="George Kennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q376749" start="41842" end="41852" title="Chittagong" label="Chittagong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362" start="41861" end="41870" title="Islamabad" label="Islamabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q131694" start="41874" end="41878" title="Aden" label="Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q864211" start="41912" end="41927" title="Carter Doctrine" label="Carter Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q19046028" start="41956" end="41981" title="Presidential Directive 59" label="Presidential Directive 59"/>
<link wikidata="Q552916" start="42150" end="42162" title="Harold Brown (Secretary of Defense)" label="Harold Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="43996" end="44002" title="dovish" label="dovish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="44070" end="44083" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824573" start="44294" end="44315" title="Reagan administration" label="Reagan administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="44391" end="44399" title="pacifism" label="pacifism"/>
<link wikidata="Q718605" start="44683" end="44704" title="martial law in Poland" label="martial law in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="44846" end="44863" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q483610" start="45046" end="45062" title="Chemical warfare" label="Chemical Warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q851756" start="45111" end="45141" title="U.S. National Security Council" label="U.S. National Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="45142" end="45160" title="U.S. Department of Defense" label="Defense Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402416" start="45246" end="45298" title="President&amp;#x27;s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board" label="President&amp;#x27;s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="45567" end="45584" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="45799" end="45802" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915590" start="45806" end="45821" title="Soviet military" label="Soviet military"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540695" start="46269" end="46278" title="January Events (Lithuania)" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q221382" start="46440" end="46451" title="August coup" label="August coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q134301" start="46678" end="46692" title="Katyn Massacre" label="Katyn Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2148" start="46743" end="46760" title="Soviet government" label="Soviet government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370801" start="46851" end="46877" title="Soviet Academy of Sciences" label="Soviet Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46899" end="46915" title="Berlin Wall#The Fall of the Wall" label="Berlin Wall fell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287886" start="46985" end="46999" title="Strobe Talbott" label="Strobe Talbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="47240" end="47248" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="47430" end="47440" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824550" start="47560" end="47582" title="Clinton administration" label="Clinton administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125372" start="47626" end="47637" title="Army of Republika Srpska" label="Serb forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="47645" end="47656" title="Bosnian war" label="Bosnian war"/>
<link wikidata="Q29269" start="47707" end="47724" title="First Chechen War" label="First Chechen War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4064227" start="47738" end="47778" title="American Committee for Peace in Chechnya" label="American Committee for Peace in Chechnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="47903" end="47917" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34453" start="47924" end="47937" title="Boris Yeltsin" label="Boris Yeltsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367724" start="47996" end="48010" title="NATO expansion" label="NATO expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q155723" start="48376" end="48403" title="1999 NATO bombing of Serbia" label="1999 NATO bombing of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190029" start="48415" end="48425" title="Kosovo war" label="Kosovo war"/>
<link wikidata="Q58085" start="48619" end="48633" title="Radek Sikorski" label="Radek Sikorski"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="48861" end="48872" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Polish pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q643015" start="49228" end="49241" title="1988 United States presidential election" label="1988 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="49255" end="49272" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q319099" start="49301" end="49316" title="Michael Dukakis" label="Michael Dukakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="49349" end="49370" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174815" start="49472" end="49486" title="David Ignatius" label="David Ignatius"/>
<link wikidata="Q656511" start="49682" end="49691" title="Brent Scowcroft" label="Scowcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="49741" end="49755" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719918" start="49844" end="49873" title="George W. Bush administration" label="George W. Bush administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="49896" end="49909" title="War on Terror" label="War on Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995725" start="50004" end="50024" title="The Grand Chessboard" label="The Grand Chessboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="50062" end="50076" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="50130" end="50149" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="50228" end="50232" title="September 11 attacks" label="9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="50569" end="50579" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q738022" start="50670" end="50710" title="The Israel Lobby and U.S. Foreign Policy" label="The Israel Lobby and U.S. Foreign Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q461830" start="50720" end="50736" title="John Mearsheimer" label="John Mearsheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="50809" end="50821" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076444" start="51355" end="51388" title="Israel lobby in the United States" label="Israel lobby in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308139" start="51432" end="51447" title="The Daily Beast" label="The Daily Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q30674927" start="51937" end="51984" title="Waldo Family Lecture on International Relations" label="Waldo Family Lecture on International Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474100" start="51988" end="52011" title="Old Dominion University" label="Old Dominion University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="52015" end="52032" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q210714" start="52068" end="52085" title="2011 military intervention in Libya" label="NATO intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="52108" end="52123" title="Muammar Gaddafi" label="Muammar Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q81545" start="52131" end="52147" title="2011 Libyan Civil War" label="Libyan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459658" start="52521" end="52538" title="Viktor Yanukovych" label="Viktor Yanukovych"/>
<link wikidata="Q15838763" start="52557" end="52575" title="2014 Crimean status referendum" label="Crimean referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602337" start="52600" end="52605" title="op-ed" label="op-ed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="52814" end="52828" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="52930" end="52942" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q194242" start="52968" end="52979" title="Sudetenland" label="Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="53026" end="53042" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="53132" end="53136" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="53438" end="53450" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260236" start="53684" end="53722" title="Department of Defense Medal for Distinguished Public Service" label="Medal for Distinguished Public Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="53732" end="53753" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q316560" start="53855" end="53867" title="sine qua non" label="sine qua non"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233935" start="55422" end="55434" title="Emilie Benes Brzezinski" label="Emilie Benes"/>
<link wikidata="Q152274" start="55486" end="55498" title="Edvard Beneš" label="Edvard Beneš"/>
<link wikidata="Q5981051" start="55549" end="55563" title="Ian Brzezinski" label="Ian Brzezinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q756373" start="55646" end="55662" title="Atlantic Council" label="Atlantic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="55768" end="55772" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q893221" start="55808" end="55827" title="Booz Allen Hamilton" label="Booz Allen Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588921" start="55846" end="55861" title="Mark Brzezinski" label="Mark Brzezinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889384" start="56020" end="56045" title="U.S. ambassador to Sweden" label="U.S. ambassador to Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889358" start="56062" end="56068" title="List of ambassadors of the United States to Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q449013" start="56096" end="56111" title="Mika Brzezinski" label="Mika Brzezinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324221" start="56213" end="56224" title="Morning Joe" label="Morning Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q756373" start="56370" end="56386" title="Atlantic Council" label="Atlantic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422577" start="56395" end="56427" title="National Endowment for Democracy" label="National Endowment for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="56478" end="56506" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="56966" end="56969" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142405" start="56983" end="56991" title="Cold War (TV series)" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110410" start="57010" end="57023" title="Jeremy Isaacs" label="Jeremy Isaacs"/>
<link wikidata="" start="57052" end="57090" title="Back Door Channels: The Price of Peace" label="Back Door Channels: The Price of Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q476608" start="57239" end="57242" title="TVN (Polish TV channel)" label="TVN"/>
<link wikidata="Q11715750" start="57271" end="57282" title="Jack Strong (film)" label="Jack Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q11749614" start="57298" end="57318" title="Krzysztof Pieczyński" label="Krzysztof Pieczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q408744" start="57390" end="57412" title="Falls Church, Virginia" label="Falls Church, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q603535" start="57484" end="57508" title="Cathedral of St. Matthew the Apostle (Washington, D.C.)" label="Cathedral of St. Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="57546" end="57552" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q174438" start="57583" end="57601" title="Madeleine Albright" label="Madeleine Albright"/>
<link wikidata="Q319967" start="57715" end="57729" title="Carl Bernstein" label="Carl Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089199" start="57731" end="57741" title="Chuck Todd" label="Chuck Todd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174815" start="57746" end="57760" title="David Ignatius" label="David Ignatius"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345127" start="57780" end="57792" title="Edward Rowny" label="Edward Rowny"/>
<link wikidata="Q50612" start="57827" end="57840" title="Susan E. Rice" label="Susan E. Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628492" start="57889" end="57903" title="H. R. McMaster" label="H. R. McMaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q179969" start="58021" end="58034" title="Air Force One" label="Air Force One"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="58069" end="58084" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144" start="58265" end="58294" title="Presidential Medal of Freedom" label="Presidential Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548060" start="58322" end="58353" title="Order of Tomáš Garrigue Masaryk" label="Order of Tomáš Garrigue Masaryk"/>
<link wikidata="Q84020" start="58362" end="58386" title="Order of the White Eagle (Poland)" label="Order of the White Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861621" start="58415" end="58460" title="Orders, decorations, and medals of Slovakia" label="Cross of the President of the Slovak Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q950604" start="58490" end="58518" title="Order of the Star of Romania" label="Order of the Star of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q987080" start="58527" end="58547" title="Honorary citizenship" label="Honorary citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="58563" end="58569" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q913910" start="58599" end="58623" title="Order of the Three Stars" label="Order of the Three Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="58710" end="58734" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="58759" end="58783" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q921536" start="58880" end="58892" title="Viking Press" label="Viking Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067003" start="58914" end="58936" title="Farrar, Straus, Giroux" label="Farrar, Straus, Giroux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611369" start="59048" end="59070" title="Atlantic Monthly Press" label="Atlantic Monthly Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q24525661" start="59094" end="59107" title="Collier Books" label="Collier Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q24525661" start="59131" end="59144" title="Collier Books" label="Collier Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995725" start="59162" end="59233" title="The Grand Chessboard" label="The Grand Chessboard: American Primacy and Its Geostrategic Imperatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034881" start="59251" end="59262" title="Basic Books" label="Basic Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034881" start="59334" end="59345" title="Basic Books" label="Basic Books"/>
<link wikidata="" start="59363" end="59432" title="Second Chance: Three Presidents and the Crisis of American Superpower" label="Second Chance: Three Presidents and the Crisis of American Superpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034881" start="59450" end="59461" title="Basic Books" label="Basic Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034881" start="59485" end="59496" title="Basic Books" label="Basic Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034881" start="59520" end="59531" title="Basic Books" label="Basic Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="59615" end="59621" title="Master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="59624" end="59632" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q201492" start="59642" end="59659" title="McGill University" label="McGill University"/>
<link wikidata="Q77442" start="59852" end="59869" title="Carl J. Friedrich" label="Carl J. Friedrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="59882" end="59906" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116159" start="59931" end="59938" title="Praeger Publishing" label="Praeger"/>
<link wikidata="Q19074" start="59956" end="59973" title="Samuel P. Huntington" label="Samuel Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q921536" start="59985" end="59997" title="Viking Press" label="Viking Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q17153156" start="60053" end="60064" title="McGraw-Hill" label="McGraw-Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q841581" start="60229" end="60245" title="Sofia University" label="Sofia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127696" start="60280" end="60294" title="Harper and Row" label="Harper and Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372254" start="60387" end="60411" title="Rowman &amp;amp; Littlefield" label="Rowman &amp;amp; Littlefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989759" start="60488" end="60502" title="Westview Press" label="Westview Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q580" start="60756" end="60760" title="Łódź" label="Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712554" start="60827" end="60839" title="M. E. Sharpe" label="M. E. Sharpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053614" start="60868" end="60916" title="Center for Strategic &amp;amp; International Studies" label="Center for Strategic &amp;amp; International Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329873" start="61024" end="61040" title="The New Republic" label="The New Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q114874389" start="61058" end="61076" title="Nader Mousavizadeh" label="Nader Mousavizadeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4470191" start="61091" end="61106" title="Leon Wieseltier" label="Leon Wieseltier"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="61118" end="61128" title="HarperCollins" label="BasicBooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135577" start="61257" end="61272" title="Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q19074" start="61374" end="61394" title="Samuel P. Huntington" label="Samuel P. Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="61551" end="61579" title="U.S. Department of State" label="Department of State Bulletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="61646" end="61670" title="U.S. Department of State" label="U.S. Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135577" start="61735" end="61750" title="Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135577" start="61850" end="61865" title="Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="61983" end="61997" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135577" start="62132" end="62147" title="Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713492" start="62256" end="62273" title="American Interest" label="American Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q218868" start="62413" end="62434" title="Trilateral Commission" label="Trilateral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q656511" start="62459" end="62474" title="Brent Scowcroft" label="Brent Scowcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329720" start="62479" end="62496" title="Richard W. Murphy" label="Richard W. Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="62498" end="62526" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q573515" start="62607" end="62619" title="Anthony Lake" label="Anthony Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="62648" end="62676" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q212979" start="62752" end="62767" title="Robert M. Gates" label="Robert M. Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="62769" end="62797" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076074" start="63038" end="63056" title="Palgrave Macmillan" label="Palgrave Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599986" start="63062" end="63075" title="Yehuda Avner" label="Avner, Yehuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521982" start="63264" end="63285" title="The National Interest" label="The National Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890361" start="63353" end="63369" title="Stephen F. Cohen" label="Stephen F. Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739528" start="63370" end="63384" title="Jerry F. Hough" label="Jerry F. Hough"/>
<link wikidata="Q449064" start="63390" end="63403" title="Richard Pipes" label="Richard Pipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645059" start="63504" end="63534" title="Johns Hopkins University Press" label="Johns Hopkins University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058809" start="63718" end="63728" title="Cencrastus" label="Cencrastus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7147785" start="63772" end="63788" title="Patrick Vaughan" label="Vaughan, Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757649" start="63889" end="63902" title="Polish Review" label="Polish Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266946" start="64207" end="64217" title="PhD Thesis" label="PhD Thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503794" start="64220" end="64242" title="Northumbria University" label="Northumbria University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4715596" start="64246" end="64274" title="Aleksandra Ziolkowska-Boehm" label="Ziolkowska-Boehm, Aleksandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372254" start="64421" end="64435" title="Hamilton Books" label="Hamilton Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679686" start="64561" end="64579" title="Talk of the Nation" label="Talk of the Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="64587" end="64590" title="National Public Radio" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053614" start="64873" end="64921" title="Center for Strategic &amp;amp; International Studies" label="Center for Strategic &amp;amp; International Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="64974" end="64978" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58419" wikidata="Q223853" url="?curid=58419" title="EPA (disambiguation)">
<text>EPA most commonly refers to the United States Environmental Protection Agency.

EPA may also refer to:
== Environmental protection agencies/authorities ==
=== National government agencies/authorities ===

* Environmental Protection Administration (Taiwan)
* Environmental Protection Agency (Ireland)
* Environmental Protection Agency (Maldives)
* Environmental Protection Agency (Netherlands)
* Environmental Protection Agency (Sweden)
* Environmental Protection Authority (New Zealand)
* Ministry of Environmental Protection of the People&#x27;s Republic of China, formerly the State Environmental Protection Agency
* Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency
* Scottish Environment Protection Agency

=== State government agencies/authorities ===
==== United States ====

* California Environmental Protection Agency
* Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
* Ohio Environmental Protection Agency

==== Australia ====
* New South Wales Environment Protection Authority
* Environmental Protection Agency (Queensland)
* Environment Protection Authority (South Australia), see 
* Environment Protection Authority (Tasmania), an agency of the Department of Natural Resources and Environment
* Environment Protection Authority (Victoria)
* Environmental Protection Authority of Western Australia

==Law and treaties==
* Emergency Powers Act (disambiguation)
* Environmental Protection Act (disambiguation)
* Economic partnership agreement, a free trade scheme between two countries
* Economic Partnership Agreements, a free trade scheme involving the European Union with the Group of African, Caribbean and Pacific countries
* Enduring power of attorney in law
* Equal Pay Act (disambiguation)
* European patent attorney, a legal specialization for Representation before the European Patent Office
* &quot;Établissement public à caractère administratif&quot;, a public law legal person in France

==Organizations==
* &quot;Europäisches Patentamt&quot;, the German name of the European Patent Office in Munich, Germany
* European Pathway Association, a clinical research organization
* European Privacy Association, lobby group
* European Pressphoto Agency, a news photo agency
* Eastern Provincial Airways, a former Canadian airline
* Eastern Psychological Association
* Euronext Paris, a stock exchange
* &quot;Eesti Põllumajandusakadeemia&quot;, now Estonian University of Life Sciences
* EPA Larnaca FC, a former Cypriot football club
* El Palomar Airport, an airport in Argentina (IATA airport code: EPA)
* Eglise Protestante d&#x27;Algérie, the Protestant Church of Algeria

==Other uses==
* East Palo Alto, California, a city in California
* Eastern Provincial Airways, Canada
* Eicosapentaenoic acid, an omega-3 fatty acid
* &quot;Electrostatic Protected Areas&quot;, see Electrostatic discharge
* English Pale Ale, beer in the Dark Star Brewery range
* English phonetic alphabet
* English Phonotypic Alphabet
* EPA tractor, an emergency tractor
* European Practice Assessment, pan-European development for quality management in primary health care
* Class designation for Reading electric multiple units
* EPa, symbol for the unit of pressure, expopascal (1018 pascal)
* Eppa, a masculine given name
* Standard for Andalusian, known as the &quot;Êttandâ pal andalûh&quot; (&quot;ÊPA&quot;) in the Andalusian &quot;language&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q223853" start="0" end="3" title="EPA (disambiguation)" label="EPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="32" end="77" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q223853" start="80" end="83" title="EPA (disambiguation)" label="EPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381152" start="207" end="246" title="Environmental Protection Administration" label="Environmental Protection Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826618" start="258" end="299" title="Environmental Protection Agency (Ireland)" label="Environmental Protection Agency (Ireland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919823" start="302" end="344" title="Environmental Protection Agency (Maldives)" label="Environmental Protection Agency (Maldives)"/>
<link wikidata="Q117832799" start="347" end="392" title="Environmental Protection Agency (Netherlands)" label="Environmental Protection Agency (Netherlands)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976522" start="395" end="435" title="Environmental Protection Agency (Sweden)" label="Environmental Protection Agency (Sweden)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381154" start="438" end="486" title="Environmental Protection Authority (New Zealand)" label="Environmental Protection Authority (New Zealand)"/>
<link wikidata="Q50484273" start="489" end="564" title="Ministry of Environmental Protection of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Ministry of Environmental Protection of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7125572" start="619" end="659" title="Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency" label="Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437713" start="662" end="700" title="Scottish Environment Protection Agency" label="Scottish Environment Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020479" start="775" end="817" title="California Environmental Protection Agency" label="California Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5999462" start="820" end="860" title="Illinois Environmental Protection Agency" label="Illinois Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080814" start="863" end="899" title="Ohio Environmental Protection Agency" label="Ohio Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q28183426" start="923" end="971" title="New South Wales Environment Protection Authority" label="New South Wales Environment Protection Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381153" start="974" end="1018" title="Environmental Protection Agency (Queensland)" label="Environmental Protection Agency (Queensland)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1021" end="1071" title="Environment Protection Authority (South Australia)" label="Environment Protection Authority (South Australia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48798763" start="1080" end="1123" title="Environment Protection Authority (Tasmania)" label="Environment Protection Authority (Tasmania)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956288" start="1142" end="1189" title="Department of Natural Resources and Environment (Tasmania)" label="Department of Natural Resources and Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381030" start="1192" end="1235" title="Environment Protection Authority (Victoria)" label="Environment Protection Authority (Victoria)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381155" start="1238" end="1293" title="Environmental Protection Authority of Western Australia" label="Environmental Protection Authority of Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370633" start="1318" end="1355" title="Emergency Powers Act (disambiguation)" label="Emergency Powers Act (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381150" start="1358" end="1403" title="Environmental Protection Act (disambiguation)" label="Environmental Protection Act (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16945649" start="1406" end="1436" title="Economic partnership agreement" label="Economic partnership agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194845" start="1482" end="1513" title="Economic Partnership Agreements" label="Economic Partnership Agreements"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376681" start="1625" end="1651" title="Enduring power of attorney" label="Enduring power of attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q16775595" start="1661" end="1691" title="Equal Pay Act (disambiguation)" label="Equal Pay Act (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q228357" start="1747" end="1795" title="Representation before the European Patent Office" label="Representation before the European Patent Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244038" start="1804" end="1850" title="Établissement public à caractère administratif" label="Établissement public à caractère administratif"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132151" start="1974" end="1996" title="European Patent Office" label="European Patent Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412985" start="2018" end="2046" title="European Pathway Association" label="European Pathway Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019564" start="2083" end="2111" title="European Privacy Association" label="European Privacy Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q40233" start="2127" end="2153" title="European Pressphoto Agency" label="European Pressphoto Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046568" start="2177" end="2203" title="Eastern Provincial Airways" label="Eastern Provincial Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q60769382" start="2233" end="2266" title="Eastern Psychological Association" label="Eastern Psychological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385849" start="2269" end="2283" title="Euronext Paris" label="Euronext Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q655542" start="2350" end="2386" title="Estonian University of Life Sciences" label="Estonian University of Life Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317850" start="2389" end="2403" title="EPA Larnaca FC" label="EPA Larnaca FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351739" start="2438" end="2456" title="El Palomar Airport" label="El Palomar Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442711" start="2548" end="2576" title="Protestant Church of Algeria" label="Protestant Church of Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q988697" start="2595" end="2621" title="East Palo Alto, California" label="East Palo Alto, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046568" start="2646" end="2672" title="Eastern Provincial Airways" label="Eastern Provincial Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q409990" start="2683" end="2704" title="Eicosapentaenoic acid" label="Eicosapentaenoic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574961" start="2777" end="2800" title="Electrostatic discharge" label="Electrostatic discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223427" start="2833" end="2850" title="Dark Star Brewery" label="Dark Star Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249972" start="2859" end="2884" title="English phonetic alphabet" label="English phonetic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3612766" start="2887" end="2914" title="English Phonotypic Alphabet" label="English Phonotypic Alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2943" end="2950" title="Tractor#Automobile conversions and other homemade" label="tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413033" start="2953" end="2981" title="European Practice Assessment" label="European Practice Assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q28126702" start="3078" end="3109" title="Reading electric multiple units" label="Reading electric multiple units"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3150" end="3160" title="Pascal (unit)#Multiples and submultiples" label="expopascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q64711288" start="3177" end="3181" title="Eppa" label="Eppa"/>
<link wikidata="Q106457136" start="3208" end="3231" title="Standard for Andalusian" label="Standard for Andalusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q489811" start="3303" end="3313" title="Andalusian Spanish" label="Andalusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q113462754" start="3314" end="3334" title="Andalusian language movement" label="&amp;quot;language&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
