<doc id="57970" wikidata="Q194251" url="?curid=57970" title="Hawker Hurricane">
<text>The Hawker Hurricane is a British single-seat fighter aircraft of the 1930s–40s which was designed and predominantly built by Hawker Aircraft Ltd. for service with the Royal Air Force (RAF). It was overshadowed in the public consciousness by the Supermarine Spitfire during the Battle of Britain in 1940, but the Hurricane inflicted 60% of the losses sustained by the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; in the campaign, and fought in all the major theatres of the Second World War.

The Hurricane originated from discussions between RAF officials and aircraft designer Sir Sydney Camm about a proposed monoplane derivative of the Hawker Fury biplane in the early 1930s. Despite an institutional preference for biplanes and lack of interest by the Air Ministry, Hawker refined its monoplane proposal, incorporating several innovations which became critical to wartime fighter aircraft, including retractable landing gear and the more powerful Rolls-Royce Merlin engine. The Air Ministry ordered Hawker&#x27;s &quot;Interceptor Monoplane&quot; in late 1934, and the prototype Hurricane &quot;K5083&quot; performed its maiden flight on 6 November 1935.

The Hurricane went into production for the Air Ministry In June 1936 and entered squadron service in December 1937. Its manufacture and maintenance were eased by using conventional construction methods so that squadrons could perform many major repairs without external support. The plane was rapidly procured prior to the outbreak of the Second World War; in September 1939, the RAF had 18 Hurricane-equipped squadrons in service. It was relied upon to defend against German aircraft operated by the Luftwaffe, including dogfighting with Messerschmitt Bf 109s in multiple theatres of action.

The Hurricane was developed through several versions: bomber-interceptors, fighter-bombers, and ground support aircraft as well as fighters. Versions designed for the Royal Navy known as the Sea Hurricane had modifications including an arrestor hook near the tail, enabling operation from ships. Some were converted as catapult-launched convoy escorts. By the end of production in July 1944, 14,487 units had been completed in Britain and Canada, with others built in Belgium and Yugoslavia.

==Development==
===Background===
During the early 1930s, when Hawker Aircraft company developed the Hurricane, RAF Fighter Command had just 13 squadrons, equipped with the Hawker Fury, Hawker Demon, or the Bristol Bulldog, all biplanes with fixed-pitch wooden propellers and non-retractable undercarriages. At the time, there was an institutional reluctance towards change within the Air Staff; some senior figures were prejudiced against the adoption of monoplane fighter aircraft, while mid-level officers were typically more open-minded.

In 1934 the British Air Ministry issued Specification F.5/34 in response to demands within the Royal Air Force (RAF) for a new generation of fighter aircraft. Earlier, during 1933, British aircraft designer Sydney Camm had conducted discussions with Major John Buchanan of the Directorate of Technical Development on a monoplane based on the existing Fury. Mason attributes Camm&#x27;s discussions with figures within the RAF, such as Squadron Leader Ralph Sorley, as having provoked the specification and some of its details, such as the preference for armaments being installed within the wings instead of within the aircraft&#x27;s nose.

An outline of the &quot;Fury Monoplane&quot; armed with two guns in the wings and two in the nose and powered by the Goshawk engine was prepared and discussed with Roger Liptrot of the Air Ministry in December 1933. The design was reworked with the PV.12, following detailed work working drawings of the &quot;Interceptor Monoplane&quot; were begun in May 1934. The complete design was presented to the Air Ministry on 4 September.

Camm&#x27;s initial submission in response to the earlier fighter specification F.7/30 was a development of the Fury, the Hawker P.V.3, However, the P.V.3 was not among the proposals which the Air Ministry selected to be built as prototype to official contract. After the rejection of the P.V.3 proposal, Camm started work on a new design involving a cantilever monoplane arrangement with a fixed undercarriage, armed with four machine guns and powered by the Rolls-Royce Goshawk engine. The original 1934 armament specifications for what evolved into the Hurricane were for a similar armament fitment to the Gloster Gladiator: four machine guns; two in the wings and two in the fuselage, synchronised to fire through the propeller arc. By January 1934, the proposal&#x27;s detail drawings had been finished, but these failed to impress the Air Ministry enough for a prototype to be ordered.

Camm&#x27;s response to this rejection was to further develop the design, introducing a retractable undercarriage and replacing the unsatisfactory Goshawk engine with a new Rolls-Royce design, initially designated the &quot;PV-12&quot;, which went on to become famous as the Merlin. In August 1934, a one-tenth scale model of the design was produced and sent to the National Physical Laboratory at Teddington, where a series of wind tunnel tests confirmed the aerodynamics were satisfactory, and in September 1934 Camm again approached the Air Ministry. This time, the Ministry&#x27;s response was favourable, and a prototype of the &quot;Interceptor Monoplane&quot; was promptly ordered.

In July 1934, at a meeting chaired by Air Commodore Arthur Tedder (director of training), the Air Ministry Science Officer Captain F.W. &quot;Gunner&quot; Hill presented his calculation showing that future fighters must carry no fewer than eight machine guns, each capable of firing 1,000 rounds per minute./ Hill&#x27;s assistant in making his calculations was his 13-year-old daughter Hazel Hill. Of the decision to place eight machine guns in fighters, Claude Hilton Keith, at the time assistant director of armament research and development, said &quot;The battle was brisk and was carried into very high quarters before the implementing authority was given. My Branch had made out a sound case for 8-gun fighters and if this recommendation had not been accepted and we had been content with half-measures, it might indeed have gone ill for us during the late summer of 1940&quot;. Present at the meeting was Squadron Leader Ralph Sorley of the Air Ministry&#x27;s Operational Requirements branch, who played an important role in the decision. In November 1934, the Air Ministry issued Specification F.5/34 which called for new fighter aircraft to be armed with a total of eight guns. However, by this time, work had progressed too far to immediately modify the planned four-gun installation. By January 1935, a wooden mock-up had been finished, and although a number of suggestions for detail changes were made, construction of the prototype was approved, and a new specification (F.36/34) was written around the design. In July 1935, this specification was amended to include installation of eight guns.

The mock-up conference with Air Ministry staff was on 10 January 1935 at Kingston. The ministry order to purchase a prototype to the September proposal was placed on 21 February 1935. At the time the armament was two Vickers Mark V machine guns in the fuselage and one Browning machine gun in each wing. Work on stressed skin outer wings to replace the fabric covered ones began in July and the contract was altered in August to include another set of wings with eight guns in them; the guns were to be either Vickers or Brownings. These wings were delivered in June 1936.

===Prototype and trials===
By the end of August 1935, work on the airframe had been completed at Hawker&#x27;s Kingston upon Thames facility and the aircraft components were transported to Brooklands, Surrey, where Hawker had an assembly shed; the prototype was fully re-assembled on 23 October 1935. Ground testing and taxi trials took place over the following two weeks. On 6 November 1935 the prototype &quot;K5083&quot; took to the air for the first time at the hands of Hawker&#x27;s chief test pilot, Flight Lieutenant George Bulman. Bulman was assisted by two other pilots in subsequent flight testing; Philip Lucas flew some of the experimental test flights, while John Hindmarsh conducted the firm&#x27;s production flight trials. As completed, the prototype had been fitted with ballast to represent the aircraft&#x27;s armament prior to the acceptance of the final multi-gun wing armament.

By March 1936, the prototype had completed ten flying hours, covering all major portions of the flight envelope. Early testing had gone reasonably well, especially in light of the trial status of the Merlin engine, which had yet to achieve full flight certification at this time and thus severe restrictions had been imposed upon use of the engine. In early 1936, the prototype was transferred to RAF Martlesham Heath, Suffolk, to participate in initial service trials under the direction of Squadron Leader D.F. Anderson. Sammy Wroath, later to be the founding commandant of the Empire Test Pilots&#x27; School, was the RAF test pilot for the Hurricane: his report was favourable, stating that: &quot;The aircraft is simple and easy to fly and has no apparent vices&quot; and proceeded to praise its control response.
In the course of RAF trials, despite the problems with the Merlin engine, which had suffered numerous failures and necessitating several changes, enthusiastic reports were produced on the aircraft and its performance. The trials had proved the aircraft to possess a maximum level speed of at an altitude of , climb to in 5.7 minutes, and a stalling speed of (only marginally higher than the Gladiator biplane), the last achieved using its flaps.

In the course of further testing, it was found that the Hurricane had poor spin recovery characteristics, in which all rudder authority could be lost due to shielding of the rudder. Hawker&#x27;s response to the issue was to request that spinning tests be waived, but the Air Ministry refused the request; the situation was resolved by the Royal Aircraft Establishment (RAE), who established that the aerodynamic problem had been caused by a breakdown of the airflow over the lower fuselage, and could be cured by the addition of a small ventral fairing and extension of the bottom of the rudder. This discovery had come too late for the changes to be incorporated in the first production aircraft, but were introduced upon the 61st built and all subsequent aircraft.

In early 1936, the Hawker board of directors had decided, in the absence of official authorisation and at company expense, to proceed with the issue of the design drawings to the production design office and to start tooling-up for a production line capable of producing a batch of 1,000 Hurricanes.

===Production===

In June 1936 the Air Ministry placed its first order for 600 aircraft. On 26 June 1936 the Air Ministry approved the type name of &quot;Hurricane&quot; that had been proposed by Hawker, and an informal naming ceremony occurred the following month during an official visit by King Edward VIII to Martlesham Heath.

It was significantly cheaper to produce than the Supermarine Spitfire and took 10,300 man hours per airframe to produce, compared to 15,200 for the Spitfire, which had many parts formed by hand, with English wheels. As war was looking likely, and time was of the essence in providing the RAF with an effective fighter, the authorities expected there to be problems with the more advanced Spitfire, while the Hurricane made use of well proven manufacturing techniques. The service squadrons were also already experienced in maintaining aircraft structurally similar to the Hurricane. A fabric-covered wing was initially adopted in order to accelerate production, while a higher-performing stressed-skin metal wing was introduced in late 1939.

The first production Hurricane I first flew on 12 October 1937, flown by Flight Lieutenant Philip Lucas and powered by a Merlin II engine. While a contract for 600 Hurricanes was received on 2 June 1936, deliveries lagged by roughly six months due to a decision in December 1936 to replace the Merlin I with the improved Merlin II, which resulted in many detail alterations.
Merlin I production ended after 180 were built. This engine had been prioritised for the Fairey Battle light bomber and the Hawker Henley, a failed competitor to the Battle briefly adapted as a target tug which shared common elements with the Hurricane design. By the following December, the first four aircraft to enter service with the RAF had joined No. 111 Squadron, stationed at RAF Northolt. By February 1938, No. 111 Squadron had received 16 Hurricanes. Upon the outbreak of the Second World War, over 550 Hurricanes had been produced equipping 18 squadrons, with 3,500 more on order.

During 1940, Lord Beaverbrook, the Minister of Aircraft Production, established the Civilian Repair Organisation through which a number of manufacturers were to repair and overhaul battle-damaged aircraft including Hurricanes. Some of these were later sent to training units or to other air forces. Factories involved included the Austin Aero Company&#x27;s Cofton Hackett plant and David Rosenfield Ltd, based at Barton aerodrome near Manchester.

The Canadian Car and Foundry of Fort William, Ontario, Canada was a major Hurricane manufacturer, producing them from November 1938 after receiving their initial contract for 40 Hurricanes. The facility&#x27;s chief engineer, Elsie MacGill, became known as the &quot;Queen of the Hurricanes&quot;. The initiative was commercially driven, but was endorsed by the British government. Hawker recognised that a major conflict was inevitable after the Munich Crisis of 1938 and drew up preliminary plans to expand Hurricane production at a new factory in Canada. Under this plan, samples, pattern aircraft, and design documents stored on microfilm were shipped to Canada. In 1938/39 the RCAF ordered 24 Hurricanes to equip one fighter squadron, 20 of which were delivered, and two were supplied to Canadian Car and Foundry as pattern aircraft but one probably did not arrive, while the other was returned to Britain in 1940. The first Hurricane built at Canadian Car and Foundry was completed in February 1940. Canadian-built Hurricanes shipped to Britain participated in the Battle of Britain.

Overall, some 14,487 Hurricanes and Sea Hurricanes were produced in England and Canada. The majority of Hurricanes, 9,986 were built by Hawker (who produced the type at Brooklands from December 1937 to October 1942 and Langley from October 1939 to July 1944), while Hawker&#x27;s sister company, the Gloster Aircraft Company, constructed 2,750. The Austin Aero Company completed 300 Hurricanes. Canada Car and Foundry produced 1,451 Hurricanes. However those shipped to Britain were often incomplete airframes and about 80% were delivered without an engine.

In 1939, production of 100 Hurricanes was initiated in Yugoslavia by Zmaj and Rogožarski. Of these, 20 were built by Zmaj by April 1941. Recognising that the supply of British-made Merlin engines might not be guaranteed, it was decided to fit one of the Yugoslavian Hurricanes with a Daimler-Benz DB 601 engine instead. This aircraft was flown in 1941. In 1938, a contract for 80 Hurricanes was placed with Fairey&#x27;s Belgian subsidiary Avions Fairey SA for the Belgian Air Force, and it was intended to arm these aircraft with four Browning machine guns. Three were built and two flown with this armament by the time of the German invasion of Belgium in May 1940, with at least 12 more constructed by Avions Fairey armed with the conventional eight rifle calibre machine gun armament.

==Design==
The Hawker Hurricane is a low-wing cantilever monoplane with retractable undercarriage and an enclosed cockpit. The primary structure of the fuselage was a Warren truss box-girder with high-tensile steel longerons and duralumin cross-bracing, which were mechanically fastened rather than being welded. Over this, a secondary structure composed of wooden formers and stringers covered with doped linen gave the fuselage a rounded section. The majority of the external surfaces were linen, except for a section between the cockpit and the engine cowling which used lightweight metal panels instead. Camm had decided to use traditional Hawker construction techniques instead of more advanced options, such as a stressed-skin metal construction. This form of construction resembled that of earlier biplanes and was already considered to be somewhat outdated when the Hurricane was introduced to service . The Hurricane was initially armed with an arrangement of eight remotely-operated wing-mounted Browning machine guns, intended for conducting rapid engagements. The Hurricane was typically equipped for flying under both day and night conditions, being provided with navigation lights, Harley landing lights, complete blind-flying equipment, and two-way radios. Upon its entry to service, much of the performance data was intentionally concealed from the general public, but it was known that the type possessed a speed range of 6:1. A simple steel tube structure supported the engine; detachable cowling panels allowed access to most of the engine&#x27;s areas for maintenance. Installed underneath the fuselage, the liquid-cooled radiator has a rectangular opening to its aft; this is covered by a hinged flap, allowing the pilot to control the cooling level. An atypical feature for the era was the use of Tungum alloy pipes throughout the cooling system.
Initially, the structure of the Hurricane&#x27;s cantilever wing consisted of two steel spars, which possessed considerable strength and stiffness. The wing was described by &quot;Flight&quot; as relatively straightforward to manufacture, employing simple vertical jigs to attach the two spars, after which the wing ribs were installed using horizontal bolts, forming separate units between the front and rear spars. Hydraulically-actuated split trailing edge flaps were fitted to the inner end of the wings. This wing was predominantly fabric-covered, like the fuselage, although some lightweight metal sheets were used on the inner wing and its leading edge. The majority of the flight control surfaces, such as the Frise-type ailerons, also had fabric coverings.

An all-metal, stressed-skin wing of duraluminium (a DERD specification similar to AA2024) was introduced in April 1939 and was used for all of the later marks. &quot;The metal skinned wings allowed a diving speed that was higher than the fabric-covered ones. They were very different in construction but were interchangeable with the fabric-covered wings; one trials Hurricane, &quot;L1877&quot;, was even flown with a fabric-covered port wing and metal-covered starboard wing. The great advantage of the metal-covered wings over the fabric ones was that the metal ones could carry far greater stress loads without needing as much structure.&quot; Several fabric-wing Hurricanes were still in service during the Battle of Britain, although a good number had had their wings replaced during servicing or after repair. Changing the wings required only three hours work per aircraft.

The Hurricane had an inward-retracting undercarriage, the main undercarriage units being housed in recesses in the wing. Hinged telescopic Vickers-built legs are attached to the bottom boom of the wing&#x27;s forward spar, but with an angled pivot to allow the strut to be perpendicular to the thrust line when extended and angle rearwards when retracted to clear the forward spar. A hydraulic jack actuated the undercarriage. Two separate hydraulic systems, one being power-operated and the other hand-operated, are present for the deployment and retraction of the undercarriage; in the event of both failing, pilots can release the retaining catches holding the undercarriage in place, deploying the wheels to the &#x27;down&#x27; position using weight alone. A wide wheel-track was used to allow for considerable stability during ground movements and to enable tight turns to be performed.

The prototype and early production Hurricanes were fitted with a Watts two-bladed fixed-pitch wooden propeller. &quot;Flight&quot; commented of this arrangement: &quot;Many have expressed surprise that the Hurricane is not fitted with variable-pitch airscrews&quot;. The original two-bladed propeller was found to be inefficient at low airspeeds and the aircraft required a long ground run to get airborne, which caused concern at Fighter Command. Accordingly, trials with a de Havilland variable-pitch propeller demonstrated a reduction in the Hurricane&#x27;s take-off run from . Deliveries of these began in April 1939: this was later replaced by the hydraulically operated constant-speed Rotol propeller, which came into service in time for the Battle of Britain.
Camm&#x27;s priority was to provide the pilot with good all-round visibility. To this end, the cockpit was mounted reasonably high in the fuselage, creating a distinctive &quot;hump-backed&quot; silhouette. Pilot access to the cockpit was aided by a retractable &quot;stirrup&quot; mounted below the trailing edge of the port wing. This was linked to a spring-loaded hinged flap which covered a handhold on the fuselage, just behind the cockpit. When the flap was shut, the footstep retracted into the fuselage. In addition, both wing roots were coated with strips of non-slip material.

An advantage of the steel-tube structure was that cannon shells could pass right through the wood and fabric covering without exploding. Even if one of the steel tubes were damaged, the repair work required was relatively simple and could be done by ground crew at the airfield. Damage to a stressed skin structure, as used by the Spitfire, required more specialised equipment to repair. The old-fashioned structure also permitted the assembly of Hurricanes with relatively basic equipment under field conditions. Crated Hurricanes were assembled at Takoradi in West Africa and flown across the Sahara to the Middle East theatre and, to save space, some Royal Navy aircraft carriers carried their reserve Sea Hurricanes dismantled into their major assemblies, which were slung up on the hangar bulkheads and deckhead for reassembly when needed.

In contrast, the contemporary Spitfire used all-metal monocoque construction and was thus both lighter and stronger, though less tolerant of bullet damage. With its ease of maintenance, widely set landing gear and benign flying characteristics, the Hurricane remained in use in theatres of operations where reliability, easy handling and a stable gun platform were more important than performance, typically in roles like ground attack. One of the design requirements of the original specification was that both the Hurricane and the Spitfire were also to be used as night fighters. The Hurricane proved to be a relatively simple aircraft to fly at night, and shot down several German aircraft on night raids. From early 1941 the Hurricane was also used as an &quot;intruder&quot; aircraft, patrolling German airfields in France at night to catch bombers taking off or landing.

==Operational history==
===Pre-war===

By the middle of 1938, the first 50 Hurricanes had reached squadrons and, at that time, it had been assessed that the rate of production was slightly greater than the RAF&#x27;s capacity to introduce the new aircraft, which had already been accelerated. Accordingly, the British government gave Hawker the clearance to sell excess aircraft to nations that were likely to oppose German expansion. As a result, there were some modest export sales made to other countries; at the earliest opportunity, a former RAF Hurricane I was dispatched to Yugoslavia for evaluation purposes. Shortly after this evaluation, an order for 24 Hurricane Mk.Is for the Royal Yugoslav Air Force was received; this was followed by the purchase of a production licence for the Hurricane by Yugoslavia. Yugoslavian Hurricanes saw action against the Luftwaffe during the invasion of Yugoslavia in 1941 by the Axis powers.

To the end of August 1939, 14 Hurricanes had been sent to Poland (SS &quot;Lassel&quot; left Liverpool on 30 August 1939 heading to Constanza in Romania, these planes never reached Poland and ultimately were sold to Turkey), seven ex-RAF Hurricanes had been sent to South Africa, while another 13 ex-RAF Hurricanes were sent to Turkey, 13 Hurricanes had been built for Belgium, 21 for Canada including one as a pattern for Canadian Car and Foundry, one for Iran, one for Poland, three for Romania and 12 for Yugoslavia. All the built for export aircraft were taken from the RAF order and so all originally had an RAF serial. Further exports were done in the final four months of 1939 and early 1940.

Hurricane production was increased as part of a plan to create a reserve of attrition aircraft as well as re-equip existing squadrons and newly formed ones such as those of the Auxiliary Air Force. Expansion scheme E included a target of 500 fighters of all types by the start of 1938. By the time of the Munich Crisis, there were only two fully operational RAF squadrons of the planned 12 to be equipped with Hurricanes. By the time of the German invasion of Poland there were 16 operational Hurricane squadrons as well as a further two more that were in the process of converting.

===Phoney War===
On 24 August 1939, the British government gave orders partially to mobilise and No. 1 Group RAF (Air Vice-Marshal Patrick Playfair) sent its 10 Fairey Battle day-bomber squadrons to France, according to plans established by the British and French earlier in the year. The group was the first echelon of the RAF Advanced Air Striking Force (AASF) and flew from bases at Abingdon, Harwell, Benson, Boscombe Down and Bicester. The group HQ became the AASF when the order to move to France was received and the home station HQs, 71, 72 74–76 Wings. 

In response to a request from the French government for the provision of 10 fighter squadrons to provide air support, Air Chief Marshal Sir Hugh Dowding, Commander-in-Chief of RAF Fighter Command, insisted that this number would deplete British defences severely, and so initially only four squadrons of Hurricanes, 1, 73, 85 and 87, were relocated to France, keeping Spitfires back for &quot;Home&quot; defence. The first to arrive was 73 Squadron on 10 September 1939, followed shortly by the other three. A little later, 607 and 615 Squadrons joined them.

Owing to the Hurricane&#x27;s rugged construction, ease of maintenance and repair in the field, and its docile landing and take-off characteristics, coupled with a wide-track undercarriage, it was selected to go to France as the principal RAF fighter. Two Hurricane squadrons, No. 1 and No. 73, formed 67 Wing of the Advanced Air Striking Force (No. 1 to Berry-au-Bac, north-west of Paris; No. 73 to Rouvres) while two more, No. 85 and No. 87, formed 60 Wing of the Air Component, BEF.

While the two squadrons of No. 60 Wing had their Hurricanes painted in the standard colour scheme and markings of Home-based fighters, those of No. 67 Wing differed considerably. It was probably because No. 1 and No. 73 Squadrons were operating in close proximity to French fighter squadrons that these units painted red, white, and blue stripes over the entire height of the rudders on their Hurricanes in a similar manner to the standard French AF National markings.

As the French squadrons were not familiar with the British use of code letters, and there could have been cause for error in aircraft identification, both Hurricane squadrons removed their squadron identification letters, leaving the grey-painted aircraft letter aft of the fuselage roundel. The decision to adopt these special changes in markings seems to have been made at 67 Group HQ (the immediate command authority for the two squadrons involved) to suit local circumstances.
The Hurricane had its first combat action on 21 October 1939, at the start of the Phoney War. That day, &quot;A&quot; Flight of 46 Squadron took off from North Coates satellite airfield, on the Lincolnshire coast, and was directed to intercept a formation of nine Heinkel He 115B floatplanes from 1/KüFlGr 906, searching for ships to attack in the North Sea. The Heinkels, which were flying at sea level in an attempt to avoid fighter attacks, had already been attacked and damaged by two Spitfires from 72 Squadron when six Hurricanes intercepted them. The Hurricanes shot down four of the enemy in rapid succession, 46 Squadron claiming five and the Spitfire pilots two.

After his first flight in October 1939, Hurricane pilot Roland Beamont subsequently flew operationally with 87 Squadron, claiming three enemy aircraft during the French campaign, and delivered great praise for his aircraft&#x27;s performance:


While the opening months of the war were characterised by little air activity in general, there were sporadic engagements and aerial skirmishes between the two sides. On 30 October 1939 Hurricanes saw action over France. That day, Pilot Officer P. W. O. &quot;Boy&quot; Mould of 1 Squadron, flying Hurricane L1842, shot down a Dornier Do 17P from 2(F)/123. The German aircraft, sent to photograph Allied airfields close to the border, fell in flames about west of Toul. Mould was the first RAF pilot to down an enemy aircraft on the European continent in the Second World War. According to Mason, the experiences gained in these early engagements proved invaluable in developing tactics which became tried and tested, and rapidly spread throughout Fighter Command.

On 6 November 1939, Pilot Officer Peter Ayerst from 73 Squadron was the first to clash with a Messerschmitt Bf 109. After the dogfight, he came back with five holes in his fuselage. Flying Officer Cobber Kain, a New Zealander, was responsible for 73 Squadron&#x27;s first victory, on 8 November 1939 while stationed at Rouvres. He went on to become one of the RAF&#x27;s first fighter aces of the war, being credited with 16 kills. On 22 December, the Hurricanes in France suffered their first losses: three, while trying to intercept an unidentified aircraft between Metz and Thionville, were jumped by four Bf 109Es from III./JG 53, with their &quot;Gruppenkommandeur&quot;, Spanish Civil War ace Captain Werner Mölders, in the lead. Mölders and &quot;Leutnant&quot; Hans von Hahn shot down the Hurricanes of Sergeant R. M. Perry and J. Winn for no loss.

===Battle of France===

In May 1940, Nos. 3, 79 and 504 Squadrons reinforced the earlier units as Germany&#x27;s &quot;Blitzkrieg&quot; gathered momentum. On 10 May, the first day of the Battle of France, Flight Lieutenant R. E. Lovett and Flying Officer &quot;Fanny&quot; Orton, of 73 Squadron, were the first RAF pilots to engage enemy aircraft in the campaign. They attacked one of three Dornier Do 17s from &quot;4. Staffel/KG 2&quot; that were flying over their airfield at Rouvres-en-Woevre. The Dornier went away unscathed, while Orton was hit by defensive fire and had to force land. On the same day the Hurricane squadrons claimed 42 German aircraft, none of them fighters, shot down during 208 sorties; seven Hurricanes were lost but no pilots were killed.

On 12 May several Hurricanes units were committed to escort bombers. That morning, five Fairey Battle volunteer crews from 12 Squadron took off from Amifontaine base to bomb Vroenhoven and Veldwezelt bridges on the Meuse, at Maastricht. The escort consisted of eight Hurricanes of 1 Squadron, with Squadron Leader P. J. H. &quot;Bull&quot; Halahan in the lead. When the formation approached Maastricht, it was bounced by 16 Bf 109Es from &quot;2./JG 27&quot;. Two Battles and two Hurricanes (including Halahan&#x27;s) were shot down, two more Battles were brought down by flak and the fifth bomber had to crash-land. The 1 Squadron pilots claimed four Messerschmitts and two Heinkel He 112s, while the Luftwaffe actually lost only one Bf 109.

On 13 May 1940, a further 32 Hurricanes arrived. All 10 requested Hurricane squadrons were then operating from French soil and felt the full force of the Nazi offensive. The following day, Hurricanes suffered heavy losses: 27 being shot down, 22 by Messerschmitts, with 15 pilots killed (another died some days later), including Squadron Leader J. B. Parnall (504 Squadron), and the Australian ace Flying Officer Les Clisby (1 Squadron). On the same day, 3 Squadron claimed 17 German aircraft shot down, 85 and 87 Squadrons together claimed four victories, while 607 Squadron claimed nine. During the following three days (15–17 May), no fewer than 51 Hurricanes were lost, in combat or in accidents.
By 17 May, the end of the first week of fighting, only three of the squadrons were near operational strength, but the Hurricanes had managed to destroy nearly twice as many German aircraft. On 18 May 1940, air combat continued from dawn to dusk; Hurricane pilots claimed 57 German aircraft and 20 probables (Luftwaffe records show 39 aircraft lost). The following day, 1 and 73 Squadrons claimed 11 German aircraft (three by &quot;Cobber&quot; Kain and three by Paul Richey). On these two days Hurricanes suffered heavier losses, with 68 Hurricanes shot down or forced to crash-land due to combat damage. Fifteen pilots were killed, eight were taken prisoner and 11 injured. Two-thirds of the Hurricanes had been shot down by Messerschmitt Bf 109s and Bf 110s.

In the afternoon of 20 May 1940, the Hurricane units based in northern France were ordered to abandon their bases on the continent and return to Great Britain. On the same day, &quot;Bull&quot; Halahan requested the repatriation of the pilots serving in 1 Squadron. During the previous 10 days, the unit had been the most successful of the campaign; it had claimed 63 victories for the loss of five pilots: two killed, one taken prisoner and two hospitalised. 1 Squadron was awarded 10 DFCs and three DFMs during the &quot;Blitzkrieg&quot;. On the evening of 21 May, the only Hurricanes still operational were those of the AASF that had been moved to bases around Troyes.

During the 11 days of fighting in France and over Dunkirk from 10 to 21 May, Hurricane pilots claimed 499 kills and 123 probables. Contemporary German records, examined postwar, attribute 299 Luftwaffe aircraft destroyed and 65 seriously damaged by RAF fighters. The last 66 Hurricanes of the 452 engaged during the Battle of France left France on 21 June; 178 were abandoned at several airfields, notably Merville, Abbeville, and Lille/Seclin.

===Operation Dynamo===
During Operation Dynamo (the evacuation from Dunkirk of British, French and Belgian troops cut off by the German army during the Battle of Dunkirk), the Hawker Hurricanes operated from British bases. Between 26 May and 3 June 1940, the 14 Hurricane units involved were credited with 108 air victories. A total of 27 Hurricane pilots became aces during Operation Dynamo, led by Canadian Pilot Officer W. L. Willie McKnight (10 victories) and Pilot Officer Percival Stanley Turner (seven victories), who served in No. 242 Squadron, consisting mostly of Canadian personnel. Losses were 22 pilots killed and three captured.

On 27 May 1940, in one of the final mass encounters of the &quot;Blitzkrieg&quot;, 13 Hurricanes from 501 Squadron intercepted 24 Heinkel He 111s escorted by 20 Bf 110s; during the ensuing battle, 11 Heinkels were claimed as &quot;kills&quot; and others damaged, with little damage to the Hurricanes. On 7 June 1940, &quot;Cobber&quot; Kain, the first RAF ace of the war, got word that he was to return to England for &quot;rest leave&quot; at an Operational Training Unit. On leaving his airfield, he put on an impromptu aerobatic display and was killed when his Hurricane crashed after completing a loop and attempting some low altitude &quot;flick&quot; rolls.

Initial engagements with the Luftwaffe had showed the Hurricane to be a tight-turning and steady platform, but the Watts two-bladed propeller was clearly unsuitable. At least one pilot complained of how a Heinkel 111 was able to pull away from him in a chase, yet by this time the Heinkel was obsolete. At the start of the war, the engine ran on standard 87 octane aviation spirit. From early 1940, increasing quantities of 100 octane fuel imported from the U.S. became available. In February 1940, Hurricanes with the Merlin II and III engines began to receive modifications to allow for an additional of supercharger boost for five minutes (although there are accounts of its use for 30 minutes continuously).

The extra supercharger boost, which increased engine output by nearly , gave the Hurricane an approximate increase in speed of , under altitude and greatly increased the aircraft&#x27;s climb rate. &quot;Overboost&quot; or &quot;pulling the plug&quot;, a form of war emergency power as it was called in later Second World War aircraft, was an important wartime modification that allowed the Hurricane to be more competitive against the Bf 109E and to increase its margin of superiority over the Bf 110C, especially at low altitude. With the + &quot;emergency boost&quot;, the Merlin III was able to generate at .

Flight Lieutenant Ian Gleed of 87 Squadron wrote about the effect of using the extra boost on the Hurricane while chasing a Bf 109 at low altitude on 19 May 1940: &quot;Damn! We&#x27;re flat out as it is. Here goes with the tit. A jerk – boost&#x27;s shot up to 12 pounds; speed&#x27;s increased by 30 mph. I&#x27;m gaining ground – 700, 600, 500 yards. Give him a burst. No, hold your fire you fool! He hasn&#x27;t seen you yet...&quot; Gleed ran out of ammunition before he could shoot the 109 down although he left it heavily damaged and flying at about .

Hurricanes equipped with Rotol constant-speed propellers were delivered to RAF squadrons in May 1940, with deliveries continuing throughout the Battle of Britain. According to aviation author David Donald, the Rotol propeller had the effect of transforming the Hurricane&#x27;s performance from &quot;disappointing&quot; to &quot;acceptable mediocrity&quot;; modified aircraft were reportedly much sought after among squadrons which had also been equipped with Hurricanes that were fitted with the older de Havilland two-position propeller.

===Battle of Britain===

At the end of June 1940, following the fall of France, 31 of Fighter Command&#x27;s 61 fighter squadrons were equipped with Hurricanes. The Battle of Britain officially lasted from 10 July until 31 October 1940, but the heaviest fighting took place between 8 August and 21 September. Both the Supermarine Spitfire and the Hurricane are renowned for their part in having defended Britain against the Luftwaffe; generally, the Spitfires intercepted the German fighters, leaving Hurricanes to concentrate on the bombers, and, despite the undoubted abilities of the &quot;thoroughbred&quot; Spitfire, it was the &quot;workhorse&quot; Hurricane that scored the higher number of RAF victories during this period, accounting for 55% of the 2,739 German losses, according to Fighter Command, compared with 42% by Spitfires. On 8 August 1940, Hurricanes of No. 145 Squadron were recorded as having fired the first shots of the Battle of Britain. The highest scoring Hurricane squadron during the Battle of Britain was the No. 303 Polish Fighter Squadron. This squadron also had the distinction of having the highest ratio of enemy aircraft destroyed to own losses suffered.

As a fighter, the Hurricane had some drawbacks. It was slightly slower than both the Spitfire I and II and the Messerschmitt Bf 109E, and the thicker wing profiles compromised acceleration; but it could out-turn both of them. In spite of its performance deficiencies against the Bf 109, the Hurricane was still capable of destroying the German fighter, especially at lower altitudes. The standard tactic of the 109s was to attempt to climb higher than the RAF fighters and &quot;bounce&quot; them in a dive; the Hurricanes could evade such tactics by turning into the attack or going into a &quot;corkscrew dive&quot;, which the 109s, with their lower rate of roll, found hard to counter. If a 109 was caught in a dogfight, the Hurricane was just as capable of out-turning the 109 as the Spitfire. In a stern chase, the 109 could evade the Hurricane.

In September 1940, the more powerful Mk.IIa series 1 Hurricanes started entering service, although only in small numbers. This version was capable of a maximum speed of . The Hurricane was a steady gun platform and had demonstrated its ruggedness as several were badly damaged yet returned to base. The Hurricane&#x27;s construction made it dangerous if it caught fire; the wood frames and fabric covering of the rear fuselage allowed fire to spread through the rear fuselage structure easily. The gravity fuel tank in the forward fuselage sat right in front of the instrument panel, without any form of protection for the pilot. Many Hurricane pilots were seriously burned as a consequence of a jet of flame which could burn through the instrument panel. This became of such concern to Hugh Dowding that he had Hawker retrofit the fuselage tanks of the Hurricanes with Linatex, a self-expanding rubber coating. If the tank happened to be punctured by a bullet, the Linatex coating expanded when soaked with petrol and sealed it. However, some Hurricane pilots felt that the fuel tanks in the wings, although they were also protected with a layer of Linatex, were vulnerable from behind, and it was thought that those, and not the fuselage tank, were the main fire risk.
From 10 July to 11 August 1940, RAF fighters fired at 114 German bombers and shot down 80, a destruction ratio of 70%. Against the Bf 109, the RAF fighters attacked 70 and shot down 54 of these, a ratio of 77%. It has been suggested that part of the success of the British fighters was possibly due to the use of the de Wilde incendiary round. The Hurricane with the highest number of kills during the Battle of Britain was P3308, a Mk.I, flown between 15 August and 7 October 1940 by RAF (auxiliary) pilot Archie McKellar of 605 Squadron. He is credited with 21 kills, 19 of those in a Hurricane during the Battle of Britain. On 7 October he is credited with shooting down five Bf 109s, making him one of only two RAF pilots (the other being Brian Carbury of New Zealand) to become an &quot;ace in a day&quot; during the Battle of Britain. During his brief fighting career, McKellar earned the DSO, DFC &amp; Bar. McKellar has remained in relative obscurity in Battle of Britain history, as he was killed in action one day after the date set by the War Ministry (after the war) as the official end date for the Battle of Britain. He died on 1 November 1940 while taking on a superior number of Bf 109s. As in the Spitfire, the Merlin engine suffered from negative-G cut-out, a problem not cured until the introduction of Miss Shilling&#x27;s orifice in early 1941.
The only Battle of Britain Victoria Cross, and the only one awarded to a member of Fighter Command during the war, was awarded to Flight Lieutenant James Brindley Nicolson of 249 Squadron as a result of an action on 16 August 1940 when his section of three Hurricanes was &quot;bounced&quot; from above by Bf 110 fighters. All three were hit simultaneously. Nicolson was badly wounded, and his Hurricane was damaged and engulfed in flames. While attempting to leave the cockpit, Nicolson noticed that one of the Bf 110s had overshot his aircraft. He returned to the cockpit, which by now was in an inferno, engaged the enemy, and may have shot down the Bf 110. Afterward, he parachuted to safety, although he was mistakenly shot at by the Home Guard after landing.

===Night fighters and intruders===

Following the Battle of Britain the Hurricane continued to give service; through the Blitz of 1941 it was the principal single-seat night fighter in Fighter Command. F/Lt. Richard Stevens claimed 14 Luftwaffe bombers flying Hurricanes in 1941. In 1942 the cannon-armed Mk.IIc performed further afield, as a night intruder over occupied Europe. F/Lt. Karel Kuttelwascher of 1 Squadron proved the top scorer, with 15 Luftwaffe bombers claimed shot down. The year 1942 also saw the manufacture of 12 Hurricane II C(NF) night fighters, equipped with pilot-operated air interception Mark VI radar. After a brief operational deployment with No. 245 and No. 247 Squadron RAF during which these aircraft proved too slow for operations in Europe, the aircraft were sent to India to serve with No. 176 Squadron RAF in the defence of Calcutta. They were withdrawn from service at the end of December 1943.

===North Africa===

A Hurricane Mk.I undertook tropical trials in Sudan in mid 1939, and a number were hastily tropicalised following Italy&#x27;s entry into the war in June 1940. These aircraft were initially ferried through France and Malta by air to 80 Squadron in Egypt, replacing Gladiator biplanes. The Hurricane claimed its first kill in the Mediterranean on 19 June 1940, when F/O P.G. Wykeham-Barnes reported shooting down two Fiat CR.42 Falcos.

Hurricanes served with several British Commonwealth squadrons in the Desert Air Force. They suffered heavy losses over North Africa after the arrival of Bf 109E and F-variants and were progressively replaced in the air superiority role from June 1941 by Curtiss Tomahawks/Kittyhawks. However, fighter-bomber variants (&quot;Hurribombers&quot;) retained an edge in the ground attack role, due to their impressive armament of four cannon and a bomb load.

From November 1941, beginning in the Libyan desert, it had to face a new formidable opponent: the new Regia Aeronautica Macchi C.202 &quot;Folgore&quot;. The Italian aircraft proved superior to the Hawker fighter and, thanks to its excellent agility and a new, more powerful inline engine licence-built by Alfa Romeo, could outperform it in a dogfight.

During and following the five-day Second Battle of El Alamein artillery barrage that commenced on the night of 23 October 1942, six squadrons of Hurricanes, including the cannon-armed Hurricane Mk.IID version, claimed to have destroyed 39 tanks, 212 lorries and armoured troop-carriers, 26 bowsers, 42 guns, 200 various other vehicles and four small fuel and ammunition dumps, flying 842 sorties with the loss of 11 pilots. Whilst performing in a ground support role, Hurricanes based at RAF Castel Benito, Tripoli, knocked out six tanks, 13 armoured vehicles, 10 lorries, five half-tracks, a gun and trailer, and a wireless van on 10 March 1943, with no losses to themselves.

In the spring of 1943, during the German &quot;Ochsenkopf&quot; offensive in Tunisia, Hurricane IIDs conducted many sorties after fog had lifted, helping to blunt the final attack at Hunts Gap.

===Defence of Malta===
The Hurricane played a significant role in the defence of Malta. When Italy entered the war on 10 June 1940, Malta&#x27;s air defence rested on Gloster Gladiators, which managed to hold out against vastly superior numbers of the Italian air force during the following 17 days. Initially there were six Gladiators, though after a while, only three were able to be flown at any one time because of a shortage of spare parts, and for whatever reason (five different explanations have been given), they became known as &quot;Faith, Hope and Charity&quot;. Four Hurricanes joined them at the end of June, and together they faced attacks throughout July from the 200 enemy aircraft based in Sicily, with the loss of one Gladiator and one Hurricane. Further reinforcements arrived on 2 August in the form of 12 more Hurricanes and two Blackburn Skuas.

The increasing number of British aircraft on the island, at last, prompted the Italians to employ German Junkers Ju 87 dive bombers to try to destroy the airfields. Finally, in an attempt to overcome the stiff resistance put up by these few aircraft, the Luftwaffe took up base on the Sicilian airfields, only to find that Malta was not an easy target. After numerous attacks on the island over the following months, and the arrival of an extra 23 Hurricanes at the end of April 1941, and a further delivery a month later, the Luftwaffe left Sicily for the Russian Front in June that year.

As Malta was situated on the increasingly important sea supply route for the North African campaign, the Luftwaffe returned with a vengeance for a second assault on the island at the beginning of 1942. It was not until March, when the onslaught was at its height, that 15 Spitfires arrived from the carrier to bolster the defence, but many of the new aircraft were lost on the ground and the Hurricane bore the brunt of the early fighting until further reinforcements arrived.

===Air defence in the Soviet Union===

The Hawker Hurricane was the first Allied Lend-Lease aircraft to be delivered to the Soviet Union with a total of 2,952 Hurricanes eventually delivered, becoming the most numerous British aircraft in Soviet service. Many Soviet pilots were disappointed by the Hawker fighter, regarding it as inferior to both German and Soviet aircraft.
In July 2023, a crate of 8 Hurricanes was found buried in Ukraine. These had been supplied by the US but under the terms of Lease Lend, the Russians did not have to pay for equipment which didn&#x27;t survive the war. 

During 1941, Mk.II Hurricanes played an important air defence role when the Soviet Union found itself under threat from the approaching German Army, who were advancing across a broad front stretching from Leningrad and Moscow to the oil fields in the south. Britain&#x27;s decision to aid the Soviets meant sending supplies by sea to the far northern ports, and as the convoys needed to sail within range of enemy air attack from the Luftwaffe based in neighbouring Finland, it was decided to deliver a number of Hurricane Mk.IIBs, flying with Nos. 81 and 134 Squadrons of No. 151 Wing RAF, to provide protection. Twenty-four were transported on the carrier &quot;Argus&quot;, arriving just off Murmansk on 28 August 1941, and another 15 crated aircraft on board merchant vessels. In addition to their convoy protection duties, the aircraft also acted as escorts to Soviet bombers.
Enemy attention to the area declined in October, at which point the RAF pilots trained their Soviet counterparts to operate the Hurricanes themselves. By the end of the year, the RAF&#x27;s direct role in the region had ended, but the aircraft themselves remained behind and became the first of thousands of Allied aircraft that were accepted by the Soviet Union. Although Soviet pilots were not universally enthusiastic about the Hurricane, twice Hero of the Soviet Union Lt. Col. Boris Safonov &quot;loved the Hurricane&quot;, and RAF Hurricane Mk.IIB fighters operating from Soviet soil in defence of Murmansk, destroyed 15 Luftwaffe aircraft for only one loss in combat. However, in some Soviet war memoirs, the Hurricane has been described in very unflattering terms.

The &quot;Soviet&quot; IIB Hurricane as a multi-role fighter-bomber had quite a few drawbacks. First of all, it was slower than its main opponent, the Bf 109E interceptor, at low and medium height, and had a slower rate of climb. The Messerschmitt could outdive the Hurricane because of the thicker wing profile of the British fighter. But the main source of complaints was the Hurricane&#x27;s armament. On occasion, the eight or 12 rifle-calibre machine guns did not damage the sturdy and heavily armoured German aircraft; consequently, Soviet ground crews started to remove the Brownings. Retaining only four or six of the 12 machine guns, two Berezin UBs or two or even four ShVAK cannons were substituted, but overall performance deteriorated as a result.

The British archives file AIR 22/310 reports 218 Mk.IIA sent to the Soviet Union or handed over, 22 lost before arrival, 1,884 Mk.IIB sent or handed over, 278 lost before arrival, 1,182 Mk.IIC sent or handed over, 46 lost before arrival, 117 rejected, 60 IID sent or handed over, 14 rejected, 30 Mk.IV handed over, total 3,374 Hurricanes sent or handed over, 346 lost before delivery, 2,897 accepted by the Soviets, 131 rejected.

===South-East Asia===
Following the outbreak of the war with Japan, 51 Hurricane Mk.IIBs en route to Iraq were diverted to Singapore; 10 were in crates, the others partially disassembled, these and the 24 pilots (many of whom were veterans of the Battle of Britain), who had been transferred to the theatre, formed the nucleus of five squadrons. They arrived on 13 January 1942, by which time the Allied fighter squadrons in Singapore, flying Brewster Buffalos, had been overwhelmed during the Malayan campaign. The fighters of the Imperial Japanese Army Air Force, especially the Nakajima Ki-43 Oscar, had been underestimated in its capability, numbers and the strategy of its commanders.

Thanks to the efforts of No. 151 Maintenance Unit RAF, the 51 Hurricanes were assembled and ready for testing within 48 hours and of these, 21 were ready for operational service within three days. The Hurricanes, originally intended for the Middle East theatre, were fitted with bulky Vokes dust filters under the nose and were armed with 12, rather than eight, machine guns. The additional weight and drag made them slow to climb and unwieldy to manoeuvre at altitude, although they were more effective bomber killers.

The recently arrived pilots were formed into 232 Squadron and 488 (NZ) Squadron, flying Buffalos, converted to Hurricanes. On 18 January, the two squadrons formed the basis of 226 Group; 232 Squadron became operational on 22 January and suffered the first losses and victories for the Hurricane in Southeast Asia. Between 27 and 30 January, another 48 Hurricanes Mk.IIB arrived with the aircraft carrier , from which they flew to airfields code-named P1 and P2, near Palembang, Sumatra in the Netherlands East Indies.

The Hurricanes first saw action on the morning of 20 January 1942, when twelve aircraft of 232 Squadron intercepted a mixed IJN and IJAAF formation of about 80 bombers escorted by fighters, the heaviest air raid on Singapore. Eight were claimed shot down and three probables, but three Hurricanes were lost along with two pilots, including Squadron Leader Leslie Ninian Landels.

Because of inadequate early warning systems (the first British radar stations became operational only towards the end of February), Japanese air raids were able to destroy 30 Hurricanes on the ground in Sumatra, most of them in one raid on 7 February. After Japanese landings in Singapore, on 10 February, the remnants of 232 and 488 Squadrons were withdrawn to Palembang. Japanese paratroopers began the invasion of Sumatra on 13 February. Hurricanes destroyed six Japanese transport ships on 14 February but lost seven aircraft in the process. On 18 February, the remaining Allied aircraft and aircrews moved to Java, with only 18 serviceable Hurricanes out of the original 99. That month, 12 Hurricane Mk.IIB Trops were supplied to the Dutch forces on Java. With dust filters removed and fuel and ammo load in wings halved, these were able to stay in a turn with the Oscars they fought. After Java was invaded, some of the New Zealand pilots were evacuated by sea to Australia.
When a Japanese carrier task force under the command of Admiral Chūichi Nagumo made a sortie into the Indian Ocean in April 1942, RAF Hurricanes based on Ceylon saw action against Nagumo&#x27;s forces during attacks on Colombo on 5 April 1942 and on Trincomalee harbour on 9 April 1942.

On 5 April 1942, Captain Mitsuo Fuchida of the Imperial Japanese Navy, who led the attack on Pearl Harbor, led a strike against Colombo with 53 Nakajima B5N torpedo bombers and 38 Aichi D3A dive bombers, escorted by 36 Mitsubishi A6M Zero fighters. They were opposed by 35 Hurricane I and IIBs of 30 and 258 Squadrons, together with six Fairey Fulmars of 803 and 806 Naval Air Squadrons of the Fleet Air Arm. The Hurricanes mainly tried to shoot down the attacking bombers, but were engaged heavily by the escorting Zeros. A total of 21 Hurricanes were shot down (although two of these were repairable), together with four Fulmars and six Swordfish of 788 Naval Air Squadron that had been surprised in flight by the raid. The RAF claimed 18 Japanese aircraft destroyed, seven probably destroyed and nine damaged, with one aircraft claimed by a Fulmar and five by anti-aircraft fire. This compared with actual Japanese losses of one Zero and six D3As, with a further seven D3As, five B5Ns and three Zeros damaged.

On 9 April 1942, the Japanese task force sent 91 B5Ns escorted by 41 Zeros against Trincomalee port and the nearby China Bay airfield. Sixteen Hurricanes opposed the raid, of which eight were lost with a further three damaged. They claimed eight Japanese aircraft destroyed with a further four probably destroyed and at least five damaged. Actual Japanese losses were three A6Ms and two B5Ns, with a further 10 B5Ns damaged.

Air battles over Arakan in 1943 represented the last large-scale use of the Hurricane as a pure fighter. However, in Burma, several squadrons flew Mk II and Mk IV Hurricanes, in the ground attack role, until the end of the war. Its pilots were occasionally caught up in air combat; for example, on 15 February 1944, Flg Off Jagadish Chandra Verma of No. 6 Squadron, Royal Indian Air Force (RIAF), shot down a Japanese Ki-43 Oscar – the only air-to-air victory for the RIAF during the Second World War.

The Hurricane remained in service as a fighter-bomber over the Balkans and at home as well where it was used mainly for second-line tasks and occasionally flown by ace pilots. For example, in mid-1944, Squadron Leader &quot;Jas&quot; Storrar of No. 1687 Flight RAF, used a Hurricane to courier documents to Allied ground forces in France, during the Normandy invasion.

===Aircraft carrier operations===

The Sea Hurricane became operational in mid-1941 and scored its first kill while operating from on 31 July 1941. During the next three years, Fleet Air Arm Sea Hurricanes were to feature prominently while operating from Royal Navy aircraft carriers. The Sea Hurricane scored an impressive kill-to-loss ratio, primarily while defending Malta convoys, and operating from escort carriers in the Atlantic Ocean. For example, on 26 May 1944, Royal Navy Sea Hurricanes operating from the escort carrier HMS &quot;Nairana&quot; claimed the destruction of three Ju 290 reconnaissance aircraft during the defence of a convoy.

===Finland===
During the Winter War, the Finnish Air Force were in dire need of modern fighters and sourced them from several countries, including the United Kingdom. Finland bought 12 Hurricanes and the delivery commenced on 2 February 1940. The Hurricanes were flown from St Athan, Wales to Västerås, Sweden, via Scotland and Norway by Finnish pilots in two batches. The first batch arrived in Västerås on 29 February, with the last aircraft arriving on 10 March. During the second batch flight, two Hurricanes were lost, with one crashing in Norway and the other being damaged during landing in Scotland and left there. The Hurricanes were initially deployed to LLv 22. Later they were transferred to LLv 28 and finally moved to LLv 30. During the period of Interim Peace, two further Hurricanes were lost in accidents.

At the start of the Continuation War on 25 June 1941, the Hurricanes were allocated to LLv 30. On 2 July 1941, a Hurricane were mistakenly shot down by friendly anti-aircraft at Vainikkala. The Finnish Hurricanes&#x27; first combat came on 3 July, when three Hurricanes encountered several Soviet fighters and shot down an I-153 &quot;Chaika&quot;. In the next day, the Hurricane shot down a Tupolev SB bomber. Other encounters with Soviet fighters took place on 15 July above the Karelian Isthmus, with two I-153 claimed as being shot down. The last aircraft shot down by Finnish Hurricanes was an I-15 on 6 January 1942.

==Hurricane aces==
Top scoring Hurricane pilots:
* Squadron Leader Marmaduke &quot;Pat&quot; Pattle, with 35 Hawker fighter victories (out of career 50 total, with two shared) serving with No. 80 and 33 Squadrons. All of his Hurricane kills were achieved over Greece in 1941. He was shot down and killed in the Battle of Athens on 20 April 1941.
* Squadron Leader Douglas Bader was a legendary flying ace who flew Hurricanes with No. 242 Squadron during the Battle of Britain. He was credited with 22 aerial victories, four shared victories, six probables, one shared probable and 11 enemy aircraft damaged. 
* Wing Commander Frank Reginald Carey claimed 28 air victories while flying Hurricanes during 1939–43.
* Squadron Leader William &quot;Cherry&quot; Vale totalled 20 kills (of 30) in Greece and Syria with No. 80 Squadron.
* Czech pilot Flight Lieutenant Karel Kuttelwascher achieved all of his 18 air victories with the Hurricane, most as an intruder night fighter with No. 1 Squadron.
* Pilot Officer Vernon Crompton Woodward (33 and 213 Squadrons) was another top-scoring ace with 14 (out of 18 total, three of which are shared).
* Flying Officer Willie McKnight scored at least 17 victories in Hurricanes.
* Flight Lieutenant Richard P. Stevens claimed all of his 14.5 enemy aircraft flying the Hurricane.
* Richard &quot;Dickie&quot; Cork was the leading Fleet Air Arm Sea Hurricane ace, with nine destroyed, two shared, one probable, four damaged and seven destroyed on the ground.
* Czech pilot Josef František, flying with 303 Polish Squadron, shot down at least 17 enemy aircraft over southeast England during September–October 1940.
* Polish pilot Witold Urbanowicz, flying with 303 Polish Squadron, had 15 confirmed kills and one probable during the Battle of Britain.
* Wing Commander Ian Gleed claimed most of his 13 victories while flying Hurricanes with No. 87 Squadron RAF from the Battle of France through the end of 1941.
* Wing Commander Mark Henry Brown scored 18 victories with No. 1 Squadron. He was the first Canadian ace of the Second World War and was killed on a strafing mission in Sicily in November 1941.
* Marshal of the Air Force Arjan Singh, DFC, was a British Indian fighter pilot who was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross for his flying during the Burma campaign. He went on to become the Chief of Air staff of the Indian Air Force and was given the honorary rank of Marshal of the Air Force for his leadership during the Indo-Pakistan war of 1965.

Pilots of Note
* 2nd Officer Winifred Crossley Fair. ATA Pilot. First female to fly a Hawker Hurricane.
* Wing Commander James Brindley Nicolson, VC, DFC. The only Battle of Britain pilot and the only pilot of RAF Fighter Command to be awarded the Victoria Cross during the Second World War.
* Roald Dahl flew a Hurricane in the Battle of Athens, which he describes in his second autobiography &quot;Going Solo&quot;.

==Variants==

;Hurricane Mk.I
:First production version, with fabric-covered wings, a wooden two-bladed, fixed-pitch propeller (first 435) or three blade two -pitch propeller, powered by the Rolls-Royce Merlin Mk.II (first 364) or III engines and armed with eight  Browning machine guns. Produced between 1937 and 1939.

;Hurricane Mk.I (revised)
:A revised Hurricane Mk.I series built with a de Havilland or Rotol constant speed propeller (from February 1940), metal-covered wings, armour and other improvements. A total of 4,200 Mk.Is were built; 1,924 by Hawker, 1,850 by Gloster Aircraft Company and 426 by Canadian Car and Foundry between December 1937 and October 1941. Apart from 30 retained in Canada the Canadian Car and Foundry Hurricanes were shipped to England to be fitted with engines.

;Hurricane Mk.IIA Series 1
:Hurricane Mk.I powered by the improved Merlin XX engine with two-speed supercharger. This new engine used a coolant mix of 30% glycol and 70% water. Pure glycol is flammable, so not only was the new mix safer, but the engine also ran approximately 21 °C (38 °F) cooler, which gave longer engine life and greater reliability. The new engine was longer than the earlier Merlin and so the Hurricane gained a 4.5 in &quot;plug&quot; in front of the cockpit, which made the aircraft slightly more stable due to the slight forward shift in centre of gravity. First flew on 11 June 1940 and went into squadron service in September 1940. Hawker built 418 and Gloster Aircraft Company 33. The series 1 may refer to the first production batch which did not have all the proposed changes incorporated, becoming series 2 when the changes were made. 33 Mk. IIA built by Gloster, 418 by Hawker.

;Hurricane Mk.IIB
:Carrying four additional wing-mounted Browning machine guns; for a total of 12 guns, 230 were factory fitted with racks allowing them to carry two or two bombs. This lowered the top speed of the Hurricane to , but by this point mixed sweeps of Hurricanes carrying bombs, protected by a screen of fighter Hurricanes were not uncommon. The same racks allowed the Hurricane to carry two drop tanks instead of the bombs, nearly doubling the Hurricane&#x27;s fuel load.

:A total of 3,178 IIBs built in Britain to November 1942, 2,011 by Hawker, 867 by Gloster Aircraft Company and 300 by the Austin Aero Company, plus another 515 by Canadian Car and Foundry built November 1941 to March 1943. Many of the Canadian built aircraft being fitted with C (cannon) wings before delivery to the RAF.

;Hurricane Mk.IIB Trop.
:For use in North Africa the Hawker Hurricane Mk.IIB (and other variants) were tropicalised. They were fitted with Vokes and Rolls-Royce engine dust filters and the pilots were issued with a desert survival kit, including a bottle of water behind the cockpit.

;Hurricane Mk.IIC
:Replaced the machine-gun armament with four Hispano Mk.II cannons, two per wing. The new wings later included a hardpoint for a bomb and, later again, fuel tanks. By then performance was inferior to the latest German fighters, and the Hurricane changed to the ground-attack role, sometimes referred to as the Hurribomber. The Mk. IIC also served as a night fighter and intruder with about three quarters converted to fighter bombers. There were 4,751 IICs built by Hawker between February 1941 and July 1944.

;Hurricane Mk.IID
:Armed with two anti-tank autocannon in a gondola-style pod, one under each wing and a single Browning machine gun in each wing loaded with tracers for aiming purposes. The first aircraft flew on 18 September 1941 and deliveries started in 1942. Had additional armour for the pilot, radiator and engine, and were armed with a Rolls-Royce gun with 12 rounds, later changed to the Vickers S gun with 15 rounds. The outer wing attachments were strengthened so that 4G could be pulled at a weight of . The weight of guns and armour protection marginally impaired the aircraft&#x27;s performance. These Hurricanes were nicknamed &quot;Flying Can Openers&quot;, perhaps a play on the logo of No. 6 Squadron, which flew the Hurricane starting in 1942. A total of 296 built by Hawker from January 1942 to February 1943.
;Hurricane Mk.IIE
:Not an official Mark number. First used informally by the RAF for 100 mark IIB factory fitted with bomb racks built September to December 1941, which were then redesignated mark IIBB. Also used by the Ministry of Aircraft Production March to October 1942 for further production, all up 270 considered built, comprising 230 IIBB and 40 IICB by the later RAF designation (230 IIB and 40 IIC). A signal to the Middle East dated 31 October 1942 states the IIE was not an official mark. The Mk.IIE was not an early Mk.IV.

;Hurricane Mk.T.IIC

:Two-seat training version of the Mk. IIC. Only two aircraft were built, for the Imperial Iranian Air Force.

;Hurricane Mk.III
:Version of the Hurricane Mk.II powered by a US Packard-built Merlin engine, intending to enable supplies of the British-built engines for other designs. Probably two Canadian built aircraft test flown in Britain with a Merlin 28 starting in May/June 1942 before becoming mark IIB with Merlin XX. By the time production was to have started, British Merlin production had increased to the point where the idea was abandoned.

;Hurricane Mk.IV
:The last major change to the Hurricane was the introduction of the &quot;universal wing&quot;, a single design able to mount two bombs,or two Vickers S guns, or two 40 mm (1.57 in) Rolls-Royce B.H. type guns, two SBC (small bomb containers) or SCI (smoke curtain installation),or two 45 or 90 gallon drop tanks or eight &quot;60 pounder&quot; RP-3 rockets. Two Brownings were fitted to aid aiming of the heavier armament. Despite persistent reports, Mk.IVs were actually fitted with the same Merlin XX as the Mk.II. All Merlin 27s were modified to Merlin 25 and used in Mosquitoes, there were only 16 production Merlin 24s by the time over 300 Mk.IV had been delivered. The individual aircraft cards held by the RAF museum reports the final Mk.IV had a Merlin XX. The radiator was deeper and armoured. Additional armour was also fitted around the engine. 524 built by Hawker between December 1942 and March 1944.

;Hurricane Mk.V
:The final variant to be produced. Only one was purpose built and two Mk.IV converted, though the variant never reached full-scale production. This was planned to be powered by a Merlin 27 but also tested with a Merlin 32 boosted engine to give at low level and was intended as a dedicated ground-attack aircraft to use in Burma. All three prototypes had four-bladed propellers. The Mk. V replaced the twin 7.7mm machine guns on the Mk. IV with two 20mm cannons, only completed on the third prototype. Speed was at 

;Hurricane Mk.X
:Not an official Mark number. The Mk.X designation is used by some RAF documents for Canadian Car and Foundry built Mk.I but many references define it as Mk.II airframes fitted with a Merlin 28 Canadian Car and Foundry report building a total of 915 Mk.II airframes for Holland (one), the RAF (514) and the RCAF (400), between November 1941 and May 1943. About two thirds of the Canadian Car and Foundry built Mk.II airframes shipped to Britain did so without an engine, the remainder being fitted with Merlin 28s, but the engine was nearly always removed upon arrival and a Merlin XX fitted instead. These aircraft were considered a Mk.II by the RAF. Apart from some test flights in Canada and England no Hurricane flew powered by a Merlin 28. Canada only imported 285 Merlin 28 for Hurricanes, all of which were shipped to Britain either as a separate engine or attached to a Hurricane.

;Hurricane Mk.XI
:Not an official Mark. number. Designation used by many references for 150 aircraft from the RCAF Mk.XII order sent to Britain, these aircraft had many items and their Merlin 29 removed before being shipped without an engine or fitted with a Merlin 28. Fitted with Merlin XX on arrival in Britain and called a Mk.II by the RAF.

;Hurricane Mk.XII
:Canadian-built variant. On 19 August 1941, the Canadian government placed an order with Canadian Car and Foundry for 400 Hurricanes, with 100 meant for the Netherlands and 300 for China, the Netherlands order was amended to 72, the Chinese decided to buy American, which resulted in 328 being offered to the USSR, to be shipped across the Pacific. Amended to all 400 for the RCAF. Originally designated the Mk.IIB (Can), designation changed to Mk.XII in April 1943. Single-seat fighter and fighter-bomber, powered by a Packard Merlin 29, armed with twelve machine guns, production starting in June 1942, 250 served with the RCAF and 150 were sent to Britain in 1943 either without an engine or fitted with a Merlin 28 which was replaced by a Merlin XX on arrival and they became Mk.IIs

;Hurricane Mk.XIIA
:Canadian-built variant. The survivors of a batch of 30 RAF order Mk.I airframes retained in Canada in late 1941 that were fitted with Merlin III and propellers from Fairey Battles, became Mk. XIIA when fitted with Merlin 29. Armed with eight machine guns

;Holland standard Hurricane
:Canadian built variant. RAF serial airframe AM270 was completed around early March 1942 to Dutch standards, including US built Merlin, instruments and gun sight, as the prototype of an order for the Netherlands East Indies (KM/KNIL). Given the Dutch serial HC3-287, its subsequent fate is unclear beyond being used by Canadian Car and Foundry for test flying. AM270 was also used by the RAF for a Consolidated San Diego built Catalina, creating a further level of confusion. 
;Sea Hurricane Mk.IA
:The Sea Hurricane Mk.IA was a Hurricane Mk.I modified by General Aircraft Limited. They were modified to be carried by CAM ships (catapult-armed merchantman), whose ships&#x27; crews were Merchant Marine and whose Hurricanes were crewed and serviced by RAF personnel, or Fighter Catapult Ships, which were Naval Auxiliary Vessels crewed by naval personnel and aircraft operated by the Fleet Air Arm. These ships were equipped with a catapult for launching an aircraft, but without facilities to recover them. Consequently, if the aircraft were not in range of a land base, pilots had to bail out or to ditch.
:Both of these options had their problems—there was always a chance of striking part of the fuselage when bailing out, and a number of pilots had been killed in this way. Ditching the Hurricane in the sea called for skill as the radiator housing acted as a water brake, pitching the nose of the fighter downwards when it hit the water, while also acting as a very efficient scoop, helping to flood the Hurricane so that a quick exit was necessary before the aircraft sank. Then the pilot had to be picked up by a ship. More than 80 modifications were needed to convert a Hurricane into a Sea Hurricane, including new radios to conform with those used by the Fleet Air Arm and new instrumentation to read in knots rather than miles per hour. They were informally known as &quot;Hurricats&quot;.
:The majority of the aircraft modified had suffered wear-and-tear serving with front line squadrons, so much so that at least one example used during trials broke up under the stress of a catapult launching. CAM Sea Hurricanes were launched operationally on eight occasions and the Hurricanes shot down six enemy aircraft for the loss of one Hurricane pilot killed. The first Sea Hurricane Mk.IA kill was an Fw 200C &quot;Condor&quot;, shot down on 2 August 1941. The Hurricanes performance was somewhat hindered as a result of the extra equipment carried that was necessary for carrier operations, although this doesn&#x27;t seem to have effected its reputation among FAA pilots, with whom it was extremely popular.

;Sea Hurricane Mk.IB
:Hurricane Mk.I version equipped with catapult spools plus an arrester hook. From July 1941 they operated from and from October 1941, they were used on merchant aircraft carrier (MAC) ships, which were large cargo vessels with a flight deck fitted, enabling aircraft to be launched and recovered. The first Sea Hurricane Mk.IB kill occurred on 31 July 1941 when Sea Hurricanes of 880 squadron FAA operating from HMS &quot;Furious&quot; shot down a Do 18 flying-boat.

:Apart from the conversions in Britain, 50 Sea Hurricane Mk.I were built in Canada and delivered in late 1941 and early 1942. Initially fitted with a Merlin III, they became Mk.XIIA when later fitted with a Merlin 29.

;Sea Hurricane Mk.IC
:A Sea Hurricane Mk.I version reported equipped with the four-cannon wing. Despite persistent reports of hundreds converted from early 1942 only eight have been traced, all from a batch of 10 Sea Hurricanes that were sent to General Aircraft Limited in February 1943 from The Merchant Ship Fighter Unit, 7 being returned in May as Ic.

:The Sea Hurricane I used during &quot;Operation Pedestal&quot; had their Merlin III engines modified to accept boost, and could generate more than at low altitude. Lt. R. J. Cork was credited with five kills while flying a Sea Hurricane I during &quot;Operation Pedestal&quot;.
The RAF reports as of end June 1944 a total of 378 conversions to Sea Hurricane I, less any conversions back to standard Hurricanes, photographic evidence suggests it was 378 transfers to the Royal Navy, most of which were converted to Sea versions.
;Sea Hurricane Mk.IIC
:60 built by Hawker between November 1942 and May 1943, version equipped with naval radio gear; other standard Mk.IICs were converted and used on fleet carriers. The Merlin XX engine on the Sea Hurricane generated at and at . Top speed was at and at . Another 47 mark IIB converted to Sea mark II, with 45 of them given C wings as part of the conversion.

;Sea Hurricane Mk.XIIA
:50 Canadian built Sea Hurricane I delivered in late 1941 and early 1942. Initially fitted with Merlin III as Mk.I, the survivors became Mk.XII when fitted with Merlin 29.

;Hillson F.40 (a.k.a. F.H.40)
:A full-scale version of the Hills &amp; Son Bi-mono slip-wing biplane/monoplane, using a Hawker Hurricane Mk.I returned from Canada as RCAF ser no 321 (RAF serial L1884). Taxi and flight trials carried out at RAF Sealand during May 1943, and at the Aeroplane and Armament Experimental Establishment, Boscombe Down from September 1943. The upper wing was not released in flight before the programme was terminated due to poor performance.

;Hurricane Photo Reconnaissance
:The Service Depot at Heliopolis in Egypt converted several Hurricanes Is for photo reconnaissance. The first three were converted in January 1941. Two carried a pair of F24 cameras with 8-inch focal length lenses. The third carried one vertical and two oblique F24s with 14-inch focal length lenses mounted in the rear fuselage, close to the trailing edge of the wing, and a fairing was built up over the lenses aft of the radiator housing. A further five Hurricanes were modified in March 1941, and two were converted in a similar manner in Malta during April 1941. During October 1941 a batch of six Hurricane Mk.IIs were converted to PR Mk.II status and a final batch, thought to be of 12 aircraft, was converted in late 1941. The PR Mk.II was said to be capable of slightly over and was able to reach .

;Hurricane Tac R
:For duties closer to the front lines some Hurricanes were converted to Tactical Reconnaissance (Tac R) aircraft. An additional radio was fitted for liaison with ground forces who were better placed to direct the Hurricane. Some Hurricane Tac R aircraft also had a vertical camera fitted in the rear fuselage, so to compensate for the extra weight either one or two Brownings or two cannon would be omitted. Externally these aircraft were only distinguishable by the missing armament.

==Operators==

The Hurricane had a long operational life in many theatres of war and was also built by, or exported to, several other countries. In some cases such as Portugal and Ireland, the Hurricane was pressed into service after being forced to land in a neutral country.

In 1939 Latvia ordered and paid for 30 Hurricane fighters, but due to the start of the Second World War later that year, the aircraft were never delivered.

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Surviving aircraft==
Of more than 14,483 Hurricanes that were built, approximately 16 (including three Sea Hurricanes) are in airworthy condition worldwide, although many other non-flying examples survive in various air museums.

==Specifications (Hurricane Mk.IIC)==


==See also==

==Notes==
==References==
===Bibliography===
* Bader, Douglas. &quot;Fight for the Sky: The Story of the Spitfire and Hurricane&quot;. London: Cassell Military Books, 2004. .
* Barker, Ralph. &quot;The Hurricats: The Fighters That could not Return.&quot; Stroud, Gloucestershire: Tempus Publishing, 2000. .
* Beamont, Roland. &quot;Hurricane Baptism.&quot; &quot;Aeroplane Monthly&quot; magazine, Volume 22, No. 1, Issue 249, January 1994. London: IPC Magazines Limited.
* Beamont, Roland. &quot;Hurricane Testing.&quot; &quot;Aeroplane Monthly&quot; magazine, Volume 22, No. 2, Issue 250, February 1994. London: IPC Magazines Limited.
* Bignozzi, Giorgio. &quot;Aerei d&#x27;Italia&quot;(in Italian). Milan: Milano Edizioni E.C.A., 2000.
* Bishop, Edward. &quot;Hurricane&quot;. Shrewsbury: Airlife Publishing, 1986. .
* Boer, P.C.. &quot;The Loss of Java&quot;. NUS Press, 2011. . And earlier Dutch version &quot;Het Verlies van Java&quot;. De Bataafsche Leeuw, 2006. .
* Bowyer, Chaz. &quot;Hurricane at War&quot;. London: Ian Allan Ltd., 1974. .
* Boyne, Walter J. &quot;Scontro di Ali — L&#x27;aviazione militare nella Seconda Guerra Mondiale&quot; (in Italian). Milan: Mursia, 1997. .
* Breffort, Dominique. &quot;Hawker Hurricane — de 1935 à 1945&quot; (Avions et Pilotes 14) (in French). Paris: Histoire et Collections, 2010. .
* Bridgman, Leonard, ed. &quot;The Hawker Hurricane&quot;. &quot;Jane&#x27;s Fighting Aircraft of World War II&quot;. London: Studio, 1946. .
* Brodie, Ian. &quot;Hurricane Mk.IIA: The Alpine Fighter Collection&quot;. Auckland, New Zealand: Reed Books, 2000. .
* Brown, Eric, CBE, DCS, AFC, RN.; William Green and Gordon Swanborough. &quot;Wings of the Navy, Flying Allied Carrier Aircraft of World War Two.&quot; London: Jane&#x27;s Publishing Company, 1980. .
* Bungay, Stephen. &quot;The Most Dangerous Enemy&quot;. London: Aurum Press, 2000. .
* Burns, Michael G. &quot;Cobber Kain&quot;. Auckland, New Zealand: Random Century, 1992. .
* Cacutt, Len, ed. &quot;Hawker Hurricane.&quot; &quot;Great Aircraft of the World&quot;. London: Marshall Cavendish, 1989. .
* Chorlton, Martyn. &quot;Hawker Hurricane MK I-V&quot;(Air Vanguard; 6). Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 2013. .
* Cull, Brian and Frederick Galea. &quot;Gladiators over Malta: The Story of Faith, Hope and Charity&quot;. Rabat, Malta: Wise Owl Publications, 2008. .
* Cull, Brian and Brian and Paul Sortehaug. &quot;Hurricanes Over Singapore: RAF, RNZAF and Nei Fighters in Action Against the Japanese Over the Island and the Netherlands East Indies, 1942 &quot;. London: Grub Street, 2004. .
* Donald, David. &quot;The Military Propeller Aircraft Guide&quot;. London: Chartwell Books, Inc., 1999. .
* Deighton, Len. &quot;Fighter: The True Story of the Battle of Britain.&quot; New York: Ballantine Books, 1977. .
* De Marchi, Italo. &quot;Fiat CR.42 Falco&quot;. Modena: Stem Mucchi Editore, 1994.
* De Marchi, Italo. &quot;Macchi MC. 200 &quot;Saetta&quot;&quot;. Modena: Stem Mucchi Editore, 1994.
* Dibbs, John and Tony Holmes. &quot;Hurricane: A Fighter Legend.&quot; Oxford, UK: Osprey, 1995. .
* Drabkin, Artem. &quot;The Red Air Force at War: Barbarossa and the Retreat to Moscow – Recollections of Fighter Pilots on the Eastern Front&quot;. Barnsley, South Yorkshire, UK: Pen &amp; Sword Military, 2007. .
* Ellis, Ken. &quot;Back to the Biplane: The &#x27;Slip-wing&#x27; and the Hurricane&quot;. &quot;Air Enthusiast&quot; No. 107, September/October 2003. pp. 47–51. 
* Fozard, John W., ed. &quot;Sydney Camm and the Hurricane: Perspectives on the Master Fighter Designer and his Finest Achievement.&quot; London: Airlife, 1991. .
* Glancey, Jonathan. &quot;Spitfire: The Illustrated Biography&quot;. London: Atlantic Books, 2006. .
* Gleed, Ian. &quot;Arise to Conquer&quot;. New York: Random House, 1942.
* Golley, John. &quot;Hurricanes over Murmansk&quot;. Shrewsbury: Airlife Publishing, 2001. 
* Gordon, Yefim. &quot;Soviet Air Power in World War 2&quot;. Hinkley, UK: Midland /Allan Publishing, 2008. .
* Goulding, James. &quot;Camouflage and Markings, RAF Fighter Command Northern Europe 1936–1945&quot; London: Ducimus Books Ltd/Doubleday &amp; Co, 1971. .
* Green, William. &quot;Hawker Hurricane.&quot; &quot;Famous Fighters of the Second World War&quot;. London: MacDonald, 1957.
* Gunston, Bill. &quot;Aerei della 2a Guerra Mondiale&quot; (in Italian). Milan: Alberto Peruzzo editore, 1984. NO ISBN.
* Haining, Peter. &quot;The Chianti Raiders&quot;. London: Robson Books, 2006. .
* &quot;Half-Century Hurricane&quot;: Part Four. &quot;Air International&quot;, July 1987, Vol. 33, No. 1, pp. 26–35, 49. ISSN 0306-5634.
* Harvey-Bailey, A. &quot;The Merlin in Perspective: The Combat Years.&quot; Derby, UK: Rolls-Royce Heritage Trust, 1995 (4th edition). .
* Hiscock, Melvyn. &quot;Hawker Hurricane Inside and Out&quot;. Ramsbury, Marlborough, UK: The Crowood Press, 2003. .
* Holmes, Tom. &quot;Hurricanes to the Fore: The First Aces&quot; (Aircraft of the Aces: Men and Legends Ser.# 7). Oxford, UK: Osprey Publishing, 1999. .
* Jackson, Robert. &quot;The Forgotten Aces&quot;. London: Sphere Books Ltd., 1989. .
* Jacobs, Peter. &quot;Hawker Hurricane&quot;. Ramsbury, Marlborough, UK: Crowood Press, 1998. .
* Jarrett, Philip. &quot;Nothing Ventured...:Part Ten&quot;. &quot;Aeroplane Monthly&quot;, January 1991, Vol 19 No 1. ISSN 0143-7240. pp. 18–23.
* Keskinen, Kalevi and Kari Stenman. &quot;Hurricane &amp; Gladiator (Suomen Ilmavoimien Historia 25)&quot; (bilingual Finnish/English). Espoo, Finland: Kari Stenman, 2005. .
* 
* Lowe, Malcolm V. and Paul Blackah. &quot;Hawker Hurricane: Owners&#x27; Workshop Manual&quot;. Sparkford, Yeovil, UK: Haynes Publishing, 2010. .
* Malizia, Nicola. &quot;Aermacchi Bagliori di guerra – Flashes of War (Macchi MC.200- MC.202 – MC.205/V)&quot; (in Italian). Rome: Ibn Editore, 2002. .
* Marchant, David J. &quot;Rise from the East: The Story of 247 (China British) Squadron Royal Air Force&quot;. Tonbridge, Kent, UK: Air Britain (Historians) Ltd., 1996. .
* Mason, Francis K. &quot;The British Fighter Since 1912&quot;. London: Putnam, 1992. .
* Mason, Francis K. &quot;Hawker Aircraft Since 1920&quot; (3rd revised edition). London: Putnam, 1991. .
* Mason, Francis K. &quot;The Hawker Hurricane&quot; (Macdonald Aircraft Monographs). London: Macdonald, 1962.
* Mason, Francis K. &quot;The Hawker Hurricane&quot; [Rev. Edition]. Manchester, UK: Crécy Publishing, 2001. .
* 
* Matricardi, Paolo. &quot;Aerei militari: Caccia e ricognitori — Volume 1&quot;. Milan: Mondadori Electa, 2006. No ISBN.
* McKinstry, Leo. &quot;Hurricane: Victor of the Battle of Britain.&quot; London: John Murray, 2010. .
* Morgan, Hugh. &quot;Gli assi Sovietici della Seconda guerra mondiale&quot;(in Italian). Milan: Edizioni del Prado/Osprey Aviation, 1999. .
* Neulen, Hans Werner. &quot;In the Skies of Europe&quot;. Ramsbury, UK: The Crowood Press, 2006. .
* Pacco, John. &quot;Hawker Hurricane Mk.I&quot; &quot;Belgisch Leger/Armee Belge: Het Militair Vliegwezen/l&#x27;Aeronautique Militare 1930–1940&quot; (bilingual French/Dutch). Aartselaar, Belgium: J.P. Publications, 2003, pp. 60–65. .
* Postan, Michael M. &quot;British War Production&quot; London: HMSO, 1952.
* Prins, François. &quot;Second to None: Homage to the Hawker Hurricane&quot;. Air Enthusiast 87, May–June 2000, pp. 26–40. 
* Ramsay, Winston, ed. &quot;The Battle of Britain Then and Now, Mark V&quot;. London: After the Battle Magazine, 1989. .
* Rybin, Yuriy. &quot;Soviet Hurricane Aces of World War 2&quot; (Osprey Aircraft of the Aces; 107). Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 2012. 
* Ryś, Marek. &quot;Hawker Hurricane&quot;. Redbourn, Herts, UK: Mushroom Model Publications, 2006. .
* Sarkar, Dilip (Ed.). &quot;Hurricane Manual 1940&quot;. Stroud (UK): Amberley, 2013. .
* Schlaifer, Robert &quot;Development of Aircraft Engines&quot;. Andover: The Andover Press, LTD, 1950. .
* Sgarlato, Nico. &quot;Fiat CR.42&quot; (in Italian). Parma, Italy: Delta Editrice, 2005.
* Shacklady, Edward. &quot;Hawker Hurricane&quot; (Classic WWII Aviation). London: Tempus Publishing, Limited, 2000. .
* Shores, Christopher. &quot;Bloody Shambles, The First Comprehensive Account of the Air Operations over South-East Asia December 1941 – April 1942. Volume One: Drift to War to the Fall of Singapore&quot;. London: Grub Street Press, 1992. 
* Shores, Christopher, Brian Cull and Yasuho Izawa.&quot;Bloody Shambles: Volume Two: The Defence of Sumatra to the Fall of Burma&quot;. London: Grub Street, 1993. .
* Shores, Christopher, Brian Cull and Nicola Malizia. &quot;Malta: The Hurricane Years&quot;. London: Grub Street, 1987. .
* Simmons, Graham. &quot;Fighters Under Construction in World War Two&quot;. Barnsley, South Yorkshire; Pen &amp; Sword Aviation, 2013. 
* Snedden, Robert. &quot;World War II Combat Aircraft&quot;. Bristol, UK: Factfinders Parragon, 1997. .
* Stenman, Kari and Andrew Thomas. &quot; Brewster F2A Buffalo Aces of World War 2&quot;. Oxford, UK: Osprey Publishing, 2010. .
* Thetford, Owen. &quot;British Naval Aircraft Since 1912&quot;. London: Putnam Aeronautical Books, 1994. .
* Thomas, Andrew. &quot;Hurricane Aces 1941–45&quot;. Aircraft of the Aces. Oxford, UK: Osprey Publishing, 2003. .
* Thomas, Andrew. &quot;India&#x27;s Night Guardians&quot;. &quot;Aviation News&quot;, 30 October–12 November 1996.
* Thomas, Andrew. &quot;Royal Navy Aces of World War 2.&quot; Aircraft of the Aces. Oxford, UK: Osprey, 2007. .
* Vaccari, Pier Francesco. &quot;Indian Ocean Raid.&quot; &quot;Historic Revue.&quot; Modena: Coop Giornalisti Storici, August 1995.
* Wawrzyński, Mirosław. &quot;Hurricane w obcej służbie — Hurricane in Foreign Service&quot;. Książki Militarne. Warsaw, Poland: AJaKS, 2001. .
* Weal, John. &quot;Bf 109D/E Aces 1939/41&quot;. Aircraft of the Aces. Oxford, UK: Osprey Publishing, 1996 (Edizioni Del Prado, 1999). .
* Yefim, Gordon. &quot;Soviet Air Power in World War 2&quot;. Midland Publishing, 2008 
==External links==

* WW2 aircraft performance and combat reports
* &quot;Hurricane operational characteristics – Report by Sqn Ldr Gillan, 1938&quot;
* A Hurricane pilot talks about the plane and compares it to flying a Spitfire. Video Interview</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q194251" start="4" end="20" title="Hawker Hurricane" label="Hawker Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="46" end="62" title="fighter aircraft" label="fighter aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992531" start="126" end="141" title="Hawker Aircraft" label="Hawker Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="168" end="183" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q29190" start="246" end="266" title="Supermarine Spitfire" label="Supermarine Spitfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="278" end="295" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="374" end="383" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724088" start="560" end="571" title="Sydney Camm" label="Sydney Camm"/>
<link wikidata="Q627537" start="589" end="598" title="monoplane" label="monoplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q577389" start="617" end="628" title="Hawker Fury" label="Hawker Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q223818" start="629" end="636" title="biplane" label="biplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q407586" start="734" end="746" title="Air Ministry" label="Air Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q263421" start="894" end="906" title="landing gear" label="landing gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412885" start="929" end="947" title="Rolls-Royce Merlin" label="Rolls-Royce Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362364" start="1103" end="1116" title="maiden flight" label="maiden flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q830494" start="1660" end="1668" title="dogfight" label="dogfight"/>
<link wikidata="Q155639" start="1677" end="1697" title="Messerschmitt Bf 109" label="Messerschmitt Bf 109"/>
<link wikidata="Q385642" start="1807" end="1821" title="fighter-bomber" label="fighter-bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q208187" start="1828" end="1842" title="Attack aircraft" label="ground support"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="1899" end="1909" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q194251" start="1923" end="1936" title="Hawker Hurricane" label="Sea Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992531" start="2287" end="2302" title="Hawker Aircraft" label="Hawker Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q657723" start="2336" end="2355" title="RAF Fighter Command" label="RAF Fighter Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q577389" start="2397" end="2408" title="Hawker Fury" label="Hawker Fury"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2410" end="2422" title="Hawker Hart#Demon" label="Hawker Demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999293" start="2431" end="2446" title="Bristol Bulldog" label="Bristol Bulldog"/>
<link wikidata="Q223818" start="2452" end="2459" title="biplane" label="biplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134697" start="2472" end="2477" title="Blade pitch" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698198" start="2609" end="2618" title="Air Staff (United Kingdom)" label="Air Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q627537" start="2680" end="2689" title="monoplane" label="monoplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q407586" start="2787" end="2799" title="Air Ministry" label="Air Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2807" end="2827" title="List of Air Ministry specifications#1930–1939" label="Specification F.5/34"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="2862" end="2877" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="2908" end="2924" title="fighter aircraft" label="fighter aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724088" start="2974" end="2985" title="Sydney Camm" label="Sydney Camm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288107" start="3218" end="3230" title="Ralph Sorley" label="Ralph Sorley"/>
<link wikidata="Q935927" start="3526" end="3540" title="Rolls-Royce Goshawk" label="Goshawk engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684986" start="3964" end="3976" title="Hawker P.V.3" label="Hawker P.V.3"/>
<link wikidata="Q17227" start="4193" end="4203" title="cantilever" label="cantilever"/>
<link wikidata="Q935927" start="4302" end="4321" title="Rolls-Royce Goshawk" label="Rolls-Royce Goshawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q850179" start="4451" end="4468" title="Gloster Gladiator" label="Gloster Gladiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365588" start="4531" end="4543" title="Synchronization gear" label="synchronised"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412885" start="5010" end="5016" title="Rolls-Royce Merlin" label="Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967606" start="5101" end="5129" title="National Physical Laboratory (United Kingdom)" label="National Physical Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281721" start="5133" end="5143" title="Teddington" label="Teddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q193010" start="5163" end="5174" title="wind tunnel" label="wind tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q334980" start="5477" end="5490" title="Arthur Tedder, 1st Baron Tedder" label="Arthur Tedder"/>
<link wikidata="Q57955119" start="5556" end="5584" title="Frederick William Hill" label="F.W. &amp;quot;Gunner&amp;quot; Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q97284984" start="5812" end="5822" title="Hazel Hill" label="Hazel Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128890" start="5881" end="5900" title="Claude Hilton Keith" label="Claude Hilton Keith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288107" start="6354" end="6366" title="Ralph Sorley" label="Ralph Sorley"/>
<link wikidata="Q484019" start="7305" end="7325" title="M1919 Browning machine gun" label="Browning machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220673" start="7546" end="7553" title="Vickers" label="Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321706" start="7721" end="7741" title="Kingston upon Thames" label="Kingston upon Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q929193" start="7799" end="7809" title="Brooklands" label="Brooklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="7811" end="7817" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q730242" start="8105" end="8115" title="test pilot" label="test pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013228" start="8117" end="8134" title="Flight Lieutenant" label="Flight Lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537414" start="8135" end="8148" title="George Bulman (pilot)" label="George Bulman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183993" start="8220" end="8232" title="Philip Lucas" label="Philip Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q452669" start="8283" end="8297" title="John Stuart Hindmarsh" label="John Hindmarsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851537" start="8399" end="8406" title="ballast" label="ballast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295903" start="8909" end="8929" title="RAF Martlesham Heath" label="RAF Martlesham Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q23111" start="8931" end="8938" title="Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428915" start="9092" end="9123" title="Empire Test Pilots&amp;#x27; School" label="Empire Test Pilots&amp;#x27; School"/>
<link wikidata="Q18407944" start="9770" end="9775" title="Flap (aeronautics)" label="flaps"/>
<link wikidata="Q910917" start="9853" end="9857" title="Spin (aerodynamics)" label="spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q209760" start="9897" end="9903" title="rudder" label="rudder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419175" start="10118" end="10146" title="Royal Aircraft Establishment" label="Royal Aircraft Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720056" start="10324" end="10331" title="aircraft fairing" label="fairing"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="10573" end="10591" title="board of directors" label="board of directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q590227" start="11141" end="11157" title="King Edward VIII" label="King Edward VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q29190" start="11229" end="11249" title="Supermarine Spitfire" label="Supermarine Spitfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775236" start="11380" end="11393" title="English wheel" label="English wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330167" start="12387" end="12400" title="Fairey Battle" label="Fairey Battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591676" start="12422" end="12435" title="Hawker Henley" label="Hawker Henley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042866" start="12651" end="12667" title="No. 111 Squadron RAF" label="No. 111 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q106119" start="12682" end="12694" title="RAF Northolt" label="RAF Northolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q332454" start="12904" end="12920" title="Max Aitken, 1st Baron Beaverbrook" label="Lord Beaverbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866042" start="12926" end="12957" title="Minister of Aircraft Production" label="Minister of Aircraft Production"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124725" start="12975" end="13003" title="Civilian Repair Organisation" label="Civilian Repair Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q781156" start="13222" end="13241" title="Austin Motor Company" label="Austin Aero Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13249" end="13269" title="Cofton Hackett#Austin Aero Works" label="Cofton Hackett plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865580" start="13305" end="13311" title="Barton-upon-Irwell" label="Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="13327" end="13337" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029804" start="13344" end="13368" title="Canadian Car and Foundry" label="Canadian Car and Foundry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438830" start="13372" end="13393" title="Fort William, Ontario" label="Fort William, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q49039" start="13566" end="13579" title="Elsie MacGill" label="Elsie MacGill"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="13787" end="13800" title="Munich Agreement" label="Munich Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q830450" start="13973" end="13982" title="microfilm" label="microfilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="14411" end="14428" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532217" start="14731" end="14755" title="Gloster Aircraft Company" label="Gloster Aircraft Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="15045" end="15055" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502667" start="15059" end="15063" title="Zmaj aircraft" label="Zmaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251550" start="15068" end="15078" title="Rogožarski" label="Rogožarski"/>
<link wikidata="Q901252" start="15274" end="15293" title="Daimler-Benz DB 601" label="Daimler-Benz DB 601"/>
<link wikidata="Q28195182" start="15430" end="15443" title="Avions Fairey" label="Avions Fairey"/>
<link wikidata="Q304134" start="15455" end="15472" title="Belgian Air Force" label="Belgian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q484019" start="15526" end="15547" title="M1919 Browning machine gun" label="Browning machine guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q697625" start="15618" end="15644" title="German invasion of Belgium (1940)" label="German invasion of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q17227" start="15826" end="15836" title="cantilever" label="cantilever"/>
<link wikidata="Q627537" start="15837" end="15846" title="monoplane" label="monoplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587800" start="15947" end="15959" title="Warren truss" label="Warren truss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662372" start="15995" end="16004" title="longerons" label="longerons"/>
<link wikidata="Q243558" start="16009" end="16018" title="duralumin" label="duralumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131172" start="16085" end="16091" title="welding" label="welded"/>
<link wikidata="Q4372167" start="16145" end="16151" title="former" label="former"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662372" start="16157" end="16166" title="stringer (aircraft)" label="stringers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4010119" start="16180" end="16191" title="aircraft dope" label="doped linen"/>
<link wikidata="Q493009" start="16983" end="16996" title="landing light" label="landing light"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="17044" end="17049" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865408" start="17599" end="17611" title="UNS C69100" label="Tungum alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17227" start="17698" end="17708" title="cantilever" label="cantilever"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428742" start="17823" end="17841" title="Flight International" label="&amp;quot;Flight&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q15331" start="17914" end="17917" title="jig (tool)" label="jig"/>
<link wikidata="Q177784" start="18066" end="18079" title="Hydraulics" label="Hydraulically"/>
<link wikidata="Q975211" start="18095" end="18108" title="trailing edge" label="trailing edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q18407944" start="18109" end="18113" title="flap (aeronautics)" label="flap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754137" start="18296" end="18308" title="leading edge" label="leading edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1705284" start="18330" end="18353" title="flight control surfaces" label="flight control surfaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q509379" start="18378" end="18385" title="aileron" label="aileron"/>
<link wikidata="Q243558" start="18452" end="18461" title="duralumin" label="duralumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q263421" start="19337" end="19350" title="landing gear" label="undercarriage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19533" end="19545" title="Landing gear#Rearwards and sideways retraction" label="angled pivot"/>
<link wikidata="Q283666" start="20667" end="20679" title="de Havilland" label="de Havilland"/>
<link wikidata="Q445623" start="20680" end="20704" title="Variable-pitch propeller (aeronautics)" label="variable-pitch propeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303672" start="20884" end="20889" title="Rotol" label="Rotol"/>
<link wikidata="Q191657" start="21228" end="21235" title="stirrup" label="stirrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463507" start="21490" end="21499" title="wing root" label="wing root"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623464" start="21839" end="21852" title="stressed skin" label="stressed skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q243293" start="22098" end="22106" title="Sekondi-Takoradi" label="Takoradi"/>
<link wikidata="Q696817" start="22157" end="22176" title="Mediterranean and Middle East theatre of World War II" label="Middle East theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="22202" end="22212" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161151" start="22448" end="22457" title="monocoque" label="monocoque"/>
<link wikidata="Q180087" start="22961" end="22974" title="night fighter" label="night fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="23854" end="23864" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463806" start="23961" end="23985" title="Royal Yugoslav Air Force" label="Royal Yugoslav Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q19818012" start="24039" end="24057" title="Licensed production" label="production licence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="24137" end="24146" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q697842" start="24158" end="24180" title="invasion of Yugoslavia" label="invasion of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="24196" end="24207" title="Axis powers" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q79808" start="24342" end="24351" title="Constanța" label="Constanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029804" start="24633" end="24657" title="Canadian Car and Foundry" label="Canadian Car and Foundry"/>
<link wikidata="Q831550" start="24987" end="24996" title="attrition warfare" label="attrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373778" start="25088" end="25107" title="Auxiliary Air Force" label="Auxiliary Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="25216" end="25229" title="Munich Crisis" label="Munich Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="25352" end="25377" title="German invasion of Poland" label="German invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043097" start="25592" end="25607" title="No. 1 Group RAF" label="No. 1 Group RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106078" start="25609" end="25625" title="Air Vice-Marshal" label="Air Vice-Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7147473" start="25626" end="25642" title="Patrick Playfair" label="Patrick Playfair"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993875" start="25819" end="25850" title="RAF Advanced Air Striking Force" label="RAF Advanced Air Striking Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q263128" start="26195" end="26211" title="Hugh Dowding, 1st Baron Dowding" label="Sir Hugh Dowding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491161" start="26375" end="26376" title="No. 1 Squadron RAF" label="1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043793" start="26378" end="26380" title="No. 73 Squadron RAF" label="73"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043844" start="26382" end="26384" title="No. 85 Squadron RAF" label="85"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056790" start="26389" end="26391" title="No. 87 Squadron RAF" label="87"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043670" start="26583" end="26586" title="No. 607 Squadron RAF" label="607"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043685" start="26591" end="26604" title="No. 615 Squadron RAF" label="615 Squadrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491161" start="26896" end="26901" title="No. 1 Squadron RAF" label="No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043793" start="26906" end="26912" title="No. 73 Squadron RAF" label="No. 73"/>
<link wikidata="Q275022" start="26974" end="26986" title="Berry-au-Bac" label="Berry-au-Bac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886527" start="27019" end="27026" title="Étain-Rouvres Air Base" label="Rouvres"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043844" start="27044" end="27050" title="No. 85 Squadron RAF" label="No. 85"/>
<link wikidata="Q190882" start="28139" end="28149" title="Phoney War" label="Phoney War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043535" start="28185" end="28196" title="No. 46 Squadron RAF" label="46 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q23090" start="28251" end="28263" title="Lincolnshire" label="Lincolnshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q694258" start="28321" end="28335" title="Heinkel He 115" label="Heinkel He 115"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043789" start="28561" end="28572" title="No. 72 Squadron RAF" label="72 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360160" start="28787" end="28801" title="Roland Beamont" label="Roland Beamont"/>
<link wikidata="Q24565995" start="29221" end="29251" title="Boy Mould" label="P. W. O. &amp;quot;Boy&amp;quot; Mould"/>
<link wikidata="Q156742" start="29303" end="29316" title="Dornier Do 17" label="Dornier Do 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q154728" start="29440" end="29444" title="Toul" label="Toul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172592" start="29776" end="29788" title="Peter Ayerst" label="Peter Ayerst"/>
<link wikidata="Q155639" start="29836" end="29856" title="Messerschmitt Bf 109" label="Messerschmitt Bf 109"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416824" start="29924" end="29938" title="Flying Officer" label="Flying Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337309" start="29939" end="29950" title="Cobber Kain" label="Cobber Kain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886527" start="30061" end="30068" title="Étain-Rouvres Air Base" label="Rouvres"/>
<link wikidata="Q222982" start="30119" end="30131" title="Flying ace" label="fighter aces"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690" start="30310" end="30314" title="Metz" label="Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q22640" start="30319" end="30329" title="Thionville" label="Thionville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612276" start="30394" end="30411" title="Gruppenkommandeur" label="Gruppenkommandeur"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="30419" end="30436" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q58641" start="30449" end="30463" title="Werner Mölders" label="Werner Mölders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127034" start="30511" end="30524" title="Hans von Hahn" label="Hans von Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q56506" start="30719" end="30729" title="Blitzkrieg" label="Blitzkrieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="30787" end="30803" title="Battle of France" label="Battle of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q109648767" start="30855" end="30878" title="Newell Orton" label="&amp;quot;Fanny&amp;quot; Orton"/>
<link wikidata="Q156742" start="30991" end="31004" title="Dornier Do 17" label="Dornier Do 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q683442" start="31028" end="31032" title="Kampfgeschwader 2" label="KG 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886527" start="31079" end="31096" title="Étain-Rouvres Air Base" label="Rouvres-en-Woevre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330167" start="31456" end="31469" title="Fairey Battle" label="Fairey Battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q990689" start="31517" end="31528" title="Amifontaine" label="Amifontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41986" start="31583" end="31588" title="Meuse (river)" label="Meuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309" start="31593" end="31603" title="Maastricht" label="Maastricht"/>
<link wikidata="Q137710" start="32043" end="32057" title="Heinkel He 112" label="Heinkel He 112"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="32070" end="32079" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416824" start="32510" end="32524" title="Flying Officer" label="Flying Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6529353" start="32525" end="32535" title="Les Clisby" label="Les Clisby"/>
<link wikidata="Q75608068" start="33275" end="33286" title="Paul Richey" label="Paul Richey"/>
<link wikidata="Q155642" start="33565" end="33572" title="Messerschmitt Bf 110" label="Bf 110s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993875" start="34198" end="34202" title="RAF Advanced Air Striking Force" label="AASF"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489" start="34239" end="34245" title="Troyes" label="Troyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q549999" start="34654" end="34662" title="Merville, Nord" label="Merville"/>
<link wikidata="Q28520" start="34664" end="34673" title="Abbeville" label="Abbeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q648" start="34679" end="34684" title="Lille" label="Lille"/>
<link wikidata="Q630627" start="34685" end="34691" title="Seclin" label="Seclin"/>
<link wikidata="Q911972" start="34724" end="34740" title="Dunkirk evacuation" label="Operation Dynamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q208529" start="34846" end="34863" title="Battle of Dunkirk" label="Battle of Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021684" start="35123" end="35138" title="Willie McKnight" label="Willie McKnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597931" start="35172" end="35195" title="Percival Stanley Turner" label="Percival Stanley Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q154532" start="35468" end="35482" title="Heinkel He 111" label="Heinkel He 111"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595946" start="35785" end="35810" title="Operational Training Unit" label="Operational Training Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q32015063" start="35939" end="35943" title="Aerobatic maneuver" label="loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q32015063" start="35977" end="36000" title="Aerobatic maneuver" label="&amp;quot;flick&amp;quot; rolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q150681" start="36361" end="36367" title="octane" label="octane"/>
<link wikidata="Q340142" start="36368" end="36383" title="avgas" label="aviation spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079988" start="36609" end="36621" title="supercharger" label="supercharger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3909519" start="36979" end="36998" title="war emergency power" label="war emergency power"/>
<link wikidata="Q155639" start="37152" end="37159" title="Messerschmitt Bf 109" label="Bf 109E"/>
<link wikidata="Q155642" start="37211" end="37218" title="Messerschmitt Bf 110" label="Bf 110C"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013228" start="37330" end="37347" title="Flight Lieutenant" label="Flight Lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303672" start="37915" end="37920" title="Dowty Rotol" label="Rotol"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="38597" end="38614" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042971" start="39305" end="39321" title="No. 145 Squadron RAF" label="No. 145 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269413" start="39470" end="39501" title="No. 303 Polish Fighter Squadron" label="No. 303 Polish Fighter Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q263128" start="41262" end="41274" title="Hugh Dowding" label="Hugh Dowding"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41345" end="41352" title="Linatex" label="Linatex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42063" end="42088" title="Incendiary ammunition#World War II" label="de Wilde incendiary round"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786742" start="42253" end="42268" title="Archie McKellar" label="Archie McKellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963282" start="42489" end="42502" title="Brian Carbury" label="Brian Carbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828751" start="42532" end="42556" title="List of aviators who became ace in a day" label="&amp;quot;ace in a day&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q615838" start="42641" end="42644" title="Distinguished Service Order" label="DSO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229534" start="42646" end="42649" title="Distinguished Flying Cross (United Kingdom)" label="DFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537204" start="42656" end="42659" title="Medal bar" label="Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6877378" start="43068" end="43096" title="Miss Shilling&amp;#x27;s orifice" label="Miss Shilling&amp;#x27;s orifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="43139" end="43153" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130229" start="43260" end="43283" title="James Brindley Nicolson" label="James Brindley Nicolson"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064248" start="43287" end="43299" title="No. 249 Squadron RAF" label="249 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="43995" end="44004" title="the Blitz" label="the Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q83643720" start="44086" end="44101" title="Richard Stevens (RAF officer)" label="Richard Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602672" start="44264" end="44283" title="Karel Kuttelwascher" label="Karel Kuttelwascher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491161" start="44287" end="44297" title="No. 1 Squadron RAF" label="1 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043218" start="44561" end="44581" title="No. 247 Squadron RAF" label="No. 247 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043032" start="44698" end="44718" title="No. 176 Squadron RAF" label="No. 176 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="44944" end="44949" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043827" start="45063" end="45074" title="No. 80 Squadron RAF" label="80 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q850179" start="45095" end="45104" title="Gloster Gladiator" label="Gladiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q141640" start="45246" end="45262" title="Fiat CR.42 Falco" label="Fiat CR.42 Falco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895978" start="45335" end="45351" title="Desert Air Force" label="Desert Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q206409" start="45520" end="45548" title="Curtiss P-40" label="Curtiss Tomahawks/Kittyhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517242" start="45822" end="45839" title="Regia Aeronautica" label="Regia Aeronautica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975" start="45840" end="45852" title="Macchi C.202" label="Macchi C.202"/>
<link wikidata="Q901252" start="45981" end="46008" title="Daimler-Benz DB 601" label="more powerful inline engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q26921" start="46026" end="46036" title="Alfa Romeo" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q153376" start="46108" end="46135" title="Second Battle of El Alamein" label="Second Battle of El Alamein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936462" start="46245" end="46251" title="Vickers S" label="cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951417" start="46364" end="46371" title="Bowser (tanker)" label="bowsers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275220" start="46562" end="46579" title="RAF Castel Benito" label="RAF Castel Benito"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="46581" end="46588" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q941081" start="46652" end="46662" title="half-track" label="half-track"/>
<link wikidata="Q20203098" start="46793" end="46825" title="Operation Ochsenkopf" label="&amp;quot;Ochsenkopf&amp;quot; offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q852365" start="46829" end="46836" title="Tunisian Campaign" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q682452" start="47017" end="47033" title="Siege of Malta (World War II)" label="defence of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q850179" start="47114" end="47131" title="Gloster Gladiator" label="Gloster Gladiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="47655" end="47661" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q536742" start="47798" end="47812" title="Blackburn Skua" label="Blackburn Skua"/>
<link wikidata="Q26795" start="47921" end="47934" title="Junkers Ju 87" label="Junkers Ju 87"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="48373" end="48386" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Russian Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="48484" end="48506" title="North African campaign" label="North African campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q207637" start="48966" end="48976" title="Lend-Lease" label="Lend-Lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="49009" end="49021" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="49124" end="49130" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="49686" end="49695" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="49700" end="49706" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043828" start="50025" end="50032" title="No. 81 Squadron RAF" label="Nos. 81"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042932" start="50037" end="50050" title="No. 134 Squadron RAF" label="134 Squadrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042992" start="50054" end="50070" title="No. 151 Wing RAF" label="No. 151 Wing RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="50131" end="50138" title="Aircraft carrier" label="carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q656745" start="50145" end="50150" title="HMS Argus (I49)" label="Argus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763" start="50176" end="50184" title="Murmansk" label="Murmansk"/>
<link wikidata="Q178473" start="50811" end="50835" title="Hero of the Soviet Union" label="Hero of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q893656" start="50845" end="50858" title="Boris Safonov" label="Boris Safonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q819089" start="51784" end="51794" title="Berezin UB" label="Berezin UB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142092" start="51816" end="51828" title="ShVAK cannon" label="ShVAK cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="52382" end="52396" title="Pacific War" label="war with Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="52453" end="52462" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q722674" start="52773" end="52789" title="Brewster Buffalo" label="Brewster Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q696664" start="52824" end="52840" title="Battle of Malaya" label="Malayan campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q702107" start="52862" end="52894" title="Imperial Japanese Army Air Force" label="Imperial Japanese Army Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q700703" start="52911" end="52925" title="Nakajima Ki-43" label="Nakajima Ki-43"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043197" start="53587" end="53599" title="No. 232 Squadron RAF" label="232 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043542" start="53604" end="53621" title="No. 488 Squadron RNZAF" label="488 (NZ) Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53718" end="53727" title="No. 226 Group RAF" label="226 Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q8131" start="54009" end="54018" title="Palembang" label="Palembang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="54020" end="54027" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="54035" end="54058" title="Netherlands East Indies" label="Netherlands East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q296754" start="54708" end="54729" title="Battle of Singapore" label="landings in Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583233" start="54846" end="54865" title="Battle of Palembang" label="invasion of Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q671079" start="54916" end="54930" title="transport ship" label="transport ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="55055" end="55059" title="Java (island)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q301300" start="55337" end="55353" title="Battle of Java" label="Java was invaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q295839" start="55486" end="55500" title="Chūichi Nagumo" label="Chūichi Nagumo"/>
<link wikidata="Q757871" start="55508" end="55536" title="Indian Ocean raid" label="sortie into the Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="55576" end="55582" title="Ceylon" label="Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35381" start="55641" end="55648" title="Colombo" label="Colombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q323873" start="55672" end="55683" title="Trincomalee" label="Trincomalee"/>
<link wikidata="Q116351" start="55735" end="55749" title="Mitsuo Fuchida" label="Mitsuo Fuchida"/>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="55757" end="55779" title="Imperial Japanese Navy" label="Imperial Japanese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="55793" end="55815" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q696128" start="55854" end="55866" title="Nakajima B5N" label="Nakajima B5N"/>
<link wikidata="Q403668" start="55890" end="55899" title="Aichi D3A" label="Aichi D3A"/>
<link wikidata="Q40156" start="55929" end="55948" title="Mitsubishi A6M Zero" label="Mitsubishi A6M Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155676" start="56007" end="56009" title="No. 30 Squadron RAF" label="30"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043235" start="56014" end="56027" title="No. 258 Squadron RAF" label="258 Squadrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393180" start="56047" end="56060" title="Fairey Fulmar" label="Fairey Fulmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644375" start="56065" end="56068" title="803 Naval Air Squadron" label="803"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644387" start="56073" end="56076" title="806 Naval Air Squadron" label="806"/>
<link wikidata="Q19839816" start="56362" end="56384" title="788 Naval Air Squadron" label="788 Naval Air Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390732" start="56839" end="56857" title="SLAF China Bay" label="China Bay airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q233838" start="57167" end="57173" title="Rakhine State" label="Arakan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043775" start="57500" end="57514" title="No. 6 Squadron IAF" label="No. 6 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942064" start="57516" end="57538" title="Royal Indian Air Force" label="Royal Indian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q700703" start="57568" end="57579" title="Ki-43 Oscar" label="Ki-43 Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="57716" end="57723" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q122730247" start="57871" end="57894" title="James Storrar" label="&amp;quot;Jas&amp;quot; Storrar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57898" end="57917" title="No. 1687 Flight RAF" label="No. 1687 Flight RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="58003" end="58020" title="Normandy invasion" label="Normandy invasion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58062" end="58075" title="Hawker Hurricane variants#Sea Hurricanes" label="Sea Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427735" start="58200" end="58213" title="Fleet Air Arm" label="Fleet Air Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="58289" end="58306" title="aircraft carriers" label="aircraft carriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509505" start="58393" end="58406" title="Malta Convoys" label="Malta convoys"/>
<link wikidata="Q253555" start="58427" end="58442" title="escort carriers" label="escort carriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684968" start="58506" end="58519" title="Sea Hurricane" label="Sea Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q46195" start="58555" end="58578" title="HMS Nairana (D05)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Nairana&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q819076" start="58612" end="58618" title="Junkers Ju 290" label="Ju 290"/>
<link wikidata="Q134949" start="58701" end="58711" title="Winter War" label="Winter War"/>
<link wikidata="Q847492" start="58717" end="58734" title="Finnish Air Force" label="Finnish Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400328" start="58950" end="58958" title="St Athan" label="St Athan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25412" start="58969" end="58977" title="Västerås" label="Västerås"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043188" start="59341" end="59347" title="No. 22 Squadron (Finland)" label="LLv 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043298" start="59380" end="59386" title="No. 28 Squadron (Finland)" label="LLv 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043360" start="59408" end="59414" title="No. 30 Squadron (Finland)" label="LLv 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098938" start="59437" end="59450" title="Interim Peace" label="Interim Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q122100" start="59520" end="59536" title="Continuation War" label="Continuation War"/>
<link wikidata="Q820629" start="59678" end="59688" title="Vainikkala" label="Vainikkala"/>
<link wikidata="Q700671" start="59823" end="59847" title="Polikarpov I-153" label="I-153 &amp;quot;Chaika&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q616241" start="59892" end="59902" title="Tupolev SB" label="Tupolev SB"/>
<link wikidata="Q209010" start="59981" end="59997" title="Karelian Isthmus" label="Karelian Isthmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q696089" start="60099" end="60103" title="Polikarpov I-15" label="I-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q733692" start="60191" end="60223" title="Pat Pattle" label="Marmaduke &amp;quot;Pat&amp;quot; Pattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870357" start="60435" end="60451" title="Battle of Athens (1941)" label="Battle of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q348780" start="60488" end="60501" title="Douglas Bader" label="Douglas Bader"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="60582" end="60599" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489176" start="60750" end="60770" title="Frank Reginald Carey" label="Frank Reginald Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019662" start="60854" end="60885" title="William Vale" label="William &amp;quot;Cherry&amp;quot; Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602672" start="60986" end="61005" title="Karel Kuttelwascher" label="Karel Kuttelwascher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922103" start="61134" end="61158" title="Vernon Crompton Woodward" label="Vernon Crompton Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021684" start="61281" end="61296" title="Willie McKnight" label="Willie McKnight"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61361" end="61379" title="Richard P. Stevens" label="Richard P. Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q15434152" start="61443" end="61474" title="Richard John Cork" label="Richard &amp;quot;Dickie&amp;quot; Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427735" start="61491" end="61504" title="Fleet Air Arm" label="Fleet Air Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q981023" start="61633" end="61648" title="Josef František" label="Josef František"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269413" start="61662" end="61681" title="303 Polish Squadron" label="303 Polish Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q665472" start="61789" end="61806" title="Witold Urbanowicz" label="Witold Urbanowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q47087526" start="61928" end="61937" title="Ian Gleed" label="Ian Gleed"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056790" start="62000" end="62019" title="No. 87 Squadron RAF" label="No. 87 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q6768006" start="62088" end="62104" title="Mark Henry Brown" label="Mark Henry Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791529" start="62292" end="62303" title="Arjan Singh" label="Arjan Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229534" start="62365" end="62391" title="Distinguished Flying Cross (United Kingdom)" label="Distinguished Flying Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q330658" start="62485" end="62501" title="Indian Air Force" label="Indian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q233583" start="62592" end="62617" title="Indo-Pakistan war of 1965" label="Indo-Pakistan war of 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q87069412" start="62649" end="62671" title="Winifred Crossley Fair" label="Winifred Crossley Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130229" start="62741" end="62764" title="James Brindley Nicolson" label="James Brindley Nicolson"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161" start="62914" end="62924" title="Roald Dahl" label="Roald Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917369" start="63020" end="63030" title="Going Solo" label="Going Solo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134697" start="63150" end="63155" title="Blade pitch" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q922654" start="63156" end="63165" title="Propeller (aircraft)" label="propeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134697" start="63198" end="63203" title="Blade pitch" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q922654" start="63204" end="63213" title="Propeller (aircraft)" label="propeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412885" start="63230" end="63248" title="Rolls-Royce Merlin" label="Rolls-Royce Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q259255" start="63303" end="63303" title=".303 British" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q484019" start="63304" end="63325" title="M1919 Browning machine gun" label="Browning machine guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q283666" start="63432" end="63444" title="de Havilland" label="de Havilland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303672" start="63448" end="63453" title="Dowty Rotol" label="Rotol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532217" start="63614" end="63638" title="Gloster Aircraft Company" label="Gloster Aircraft Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029804" start="63650" end="63674" title="Canadian Car and Foundry" label="Canadian Car and Foundry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029804" start="63752" end="63776" title="Canadian Car and Foundry" label="Canadian Car and Foundry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532217" start="64519" end="64543" title="Gloster Aircraft Company" label="Gloster Aircraft Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532217" start="65317" end="65341" title="Gloster Aircraft Company" label="Gloster Aircraft Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q781156" start="65357" end="65376" title="Austin Motor Company" label="Austin Aero Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029804" start="65398" end="65422" title="Canadian Car and Foundry" label="Canadian Car and Foundry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620698" start="65906" end="65919" title="Hispano-Suiza HS.404" label="Hispano Mk.II"/>
<link wikidata="Q208187" start="66122" end="66135" title="ground attack aircraft" label="ground-attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q180087" start="66213" end="66226" title="night fighter" label="night fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680087" start="66231" end="66239" title="intruder (air combat)" label="intruder"/>
<link wikidata="Q820248" start="66432" end="66449" title="Gun pod" label="gondola-style pod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936462" start="66769" end="66782" title="Vickers S gun" label="Vickers S gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118479" start="67841" end="67867" title="Imperial Iranian Air Force" label="Imperial Iranian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479025" start="67936" end="67963" title="Packard V-1650 Merlin" label="Packard-built Merlin engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031336" start="68651" end="68678" title="RP-3" label="&amp;quot;60 pounder&amp;quot; RP-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q221519" start="69584" end="69589" title="Burma Campaign" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029804" start="69879" end="69903" title="Canadian Car and Foundry" label="Canadian Car and Foundry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029804" start="69988" end="70012" title="Canadian Car and Foundry" label="Canadian Car and Foundry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029804" start="72459" end="72483" title="Canadian Car and Foundry" label="Canadian Car and Foundry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100482" start="72696" end="72720" title="General Aircraft Limited" label="General Aircraft Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022779" start="72758" end="72766" title="CAM ship" label="CAM ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031873" start="72769" end="72777" title="Aircraft catapult" label="catapult"/>
<link wikidata="Q105999" start="72784" end="72795" title="Cargo ship" label="merchantman"/>
<link wikidata="Q157485" start="74450" end="74476" title="Focke-Wulf Fw 200 Condor" label="Fw 200C &amp;quot;Condor&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322774" start="74933" end="74958" title="merchant aircraft carrier" label="merchant aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q697344" start="75229" end="75246" title="Dornier Do 18" label="Do 18 flying-boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927362" start="75864" end="75882" title="Operation Pedestal" label="Operation Pedestal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618827" start="77003" end="77010" title="Hillson Bi-mono" label="Bi-mono"/>
<link wikidata="Q15253917" start="77168" end="77179" title="RAF Sealand" label="RAF Sealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825663" start="77208" end="77257" title="Aeroplane and Armament Experimental Establishment" label="Aeroplane and Armament Experimental Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424183" start="77600" end="77610" title="F24 camera" label="F24 camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="79028" end="79034" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360160" start="79809" end="79824" title="Roland Beamont" label="Beamont, Roland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965219" start="80552" end="80568" title="Walter J. Boyne" label="Boyne, Walter J."/>
<link wikidata="Q4697856" start="82912" end="82926" title="Air Enthusiast" label="Air Enthusiast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828207" start="84059" end="84076" title="Air International" label="Air International"/>
<link wikidata="Q116457700" start="84737" end="84752" title="Philip Jarrett" label="Jarrett, Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825662" start="84802" end="84819" title="Aeroplane Monthly" label="Aeroplane Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697856" start="86808" end="86822" title="Air Enthusiast" label="Air Enthusiast"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="57973" wikidata="Q2593718" url="?curid=57973" title="Tony Robinson">
<text>Sir Anthony Robinson (born 15 August 1946) is an English actor, author, broadcaster, and political activist. He played Baldrick in the BBC television sitcom &quot;Blackadder&quot; and has presented many historical documentaries, including the Channel 4 series &quot;Time Team&quot; and &quot;The Worst Jobs in History&quot;. He has written 16 children&#x27;s books.

As a member of the Labour Party, Robinson was knighted in the 2013 Queen&#x27;s Birthday Honours for his public and political service.

==Early life==
Robinson was born on 15 August 1946 in Homerton, London, to Phyllis (1916–2005) and Leslie Robinson (1913–1989). His parents were from working-class Hackney backgrounds; his father was a civil servant and council employee who served in the RAF, and his mother, an audio-typist, served in the WAAF. He attended the private Woodford Green Preparatory School and Wanstead County High grammar school. He passed four O-levels (English language, English literature, history, and geography) and went on to study for A-levels, but did not complete them and decided to study at a drama school instead. Too young to attend the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, Robinson enrolled at the Central School of Speech and Drama in 1963, graduating in 1966.

Robinson had his first acting role at the age of 13, as a member of Fagin&#x27;s gang in the original production of the musical &quot;Oliver!&quot;, including a stint as the Artful Dodger when the boy playing the role failed to turn up. Over the next five years, he appeared in a number of West End theatre shows, and in film, and television.

Through genealogical research, Robinson found that one of his great-great-great grandmothers, Julia Levy, was Jewish; his father, unaware of this ancestry, had been beaten by Fascists in the East End of London in the 1930s who assumed he was a Jew.

==Acting career==
===Early career===
After drama school, he spent four years in repertory theatre most notably at the West Yorkshire Playhouse in Leeds. Robinson won an Arts Council bursary to work as a director at the Midlands Arts Centre, Birmingham, and founded the Avon Touring Company, a Bristol-based community theatre company, with writer David Illingworth. He played a small role as student doctor Grace in the 1972–73 series of &quot;Doctor In Charge&quot;.

Robinson appeared in the 1974–75 season at Chichester Festival Theatre, as Angel Chicago in the nativity musical &quot;Follow The Star&quot;. In the 1975 season, he appeared as Hovstad in Henrik Ibsen&#x27;s &quot;An Enemy of the People&quot;. In 1976, he appeared as Feste in &quot;Twelfth Night&quot;, and as Majorin in &quot;Monsieur Perrichon&#x27;s Travels&quot;.

In 1972, Robinson starred in the children&#x27;s educational programme &quot;Sam on Boffs&#x27; Island&quot; and was later a presenter on &quot;Play Away&quot;. He also appeared in the award-winning &quot;Horizon&quot; documentary &quot;Joey&quot;, and in the title role in the BBC production of &quot;The Miracle of Brother Humphrey&quot;. He also appeared in the film &quot;Brannigan&quot; starring John Wayne, in which he shared two speaking part scenes with Wayne, playing a motorcycle courier who is pushed off a quay into the Thames by Wayne. He was also one of the team in the Channel 4 comedy/satirical series &quot;Who Dares Wins&quot; in the early/mid-1980s. He was also seen in &quot;The Rag Trade&quot;&#x27;s 1970s reboot.

===&quot;Blackadder&quot; period (1983–1989)===
Robinson came to prominence in 1983 for his role in the British historical sitcom &quot;Blackadder&quot;, as Edmund Blackadder&#x27;s dogsbody Baldrick. In the first series, broadcast as &quot;The Black Adder&quot;, he was quite astute, while his master was an idiot. Later series (&quot;Blackadder II&quot;, &quot;Blackadder the Third&quot;, &quot;Blackadder Goes Forth&quot;) moved the duo through history and switched the relationship: the Edmund Blackadder of &quot;Blackadder II&quot; was a brilliant schemer, whereas Baldrick had devolved into a buffoon whose catchphrase was &quot;I have a cunning plan&quot;.

In addition to his acting on &quot;Blackadder&quot;, Robinson also wrote and narrated several &quot;Jackanory&quot;-style children&#x27;s programmes, encouraged by Richard Curtis. Programmes in this style included &quot;Tales From Fat Tulip&#x27;s Garden&quot; (continued in &quot;Fat Tulip Too&quot;), &quot;Odysseus: The Greatest Hero of Them All&quot; (a retelling of the &quot;Iliad&quot; and the &quot;Odyssey&quot;) and &quot;Blood and Honey&quot; (tales from the Old Testament, filmed on location).

Robinson also performed within the BBC Radio 4 comedy &quot;Delve Special&quot; (1984–1987), written by Tony Sarchet.

===After &quot;Blackadder&quot; (1989–1999)===

After &quot;Blackadder&quot;, Robinson became the narrator and one of the lead actors for the British animated series &quot;Nellie the Elephant&quot;, based on the song of the same name. The series ran from 1989 until 1991 and was screened on Children&#x27;s ITV.

Robinson also provided voice-over for the cartoon short &quot;Free-Ranger&quot;, an English child-scripted arts-funded production in 1989. Robinson also presented the early-Saturday evening series &quot;Stay Tooned&quot; for BBC 1, which featured a selection of classic Warner Bros. and MGM cartoons. In 1989, after attending a pantomime at Tyndale Baptist Church, Bristol, which was based on the Robin Hood story but featuring Maid Marian as the lead role, he created the children&#x27;s comedy series &quot;Maid Marian and her Merry Men&quot;, a loose retelling of the legend of Robin Hood in which he appeared as the Sheriff of Nottingham. Four series were broadcast on BBC1 from 1989 until 1994. In 1990 he appeared as &quot;Shlomo Denkoviz&quot; in an episode of &quot;Bergerac&quot;, entitled &quot;My Name&#x27;s Sergeant Bergerac&quot; (Series 8, Episode 2).

Also in 1994, Robinson played a minor part in an episode of the television series &quot;Minder&quot;, called &quot;One Flew Over the Parents&#x27; Nest&quot;, in which he played a character called &quot;Willie the Weed&quot;.

===1999–2010===
In 1999, Robinson returned to star as Baldrick in a one-off short film in the &quot;Blackadder&quot; series, made to celebrate the new millennium. Entitled &quot;&quot;, it was screened in the Millennium Dome throughout 2000 and was later aired on BBC One in 2002.

Robinson also contributed the voiceover for the television series &quot;Airline&quot; screened from 1999 and focusing on the daily routine of EasyJet staff at a selection of airports. The series was made for ITV and is often repeated today on Sky Real Lives, Sky One, Sky Two, Sky Three (now Sky Mix), and ITV2. Robinson worked as the narrator for six of the remaining nine series until 2006 when it ended.

&quot;Tony Robinson&#x27;s Cunning Night Out&quot;, a largely improvised one-man stage show, followed in early 2005 and included a mix of the many themes from his career for which Robinson is famous. The show was later released on DVD.

In addition to telling his own stories, Robinson narrated the abridged audiobook versions of Terry Pratchett&#x27;s &quot;Discworld&quot; novels. Nigel Planer, Celia Imrie, and Stephen Briggs narrated the unabridged versions. He also provided the voicing for several characters in the videogame &quot;Discworld&quot;. He followed on this &quot;Discworld&quot; work by playing a role in the live action television dramatisation of &quot;Hogfather&quot;, broadcast on Sky over the Christmas season in 2006.

Robinson also presented Classic FM&#x27;s &quot;Friendly Guide to Classical Music&quot; which aired on a Sunday at 4pm. The whole 16-episode series was repeated on 26 December 2006. He revealed on the BBC Radio 2 feature &quot;Tracks of My Years&quot; that his favourite songs are: &quot;I Can Help&quot; by Billy Swan, &quot;Bleeding Love&quot; by Leona Lewis, &quot;Chasing Cars&quot; by Snow Patrol, &quot;Beautiful&quot; by Christina Aguilera, &quot;Unfinished Sympathy&quot; by Massive Attack, &quot;Tangled Up In Blue&quot; by Bob Dylan, &quot;Shoulda Woulda Coulda&quot; by Beverley Knight, &quot;This Woman&#x27;s Work&quot; by Maxwell, &quot;He&#x27;s So Fine&quot; by the Chiffons, and &quot;Falling Slowly&quot; by the Frames.

In 2007, Robinson narrated television advertisements for Honda, in the humorous style of &quot;Tales From Fat Tulip&#x27;s Garden&quot;. The advertisements feature plastic cars with expressive faces (similar to &quot;Thomas the Tank Engine&quot;). He also did voiceovers for cleaning products Domestos and Vanish from 2007 until 2009. Also in 2007, Robinson visited 30 towns in Britain and Ireland with &quot;A Cunning Night Out&quot;.

In July 2009, Robinson appeared in the light-hearted BBC1 series &quot;Hotel Babylon&quot; as a sly hit-man named Arthur Barnes. The character is knocked unconscious by a flying bottle expertly lobbed by the hotel manager during a showdown in the lobby.

=== 2010–present ===

In September 2013, Robinson played the Fool in the Gala Performance of William Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;King Lear&quot; at the Old Vic in London, directed by Jonathan Miller .

In 2014, Robinson played the title role in a touring production of &quot;The Hypochondriac&quot;, Richard Bean&#x27;s new translation of Molière&#x27;s &quot;Le malade imaginaire&quot;, directed by Lindsay Posner.

In 2016 and 2017, Robinson played the antagonist &#x27;Daddy&#x27; in Man Down alongside Greg Davies and Roisin Conaty.

In 2019, Robinson guested in the episode &#x27;The Dig&#x27; in Series 5 of the ITV comedy Plebs (TV series) as an Archaeologist called Daedalus Graeco.

==History presenter==

=== Beginnings and &quot;Time Team&quot; (1994–2001) ===

In 1994, Robinson began presenting &quot;Time Team&quot;, a TV programme devoted to archaeological investigations limited to three days. The series spanned 20 years, and included 59 one-off specials, which paved the way for his later history presenting career.

In 2005 Exeter University conferred an honorary doctorate on Robinson, and honorary professorships on principal presenter Mick Aston and producer Tim Taylor, to reflect its great appreciation for what &quot;Time Team&quot; has done for the public understanding of archaeology in the UK. In the 2011 episode &quot;Hitler&#x27;s Island Fortress&quot;, Robinson described himself as an amateur archaeologist.

=== Broader history presenting (2001–2012) ===
From 2001, Robinson branched out into other history documentary series, including the series &quot;Fact or Fiction&quot; (which debunked historical myths and gave the true story), followed by &quot;Romans&quot; in 2003 and the highly successful &quot;The Worst Jobs in History&quot; in 2006, researching and re-enacting some of the more horrible jobs of the past millennium. He also took this show on tour around the country along with an autobiographical question and answer session. This first series was followed by &quot;The Worst Christmas Jobs in History&quot; in December 2005 and then a second series of &quot;The Worst Jobs in History&quot; on Channel 4 in April 2006.

Following this, he presented one-off specials such as &quot;Britain&#x27;s Real Monarch&quot; (2004) and &quot;The Real Da Vinci Code&quot; (2005).

With Channel 4 in 2005, Robinson presented a special called &quot;Tony Robinson&#x27;s Titanic Adventure&quot; where he joined director James Cameron on his final dive to the wreck of the RMS Titanic. Also with Channel 4, he presented &quot;Tony Robinson&#x27;s Crime and Punishment&quot;, &quot;Catastrophe&quot; and &quot;Man on Earth&quot; focusing on humanity&#x27;s struggle with climate change in the past 200,000 years. &quot;Unexplained with Tony Robinson&quot; was first broadcast on Channel 4 in December 2008. In this series, Robinson investigates paranormal phenomena combining the fields of archaeology, parapsychology, history and spiritualism to investigate paranormal evidence. He also presented &quot;The Doomsday Code&quot; in 2006.

From 1 September 2010, Robinson hosted a series on the National Geographic Channel called &quot;Birth of Britain&quot; which was repeated on Channel 4 beginning in January 2011. In 2011 he also presented &quot;Gods and Monsters&quot;.

&quot;Tony Robinson Explores Australia&quot; was first broadcast in the first half of 2012. Filmed in High Definition, the series roughly follows a chronology from the earliest sightings of &quot;Terra Australis Incognita&quot; through to the present with each era defined by a theme rather than equal blocks of time.

From 10 September 2012, Robinson hosted a series on History Channel called &quot;Tony Robinson&#x27;s Time Walks&quot;. The series uncovers stories that shaped the character of various cities and suburbs around Australia, including Fremantle, Melbourne, Hobart, Woolloomooloo, Bendigo, Newcastle, Carlton, Brisbane, St Kilda, Adelaide, Canberra, Kalgoorlie, Townsville and Launceston. He also went to Christchurch, New Zealand. In 2015, Robinson continued his history presenting in Australia with &quot;Tour of Duty&quot;, again on History Channel.

During October 2012, it was announced that &quot;Time Team&quot; would be cancelled after nearly 20 years on television. Tara Conlan from &quot;The Guardian&quot; called the show &quot;television history&quot;. When talking about the successful run of the show, Robinson said, &quot;Not many performers are given the privilege of featuring in two iconic TV series—but I&#x27;ve been lucky.&quot; The show&#x27;s ratings were falling, causing Channel 4 to pursue an alternative &quot;innovative&quot; approach to historical documentary programming.

=== Post-&quot;Time Team&quot; and presenting other history documentaries (2012–present) ===
Between 2012 and 2014, Robinson presented a series of programmes for Channel 4 called &quot;Walking Through History&quot;. It featured Robinson hiking through iconic British landscapes, including the Cairngorms, the Jurassic Coast and Stonehenge. At least 16 hour-long episodes were aired, in four series. A further three-part series called &quot;Britain&#x27;s Ancient Tracks with Tony Robinson&quot; was shown on Channel 4 in 2016. A second four-part series of &quot;Britain&#x27;s Ancient Tracks&quot; was aired in 2017.

In 2014, Robinson presented a history of The Great War titled &quot;Tony Robinson&#x27;s World War 1&quot;. He also presented &quot;The Real Mill&quot;, revealing the true history to the Channel 4 series, The Mill.

In 2015, Robinson presented a three-hour-long programmes for Discovery TV, &quot;Tony Robinson&#x27;s Wild West&quot; (also known as &quot;Tony Robinson&#x27;s Wild West in 3D&quot;), in which he attempted to uncover the reality of America&#x27;s Wild West in the 19th and early 20th centuries. Featuring such key figures as Wyatt Earp, Geronimo and Buffalo Bill, it included artefacts and stereographic images. Also in 2015 he hosted a short-lived programme &quot;Time Crashers.&quot;

In 2016, Robinson hosted &quot;Hidden Britain By Drone&quot;, exploring parts of Britain only accessible by drone. A second series ran in 2018.

In February 2017, Robinson hosted his self-titled Channel Five programme &quot;Tony Robinson: Coast to Coast&quot;.

In 2018 Robinson continued his work with Channel Five presenting &quot;Britain&#x27;s Great Cathedrals&quot; where he uncovers the history behind six of Britain&#x27;s best cathedrals. He also presented a two-part series on Ancient Egypt called &quot;Egyptian Tomb Hunting&quot;.

In March 2019, Robinson premiered &quot;Around the World by Train with Tony Robinson&quot; on Channel 5 where he travelled to Asia, Australia and South America by rail. Series two of the programme premiered in March 2020.

In June 2019, Robinson presented a four-part series on Channel 5 titled &quot;The Thames: Britain&#x27;s Great River with Tony Robinson&quot; where he walks the River Thames from source to the mouth.

In January 2020 Robinson premiered a new programme on Channel 5, &quot;Tony Robinson&#x27;s History of Britain&quot;. A second series was broadcast in 2021.

In January 2021 Robinson returned to present the third series of his shows about the River Thames on Channel 5, now retitled &quot;The Secret Life of the Thames with Tony Robinson&quot;.

In 2021, Robinson narrated a series &quot;World War 2 From Above&quot; on UKTV.

In 2022, Robinson presented a new show for Channel 4 titled &quot;Tony Robinson&#x27;s Museum of Us&quot;.

In 2022, Robinson was confirmed to return to the re-boot of Time Team in 2023.

==Broadcasting career==
In 2023, Robinson started broadcasting a weekly history podcast called &quot;Tony Robinson&#x27;s Cunningcast&quot;.

==Politics and charity work==
Robinson identifies as a democratic socialist and an allied member of the Jewish Labour Movement. From 1996 to 2000, Robinson was vice-president of the actors&#x27; union Equity, helping with a restructuring programme which turned a £500,000 deficit into a small surplus. He continues to work within Equity. In 2000, he was elected to the Labour Party&#x27;s National Executive Committee, a position he held until 2004.

Robinson was active in the Make Poverty History campaign in 2005, and is the patron for UK-based charity Street Child Africa.

In March 2011, Robinson participated in the &quot;March for the Alternative&quot; protests in Central London, which opposed the Cameron–Clegg coalition&#x27;s spending cuts programme.

Robinson is honorary president of the Young Archaeologists&#x27; Club of the Council for British Archaeology. Robinson has shown his support for the Burma Campaign UK, an NGO that aims to highlight human rights violations in Myanmar under the State Peace and Development Council.

Robinson is a patron of older people&#x27;s charity Alive, saying that the organisation is &quot;at the forefront of promoting stimulating activities which help improve the quality of life of people in care&quot;. Alive works to transform the residential care sector, so that older people&#x27;s mental, social and emotional well-being is prioritised alongside their physical care.

Robinson is a patron of the RSPCA Derby Abbey street animal rehoming centre in Derby, after adopting a dog from the centre.

Robinson was knighted in the 2013 Birthday Honours for public and political service.

On 23 June 2018, Robinson appeared at the People&#x27;s Vote march in London to mark the second anniversary of the referendum to leave the European Union. People&#x27;s Vote was a campaign group calling for a referendum on the final Brexit deal between the UK and the European Union.

On 3 May 2019, Robinson announced that he had left the Labour Party after more than 40 years of membership, citing his dissatisfaction with the leadership of Jeremy Corbyn and the party&#x27;s handling of Brexit and antisemitism allegations. He subsequently rejoined on 4 April 2020 after Corbyn&#x27;s resignation and Keir Starmer&#x27;s election as Labour leader.

On the day of the 2024 general election, Robinson campaigned for the Labour party, and posted to TikTok and Twitter, telling voters to &quot;vote today, vote change, [and] vote Labour&quot; in the &quot;crucial&quot; election.

==Personal life==
Robinson was first married in 1969 to Barbara (&quot;Bardy&quot;) Henshall, and divorced four years later. He was married from the late 1970s until 1992 to Mary Shepherd, with whom he had two children. He married Louise Hobbs in 2011.

In 2006, Robinson appeared in &quot;Tony Robinson: Me and My Mum&quot;, a documentary surrounding his decision to find a nursing home for his mother, and the difficulty he had doing so. The documentary showed his mother&#x27;s death in the home. It also featured stories from other families in similar situations. It appeared as part of Channel 4&#x27;s short series of programmes titled &quot;The Trouble with Old People&quot;.

In late 2009, Robinson was invited to be guest speaker at the Pride of Craegmoor Awards, where he gave a speech about his time with his mother and finding a care home. He then went on to give the prizes to Craegmoor&#x27;s Shining Star and Leading Light. In January 2016, he described Alzheimer&#x27;s as &quot;one of the last great medical terrors&quot; and announced he would be leaving money to the Alzheimer&#x27;s Society in his will.

Robinson is a fan of EFL Championship club Bristol City F.C. He is also a fan of the rock band Genesis and provided sleeve notes for the reissue of the album &quot;The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway&quot; as part of the &quot;Genesis 1970–1975&quot; box set.

==Honours and awards==
*1999: Honorary Master of Arts (M.A.) degree from the University of Bristol for his services to drama and archaeology.
*2002: Honorary Master of Arts (M.A.) degree by the University of East London.
*2005: Honorary degree of Doctor of the University (D.Univ.) from the Open University for his contribution to the educational or cultural well-being of society.
*2005: Honorary Doctor of Laws (LL.D.) degree from the University of Exeter for his active involvement in politics.
*2006: Honorary degree of Doctor of the University (D.Univ.) from Oxford Brookes University.
*2008: James Joyce Award from the Literary and Historical Society of UCD.
*2011: Honorary Doctor of Science (D.Sc.) degree by University of Chester.
*2013: Knighthood from Queen Elizabeth II in her 2013 Birthday Honours List.
*2019: Honorary Doctor of Letters (D.Litt.) degree from the University of Aberdeen.

== Selected filmography ==
* &quot;Sam on Boff&#x27;s Island&quot; (1972) – Sam Samson
* &quot;Doctor in Charge&quot; (1973) – Reginald Grace
* &quot;Brannigan&quot; (1975) – Messenger
* &quot;The Boys and Mrs B&quot; (1977) - Mark
* &quot;Who Dares Wins&quot; (1983-1988) - Various characters
* &quot;Blackadder&quot; (1983-1989, 1999) – Baldrick
* &quot;The Young Ones&quot; (1984 Episode entitled &quot;Bambi&quot;) – Dr. Not-The-Nine-O&#x27;clock-News
* &quot;Maid Marian and her Merry Men&quot; (1989-1994) – Sheriff of Nottingham &amp; creator/writer
* &quot;Stay Tooned&quot; (1990-1996) – Presenter
* &quot;Blood and Honey&quot; (1991) – Presenter (Storyteller)
* &quot;Young Indiana Jones&quot; (1992) – Pierre Duclos
* &quot;The Neverending Story III&quot; (1994) – Engywook (male gnome)
* &quot;Time Team&quot; (1994–2013) – Presenter
* &quot;Wrestling with the Big One&quot; (1995) – Presenter (Storyteller)
* &quot;I&#x27;m Starting School&quot; (1995) – Timmy the Tortoise (voice)
* &quot;Holed&quot; (1996) – Hugh
* &quot;My Wonderful Life&quot; (1997-1999) – Alan
* &quot;Faeries&quot; (1999) – Broom (voice)
* &quot;Minder&quot; (&quot;One Flew Over the Parents&#x27; Nest&quot;, Series 10, Episode 4) (1994) – Willie the Weed
* &quot;Fact or Fiction&quot; (2001–2004) – Presenter (Channel 4)
* &quot;Mrs Calicot&#x27;s Cabbage War&quot; (2002) – Nick Reid
* &quot;Romans (documentary)&quot; (2003) – Presenter
* &quot;Britain&#x27;s Real Monarch&quot; (2004) – Presenter
* &quot;The Worst Jobs in History&quot; (2004–07) – Presenter (Channel 4)
* &quot;The Real Da Vinci Code&quot; (2005) – Presenter (Channel 4)
* &quot;Tony Robinson&#x27;s Titanic Adventure&quot; (2005) - Presenter (Channel 4)
* &quot;Spider-Plant Man&quot; (2005) – Robin
* &quot;Terry Pratchett&#x27;s Hogfather&quot; (2006) – Vernon Crumley
* &quot;The Doomsday Code&quot; (2006) – Presenter
* &quot;Codex&quot; (2006–2007) – Presenter (Tuesday Morning Channel 4 and 4 HD)
* &quot;Unexplained&quot; (2008) – Presenter (Channel 4)
* &quot;Tony Robinson&#x27;s Crime and Punishment&quot; (2008) – Presenter
* &quot;Catastrophe&quot; (2008) – Presenter
* &quot;Big Top&quot; (2009)
* &quot;Airline&quot; – Narrator
* &quot;Hotel Babylon&quot; – Arthur – Series 4, Episode 3 (2009)
* &quot;Jam TV&quot; (2009) – Himself, Episode 5
* &quot;Man on Earth&quot; (2009) – Presenter
* &quot;Birth of Britain&quot; (2010) – Presenter (Channel 4)
* &quot;Tony Robinson Explores Australia&quot; (2011) – Presenter (The History Channel Australia)
* &quot;Tony Robinson&#x27;s God&#x27;s and Monsters&quot; (2011–12) – Presenter (Channel 4)
* &quot;Tony Robinson&#x27;s Time Walks&quot; (2012–2014) – Presenter (The History Channel Australia)
* &quot;The Life Of the Midland &amp; South Western Junction Railway&quot; (2012) – Contributor (Independent Film)
* &quot;Walking Through History&quot; (2013–2014) – Presenter and Producer (Channel 4 and SBS)
* &quot;The Real Mill&quot; (2014) – Presenter (Channel 4)
* &quot;Tony Robinson&#x27;s World War 1&quot; (2014) – Presenter (Discovery)
* &quot;Tony Robinson&#x27;s Tour of Duty&quot; (2015) – Presenter (The History Channel Australia)
* &quot;Tony Robinson&#x27;s Wild West&quot; (2015) – Presenter (Discovery)
* &quot;Time Crashers&quot; (2015) – Host (Channel 4)
* &quot;Imaginative Storytelling Experiences featuring &#x27;Tales from Fat Tulip&#x27;s Garden&quot; (2016) – Contributor (Independent Film)
* &quot;Britain&#x27;s Ancient Tracks with Tony Robinson&quot; (2016–2018) – Presenter (Channel 4 and SBS)
* &quot;Man Down&quot; (2016)
* &quot;Hidden Britain by Drone&quot; (2016–2018) – Presenter (Channel 4)
* &quot;Tony Robinson: Coast to Coast&quot; (2017) - Presenter (Channel 5 and SBS)
* &quot;Britain&#x27;s Great Cathedrals with Tony Robinson&quot; (2018) – Presenter (Channel 5)
*&quot;Egyptian Tomb Hunting&quot; (2018) - Presenter (Channel 5)
*&quot;Around The World By Train With Tony Robinson&quot; (2019–20) - Presenter (Channel 5)
*&quot;The Thames: Britain&#x27;s Great River with Tony Robinson&quot; (2019-2021) - Presenter (Channel 5) (also known under the alternative title &quot;The Secret Life of the Thames with Tony Robinson&quot;)
*&quot;Tony Robinson&#x27;s History of Britain&quot; (2020–21) - Presenter (Channel 5)
*&quot;World War II from Above&quot; (2021) - Narrator (Yesterday)
*&quot;Britain&#x27;s Forgotten Wars with Tony Robinson&quot; (2021) - Presenter (Channel 4)
*&quot;Thames at Night with Tony Robinson&quot; (2021) - Presenter (Channel 5)
*&quot;Tony Robinson&#x27;s Museum of Us&quot; (2022) - Presenter (More4)
*&quot;The Madame Blanc Mysteries&quot; (2022) - Uncle Patrick (Channel 5)
*&quot;The Great Christmas Bake Off!&quot; (2022) - Contestant (Channel 4)
*&quot;Britain&#x27;s Forgotten Wars with Tony Robinson&quot; (2021) - Presenter (Channel 5)
*&quot;Britain on Film with Tony Robinson&quot; (2022) - Presenter (Apple TV)
*&quot;Tony Robinson&#x27;s Museum of Us&quot; (2022)- Presenter (Channel 4)
*&quot;Tony Robinson&#x27;s Marvellous Machines&quot; (2023) - Presenter (Yesterday)

*&quot;The Masked Singer&quot; (2023) - Contestant (ITV1)

== Selected books written by Robinson ==
* &quot;Odysseus: The Greatest Hero of Them All&quot; (1986) co-written by Richard Curtis [children&#x27;s book]
* &quot;Maid Marian and Her Merry Men&quot; (1989) [children&#x27;s book]
* &quot;Odysseus Superhero&quot; (1996) co-written by Amanda Robinson and Richard Curtis [children&#x27;s book]
* &quot;The Hutchinson Book of Kings and Queens of England&quot; (1999) illustrated by Posy Simmonds, Babette Cole and Nicholas Allan [children&#x27;s book]
* &quot;Tony Robinson&#x27;s History of Australia: From New Holland to Neighbours&quot; (2001) [travel book]
* &quot;Tony Robinson&#x27;s Kings and Queens&quot; (2001) illustrated by Tony Robinson [children&#x27;s book]
* &quot;Archaeology is Rubbish: A Beginner&#x27;s Guide&quot; (2002) co-written by Michael Aston
* &quot;In Search of British Heroes&quot; (2003) [biography]
* &quot;The&quot; &quot;Worst Jobs in History&quot; (2005) illustrated by Mike Phillips [children&#x27;s book]
* &quot;Bad Kids: The Worst-Behaved Children in History&quot; (2009) illustrated by Mike Phillips [children&#x27;s book]
* &quot;Tony Robinson&#x27;s&quot; &quot;Bad Kids: The Naughtiest Children in History&quot; (2011) illustrated by Del Thorpe [children&#x27;s book]
* &quot;Tony Robinson&#x27;s Weird World of Wonders!&quot; series, illustrated by Del Thorpe [children&#x27;s book]. Topics include &quot;Romans&quot; (2012); &quot;Egyptians&quot; (2012); &quot;British&quot; (2012); &quot;Greeks&quot; (2012); &quot;World War II&quot; (2013); &quot;Inventions: A World Book Day Book&quot; (2013); &quot;Pets&quot; (2015); &quot;Joke Book&quot; (2017)
* &quot;Skulduggery&quot; (2014) illustrated by Jamie Smith [children&#x27;s book]
* &quot;Tony Robinson: No Cunning Plan&quot; (2016) [autobiography]

==References==
==External links==
* Tony Robinson presents the Birth of Britain on National Geographic Channel – starts 1 September 2010
* &quot;Tony Robinson&#x27;s cunning plan&quot; – BBC News article dated Friday 26 May 2000
* Tony Robinson – Interviews in Sherwood
* &quot;The Worst Children&#x27;s Jobs in History&quot; Interview about book (November 2005)
* &quot;Time Team&quot; – Television series</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2593718" start="0" end="20" title="Tony Robinson" label="Sir Anthony Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130740" start="119" end="127" title="Baldrick" label="Baldrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="135" end="138" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q49019" start="163" end="173" title="Blackadder" label="Blackadder"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="243" end="252" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788226" start="266" end="275" title="Time Team" label="Time Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776210" start="292" end="317" title="The Worst Jobs in History" label="The Worst Jobs in History"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="386" end="398" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q768855" start="413" end="421" title="Knighthood (UK)" label="knighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954072" start="429" end="463" title="2013 Queen&amp;#x27;s Birthday Honours" label="2013 Queen&amp;#x27;s Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744319" start="557" end="565" title="Homerton" label="Homerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="567" end="573" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q58888182" start="667" end="674" title="Hackney, London" label="Hackney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914968" start="810" end="814" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Auxiliary Air Force" label="WAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032654" start="840" end="873" title="Woodford Green Preparatory School" label="Woodford Green Preparatory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968100" start="878" end="898" title="Wanstead High School" label="Wanstead County High"/>
<link wikidata="Q967098" start="899" end="913" title="grammar school" label="grammar school"/>
<link wikidata="Q13634883" start="930" end="938" title="O-levels" label="O-levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q379609" start="1027" end="1035" title="A-levels" label="A-levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q523926" start="1135" end="1164" title="Royal Academy of Dramatic Art" label="Royal Academy of Dramatic Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q981195" start="1191" end="1225" title="Central School of Speech and Drama" label="Central School of Speech and Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392000" start="1324" end="1329" title="Fagin" label="Fagin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483458" start="1390" end="1397" title="Oliver!" label="Oliver!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783187" start="1430" end="1443" title="Artful Dodger" label="Artful Dodger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="1546" end="1562" title="West End theatre" label="West End theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893282" start="1930" end="1947" title="repertory" label="repertory theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987042" start="1968" end="1992" title="West Yorkshire Playhouse" label="West Yorkshire Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="1996" end="2001" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722166" start="2069" end="2089" title="Midlands Arts Centre" label="Midlands Arts Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="2091" end="2101" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="2143" end="2150" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095994" start="2361" end="2388" title="Chichester Festival Theatre" label="Chichester Festival Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q51628" start="2414" end="2422" title="Nativity of Jesus" label="nativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q36661" start="2506" end="2518" title="Henrik Ibsen" label="Henrik Ibsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305319" start="2532" end="2554" title="An Enemy of the People" label="An Enemy of the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445659" start="2586" end="2591" title="Feste" label="Feste"/>
<link wikidata="Q221211" start="2601" end="2614" title="Twelfth Night" label="Twelfth Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408388" start="2765" end="2790" title="Sam on Boffs&amp;#x27; Island" label="Sam on Boffs&amp;#x27; Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203005" start="2832" end="2841" title="Play Away" label="Play Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112475" start="2893" end="2900" title="Horizon (British TV series)" label="Horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="2966" end="2969" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q898759" start="3064" end="3073" title="Brannigan (film)" label="Brannigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q40531" start="3089" end="3099" title="John Wayne" label="John Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="3272" end="3281" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997194" start="3312" end="3326" title="Who Dares Wins (TV series)" label="Who Dares Wins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759257" start="3383" end="3396" title="The Rag Trade" label="The Rag Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q49019" start="3561" end="3571" title="Blackadder" label="Blackadder"/>
<link wikidata="Q942939" start="3582" end="3599" title="Edmund Blackadder" label="Edmund Blackadder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288459" start="3607" end="3615" title="dogsbody" label="dogsbody"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130740" start="3616" end="3624" title="Baldrick" label="Baldrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555174" start="3666" end="3681" title="The Black Adder" label="The Black Adder"/>
<link wikidata="Q942939" start="3716" end="3726" title="Prince Edmund (Blackadder)" label="his master"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668056" start="3761" end="3774" title="Blackadder II" label="Blackadder II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887578" start="3788" end="3808" title="Blackadder the Third" label="Blackadder the Third"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740751" start="3822" end="3843" title="Blackadder Goes Forth" label="Blackadder Goes Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q942939" start="3916" end="3933" title="Edmund Blackadder" label="Edmund Blackadder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116072" start="4191" end="4200" title="Jackanory" label="Jackanory"/>
<link wikidata="Q355300" start="4255" end="4269" title="Richard Curtis" label="Richard Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679226" start="4311" end="4345" title="Tales From Fat Tulip&amp;#x27;s Garden" label="Tales From Fat Tulip&amp;#x27;s Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="4400" end="4408" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="4472" end="4477" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="4498" end="4505" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="4561" end="4574" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254935" start="4658" end="4671" title="Delve Special" label="Delve Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q6990160" start="4889" end="4908" title="Nellie the Elephant (cartoon)" label="Nellie the Elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997305" start="5008" end="5027" title="CITV" label="Children&amp;#x27;s ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605055" start="5233" end="5244" title="Stay Tooned! (TV programme)" label="Stay Tooned"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="5255" end="5260" title="BBC 1" label="BBC 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="5300" end="5312" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="5317" end="5320" title="MGM" label="MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409536" start="5358" end="5367" title="pantomime" label="pantomime"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="5395" end="5402" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q122634" start="5427" end="5437" title="Robin Hood" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859473" start="5539" end="5568" title="Maid Marian and her Merry Men" label="Maid Marian and her Merry Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q122634" start="5611" end="5621" title="Robin Hood" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712262" start="5650" end="5671" title="Sheriff of Nottingham" label="Sheriff of Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="5703" end="5707" title="BBC1" label="BBC1"/>
<link wikidata="Q960233" start="5804" end="5812" title="Bergerac (TV series)" label="Bergerac"/>
<link wikidata="Q632653" start="5986" end="5992" title="Minder (TV series)" label="Minder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6013" end="6049" title="List of Minder episodes#One Flew Over the Parents&amp;#x27; Nest" label="One Flew Over the Parents&amp;#x27; Nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q29014" start="6334" end="6349" title="Millennium Dome" label="Millennium Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="6389" end="6396" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234492" start="6479" end="6486" title="Airline (1998 TV series)" label="Airline"/>
<link wikidata="Q191551" start="6549" end="6556" title="EasyJet" label="EasyJet"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="6615" end="6618" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537481" start="6650" end="6664" title="Sky Real Lives" label="Sky Real Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q909662" start="6666" end="6673" title="Sky One" label="Sky One"/>
<link wikidata="Q843428" start="6675" end="6682" title="Sky Two" label="Sky Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289316" start="6699" end="6706" title="Sky Mix" label="Sky Mix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715155" start="6713" end="6717" title="ITV2" label="ITV2"/>
<link wikidata="Q106833" start="7123" end="7132" title="audiobook" label="audiobook"/>
<link wikidata="Q46248" start="7145" end="7160" title="Terry Pratchett" label="Terry Pratchett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257270" start="7174" end="7183" title="Discworld" label="Discworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232106" start="7198" end="7210" title="Nigel Planer" label="Nigel Planer"/>
<link wikidata="Q467502" start="7212" end="7223" title="Celia Imrie" label="Celia Imrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498524" start="7229" end="7243" title="Stephen Briggs" label="Stephen Briggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228607" start="7353" end="7362" title="Discworld (video game)" label="Discworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q617847" start="7488" end="7497" title="Terry Pratchett&amp;#x27;s Hogfather" label="Hogfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033167" start="7518" end="7521" title="British Sky Broadcasting" label="Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128150" start="7582" end="7592" title="Classic FM (UK)" label="Classic FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911675" start="7606" end="7639" title="Friendly Guide to Classical Music" label="Friendly Guide to Classical Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="7759" end="7770" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q325562" start="7866" end="7876" title="Billy Swan" label="Billy Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183519" start="7907" end="7918" title="Leona Lewis" label="Leona Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188407" start="7948" end="7959" title="Snow Patrol" label="Snow Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q41594" start="7986" end="8004" title="Christina Aguilera" label="Christina Aguilera"/>
<link wikidata="Q357418" start="8041" end="8055" title="Massive Attack" label="Massive Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047985" start="8063" end="8081" title="Tangled Up In Blue" label="Tangled Up In Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="8091" end="8100" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q508171" start="8139" end="8154" title="Beverley Knight" label="Beverley Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378643" start="8194" end="8201" title="Maxwell (singer)" label="Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5688613" start="8209" end="8226" title="He&amp;#x27;s So Fine" label="He&amp;#x27;s So Fine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386995" start="8236" end="8248" title="the Chiffons" label="the Chiffons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550391" start="8284" end="8294" title="the Frames" label="the Frames"/>
<link wikidata="Q9584" start="8354" end="8359" title="Honda" label="Honda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679226" start="8392" end="8426" title="Tales From Fat Tulip&amp;#x27;s Garden" label="Tales From Fat Tulip&amp;#x27;s Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257965" start="8514" end="8536" title="Thomas the Tank Engine" label="Thomas the Tank Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089295" start="8590" end="8598" title="Domestos" label="Domestos"/>
<link wikidata="Q25203167" start="8603" end="8609" title="Vanish (stain remover)" label="Vanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q608555" start="8805" end="8818" title="Hotel Babylon (BBC series)" label="Hotel Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="9082" end="9101" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q181598" start="9115" end="9124" title="King Lear" label="King Lear"/>
<link wikidata="Q868806" start="9134" end="9145" title="the Old Vic" label="the Old Vic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435905" start="9169" end="9184" title="Jonathan Miller" label="Jonathan Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324038" start="9286" end="9298" title="Richard Bean" label="Richard Bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q588161" start="9346" end="9366" title="The Imaginary Invalid" label="Le malade imaginaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6552783" start="9386" end="9400" title="Lindsay Posner" label="Lindsay Posner"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997261" start="9473" end="9481" title="Man Down (TV series)" label="Man Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q13419448" start="9615" end="9632" title="Plebs (TV series)" label="Plebs (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788226" start="9800" end="9809" title="Time Team" label="Time Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="9843" end="9857" title="archaeology" label="archaeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805125" start="9949" end="9957" title="Time Team (specials)" label="specials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414861" start="10029" end="10046" title="Exeter University" label="Exeter University"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="10060" end="10078" title="honorary doctorate" label="honorary doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326175" start="10143" end="10153" title="Mick Aston" label="Mick Aston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362777" start="10667" end="10685" title="Romans (documentary)" label="&amp;quot;Romans&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776210" start="10726" end="10751" title="The Worst Jobs in History" label="The Worst Jobs in History"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969235" start="11214" end="11241" title="Britain&amp;#x27;s Real Monarch" label="Britain&amp;#x27;s Real Monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q42574" start="11439" end="11452" title="James Cameron" label="James Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q25173" start="11491" end="11502" title="RMS Titanic" label="RMS Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823283" start="11544" end="11585" title="Tony Robinson&amp;#x27;s Crime and Punishment" label="Tony Robinson&amp;#x27;s Crime and Punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051564" start="11599" end="11610" title="Catastrophe (2008 TV series)" label="Catastrophe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746433" start="11627" end="11639" title="Man on Earth" label="Man on Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133621" start="11688" end="11702" title="Climate change (general concept)" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q332102" start="11862" end="11872" title="paranormal" label="paranormal"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="11907" end="11918" title="archaeology" label="archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q179098" start="11920" end="11934" title="parapsychology" label="parapsychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578143" start="11948" end="11960" title="Spiritualism (beliefs)" label="spiritualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q157118" start="12110" end="12137" title="National Geographic Channel" label="National Geographic Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="12196" end="12205" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q12687764" start="12662" end="12677" title="History (Australian TV channel)" label="History Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q24884792" start="12691" end="12722" title="Tony Robinson&amp;#x27;s Time Walks" label="Tony Robinson&amp;#x27;s Time Walks"/>
<link wikidata="Q606212" start="12842" end="12851" title="Fremantle" label="Fremantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="12853" end="12862" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q40191" start="12864" end="12870" title="Hobart" label="Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2678743" start="12872" end="12885" title="Woolloomooloo" label="Woolloomooloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q497793" start="12887" end="12894" title="Bendigo" label="Bendigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q57278" start="12896" end="12905" title="Newcastle, New South Wales" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q47002" start="12907" end="12914" title="Carlton, Victoria" label="Carlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="12916" end="12924" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q823531" start="12926" end="12934" title="St Kilda, Victoria" label="St Kilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="12936" end="12944" title="Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="12946" end="12954" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q329503" start="12956" end="12966" title="Kalgoorlie" label="Kalgoorlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q190021" start="12968" end="12978" title="Townsville" label="Townsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q339527" start="12983" end="12993" title="Launceston, Tasmania" label="Launceston"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="13011" end="13023" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12687764" start="13142" end="13157" title="History (Australian TV channel)" label="History Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="13304" end="13316" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="13602" end="13611" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q42847092" start="13894" end="13917" title="Walking Through History" label="Walking Through History"/>
<link wikidata="Q747064" start="14002" end="14012" title="Cairngorms" label="Cairngorms"/>
<link wikidata="Q575976" start="14018" end="14032" title="Jurassic Coast" label="Jurassic Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q39671" start="14037" end="14047" title="Stonehenge" label="Stonehenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q30688717" start="14149" end="14197" title="Britain&amp;#x27;s Ancient Tracks with Tony Robinson" label="Britain&amp;#x27;s Ancient Tracks with Tony Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="14368" end="14381" title="World War I" label="The Great War"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="14514" end="14523" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997810" start="14532" end="14540" title="The Mill (TV series)" label="The Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q43404" start="14604" end="14616" title="Discovery TV" label="Discovery TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q44616" start="14868" end="14878" title="Wyatt Earp" label="Wyatt Earp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2791" start="14880" end="14888" title="Geronimo" label="Geronimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q202285" start="14893" end="14905" title="Buffalo Bill" label="Buffalo Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q35158" start="14933" end="14946" title="Stereoscopy" label="stereographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q20992493" start="15008" end="15021" title="Time Crashers" label="Time Crashers"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="15138" end="15143" title="Unmanned aerial vehicle" label="drone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="15225" end="15237" title="Channel 5 (British TV channel)" label="Channel Five"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15254" end="15283" title="Tony Robinson: Coast to Coast" label="Tony Robinson: Coast to Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="15333" end="15345" title="Channel 5 (British TV channel)" label="Channel Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="15516" end="15529" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="15957" end="15969" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="16240" end="16252" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350273" start="16417" end="16421" title="UKTV" label="UKTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q189280" start="16809" end="16829" title="democratic socialism" label="democratic socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q16851303" start="16858" end="16880" title="Jewish Labour Movement" label="Jewish Labour Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384659" start="16955" end="16961" title="British Actors&amp;#x27; Equity Association" label="Equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="17123" end="17135" title="The Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091265" start="17143" end="17171" title="National Executive Committee (Labour Party)" label="National Executive Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183278" start="17232" end="17252" title="Make Poverty History" label="Make Poverty History"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354215" start="17426" end="17440" title="Central London" label="Central London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719801" start="17460" end="17483" title="Cameron–Clegg coalition" label="Cameron–Clegg coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998867" start="17594" end="17625" title="Council for British Archaeology" label="Council for British Archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999330" start="17666" end="17683" title="Burma Campaign UK" label="Burma Campaign UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="17742" end="17749" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062377" start="17760" end="17795" title="State Peace and Development Council" label="State Peace and Development Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="18319" end="18327" title="Knight Bachelor" label="knighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q55074877" start="18434" end="18452" title="People&amp;#x27;s Vote" label="People&amp;#x27;s Vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="18503" end="18545" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="the referendum to leave the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q291169" start="18835" end="18848" title="Jeremy Corbyn" label="Jeremy Corbyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="18882" end="18888" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q48698770" start="18893" end="18905" title="Antisemitism in the British Labour Party" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383803" start="18996" end="19008" title="Keir Starmer" label="Keir Starmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q78851988" start="19062" end="19083" title="2024 United Kingdom general election" label="2024 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q48938223" start="19141" end="19147" title="TikTok" label="TikTok"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="19152" end="19159" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q837142" start="19647" end="19659" title="nursing home" label="nursing home"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="19863" end="19872" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="20241" end="20257" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080503" start="20358" end="20382" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s Society" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q19510" start="20418" end="20434" title="EFL Championship" label="EFL Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q19456" start="20440" end="20456" title="Bristol City F.C." label="Bristol City F.C"/>
<link wikidata="Q151012" start="20492" end="20499" title="Genesis (band)" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q753867" start="20561" end="20591" title="The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway" label="The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5877086" start="20619" end="20636" title="Genesis 1970–1975" label="Genesis 1970–1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091008" start="20692" end="20706" title="Master of Arts" label="Master of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q459506" start="20730" end="20751" title="University of Bristol" label="University of Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091008" start="20811" end="20825" title="Master of Arts" label="Master of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345942" start="20847" end="20872" title="University of East London" label="University of East London"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="20900" end="20924" title="Doctor of the University" label="Doctor of the University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413375" start="20944" end="20959" title="Open University" label="Open University"/>
<link wikidata="Q959320" start="21051" end="21065" title="Doctor of Laws" label="Doctor of Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414861" start="21090" end="21110" title="University of Exeter" label="University of Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="21177" end="21201" title="Doctor of the University" label="Doctor of the University"/>
<link wikidata="Q132478" start="21217" end="21242" title="Oxford Brookes University" label="Oxford Brookes University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806623" start="21251" end="21268" title="James Joyce Award" label="James Joyce Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647647" start="21278" end="21309" title="Literary and Historical Society (University College Dublin)" label="Literary and Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068258" start="21313" end="21316" title="University College Dublin" label="UCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248352" start="21334" end="21351" title="Doctor of Science" label="Doctor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q762243" start="21370" end="21391" title="University of Chester" label="University of Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="21400" end="21410" title="Knight Bachelor" label="Knighthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="21416" end="21434" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954072" start="21442" end="21468" title="2013 Birthday Honours" label="2013 Birthday Honours List"/>
<link wikidata="Q837343" start="21486" end="21503" title="Doctor of Letters" label="Doctor of Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q270532" start="21530" end="21552" title="University of Aberdeen" label="University of Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408388" start="21590" end="21615" title="Sam on Boff&amp;#x27;s Island" label="Sam on Boff&amp;#x27;s Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287488" start="21650" end="21666" title="Doctor in Charge" label="Doctor in Charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q898759" start="21705" end="21714" title="Brannigan (film)" label="Brannigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q107439545" start="21748" end="21766" title="The Boys and Mrs B" label="The Boys and Mrs B"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997194" start="21795" end="21809" title="Who Dares Wins (TV series)" label="Who Dares Wins"/>
<link wikidata="Q49019" start="21857" end="21867" title="Blackadder" label="Blackadder"/>
<link wikidata="Q49022" start="21911" end="21925" title="The Young Ones (TV series)" label="The Young Ones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853370" start="21961" end="21966" title="Bambi (The Young Ones)" label="Bambi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859473" start="22019" end="22048" title="Maid Marian and her Merry Men" label="Maid Marian and her Merry Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q685962" start="22233" end="22252" title="The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles" label="Young Indiana Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q699299" start="22290" end="22315" title="The Neverending Story III" label="The Neverending Story III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788226" start="22361" end="22370" title="Time Team" label="Time Team"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22592" end="22609" title="My Wonderful Life (TV series)" label="My Wonderful Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429331" start="22643" end="22650" title="Faeries (1999 film)" label="Faeries"/>
<link wikidata="Q632653" start="22688" end="22694" title="Minder (TV series)" label="Minder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22708" end="22744" title="List of Minder episodes#One Flew Over the Parents&amp;#x27; Nest" label="One Flew Over the Parents&amp;#x27; Nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362777" start="22937" end="22957" title="Romans (documentary)" label="Romans (documentary)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969235" start="22991" end="23018" title="Britain&amp;#x27;s Real Monarch" label="Britain&amp;#x27;s Real Monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776210" start="23052" end="23077" title="The Worst Jobs in History" label="The Worst Jobs in History"/>
<link wikidata="Q4508520" start="23278" end="23294" title="Spider-Plant Man" label="Spider-Plant Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q59996" start="23310" end="23315" title="Robin (comics)" label="Robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q617847" start="23324" end="23356" title="Terry Pratchett&amp;#x27;s Hogfather" label="Terry Pratchett&amp;#x27;s Hogfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902717" start="23446" end="23451" title="Codex (TV series)" label="Codex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823283" start="23584" end="23625" title="Tony Robinson&amp;#x27;s Crime and Punishment" label="Tony Robinson&amp;#x27;s Crime and Punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051564" start="23659" end="23670" title="Catastrophe (2008 TV series)" label="Catastrophe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16827272" start="23704" end="23711" title="Big Top (British TV series)" label="Big Top"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234492" start="23733" end="23740" title="Airline (1998 TV series)" label="Airline"/>
<link wikidata="Q608555" start="23766" end="23779" title="Hotel Babylon (BBC series)" label="Hotel Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746433" start="23881" end="23893" title="Man on Earth" label="Man on Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q24884792" start="24180" end="24211" title="Tony Robinson&amp;#x27;s Time Walks" label="Tony Robinson&amp;#x27;s Time Walks"/>
<link wikidata="Q42847092" start="24397" end="24420" title="Walking Through History" label="Walking Through History"/>
<link wikidata="Q20992493" start="24804" end="24817" title="Time Crashers" label="Time Crashers"/>
<link wikidata="Q30688717" start="25000" end="25048" title="Britain&amp;#x27;s Ancient Tracks with Tony Robinson" label="Britain&amp;#x27;s Ancient Tracks with Tony Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997261" start="25107" end="25115" title="Man Down (TV series)" label="Man Down"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25211" end="25240" title="Tony Robinson: Coast to Coast" label="Tony Robinson: Coast to Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q8052976" start="25892" end="25901" title="Yesterday (TV channel)" label="Yesterday"/>
<link wikidata="Q110264153" start="26156" end="26182" title="The Madame Blanc Mysteries" label="The Madame Blanc Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q81522459" start="26640" end="26657" title="The Masked Singer (British TV series)" label="The Masked Singer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="57974" wikidata="Q154720" url="?curid=57974" title="Battle of Britain">
<text>The Battle of Britain () was a military campaign of the Second World War, in which the Royal Air Force (RAF) and the Fleet Air Arm (FAA) of the Royal Navy defended the United Kingdom (UK) against large-scale attacks by Nazi Germany&#x27;s air force, the Luftwaffe. It was the first major military campaign fought entirely by air forces. The British officially recognise the battle&#x27;s duration as being from 10 July until 31 October 1940, which overlaps the period of large-scale night attacks known as the Blitz, that lasted from 7 September 1940 to 11 May 1941. German historians do not follow this subdivision and regard the battle as a single campaign lasting from July 1940 to May 1941, including the Blitz.

The primary objective of the German forces was to compel Britain to agree to a negotiated peace settlement. In July 1940, the air and sea blockade began, with the Luftwaffe mainly targeting coastal-shipping convoys, as well as ports and shipping centres such as Portsmouth. On 1 August, the Luftwaffe was directed to achieve air superiority over the RAF, with the aim of incapacitating RAF Fighter Command; 12 days later, it shifted the attacks to RAF airfields and infrastructure. As the battle progressed, the Luftwaffe also targeted factories involved in aircraft production and strategic infrastructure. Eventually, it employed terror bombing on areas of political significance and on civilians.

The Germans had rapidly overwhelmed France and the Low Countries in the Battle of France, leaving Britain to face the threat of invasion by sea. The German high command recognised the difficulties of a seaborne attack while the Royal Navy controlled the English Channel and the North Sea. On 16 July, Hitler ordered the preparation of Operation Sea Lion as a potential amphibious and airborne assault on Britain, to follow once the Luftwaffe had air superiority over the Channel. In September, RAF Bomber Command night raids disrupted the German preparation of converted barges, and the Luftwaffe&#x27;s failure to overwhelm the RAF forced Hitler to postpone and eventually cancel Operation Sea Lion. The Luftwaffe proved unable to sustain daylight raids, but their continued night-bombing operations on Britain became known as the Blitz.

Germany&#x27;s failure to destroy Britain&#x27;s air defences and force it out of the war was the first major German defeat in the Second World War. The Battle of Britain takes its name from the speech given by Prime Minister Winston Churchill to the House of Commons on 18 June: &quot;What General Weygand called the &#x27;Battle of France&#x27; is over. I expect that the Battle of Britain is about to begin.&quot;

==Background==
Strategic bombing during World War I introduced air attacks intended to panic civilian targets and led in 1918 to the merger of the British army and navy air services into the Royal Air Force (RAF). Its first Chief of the Air Staff, Hugh Trenchard, was among the military strategists in the 1920s, like Giulio Douhet, who saw air warfare as a new way to overcome the bloody stalemate of trench warfare. Interception was expected to be nearly impossible, with fighter planes no faster than bombers. Their slogan was that the bomber will always get through, and that the only defence was a deterrent bomber force capable of matching retaliation. Predictions were made that a bomber offensive would quickly cause thousands of deaths and civilian hysteria leading to capitulation. However, widespread pacifism following the horrors of the First World War contributed to a reluctance to provide resources.

===Developing air strategies===
Germany was forbidden a military air force by the 1919 Treaty of Versailles, and therefore air crew were trained by means of civilian and sport flying. Following a 1923 memorandum, the Deutsche Luft Hansa airline developed designs for aircraft such as the Junkers Ju 52, which could carry passengers and freight, but also be readily adapted into a bomber. In 1926, the secret Lipetsk fighter-pilot school began training Germans in the Soviet Union. Erhard Milch organised rapid expansion, and following the 1933 Nazi seizure of power, his subordinate Robert Knauss formulated a deterrence theory incorporating Douhet&#x27;s ideas and Tirpitz&#x27;s &quot;risk theory&quot;. This proposed a fleet of heavy bombers to deter a preventive attack by France and Poland before Germany could fully rearm. A 1933–34 war game indicated a need for fighters and anti-aircraft protection as well as bombers. On 1 March 1935, the Luftwaffe was formally announced, with Walther Wever as Chief of Staff. The 1935 Luftwaffe doctrine for &quot;Conduct of Air War&quot; (&quot;Luftkriegführung&quot;) set air power within the overall military strategy, with critical tasks of attaining (local and temporary) air superiority and providing battlefield support for army and naval forces. Strategic bombing of industries and transport could be decisive longer-term options, dependent on opportunity or preparations by the army and navy. It could be used to overcome a stalemate, or used when only destruction of the enemy&#x27;s economy would be conclusive. The list excluded bombing civilians to destroy homes or undermine morale, as that was considered a waste of strategic effort, but the doctrine allowed revenge attacks if German civilians were bombed. A revised edition was issued in 1940, and the continuing central principle of Luftwaffe doctrine was that destruction of enemy armed forces was of primary importance.

The RAF responded to Luftwaffe developments with its 1934 Expansion Plan A rearmament scheme, and in 1936 it was restructured into Bomber Command, Coastal Command, Training Command and Fighter Command. The last was under Hugh Dowding, who opposed the doctrine that bombers were unstoppable: the invention of radar at that time could allow early detection, and prototype monoplane fighters were significantly faster. Priorities were disputed, but in December 1937, the Minister in charge of Defence Coordination, Sir Thomas Inskip, sided with Dowding that &quot;The role of our air force is not an early knock-out blow&quot; but rather was &quot;to prevent the Germans from knocking us out&quot; and fighter squadrons were just as necessary as bomber squadrons.

The Spanish Civil War (1936–1939) gave the Luftwaffe Condor Legion the opportunity to test air fighting tactics with their new aeroplanes. Wolfram von Richthofen became an exponent of air power providing ground support to other services. The difficulty of accurately hitting targets prompted Ernst Udet to require that all new bombers had to be dive bombers, and led to the development of the Knickebein system for night time navigation. Priority was given to producing large numbers of smaller aeroplanes, and plans for a long-range, four-engined strategic bomber were cancelled.

===First stages of the Second World War===
 The early stages of the Second World War saw successful German invasions on the continent, aided decisively by the air power of the Luftwaffe, which was able to establish tactical air superiority with great effectiveness. The speed with which German forces defeated most of the defending armies in Norway in early 1940 created a significant political crisis in Britain. In early May 1940, the Norway Debate questioned the fitness for office of the British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain. On 10 May, the same day Winston Churchill became British Prime Minister, the Germans initiated the Battle of France with an aggressive invasion of French territory. RAF Fighter Command was desperately short of trained pilots and aircraft. Churchill sent fighter squadrons, the Air Component of the British Expeditionary Force, to support operations in France, where the RAF suffered heavy losses. This was despite the objections of its commander Hugh Dowding that the diversion of his forces would leave home defences under-strength.

After the evacuation of British and French soldiers from Dunkirk and the French surrender on 22 June 1940, Hitler mainly focused his energies on the possibility of invading the Soviet Union. He believed that the British, defeated on the continent and without European allies, would quickly come to terms. The Germans were so convinced of an imminent armistice that they began constructing street decorations for the homecoming parades of victorious troops. Although the British Foreign Secretary, Lord Halifax, and certain elements of the British public favoured a negotiated peace with an ascendant Germany, Churchill and a majority of his Cabinet refused to consider an armistice. Instead, Churchill used his skilful rhetoric to harden public opinion against capitulation and prepare the British for a long war.

The Battle of Britain has the unusual distinction that it gained its name before being fought. The name is derived from the &quot;This was their finest hour&quot; speech delivered by Winston Churchill in the House of Commons on 18 June, more than three weeks prior to the generally accepted date for the start of the battle:

===German aims and directives===
 From the outset of his rise to power, Adolf Hitler expressed admiration for Britain, and throughout the Battle period he sought neutrality or a peace treaty with Britain. In a secret conference on 23 May 1939, Hitler set out his rather contradictory strategy that an attack on Poland was essential and &quot;will only be successful if the Western Powers keep out of it. If this is impossible, then it will be better to attack in the West and to settle Poland at the same time&quot; with a surprise attack. &quot;If Holland and Belgium are successfully occupied and held, and if France is also defeated, the fundamental conditions for a successful war against England will have been secured. England can then be blockaded from Western France at close quarters by the Air Force, while the Navy with its submarines extend the range of the blockade.&quot;

When war commenced, Hitler and the OKW (&quot;Oberkommando der Wehrmacht&quot; or &quot;High Command of the Armed Forces&quot;) issued a series of directives ordering, planning and stating strategic objectives. &quot;Directive No. 1 for the Conduct of the War&quot;, dated 31 August 1939, instructed the invasion of Poland on 1 September as planned. Potentially, Luftwaffe &quot;operations against England&quot; were to:
Both France and the UK declared war on Germany; on 9 October, Hitler&#x27;s &quot;Directive No. 6&quot; planned the offensive to defeat these allies and &quot;win as much territory as possible in the Netherlands, Belgium, and northern France to serve as a base for the successful prosecution of the air and sea war against England&quot;. On 29 November, OKW &quot;Directive No. 9 – Instructions For Warfare Against The Economy Of The Enemy&quot; stated that once this coastline had been secured, the Luftwaffe together with the Kriegsmarine (German Navy) was to blockade UK ports with sea mines. They were to attack shipping and warships and make air attacks on shore installations and industrial production. This directive remained in force in the first phase of the Battle of Britain. It was reinforced on 24 May during the Battle of France by &quot;Directive No. 13&quot;, which authorised the Luftwaffe &quot;to attack the English homeland in the fullest manner, as soon as sufficient forces are available. This attack will be opened by an annihilating reprisal for English attacks on the Ruhr Basin.&quot;

By the end of June 1940, Germany had defeated Britain&#x27;s allies on the continent, and on 30 June the OKW Chief of Staff, Alfred Jodl, issued his review of options to increase pressure on Britain to agree to a negotiated peace. The first priority was to eliminate the RAF and gain air supremacy. Intensified air attacks against shipping and the economy could affect food supplies and civilian morale in the long term. Reprisal attacks of terror bombing had the potential to cause quicker capitulation, but the effect on morale was uncertain. On the same day, the Luftwaffe Commander-in-Chief, Hermann Göring issued his operational directive: to destroy the RAF, thus protecting German industry, and also to block overseas supplies to Britain. The German Supreme Command argued over the practicality of these options.

In &quot;Directive No. 16 – On preparations for a landing operation against England&quot; on 16 July, Hitler required readiness by mid-August for the possibility of an invasion he called Operation Sea Lion, unless the British agreed to negotiations. The Luftwaffe reported that it would be ready to launch its major attack early in August. The Kriegsmarine Commander-in-Chief, Grand Admiral Erich Raeder, continued to highlight the impracticality of these plans and said sea invasion could not take place before early 1941. Hitler now argued that Britain was holding out in hope of assistance from Russia, and the Soviet Union was to be invaded by mid 1941. Göring met his air fleet commanders, and on 24 July issued &quot;Tasks and Goals&quot; of firstly gaining air supremacy, secondly protecting invasion forces and attacking the Royal Navy&#x27;s ships. Thirdly, they were to blockade imports, bombing harbours and stores of supplies.

Hitler&#x27;s &quot;Directive No. 17 – For the conduct of air and sea warfare against England&quot; issued on 1 August attempted to keep all the options open. The Luftwaffe&#x27;s &quot;Adlertag&quot; campaign was to start around 5 August, subject to weather, with the aim of gaining air superiority over southern England as a necessary precondition of invasion, to give credibility to the threat and give Hitler the option of ordering the invasion. The intention was to incapacitate the RAF so much that the UK would feel open to air attack, and would begin peace negotiations. It was also to isolate the UK and damage war production, beginning an effective blockade. Following severe Luftwaffe losses, Hitler agreed at a 14 September OKW conference that the air campaign was to intensify regardless of invasion plans. On 16 September, Göring gave the order for this change in strategy, to the first independent strategic bombing campaign.

====Negotiated peace or neutrality====
Hitler&#x27;s 1925 book &quot;Mein Kampf&quot; mostly set out his hatreds: he only admired ordinary German World War I soldiers and Britain, which he saw as an ally against communism. In 1935 Hermann Göring welcomed news that Britain, as a potential ally, was rearming. In 1936 he promised assistance to defend the British Empire, asking only a free hand in Eastern Europe, and repeated this to Lord Halifax in 1937. That year, von Ribbentrop met Churchill with a similar proposal; when rebuffed, he told Churchill that interference with German domination would mean war. To Hitler&#x27;s great annoyance, all his diplomacy failed to stop Britain from declaring war when he invaded Poland. During the fall of France, he repeatedly discussed peace efforts with his generals.

When Churchill came to power, there was still wide support for Halifax, who as Foreign Secretary openly argued for peace negotiations in the tradition of British diplomacy, to secure British independence without war. On 20 May, Halifax secretly requested a Swedish businessman to make contact with Göring to open negotiations. Shortly afterwards, in the May 1940 War Cabinet Crisis, Halifax argued for negotiations involving the Italians, but this was rejected by Churchill with majority support. An approach made through the Swedish ambassador on 22 June was reported to Hitler, making peace negotiations seem feasible. Throughout July, as the battle started, the Germans made wider attempts to find a diplomatic solution. On 2 July, the day the armed forces were asked to start preliminary planning for an invasion, Hitler got von Ribbentrop to draft a speech offering peace negotiations. On 19 July Hitler made this speech to the German Parliament in Berlin, appealing &quot;to reason and common sense&quot;, and said he could &quot;see no reason why this war should go on&quot;. His sombre conclusion was received in silence, but he did not suggest negotiations and this was perceived as being effectively an ultimatum by the British government, which rejected the offer. Halifax kept trying to arrange peace until he was sent to Washington in December as ambassador, and in January 1941 Hitler expressed continued interest in negotiating peace with Britain.

====Blockade and siege====
A May 1939 planning exercise by Luftflotte 3 found that the Luftwaffe lacked the means to do much damage to Britain&#x27;s war economy beyond laying naval mines. Joseph Schmid, in charge of Luftwaffe intelligence, presented a report on 22 November 1939, stating that, &quot;Of all Germany&#x27;s possible enemies, Britain is the most dangerous.&quot; This &quot;Proposal for the Conduct of Air Warfare&quot; argued for a counter to the British blockade and said &quot;Key is to paralyse the British trade&quot;. Instead of the Wehrmacht attacking the French, the Luftwaffe with naval assistance was to block imports to Britain and attack seaports. &quot;Should the enemy resort to terror measuresfor example, to attack our towns in western Germany&quot; they could retaliate by bombing industrial centres and London. Parts of this appeared on 29 November in &quot;Directive No. 9&quot; as future actions once the coast had been conquered. On 24 May 1940 &quot;Directive No. 13&quot; authorised attacks on the blockade targets, as well as retaliation for RAF bombing of industrial targets in the Ruhr.

After the defeat of France, the OKW felt they had won the war, and some more pressure would persuade Britain to give in. On 30 June, the OKW Chief of Staff Alfred Jodl issued his paper setting out options: the first was to increase attacks on shipping, economic targets and the RAF: air attacks and food shortages were expected to break morale and lead to capitulation. Destruction of the RAF was the first priority, and invasion would be a last resort. Göring&#x27;s operational directive issued the same day ordered the destruction of the RAF to clear the way for attacks cutting off seaborne supplies to Britain. It made no mention of invasion.

====Invasion plans====
In November 1939, the OKW reviewed the potential for an air- and seaborne invasion of Britain: the Kriegsmarine was faced with the threat the Royal Navy&#x27;s larger Home Fleet posed to a crossing of the English Channel, and together with the German Army viewed control of airspace as a necessary precondition. The German navy thought air superiority alone was insufficient; the German naval staff had already produced a study (in 1939) on the possibility of an invasion of Britain and concluded that it also required naval superiority. The Luftwaffe said invasion could only be &quot;the final act in an already victorious war.&quot;

Hitler first discussed the idea of an invasion at a 21 May 1940 meeting with Grand Admiral Erich Raeder, who stressed the difficulties and his own preference for a blockade. OKW Chief of Staff Jodl&#x27;s 30 June report described invasion as a last resort once the British economy had been damaged and the Luftwaffe had full air superiority. On 2 July, OKW requested preliminary plans.

In Britain, Churchill described &quot;the great invasion scare&quot; as &quot;serving a very useful purpose&quot; by &quot;keeping every man and woman tuned to a high pitch of readiness&quot;. Historian Len Deighton stated that on 10 July Churchill advised the War Cabinet that invasion could be ignored, as it &quot;would be a most hazardous and suicidal operation&quot;.

On 11 July, Hitler agreed with Raeder that invasion would be a last resort, and the Luftwaffe advised that gaining air superiority would take 14 to 28 days. Hitler met his army chiefs, von Brauchitsch and Halder, at the Berchtesgaden on 13 July where they presented detailed plans on the assumption that the navy would provide safe transport. Von Brauchitsch and Halder were surprised that Hitler took no interest in the invasion plans, unlike his usual attitude toward military operations, but on 16 July he issued Directive No. 16, ordering preparations for Operation Sea Lion.

The navy insisted on a narrow beachhead and an extended period for landing troops; the army rejected these plans: the Luftwaffe could begin an air attack in August. Hitler held a meeting of his army and navy chiefs on 31 July. The navy said 22 September was the earliest possible date and proposed postponement until the following year, but Hitler preferred September. He then told von Brauchitsch and Halder that he would decide on the landing operation eight to fourteen days after the air attack began. On 1 August, he issued Directive No. 17 for intensified air and sea warfare, to begin with Adlertag on or after 5 August, subject to weather, keeping options open for negotiated peace or blockade and siege.

====Independent air attack====
Under the continuing influence of the 1935 &quot;Conduct of the Air War&quot; doctrine, the main focus of the Luftwaffe command (including Göring) was in concentrating attacks to destroy enemy armed forces on the battlefield, and &quot;blitzkrieg&quot; close air support of the army succeeded brilliantly. They reserved strategic bombing for a stalemate situation or revenge attacks, but doubted if this could be decisive on its own and regarded bombing civilians to destroy homes or undermine morale as a waste of strategic effort.

The defeat of France in June 1940 introduced the prospect for the first time of independent air action against Britain. A July &quot;Fliegercorps I&quot; paper asserted that Germany was by definition an air power: &quot;Its chief weapon against England is the Air Force, then the Navy, followed by the landing forces and the Army.&quot; In 1940, the Luftwaffe would undertake a &quot;&quot;strategic offensive&quot; ... on its own and independent of the other services&quot;, according to an April 1944 German account of their military mission. Göring was convinced that strategic bombing could win objectives that were beyond the army and navy, and gain political advantages in the Third Reich for the Luftwaffe and himself. He expected air warfare to decisively force Britain to negotiate, as all in the OKW hoped, and the Luftwaffe took little interest in planning to support an invasion.

==Opposing forces==
The Luftwaffe faced a more capable opponent than any it had previously met: a sizeable, highly coordinated, well-supplied, modern air force.

===Fighters===
The Luftwaffe&#x27;s Messerschmitt Bf 109E and Bf 110C fought against the RAF&#x27;s workhorse Hurricane Mk I and the less numerous Spitfire Mk I; Hurricanes outnumbered Spitfires in RAF Fighter Command by about 2:1 when war broke out. The Bf 109E had a better climb rate and was up to 40 mph faster in level flight than the Rotol (constant speed propeller) equipped Hurricane Mk I, depending on altitude. The speed and climb disparity with the original non-Rotol Hurricane was even greater. By mid-1940, all RAF Spitfire and Hurricane fighter squadrons converted to 100 octane aviation fuel, which allowed their Merlin engines to generate significantly more power and an approximately 30 mph increase in speed at low altitudes through the use of an Emergency Boost Override. In September 1940, the more powerful Mk IIa series 1 Hurricanes started entering service in small numbers. This version was capable of a maximum speed of , some 20 mph more than the original (non-Rotol) Mk I, though it was still 15 to 20 mph slower than a Bf 109 (depending on altitude).

The performance of the Spitfire over Dunkirk came as a surprise to the &quot;Jagdwaffe&quot;, although the German pilots retained a strong belief that the 109 was the superior fighter. The British fighters were equipped with eight Browning .303 (7.7mm) machine guns firing bullets, while most Bf 109Es had two 20mm cannons firing explosive shells, supplemented by two 7.92mm machine guns. The 20mm cannons were much more effective than the .303; during the Battle it was not unknown for damaged German bombers to limp home with up to two hundred .303 hits. At some altitudes, the Bf 109 could outclimb the British fighter. It could also engage in vertical-plane negative-&quot;g&quot; manoeuvres without the engine cutting out because its DB 601 engine used fuel injection; this allowed the 109 to dive away from attackers more readily than the carburettor-equipped Merlin. On the other hand, the Bf 109E had the disadvantage of a much larger turning circle than its two foes. In general, though, as Alfred Price noted in &quot;The Spitfire Story&quot;:

The Bf 109E was also used as a &quot;Jabo&quot; (&quot;jagdbomber&quot;, fighter-bomber)the E-4/B and E-7 models could carry a 250 kg bomb underneath the fuselage, the later model arriving during the battle. The Bf 109, unlike the &quot;Stuka&quot;, could fight on equal terms with RAF fighters after releasing its ordnance.

At the start of the battle, the twin-engined Messerschmitt Bf 110C long-range &quot;Zerstörer&quot; (&quot;Destroyer&quot;) was also expected to engage in air-to-air combat while escorting the Luftwaffe bomber fleet. Although the 110 was faster than the Hurricane and almost as fast as the Spitfire, its lack of manoeuvrability and acceleration meant that it was a failure as a long-range escort fighter. On 13 and 15 August, thirteen and thirty aircraft were lost, the equivalent of an entire &quot;Gruppe&quot;, and the type&#x27;s worst losses during the campaign. This trend continued with a further eight and fifteen lost on 16 and 17 August.

The most successful role of the Bf 110 during the battle was as a &quot;Schnellbomber&quot; (fast bomber). The Bf 110 usually used a shallow dive to bomb the target and escape at high speed. One unit, &quot;Erprobungsgruppe 210&quot; – initially formed as the service test unit (&quot;Erprobungskommando&quot;) for the emerging successor to the 110, the Me 210 – proved that the Bf 110 could still be used to good effect in attacking small or &quot;pinpoint&quot; targets.

The RAF&#x27;s Boulton Paul Defiant had some initial success over Dunkirk because of its resemblance to the Hurricane; Luftwaffe fighters attacking from the rear were surprised by its unusual gun turret, which could fire to the rear. During the Battle of Britain, it proved hopelessly outclassed. The Defiant, designed to attack bombers without fighter escort, lacked any form of forward-firing armament, and the heavy turret and second crewman meant it could not outrun or outmanoeuvre either the Bf 109 or Bf 110. By the end of August, after disastrous losses, the aircraft was withdrawn from daylight service.

===Bombers===

The Luftwaffe&#x27;s primary bombers were the Heinkel He 111, Dornier Do 17, and Junkers Ju 88 for level bombing at medium to high altitudes, and the Junkers Ju 87 &quot;Stuka&quot; for dive-bombing. The He 111 was used in greater numbers than the others during the conflict, and was better known, partly due to its distinctive wing shape. Each level bomber also had a few reconnaissance versions accompanying them that were used during the battle.

Although it had been successful in previous Luftwaffe engagements, the &quot;Stuka&quot; suffered heavy losses in the Battle of Britain, particularly on 18 August, due to its slow speed and vulnerability to fighter interception after dive-bombing a target. As the losses went up &quot;Stuka&quot; units, with limited payload and range in addition to their vulnerability, were largely removed from operations over England and diverted to concentrate on shipping, until eventually re-deployed to the Eastern Front in 1941. For some raids they were called back, such as on 13 September to attack Tangmere airfield.

The remaining three bomber types differed in their capabilities; the Dornier Do 17 was both the slowest and had the smallest bomb load; the Ju 88 was the fastest once its mainly external bomb load was dropped; and the He 111 carried the largest, internal, bomb load. All three bomber types suffered heavy losses from the home-based British fighters, but the Ju 88 had significantly lower loss rates due to its greater speed and its ability to dive out of trouble (it was originally designed as a dive bomber). The German bombers required constant protection by the Luftwaffe&#x27;s insufficiently numerous fighter force. Bf 109Es were ordered to support more than 300–400 bombers on any given day. Later in the conflict, when night bombing became more frequent, all three were used. Due to its smaller bomb load, the lighter Do 17 was used less than the He 111 and Ju 88 for this purpose.

On the British side, three bomber types were mostly used on night operations against targets such as factories, invasion ports and railway centres; the Armstrong Whitworth Whitley, the Handley-Page Hampden and the Vickers Wellington were classified as heavy bombers by the RAF, although the Hampden was a medium bomber comparable to the He 111. The twin-engined Bristol Blenheim and the obsolescent single-engined Fairey Battle were both light bombers; the Blenheim was the most numerous of the aircraft equipping RAF Bomber Command, and was used in attacks against shipping, ports, airfields and factories on the continent by day and by night. The Fairey Battle squadrons, which had suffered heavy losses in daylight attacks during the Battle of France, were brought up to strength with reserve aircraft and continued to operate at night in attacks against the invasion ports, until the Battle was withdrawn from UK front-line service in October 1940.

===Pilots===
Before the war, the RAF&#x27;s processes for selecting potential candidates were opened to men of all social classes through the creation in 1936 of the RAF Volunteer Reserve, which &quot;... was designed to appeal, to ... young men ... without any class distinctions ...&quot; The older squadrons of the Royal Auxiliary Air Force did retain some of their upper-class exclusiveness, but their numbers were soon swamped by the newcomers of the RAFVR; by 1 September 1939, 6,646 pilots had been trained through the RAFVR.

By mid-1940, there were about 9,000 pilots in the RAF to man about 5,000 aircraft, most of which were bombers. Fighter Command was never short of pilots, but the problem of finding sufficient numbers of fighter pilots became acute by mid-August 1940. With aircraft production running at 300 planes each week, only 200 pilots were trained in the same period. In addition, more pilots were allocated to squadrons than there were aircraft, as this allowed squadrons to maintain operational strength despite casualties and still provide for pilot leave. Another factor was that only about 30% of the 9,000 pilots were assigned to operational squadrons; 20% of the pilots were involved in conducting pilot training, and a further 20% were undergoing further instruction, like those offered in Canada and in Southern Rhodesia to the Commonwealth trainees, although already qualified. The rest were assigned to staff positions, since RAF policy dictated that only pilots could make many staff and operational command decisions, even in engineering matters. At the height of the fighting, and despite Churchill&#x27;s insistence, only 30 pilots were released to the front line from administrative duties.

For these reasons, and the permanent loss of 435 pilots during the Battle of France alone along with many more wounded, and others lost in Norway, the RAF had fewer experienced pilots at the start of the Battle of Britain than the Luftwaffe. It was the lack of trained pilots in the fighting squadrons, rather than the lack of aircraft, that became the greatest concern for Air Chief Marshal Hugh Dowding, commander of Fighter Command. Drawing from regular RAF forces, the Auxiliary Air Force and the Volunteer Reserve, the British were able to muster some 1,103 fighter pilots on 1 July. Replacement pilots, with little flight training and often no gunnery training, suffered high casualty rates, exacerbating the problem.

The Luftwaffe, on the other hand, were able to muster a large number (1,450) of experienced fighter pilots. Drawing from a cadre of Spanish Civil War veterans, these pilots already had comprehensive courses in aerial gunnery and instructions in tactics suited for fighter-versus-fighter combat. Training manuals discouraged heroism, stressing the importance of attacking only when the odds were in the pilot&#x27;s favour. Despite the high levels of experience, German fighter formations did not provide a sufficient reserve of pilots to allow for losses and leave, and the Luftwaffe was unable to produce enough pilots to prevent a decline in operational strength as the battle progressed.

== International participation ==

=== Allies ===
About 20% of pilots who took part in the battle were from non-British countries. The Royal Air Force roll of honour for the Battle of Britain recognises 595 non-British pilots (out of 2,936) as flying at least one authorised operational sortie with an eligible unit of the RAF or Fleet Air Arm between 10 July and 31 October 1940. These included 145 Poles, 127 New Zealanders, 112 Canadians, 88 Czechoslovaks, 10 Irish, 32 Australians, 28 Belgians, 25 South Africans, 13 French, 9 Americans, 3 Southern Rhodesians and individuals from Jamaica, Barbados and Newfoundland. &quot;Altogether in the fighter battles, the bombing raids, and the various patrols flown between 10 July and 31 October 1940 by the Royal Air Force, 1495 aircrew were killed, of whom 449 were fighter pilots, 718 aircrew from Bomber Command, and 280 from Coastal Command. Among those killed were 47 airmen from Canada, 24 from Australia, 17 from South Africa, 30 from Poland, 20 from Czechoslovakia and six from Belgium. Forty-seven New Zealanders lost their lives, including 15 fighter pilots, 24 bomber and eight coastal aircrew. The names of these Allied and Commonwealth airmen are inscribed in a memorial book that rests in the Battle of Britain Chapel in Westminster Abbey. In the chapel is a stained glass window which contains the badges of the fighter squadrons which operated during the battle and the flags of the nations to which the pilots and aircrew belonged. These pilots, some of whom had to flee their home countries because of German invasions, fought with distinction. 

The No. 303 Polish Fighter Squadron was the highest-scoring fighter squadron of the Battle of Britain, even though it joined the fray two months after the battle had begun. &quot;Had it not been for the magnificent material contributed by the Polish squadrons and their unsurpassed gallantry,&quot; wrote Air Chief Marshal Hugh Dowding, head of RAF Fighter Command, &quot;I hesitate to say that the outcome of the Battle would have been the same.&quot;

=== Axis ===

At the urging of Italian dictator Benito Mussolini, an element of the Italian Royal Air Force (&quot;Regia Aeronautica&quot;) called the Italian Air Corps (&quot;Corpo Aereo Italiano&quot; or CAI) took part in the later stages of the Battle of Britain. It first saw action on 24 October 1940 when a force of Fiat BR.20 medium bombers attacked the port at Harwich. The CAI achieved limited success during this and subsequent raids. The unit was redeployed in January 1941, having claimed to have shot down at least nine British aircraft. This was inaccurate and their actual successes were much lower.

==Luftwaffe strategy==

The indecision of OKL over what to do was reflected in shifts in &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; strategy. The doctrine of concentrated close air support of the army at the battlefront succeeded against Poland, Denmark and Norway, the Low Countries and France but incurred significant losses. The &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; had to build or repair bases in the conquered territories, and rebuild their strength. In June 1940 they began regular armed reconnaissance flights and sporadic &quot;Störangriffe&quot;, nuisance raids of one or a few bombers by day and night. These gave crews practice in navigation and avoiding air defences and set off air raid alarms which disturbed civilian morale. Similar nuisance raids continued throughout the battle, into late 1940. Scattered naval mine-laying sorties began at the outset and increased gradually over the battle period.

Göring&#x27;s operational directive of 30 June ordered the destruction of the RAF, including the aircraft industry, to end RAF bombing raids on Germany and facilitating attacks on ports and storage in the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; blockade of Britain. Attacks on Channel shipping in the &quot;Kanalkampf&quot; began on 4 July, and were formalised on 11 July in an order by Hans Jeschonnek which added the arms industry as a target. On 16 July, Directive No. 16 ordered preparations for Operation Sea Lion and on the next day the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; was ordered to stand by in full readiness. Göring met his air fleet commanders and on 24 July issued orders for gaining air supremacy, protecting the army and navy if the invasion went ahead and attacking Royal Navy ships and continuing the blockade. Once the RAF had been defeated, &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; bombers were to move forward beyond London without the need for fighter escort, destroying military and economic targets.

At a meeting on 1 August the command reviewed plans produced by each &quot;Fliegerkorps&quot; with differing proposals for targets including whether to bomb airfields but failed to decide a priority. Intelligence reports gave Göring the impression that the RAF was almost defeated, so that raids would attract British fighters for the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; to shoot down. On 6 August he finalised plans for &quot;Adlertag&quot; (Eagle Day) with Kesselring, Sperrle and Stumpff; the destruction of RAF Fighter Command in the south of England was to take four days, with lightly escorted small bomber raids leaving the main fighter force free to attack RAF fighters. Bombing of military and economic targets was then to systematically extend up to the Midlands until daylight attacks could proceed unhindered over the whole of Britain.

Bombing of London was to be held back while these night time &quot;destroyer&quot; attacks proceeded over other urban areas, then, in the culmination of the campaign, a major attack on the capital was intended to cause a crisis, with refugees fleeing London just as Operation Sea Lion was to begin. With hopes fading for the possibility of invasion, on 4 September Hitler authorised a main focus on day and night attacks on tactical targets, with London as the main target, which became known as the Blitz. With increasing difficulty in defending bombers in day raids, the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; shifted to a strategic bombing campaign of night raids aiming to overcome British resistance by damaging infrastructure and food stocks, though intentional terror bombing of civilians was not sanctioned.

===Regrouping of &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; in &quot;Luftflotten&quot;===
The &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; regrouped after the Battle of France into three &quot;Luftflotten&quot; (Air Fleets) opposite Britain&#x27;s southern and eastern coasts. &quot;Luftflotte&quot; 2 (&quot;Generalfeldmarschall&quot; Albert Kesselring), was responsible for the bombing of south-east England and the London area. &quot;Luftflotte&quot; 3 (&quot;Generalfeldmarschall&quot; Hugo Sperrle) concentrated on the West Country, Wales, the Midlands and north-west England. &quot;Luftflotte&quot; 5 (&quot;Generaloberst&quot; Hans-Jürgen Stumpff) from his headquarters in Norway, attacked the north of England and Scotland. As the battle progressed, command responsibility shifted, with &quot;Luftflotte&quot; 3 taking more responsibility for the night bombing and the main daylight operations fell upon &quot;Luftflotte&quot; 2.

Initial &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; estimates were that it would take four days to defeat RAF Fighter Command in southern England. This would be followed by a four-week offensive during which the bombers and long-range fighters would destroy all military installations throughout the country and wreck the British aircraft industry. The campaign was planned to begin with attacks on airfields near the coast, gradually moving inland to attack the ring of sector airfields defending London. Later reassessments gave the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; five weeks, from 8 August to 15 September, to establish temporary air superiority over England. Fighter Command had to be destroyed, either on the ground or in the air, yet the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; had to preserve its strength to be able to support the invasion; the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; had to maintain a high &quot;kill ratio&quot; over the RAF fighters. The only alternative to the goal of air superiority was a terror bombing campaign aimed at the civilian population but this was considered a last resort and it was forbidden by Hitler. The &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; kept broadly to this scheme but its commanders had differences of opinion on strategy. Sperrle wanted to eradicate the air defence infrastructure by bombing it. Kesselring championed attacking London directly, either to bombard the British government into submission or to draw RAF fighters into a decisive battle. Göring did nothing to resolve this disagreement between his commanders and gave only vague directives during the initial stages of the battle, apparently unable to decide upon which strategy to pursue.

===Tactics===

====Fighter formations====
Luftwaffe formations employed a loose section of two (called &quot;Rotte&quot; [pack]), based on a leader (&quot;Rottenführer&quot;) followed at a distance of about by his wingman, &quot;Rottenhund&quot; pack dog or &quot;Katschmarek&quot;, the turning radius of a Bf 109, enabling both aircraft to turn together at high speed. The &quot;Katschmarek&quot; flew slightly higher and was trained always to stay with his leader. With more room between them, both could spend less time maintaining formation and more time looking around and covering each other&#x27;s blind spots. Attacking aircraft could be sandwiched between the two 109s. The formation was developed from principles formulated by the First World War ace Oswald Boelcke in 1916. In 1934 the Finnish Air Force adopted similar formations, called &quot;partio&quot; (patrol; two aircraft) and &quot;parvi&quot; (two patrols; four aircraft), for similar reasons, though &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; pilots during the Spanish Civil War (led by Günther Lützow and Werner Mölders, among others) are generally given credit. The &quot;Rotte&quot; allowed the &quot;Rottenführer&quot; to concentrate on shooting down aircraft but few wingmen had the chance, leading to some resentment in the lower ranks where it was felt that the high scores came at their expense. Two &quot;Rotten&quot; combined as a &quot;Schwarm&quot;, where all the pilots could watch what was happening around them. Each &quot;Schwarm&quot; in a &quot;Staffel&quot; flew at staggered heights and with about between them, making the formation difficult to spot at longer ranges and allowing for a great deal of flexibility. By using a tight &quot;cross-over&quot; turn, a &quot;Schwarm&quot; could quickly change direction.

The Bf 110s adopted the same &quot;Schwarm&quot; formation as the 109s but were seldom able to use this to the same advantage. The Bf 110&#x27;s most successful method of attack was the &quot;bounce&quot; from above. When attacked, &quot;Zerstörergruppen&quot; increasingly resorted to forming large defensive circles, where each Bf 110 guarded the tail of the aircraft ahead of it. Göring ordered that they be renamed &quot;offensive circles&quot; in a vain bid to improve rapidly declining morale. These conspicuous formations were often successful in attracting RAF fighters that were sometimes &quot;bounced&quot; by high-flying Bf 109s. This led to the often repeated misconception that the Bf 110s were escorted by Bf 109s.

====Higher-level dispositions====
&quot;Luftwaffe&quot; tactics were influenced by their fighters. The Bf 110 proved too vulnerable against the nimble single-engined RAF fighters and the bulk of fighter escort duties devolved to the Bf 109. Fighter tactics were then complicated by bomber crews who demanded closer protection. After the hard-fought battles of 15 and 18 August, Göring met his unit leaders. The need for the fighters to meet up on time with the bombers was stressed. It was also decided that one bomber &quot;Gruppe&quot; could only be properly protected by several &quot;Gruppen&quot; of 109s. Göring stipulated that as many fighters as possible were to be left free for &quot;Freie Jagd&quot; (&quot;Free Hunts&quot;: a free-roving fighter sweep preceded a raid to try to sweep defenders out of the raid&#x27;s path). The Ju 87 units, which had suffered heavy casualties, were only to be used under favourable circumstances. In early September, due to increasing complaints from the bomber crews about RAF fighters seemingly able to get through the escort screen, Göring ordered an increase in close escort duties. This decision shackled many of the Bf 109s to the bombers and, although they were more successful at protecting the bombers, casualties amongst the fighters mounted, primarily because they were forced to fly and manoeuvre at reduced speeds.

The &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; varied its tactics to break Fighter Command. It launched many &quot;Freie Jagd&quot; to draw up RAF fighters. RAF fighter controllers were often able to detect these and position squadrons to avoid them, keeping to Dowding&#x27;s plan to preserve fighter strength for the bomber formations. The &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; also tried using small formations of bombers as bait, covering them with large numbers of escorts. This was more successful, but escort duty kept the fighters tied to the slower bombers making them more vulnerable.

By September, standard tactics for raids had become an amalgam of techniques. A &quot;Freie Jagd&quot; would precede the main attack formations. The bombers would fly in at altitudes between , closely escorted by fighters. Escorts were divided into two parts (usually &quot;Gruppen&quot;), some operating close to the bombers and others a few hundred yards away and a little above. If the formation was attacked from the starboard, the starboard section engaged the attackers, the top section moving to starboard and the port section to the top position. If the attack came from the port side the system was reversed. British fighters coming from the rear were engaged by the rear section and the two outside sections similarly moving to the rear. If the threat came from above, the top section went into action while the side sections gained height to be able to follow RAF fighters down as they broke away. If attacked, all sections flew in defensive circles. These tactics were skilfully evolved and carried out and were difficult to counter.
Adolf Galland noted:

The biggest disadvantage faced by Bf 109 pilots was that without the benefit of long-range drop tanks (which were introduced in limited numbers in the late stages of the battle), usually of capacity, the 109s had an endurance of just over an hour and, for the 109E, a range. Once over Britain, a 109 pilot had to keep an eye on a red &quot;low fuel&quot; light on the instrument panel: once this was illuminated, he was forced to turn back and head for France. With the prospect of two long flights over water and knowing their range was substantially reduced when escorting bombers or during combat, the &quot;Jagdflieger&quot; coined the term &quot;Kanalkrankheit&quot; or &quot;Channel sickness&quot;.

===Intelligence===
The Luftwaffe was ill-served by its lack of military intelligence about the British defences. The German intelligence services were fractured and plagued by rivalry; their performance was &quot;amateurish&quot;. By 1940, there were few German agents operating in Great Britain and a handful of attempts to insert spies into the country were foiled.

As a result of intercepted radio transmissions, the Germans began to realise that the RAF fighters were being controlled from ground facilities; in July and August 1939, for example, the airship &quot;Graf Zeppelin&quot;, which was packed with equipment for listening in on RAF radio and RDF transmissions, flew around the coasts of Britain. Although the Luftwaffe correctly interpreted these new ground control procedures, they were incorrectly assessed as being rigid and ineffectual. A British radar system was well known to the Luftwaffe from intelligence gathered before the war, but the highly developed &quot;Dowding system&quot; linked with fighter control had been a well-kept secret. Even when good information existed, such as a November 1939 &quot;Abwehr&quot; assessment of Fighter Command strengths and capabilities by &quot;Abteilung V&quot;, it was ignored if it did not match conventional preconceptions.

On 16 July 1940, &quot;Abteilung V&quot;, commanded by &quot;Oberstleutnant&quot; &quot;Beppo&quot; Schmid, produced a report on the RAF and on Britain&#x27;s defensive capabilities which was adopted by the frontline commanders as a basis for their operational plans. One of the most conspicuous failures of the report was the lack of information on the RAF&#x27;s RDF network and control systems capabilities; it was assumed that the system was rigid and inflexible, with the RAF fighters being &quot;tied&quot; to their home bases. An optimistic (and, as it turned out, erroneous) conclusion reached was:

Because of this statement, reinforced by another more detailed report, issued on 10 August, there was a mindset in the ranks of the Luftwaffe that the RAF would run out of frontline fighters. The Luftwaffe believed it was weakening Fighter Command at three times the actual attrition rate. Many times, the leadership believed Fighter Command&#x27;s strength had collapsed, only to discover that the RAF were able to send up defensive formations at will.

Throughout the battle, the Luftwaffe had to use numerous reconnaissance sorties to make up for poor intelligence. Reconnaissance aircraft (initially mostly Dornier Do 17s, but increasingly Bf 110s) proved easy prey for British fighters, as it was seldom possible for them to be escorted by Bf 109s. Thus, the Luftwaffe operated &quot;blind&quot; for much of the battle, unsure of its enemy&#x27;s true strengths, capabilities, and deployments. Many of the Fighter Command airfields were never attacked, while raids against supposed fighter airfields fell instead on bomber or coastal defence stations. The results of bombing and air fighting were consistently exaggerated, due to inaccurate claims, over-enthusiastic reports and the difficulty of confirmation over enemy territory. In the euphoric atmosphere of perceived victory, the Luftwaffe leadership became increasingly disconnected from reality. This lack of leadership and solid intelligence meant the Germans did not adopt a consistent strategy, even when the RAF had its back to the wall. Moreover, there was never a systematic focus on one type of target (such as airbases, radar stations, or aircraft factories); consequently, the already haphazard effort was further diluted.

===Navigational aids===
While the British were using radar for air defence more effectively than the Germans realised, the Luftwaffe attempted to press its own offensive with advanced radio navigation systems of which the British were initially not aware. One of these was &quot;Knickebein&quot; (&quot;bent leg&quot;); this system was used at night and for raids where precision was required. It was rarely used during the Battle of Britain.

===Air-sea rescue===
The Luftwaffe was much better prepared for the task of air-sea rescue than the RAF, specifically tasking the &quot;Seenotdienst&quot; unit, equipped with about 30 Heinkel He 59 floatplanes, with picking up downed aircrew from the North Sea, English Channel and the Dover Straits. In addition, Luftwaffe aircraft were equipped with life rafts and the aircrew were provided with sachets of a chemical called fluorescein which, on reacting with water, created a large, easy-to-see, bright green patch. In accordance with the Geneva Convention, the He 59s were unarmed and painted white with civilian registration markings and red crosses. Nevertheless, RAF aircraft attacked these aircraft, as some were escorted by Bf 109s.

After single He 59s were forced to land on the sea by RAF fighters on 1 and 9 July, a controversial order was issued to the RAF on 13 July; this stated that from 20 July, &quot;Seenotdienst&quot; aircraft were to be shot down. One of the reasons given by Churchill was:
The British also believed that their crews would report on convoys, the Air Ministry issuing a communiqué to the German government on 14 July that Britain was

The white He 59s were soon repainted in camouflage colours and armed with defensive machine guns. Although another four He 59s were shot down by RAF aircraft, the &quot;Seenotdienst&quot; continued to pick up downed Luftwaffe and Allied aircrew throughout the battle, earning praise from Adolf Galland for their bravery.

==RAF strategy==
===The Dowding system===

During early tests of the Chain Home system, the slow flow of information from the CH radars and observers to the aircraft often caused them to miss their &quot;bandits&quot;. The solution, today known as the &quot;Dowding system&quot;, was to create a set of reporting chains to move information from the various observation points to the pilots in their fighters. It was named after its chief architect, &quot;Stuffy&quot; Dowding.

Reports from CH radars and the Observer Corps were sent directly to Fighter Command Headquarters (FCHQ) at Bentley Priory where they were &quot;filtered&quot; to combine multiple reports of the same formations into single tracks. Telephone operators would then forward only the information of interest to the Group headquarters, where the map would be re-created. This process was repeated to produce another version of the map at the Sector level, covering a much smaller area. Looking over their maps, Group level commanders could select squadrons to attack particular targets. From that point, the Sector operators would give commands to the fighters to arrange an interception, as well as return them to base. Sector stations also controlled the anti-aircraft batteries in their area; an army officer sat beside each fighter controller and directed the gun crews when to open and cease fire.

The Dowding system dramatically improved the speed and accuracy of the information that flowed to the pilots. During the early war period, it was expected that an average interception mission might have a 30% chance of ever seeing their target. During the battle, the Dowding system maintained an average rate over 75%, with several examples of 100% rates – every fighter dispatched found and intercepted its target. In contrast, Luftwaffe fighters attempting to intercept raids had to randomly seek their targets and often returned home having never seen enemy aircraft. The result is what is now known as an example of &quot;force multiplication&quot;; RAF fighters were as effective as two or more Luftwaffe fighters, greatly offsetting, or overturning, the disparity in actual numbers.

===Intelligence===
While Luftwaffe intelligence reports underestimated British fighter forces and aircraft production, the British intelligence estimates went the other way: they overestimated German aircraft production, numbers and range of aircraft available, and numbers of Luftwaffe pilots. In action, the Luftwaffe believed from their pilot claims and the impression given by aerial reconnaissance that the RAF was close to defeat, and the British made strenuous efforts to overcome the perceived advantages held by their opponents.

It is unclear how much the British intercepts of the Enigma cipher, used for high-security German radio communications, affected the battle. Ultra, the information obtained from Enigma intercepts, gave the highest echelons of the British command a view of German intentions. According to F. W. Winterbotham, who was the senior Air Staff representative in the Secret Intelligence Service, Ultra helped establish the strength and composition of the Luftwaffe&#x27;s formations, the aims of the commanders and provided early warning of some raids. In early August it was decided that a small unit would be set up at FCHQ, which would process the flow of information from Bletchley and provide Dowding only with the most essential Ultra material; thus the Air Ministry did not have to send a continual flow of information to FCHQ, preserving secrecy, and Dowding was not inundated with non-essential information. Keith Park and his controllers were also told about Ultra. In a further attempt to camouflage the existence of Ultra, Dowding created a unit named No. 421 (Reconnaissance) Flight RAF. This unit (which later became No. 91 Squadron RAF), was equipped with Hurricanes and Spitfires and sent out aircraft to search for and report Luftwaffe formations approaching England. In addition, the radio listening service (known as Y Service), monitoring the patterns of Luftwaffe radio traffic contributed considerably to the early warning of raids.

===Tactics===
====Fighter formations====
In the late 1930s, Fighter Command expected to face only bombers over Britain, not single-engined fighters. A series of &quot;Fighting Area Tactics&quot; were formulated and rigidly adhered to, involving a series of manoeuvres designed to concentrate a squadron&#x27;s firepower to bring down bombers. RAF fighters flew in tight, v-shaped sections (&quot;vics&quot;) of three aircraft, with four such &quot;sections&quot; in tight formation. Only the squadron leader at the front was free to watch for the enemy; the other pilots had to concentrate on keeping station. Training also emphasised by-the-book attacks by sections breaking away in sequence. Fighter Command recognised the weaknesses of this structure early in the battle, but it was felt too risky to change tactics during the battle because replacement pilotsoften with only minimal flying timecould not be readily retrained, and inexperienced pilots needed firm leadership in the air only rigid formations could provide. German pilots dubbed the RAF formations &quot;Idiotenreihen&quot; (&quot;rows of idiots&quot;) because they left squadrons vulnerable to attack.

Front line RAF pilots were acutely aware of the inherent deficiencies of their own tactics. A compromise was adopted whereby squadron formations used much looser formations with one or two &quot;weavers&quot; flying independently above and behind to provide increased observation and rear protection; these tended to be the least experienced men and were often the first to be shot down without the other pilots even noticing that they were under attack. During the battle, 74 Squadron under Squadron Leader Adolph &quot;Sailor&quot; Malan adopted a variation of the German formation called the &quot;fours in line astern&quot;, which was a vast improvement on the old three aircraft &quot;vic&quot;. Malan&#x27;s formation was later generally used by Fighter Command.

====Squadron- and higher-level deployment====
The weight of the battle fell upon 11 Group. Keith Park&#x27;s tactics were to dispatch individual squadrons to intercept raids. The intention was to subject incoming bombers to continual attacks by relatively small numbers of fighters and try to break up the tight German formations. Once formations had fallen apart, stragglers could be picked off one by one. Where multiple squadrons reached a raid the procedure was for the slower Hurricanes to tackle the bombers while the more agile Spitfires held up the fighter escort. This ideal was not always achieved, resulting in occasions when Spitfires and Hurricanes reversed roles. Park also issued instructions to his units to engage in frontal attacks against the bombers, which were more vulnerable to such attacks. Again, in the environment of fast-moving, three-dimensional air battles, few RAF fighter units were able to attack the bombers from head-on.

During the battle, some commanders, notably Leigh-Mallory, proposed squadrons be formed into &quot;Big Wings,&quot; consisting of at least three squadrons, to attack the enemy &quot;en masse&quot;, a method pioneered by Douglas Bader.

Proponents of this tactic claimed interceptions in large numbers caused greater enemy losses while reducing their own casualties. Opponents pointed out the big wings would take too long to form up, and the strategy ran a greater risk of fighters being caught on the ground refuelling. The big wing idea also caused pilots to overclaim their kills, due to the confusion of a more intense battle zone. This led to the belief big wings were far more effective than they actually were.

The issue caused intense friction between Park and Leigh-Mallory, as 12 Group was tasked with protecting 11 Group&#x27;s airfields whilst Park&#x27;s squadrons intercepted incoming raids. The delay in forming up Big Wings meant the formations often did not arrive at all or until after German bombers had hit 11 Group&#x27;s airfields. Dowding, to highlight the problem of the Big Wing&#x27;s performance, submitted a report compiled by Park to the Air Ministry on 15 November. In the report, he highlighted that during the period of 11 September – 31 October, the extensive use of the Big Wing had resulted in just 10 interceptions and one German aircraft destroyed, but his report was ignored. Post-war analysis agrees Dowding and Park&#x27;s approach was best for 11 Group.

Dowding&#x27;s removal from his post in November 1940 has been blamed on this struggle between Park and Leigh-Mallory&#x27;s daylight strategy. The intensive raids and destruction wrought during the Blitz damaged both Dowding and Park in particular, for the failure to produce an effective night-fighter defence system, something for which the influential Leigh-Mallory had long criticised them.

===Bomber and Coastal Command contributions===

Bomber Command and Coastal Command aircraft flew offensive sorties against targets in Germany and France during the battle. An hour after the declaration of war, Bomber Command launched raids on warships and naval ports by day, and in night raids dropped leaflets as it was considered illegal to bomb targets which could affect civilians. After the initial disasters of the war, with Vickers Wellington bombers shot down in large numbers attacking Wilhelmshaven and the slaughter of the Fairey Battle squadrons sent to France, it became clear that they would have to operate mainly at night to avoid incurring very high losses. Churchill came to power on 10 May 1940, and the War Cabinet on 12 May agreed that German actions justified &quot;unrestricted warfare&quot;, and on 14 May they authorised an attack on the night of 14/15 May against oil and rail targets in Germany. At the urging of Clement Attlee, the Cabinet on 15 May authorised a full bombing strategy against &quot;suitable military objectives&quot;, even where there could be civilian casualties. That evening, a night time bomber campaign began against the German oil industry, communications, and forests/crops, mainly in the Ruhr area. The RAF lacked accurate night navigation and carried small bomb loads. As the threat mounted, Bomber Command changed targeting priority on 3 June 1940 to attack the German aircraft industry. On 4 July, the Air Ministry gave Bomber Command orders to attack ports and shipping. By September, the build-up of invasion barges in the Channel ports had become a top priority target.

On 7 September, the government issued a warning that the invasion could be expected within the next few days and, that night, Bomber Command attacked the Channel ports and supply dumps. On 13 September, they carried out another large raid on the Channel ports, sinking 80 large barges in the port of Ostend. 84 barges were sunk in Dunkirk after another raid on 17 September and by 19 September, almost 200 barges had been sunk. The loss of these barges may have contributed to Hitler&#x27;s decision to postpone Operation Sea Lion indefinitely. The success of these raids was in part because the Germans had few Freya radar stations set up in France, so that air defences of the French harbours were not nearly as good as the air defences over Germany; Bomber Command had directed some 60% of its strength against the Channel ports.

The Bristol Blenheim units also raided German-occupied airfields throughout July to December 1940, both during daylight hours and at night. Although most of these raids were unproductive, there were some successes; on 1 August, five out of twelve Blenheims sent to attack Haamstede and Evere (Brussels) were able to destroy or heavily damage three Bf 109s of II./JG 27 and apparently kill a &quot;Staffelkapitän&quot; identified as a &quot;Hauptmann&quot; Albrecht von Ankum-Frank. Two other 109s were claimed by Blenheim gunners. Another successful raid on Haamstede was made by a single Blenheim on 7 August which destroyed one 109 of 4./JG 54, heavily damaged another and caused lighter damage to four more.

There were some missions that produced an almost 100% casualty rate amongst the Blenheims; one such operation was mounted on 13 August 1940 against a Luftwaffe airfield near Aalborg in north-eastern Denmark by 12 aircraft of 82 Squadron. One Blenheim returned early (the pilot was later charged and due to appear before a court martial, but was killed on another operation); the other eleven, which reached Denmark, were shot down, five by flak and six by Bf 109s. Of the 33 crewmen who took part in the attack, 20 were killed and 13 captured.

As well as the bombing operations, Blenheim-equipped units had been formed to carry out long-range strategic reconnaissance missions over Germany and German-occupied territories. In this role, the Blenheims again proved to be too slow and vulnerable against Luftwaffe fighters, and they took constant casualties.

Coastal Command directed its attention towards the protection of British shipping, and the destruction of enemy shipping. As invasion became more likely, it participated in the strikes on French harbours and airfields, laying mines, and mounting numerous reconnaissance missions over the enemy-held coast. In all, some 9,180 sorties were flown by bombers from July to October 1940. Although this was much less than the 80,000 sorties flown by fighters, bomber crews suffered about half the total casualties borne by their fighter colleagues. The bomber contribution was, therefore, much more dangerous on a loss-per-sortie comparison.

Bomber, reconnaissance, and antisubmarine patrol operations continued throughout these months with little respite and none of the publicity accorded to Fighter Command. In his famous 20 August speech about &quot;The Few&quot;, praising Fighter Command, Churchill also made a point of mentioning Bomber Command&#x27;s contribution, adding that bombers were even then striking back at Germany; this part of the speech is often overlooked, even today. The Battle of Britain Chapel in Westminster Abbey lists in a roll of honour, 718 Bomber Command crew members, and 280 from Coastal Command who were killed between 10 July and 31 October.

Bomber and Coastal Command attacks against invasion barge concentrations in Channel ports were widely reported by the British media during September and October 1940. In what became known as &#x27;the Battle of the Barges&#x27; RAF attacks were claimed in British propaganda to have sunk large numbers of barges, and to have created widespread chaos and disruption to German invasion preparations. Given the volume of British propaganda interest in these bomber attacks during September and earlier October, it is striking how quickly this was overlooked once the Battle of Britain had been concluded. Even by mid-war, the bomber pilots&#x27; efforts had been largely eclipsed by a continuing focus on the Few, this a result of the Air Ministry&#x27;s continuing valorisation of the ″fighter boys″, beginning with the March 1941 Battle of Britain propaganda pamphlet.

===Air-sea rescue===

One of the biggest oversights of the entire system was the lack of adequate air-sea rescue organisation. The RAF had started organising a system in 1940 with High Speed Launches (HSLs) based on flying boat bases and at some overseas locations, but it was still believed that the amount of cross-Channel traffic meant that there was no need for a rescue service to cover these areas. Downed pilots and aircrew, it was hoped, would be picked up by any boats or ships which happened to be passing by. Otherwise, the local life boat would be alerted, assuming someone had seen the pilot going into the water.

RAF aircrew were issued with a life jacket, nicknamed the &quot;Mae West,&quot; but in 1940 it still required manual inflation, which was almost impossible for someone who was injured or in shock. The waters of the English Channel and Dover Straits are cold, even in the middle of summer, and clothing issued to RAF aircrew did little to insulate them against these freezing conditions. The RAF also imitated the German practice of issuing fluorescein. A conference in 1939 had placed air-sea rescue under Coastal Command. Because pilots had been lost at sea during the &quot;Channel Battle&quot;, on 22 August, control of RAF rescue launches was passed to the local naval authorities and 12 Lysanders were given to Fighter Command to help look for pilots at sea. In all, some 200 pilots and aircrew were lost at sea during the battle. No proper air-sea rescue service was formed until 1941.

==Phases of the battle==

The battle covered a shifting geographical area, and there have been differing opinions on significant dates: when the Air Ministry proposed 8 August as the start, Dowding responded that operations &quot;merged into one another almost insensibly&quot;, and proposed 10 July as the onset of increased attacks. With the caution that phases drifted into each other and dates are not firm, the Royal Air Force Museum states that five main phases can be identified:
* 26 June – 16 July: &quot;Störangriffe&quot; (&quot;nuisance raids&quot;), scattered small scale probing attacks both day and night, armed reconnaissance and mine-laying sorties. From 4 July, daylight &quot;Kanalkampf&quot; (&quot;the Channel battles&quot;) against shipping.
* 17 July – 12 August: daylight &quot;Kanalkampf&quot; attacks on shipping intensify through this period, increased attacks on ports and coastal airfields, night raids on RAF and aircraft manufacturing.
* 13 August – 6 September: &quot;Adlerangriff&quot; (&quot;Eagle Attack&quot;), the main assault; attempt to destroy the RAF in southern England, including massive daylight attacks on RAF airfields, followed from 19 August by heavy night bombing of ports and industrial cities, including suburbs of London.
* 7 September – 2 October: the Blitz commences, main focus day and night attacks on London.
* 3–31 October: large scale night bombing raids, mostly on London; daylight attacks now confined to small scale fighter-bomber &quot;Störangriffe&quot; raids luring RAF fighters into dogfights.

===Small scale raids===
Following Germany&#x27;s rapid territorial gains in the Battle of France, the Luftwaffe had to reorganise its forces, set up bases along the coast, and rebuild after heavy losses. It began small scale bombing raids on Britain on the night of 5/6 June, and continued sporadic attacks throughout June and July. The first large-scale attack was at night, on 18/19 June, when small raids scattered between Yorkshire and Kent involved in total 100 bombers. These &quot;Störangriffe&quot; (&quot;nuisance raids&quot;) which involved only a few aeroplanes, sometimes just one, were used to train bomber crews in both day and night attacks, to test defences and try out methods, with most flights at night. They found that, rather than carrying small numbers of large high explosive bombs, it was more effective to use more small bombs, similarly incendiaries had to cover a large area to set effective fires. These training flights continued through August and into the first week of September. Against this, the raids also gave the British time to assess the German tactics, and invaluable time for the RAF fighters and anti-aircraft defences to prepare and gain practice.
The attacks were widespread: over the night of 30 June alarms were set off in 20 counties by just 20 bombers, then next day the first daylight raids were carried out during 1 July, on both Hull in Yorkshire and Wick, Caithness. On 3 July most flights were reconnaissance sorties, but 15 civilians were killed when bombs hit Guildford in Surrey. Numerous small &quot;Störangriffe&quot; raids, both day and night, were made daily through August, September and into the winter, with aims including bringing RAF fighters up to battle, destruction of specific military and economic targets, and setting off air-raid warnings to affect civilian morale: four major air-raids in August involved hundreds of bombers; in the same month 1,062 small raids were made, spread across the whole of Britain.

===Channel battles===
The &quot;Kanalkampf&quot; comprised a series of running fights over convoys in the English Channel. It was launched partly because Kesselring and Sperrle were not sure about what else to do, and partly because it gave German aircrews some training and a chance to probe the British defences. Dowding could provide only minimal shipping protection, and these battles off the coast tended to favour the Germans, whose bomber escorts had the advantage of altitude and outnumbered the RAF fighters. From 9 July reconnaissance probing by Dornier Do 17 bombers put a severe strain on RAF pilots and machines, with high RAF losses to Bf 109s. When nine 141 Squadron Defiants went into action on 19 July six were lost to Bf 109s before a squadron of Hurricanes intervened. On 25 July a coal convoy and escorting destroyers suffered such heavy losses to attacks by Stuka dive bombers that the Admiralty decided convoys should travel at night: the RAF shot down 16 raiders but lost 7 aircraft. By 8 August 18 coal ships and 4 destroyers had been sunk, but the Navy was determined to send a convoy of 20 ships through rather than move the coal by railway. After repeated Stuka attacks that day, six ships were badly damaged, four were sunk and only four reached their destination. The RAF lost 19 fighters and shot down 31 German aircraft. The Navy now cancelled all further convoys through the Channel and the cargo was sent by rail. Even so, these early combat encounters provided both sides with experience.

===Main assault===
The main attack upon the RAF&#x27;s defences was code-named &quot;Adlerangriff&quot; (&quot;Eagle Attack&quot;). Intelligence reports gave Göring the impression that the RAF was almost defeated, and raids would attract British fighters for the Luftwaffe to shoot down. The strategy agreed on 6 August was to destroy RAF Fighter Command across the south of England in four days, then bombing of military and economic targets was to systematically extend up to the Midlands until daylight attacks could proceed unhindered over the whole of Britain, culminating in a major bombing attack on London.

====Assault on RAF: radar and airfields====

Poor weather delayed &quot;Adlertag&quot; (&quot;Eagle Day&quot;) until 13 August 1940. On 12 August, the first attempt was made to blind the Dowding system, when aircraft from the specialist fighter-bomber unit &quot;Erprobungsgruppe&quot; 210 attacked four radar stations. Three were briefly taken off the air but were back working within six hours. The raids appeared to show that British radars were difficult to knock out. The failure to mount follow-up attacks allowed the RAF to get the stations back on the air, and the Luftwaffe neglected strikes on the supporting infrastructure, such as phone lines and power stations, which could have rendered the radars useless, even if the lattice-work towers themselves, which were very difficult to destroy, remained intact.

&quot;Adlertag&quot; opened with a series of attacks, led again by &quot;Erpro&quot; 210, on coastal airfields used as forward landing grounds for the RAF fighters, as well as &#x27;satellite airfields&#x27; including Manston and Hawkinge. As the week drew on, the airfield attacks moved further inland, and repeated raids were made on the radar chain. 15 August was &quot;The Greatest Day&quot; when the Luftwaffe mounted the largest number of sorties of the campaign. &quot;Luftflotte&quot; 5 attacked the north of England. Raiding forces from Denmark and Norway, which believed Fighter Command strength to be concentrated in the south, ran into resistance which was unexpectedly strong. Inadequately escorted by Bf 110s, Bf109s having insufficient range to escort raids from Norway, bombers were shot down in large numbers. North East England was attacked by 65 Heinkel 111s escorted by 34 Messerschmitt 110s, and RAF Great Driffield was attacked by 50 unescorted Junkers 88s. Out of 115 bombers and 35 fighters sent, 75 planes were destroyed and many others were damaged beyond repair. Furthermore, due to early engagement by RAF fighters, many of the bombers dropped their payloads ineffectively early. As a result of these casualties, &quot;Luftflotte&quot; 5 did not appear in strength again in the campaign.
18 August, which had the greatest number of casualties to both sides, has been dubbed &quot;The Hardest Day&quot;. Following this grinding battle, exhaustion and the weather reduced operations for most of a week, allowing the Luftwaffe to review their performance. &quot;The Hardest Day&quot; had sounded the end for the Ju 87 in the campaign. This veteran of &quot;Blitzkrieg&quot; was too vulnerable to fighters to operate over Britain. Göring withdrew the &quot;Stuka&quot; from the fighting to preserve the &quot;Stuka&quot; force, removing the main Luftwaffe precision-bombing weapon and shifting the burden of pinpoint attacks onto the already-stretched &quot;Erpro&quot; 210. The Bf 110 proved too clumsy for dogfighting with single-engined fighters, and its participation was scaled back. It would be used only when range required it or when sufficient single-engined escort could not be provided for the bombers.

Göring made yet another important decision: to order more bomber escorts at the expense of free-hunting sweeps. To achieve this, the weight of the attack now fell on &quot;Luftflotte&quot; 2, and the bulk of the Bf 109s in &quot;Luftflotte 3&quot; were transferred to Kesselring&#x27;s command, reinforcing the fighter bases in the Pas-de-Calais. Stripped of its fighters, &quot;Luftflotte 3&quot; would concentrate on the night bombing campaign. Göring, expressing disappointment with the fighter performance thus far in the campaign, also made sweeping changes in the command structure of the fighter units, replacing many &quot;Geschwaderkommodore&quot; with younger, more aggressive pilots such as Adolf Galland and Werner Mölders.

Finally, Göring stopped the attacks on the radar chain. These were seen as unsuccessful, and neither the &quot;Reichsmarschall&quot; nor his subordinates realised how vital the Chain Home stations were to the defence systems. It was known that radar provided some early warning of raids, but the belief among German fighter pilots was that anything bringing up the &quot;Tommies&quot; to fight was to be encouraged.

====Raids on British cities====
On the afternoon of 15 August, &quot;Hauptmann&quot; Walter Rubensdörffer leading &quot;Erprobungsgruppe&quot; 210 mistakenly bombed Croydon airfield (on the outskirts of London) instead of the intended target, RAF Kenley. German intelligence reports made the Luftwaffe optimistic that the RAF, thought to be dependent on local air control, was struggling with supply problems and pilot losses. After a raid on Biggin Hill on 18 August, Luftwaffe aircrew said they had been unopposed, the airfield was &quot;completely destroyed&quot;, and asked, &quot;Is England already finished?&quot; In accordance with the strategy agreed on 6 August, defeat of the RAF was to be followed by bombing military and economic targets, systematically extending up to the Midlands.

Göring ordered attacks on aircraft factories on 19 August 1940. Sixty raids on the night of 19/20 August targeted the aircraft industry and harbours, and bombs fell on suburban areas around London: Croydon, Wimbledon and the Maldens. Night raids were made on 21/22 August on Aberdeen, Bristol and South Wales. That morning, bombs were dropped on Harrow and Wealdstone, on the outskirts of London. Overnight on 22/23 August, the output of an aircraft factory at Filton near Bristol was drastically affected by a raid in which Ju 88 bombers dropped over of high explosive bombs. On the night of 23/24 August over 200 bombers attacked the Fort Dunlop tyre factory in Birmingham, with a significant effect on production. A bombing campaign began on 24 August with the largest raid so far, killing 100 in Portsmouth, and that night, several areas of London were bombed; the East End was set ablaze and bombs landed on central London. Some historians believe that these bombs were dropped accidentally by a group of Heinkel He 111s which had failed to find their target; this account has been contested.

More night raids were made around London on 24/25 August, when bombs fell on Croydon, Banstead, Lewisham, Uxbridge, Harrow and Hayes. London was on red alert over the night of 28/29 August, with bombs reported in Finchley, St Pancras, Wembley, Wood Green, Southgate, Old Kent Road, Mill Hill, Ilford, Chigwell and Hendon.

====Attacks on airfields from 24 August====

Göring&#x27;s directive issued on 23 August 1940 ordered ceaseless attacks on the aircraft industry and on RAF ground organisation to force the RAF to use its fighters, continuing the tactic of luring them up to be destroyed, and added that focussed attacks were to be made on RAF airfields.

From 24 August onwards, the battle was a fight between Kesselring&#x27;s &quot;Luftflotte&quot; 2 and Park&#x27;s 11 Group. The Luftwaffe concentrated all their strength on knocking out Fighter Command and made repeated attacks on the airfields. Of the 33 heavy attacks in the following two weeks, 24 were against airfields. The key sector stations were hit repeatedly: Biggin Hill and Hornchurch four times each; Debden and North Weald twice each. Croydon, Gravesend, Rochford, Hawkinge and Manston were also attacked in strength. Coastal Command&#x27;s Eastchurch was bombed at least seven times because it was believed to be a Fighter Command aerodrome. At times these raids caused some damage to the sector stations, threatening the integrity of the Dowding system.

To offset some losses, some 58 Fleet Air Arm fighter pilot volunteers were seconded to RAF squadrons, and a similar number of former Fairey Battle pilots were used. Most replacements from Operational Training Units (OTUs) had as little as nine hours flying time and no gunnery or air-to-air combat training. At this point, the multinational nature of Fighter Command came to the fore. Many squadrons and personnel from the air forces of the Dominions were already attached to the RAF, including top-level commanders – Australians, Canadians, New Zealanders, Rhodesians and South Africans. Other nationalities were also represented, including Free French, Belgian and a Jewish pilot from the British mandate of Palestine.

They were bolstered by the arrival of fresh Czechoslovak and Polish squadrons. These had been held back by Dowding, who thought non-English speaking aircrew would have trouble working within his control system, but Polish and Czech fliers proved to be especially effective. The pre-war Polish Air Force had lengthy and extensive training, and high standards; with Poland conquered and under brutal German occupation, the pilots of No. 303 (Polish) Squadron, which became the highest-scoring Allied unit, were experienced and strongly motivated. Josef František, a Czech regular airman who had flown from the occupation of his own country to join the Polish and then French air forces before arriving in Britain, flew as a guest of 303 Squadron and was ultimately credited with the highest &quot;RAF score&quot; in the Battle of Britain.

The RAF had the advantage of fighting over home territory. Pilots who bailed out after being shot down could be back at their airfields within hours, and aircraft low on fuel or ammunition could be immediately re-equipped. One RAF pilot interviewed in late 1940 had been shot down five times during the Battle of Britain, but was able to crash-land in Britain or bail out each time. For Luftwaffe aircrews, a bailout or crash landing in England meant capture – in the critical August period, almost as many Luftwaffe pilots were taken prisoner as were killed – while parachuting into the English Channel often meant drowning. Morale began to suffer, and &quot;Kanalkrankheit&quot; (&quot;Channel sickness&quot;) – a form of combat fatigue – began to appear among the German pilots. Their replacement problem became worse than the British.

====Assessment of attempt to destroy the RAF====
The effect of the German attacks on airfields is unclear. According to Stephen Bungay, Dowding, in a letter to Hugh Trenchard accompanying Park&#x27;s report on the period 8 August – 10 September 1940, states that the Luftwaffe &quot;achieved very little&quot; in the last week of August and the first week of September. The only Sector Station to be shut down operationally was Biggin Hill, and it was non-operational for just two hours. Dowding admitted that 11 Group&#x27;s efficiency was impaired but, despite serious damage to some airfields, only two out of 13 heavily attacked airfields were down for more than a few hours. The German refocus on London was not critical.

Retired Air Vice-Marshal Peter Dye, head of the RAF Museum, discussed the logistics of the battle in 2000 and 2010, dealing specifically with the single-seat fighters. He said that not only was British aircraft production replacing aircraft, but replacement pilots were keeping pace with losses. The number of pilots in RAF Fighter Command increased during July, August and September. The figures indicate the number of pilots available never decreased: from July, 1,200 were available; from 1 August, 1,400; in September, over 1,400; in October, nearly 1,600; by 1 November, 1,800. Throughout the battle, the RAF had more fighter pilots available than the Luftwaffe. Although the RAF&#x27;s reserves of single-seat fighters fell during July, the wastage was made up for by an efficient Civilian Repair Organisation (CRO), which by December had repaired and put back into service some 4,955 aircraft, and by aircraft held at Air Servicing Unit (ASU) airfields.
Richard Overy agrees with Dye and Bungay. Overy says that only one airfield was temporarily put out of action and &quot;only&quot; 103 pilots were lost. British fighter production, not counting repaired aircraft, produced 496 new aircraft in July, 467 in August, and 467 in September, covering the losses of August and September. Overy indicates the number of serviceable and total strength returns reveal an &quot;increase&quot; in fighters from 3 August to 7 September, 1,061 on strength and 708 serviceable to 1,161 on strength and 746 serviceable. Moreover, Overy points out that the number of RAF fighter pilots grew by one-third between June and August 1940. Personnel records show a constant supply of around 1,400 pilots in the crucial weeks of the battle. In the second half of September it reached 1,500. The shortfall of pilots was never above 10%. The Germans never had more than between 1,100 and 1,200 pilots, a deficiency of up to one-third. &quot;If Fighter Command were &#x27;the few&#x27;, the German fighter pilots were fewer&quot;.

Other scholars assert that this period was the most dangerous of all. In &quot;The Narrow Margin&quot;, published in 1961, historians Derek Wood and Derek Dempster believed that the two weeks from 24 August to 6 September represented a real danger. According to them, from 24 August to 6 September 295 fighters had been totally destroyed and 171 badly damaged, against a total output of 269 new and repaired Spitfires and Hurricanes. They say that 103 pilots were killed or missing and 128 were wounded, a total wastage of 120 pilots per week out of a fighting strength of just under 1,000, and that during August no more than 260 fighter pilots were turned out by OTUs, while casualties were just over 300. A full squadron establishment was 26 pilots, whereas the average in August was 16. In their assessment, the RAF was losing the battle. Denis Richards, in his 1953 contribution to the official British account &quot;History of the Second World War&quot;, agreed that lack of pilots, especially experienced ones, was the RAF&#x27;s greatest problem. He states that between 8 and 18 August 154 RAF pilots were killed, severely wounded, or missing, while only 63 new pilots were trained. Availability of aircraft was also a serious issue. While its reserves during the Battle of Britain never declined to a half dozen planes as some later claimed, Richards describes 24 August to 6 September as the critical period because during these two weeks Germany destroyed far more aircraft through its attacks on 11 Group&#x27;s southeast bases than Britain was producing. Three more weeks of such a pace would indeed have exhausted aircraft reserves. Germany had also suffered heavy losses of pilots and aircraft, hence its shift to night-time attacks in September. On 7 September RAF aircraft losses fell below British production and remained so until the end of the war.

===Day and night attacks on London: start of the Blitz===
Hitler&#x27;s &quot;Directive No. 17 – For the conduct of air and sea warfare against England&quot; issued on 1 August 1940, reserved to himself the right to decide on terror attacks as measures of reprisal. Hitler issued a directive that London was not to be bombed save on his sole instruction. In preparation, detailed target plans under the code name Operation Loge for raids on communications, power stations, armaments works and docks in the Port of London were distributed to the &quot;Fliegerkorps&quot; in July. The port areas were crowded next to residential housing and civilian casualties would be expected, but this would combine military and economic targets with indirect effects on morale. The strategy agreed on 6 August was for raids on military and economic targets in towns and cities to culminate in a major attack on London. In mid-August, raids were made on targets on the outskirts of London.

Luftwaffe doctrine included the possibility of retaliatory attacks on cities, and since 11 May small-scale night raids by RAF Bomber Command had frequently bombed residential areas. The Germans assumed this was deliberate, and as the raids increased in frequency and scale the population grew impatient for measures of revenge. On 25 August 1940, 81 bombers of Bomber Command were sent out to raid industrial and commercial targets in Berlin. Clouds prevented accurate identification and the bombs fell across the city, causing some casualties among the civilian population as well as damage to residential areas. Continuing RAF raids on Berlin led to Hitler withdrawing his directive on 30 August, and giving the go-ahead to the planned bombing offensive. On 3 September Göring planned to bomb London daily, with General Albert Kesselring&#x27;s enthusiastic support, having received reports the average strength of RAF squadrons was down to five or seven fighters out of twelve and their airfields in the area were out of action. Hitler issued a directive on 5 September to attack cities including London. In a widely publicised speech delivered on 4 September 1940, Hitler condemned the bombing of Berlin and presented the planned attacks on London as reprisals. The first daylight raid was titled &quot;Vergeltungsangriff&quot; (revenge attack).
On 7 September, a massive series of raids involving nearly four hundred bombers and more than six hundred fighters targeted docks in the East End of London, day and night. The RAF anticipated attacks on airfields, and 11 Group rose to meet them, in greater numbers than the Luftwaffe expected. The first official deployment of 12 Group&#x27;s Leigh-Mallory&#x27;s Big Wing took twenty minutes to form up, missing its intended target, but encountering another formation of bombers while still climbing. They returned, apologetic about their limited success, and blamed the delay on being scrambled too late.

The German press jubilantly announced that &quot;one great cloud of smoke stretches tonight from the middle of London to the mouth of the Thames.&quot; Reports reflected the briefings given to crews before the raids – &quot;Everyone knew about the last cowardly attacks on German cities, and thought about wives, mothers and children. And then came that word &#x27;Vengeance!&#x27;&quot; Pilots reported seeing ruined airfields as they flew towards London, appearances which gave intelligence reports the impression of devastated defences. Göring maintained that the RAF was close to defeat, making invasion feasible.

Fighter Command had been at its lowest ebb, short of men and machines, and the break from airfield attacks allowed them to recover. 11 Group had considerable success in breaking up daytime raids. 12 Group repeatedly disobeyed orders and failed to meet requests to protect 11 Group airfields, but their experiments with increasingly large Big Wings had some success. The Luftwaffe began to abandon their morning raids, with attacks on London starting late in the afternoon for fifty-seven consecutive nights.
The most damaging aspect to the Luftwaffe of targeting London was the increased distance. The Bf 109E escorts had a limited fuel capacity, giving them only a 660 km (410-mile) maximum range solely on internal fuel, and when they arrived had only 10 minutes of flying time before turning for home, leaving the bombers undefended. Its eventual stablemate, the Focke-Wulf Fw 190A, was flying only in prototype form in mid-1940; the first 28 Fw 190s were not delivered until November 1940. The Fw 190A-1 had a maximum range of 940 km (584 miles) on internal fuel, 40% greater than the Bf 109E. The Messerschmitt Bf 109E-7 corrected this deficiency by adding a ventral centre-line ordnance rack to take either an SC 250 bomb or a standard 300-litre Luftwaffe drop tank to double the range to 1,325 km (820 mi). The ordnance rack was not retrofitted to earlier Bf 109Es until October 1940.

On 14 September, Hitler chaired a meeting with the OKW staff. Göring was in France directing the decisive battle, so Erhard Milch deputised for him. Hitler asked &quot;Should we call it off altogether?&quot; General Hans Jeschonnek, Luftwaffe Chief of Staff, begged for a last chance to defeat the RAF and for permission to launch attacks on civilian residential areas to cause mass panic. Hitler refused the latter, perhaps unaware of how much damage had already been done to civilian targets. He reserved for himself the power to unleash the terror weapon. Instead, political will was to be broken by destroying the material infrastructure, the weapons industry, and stocks of fuel and food.

On 15 September, two massive waves of German attacks were decisively repulsed by the RAF by deploying every aircraft in 11 Group. Sixty German and twenty-six RAF aircraft were shot down. The action was the climax of the Battle of Britain.

Two days after this German defeat Hitler postponed preparations for the invasion of Britain. Henceforth, in the face of mounting losses in men, aircraft and the lack of adequate replacements, the Luftwaffe completed their gradual shift from daylight bomber raids and continued with nighttime bombing. 15 September is commemorated as Battle of Britain Day.

===Night time Blitz, fighter-bomber day raids===
At the 14 September OKW conference, Hitler acknowledged that the Luftwaffe had still not gained the air superiority needed for the Operation Sea Lion invasion. In agreement with Raeder&#x27;s written recommendation, Hitler said the campaign was to intensify regardless of invasion plans: &quot;The decisive thing is the ceaseless continuation of air attacks.&quot; Jeschonnek proposed attacking residential areas to cause &quot;mass panic&quot;, but Hitler turned this down: he reserved to himself the option of terror bombing. British morale was to be broken by destroying infrastructure, armaments manufacturing, fuel and food stocks. On 16 September, Göring gave the order for this change in strategy. This new phase was to be the first independent strategic bombing campaign, in hopes of a political success forcing the British to give up. Hitler hoped it might result in &quot;eight million going mad&quot; (referring to the population of London in 1940), which would &quot;cause a catastrophe&quot; for the British. In those circumstances, Hitler said, &quot;even a small invasion might go a long way&quot;. Hitler was against cancelling the invasion as &quot;the cancellation would reach the ears of the enemy and strengthen his resolve&quot;. On 19 September, Hitler ordered a reduction in work on Operation Sea Lion. He doubted if strategic bombing could achieve its aims, but ending the air war would be an open admission of defeat. He had to maintain the appearance of concentration on defeating Britain, to conceal from Joseph Stalin his covert aim to invade the Soviet Union.

Throughout the battle, most Luftwaffe bombing raids had been at night. They increasingly suffered unsustainable losses in daylight raids, and the last massive daytime attacks were on 15 September. A raid of 70 bombers on 18 September also suffered badly, and day raids were gradually phased out leaving the main attacks at night. Fighter Command still lacked any effective capacity to intercept night-time raiders. The night fighters, mostly Blenheims and Beaufighters, at this time lacked airborne radar and so could not find the bombers. Anti-aircraft guns were diverted to London&#x27;s defences, but had a much-reduced success rate against night attacks.

From mid September, Luftwaffe daylight bombing was gradually taken over by Bf 109 fighters, adapted to take one 250 kg bomb. Small groups of fighter-bombers would carry out &quot;Störangriffe&quot; raids escorted by large escort formations of about 200 to 300 combat fighters. They flew at altitudes over where the Bf 109 had an advantage over RAF fighters, except the Spitfire. The raids disturbed civilians, and continued the war of attrition against Fighter Command. The raids were intended to carry out precision bombing on military or economic targets, but it was hard to achieve sufficient accuracy with the single bomb. Sometimes, when attacked, the fighter-bombers had to jettison the bomb to function as fighters. The RAF was at a disadvantage and changed defensive tactics by introducing standing patrols of Spitfires at high altitude to monitor incoming raids. On a sighting, other patrols at lower altitude would fly up to join the battle.

A Junkers Ju 88 returning from a raid on London was shot down in Kent on 27 September resulting in the Battle of Graveney Marsh, the last action between British and foreign military forces on British mainland soil.

German bombing of Britain reached its peak in October and November 1940. In post-war interrogation, Wilhelm Keitel described the aims as economic blockade, in conjunction with submarine warfare, and attrition of Britain&#x27;s military and economic resources. The Luftwaffe wanted to achieve victory on its own and was reluctant to cooperate with the navy. Their strategy for the blockade was to destroy ports and storage facilities in towns and cities. Priorities were based on the pattern of trade and distribution, so for these months, London was the main target. In November their attention turned to other ports and industrial targets around Britain.

Hitler postponed the Sealion invasion on 13 October &quot;until the spring of 1941&quot;. It was not until Hitler&#x27;s Directive 21 was issued, on 18 December 1940, that the threat to Britain of invasion finally ended.

====Royal family====
During the battle, and for the rest of the war, an important factor in keeping public morale high was the continued presence in London of King George VI and his wife Queen Elizabeth. When war broke out in 1939, the King and Queen decided to stay in London and not flee to Canada, as had been suggested. George VI and Elizabeth officially stayed in Buckingham Palace throughout the war, although they often spent weekends at Windsor Castle to visit their daughters, Elizabeth (the future queen) and Margaret. Buckingham Palace was damaged by bombs which landed in the grounds on 10 September and, on 13 September, more serious damage was caused by two bombs which destroyed the Royal Chapel. The royal couple were in a small sitting room about 80 yards from where the bombs exploded. On 24 September, in recognition of the bravery of civilians, King George VI inaugurated the award of the George Cross.

==Attrition statistics==


Overall, by 2 November, the RAF fielded 1,796 pilots, an increase of over 40% from July 1940&#x27;s count of 1,259 pilots. Based on German sources (from a Luftwaffe intelligence officer Otto Bechtle attached to KG 2 in February 1944) translated by the Air Historical Branch, Stephen Bungay asserts German fighter and bomber &quot;strength&quot; declined without recovery, and that from August–December 1940, the German fighter and bomber strength declined by 30 and 25 per cent. In contrast, Williamson Murray argues (using translations by the Air Historical Branch) that 1,380 German bombers were on strength on 29 June 1940, 1,420 bombers on 28 September, 1,423 level bombers on 2 November and 1,393 bombers on 30 November 1940. In July–September the number of Luftwaffe pilots available fell by 136, but the number of operational pilots had shrunk by 171 by September. The training organisation of the Luftwaffe was failing to replace losses. German fighter pilots, in contrast to popular perception, were not afforded training or rest rotations, unlike their British counterparts. The first week of September accounted for 25% of Fighter Command&#x27;s and 24% of the Luftwaffe&#x27;s overall losses. Between the dates 26 August – 6 September, on only one day (1 September) did the Germans destroy more aircraft than they lost. Losses were 325 German and 248 British.

Luftwaffe losses for August numbered 774 aircraft to all causes, representing 18.5% of all combat aircraft at the beginning of the month. Fighter Command&#x27;s losses in August were 426 fighters destroyed, amounting to 40 per cent of 1,061 fighters available on 3 August. In addition, 99 German bombers and 27 other types were destroyed between 1 and 29 August.

From July to September, the Luftwaffe&#x27;s loss records indicate the loss of 1,636 aircraft, 1,184 to enemy action. This represented 47% of the initial strength of single-engined fighters, 66% of twin-engined fighters, and 45% of bombers. This indicates the Germans were running out of aircrew as well as aircraft.

Throughout the battle, the Germans greatly underestimated the size of the RAF and the scale of British aircraft production. Across the Channel, the Air Intelligence division of the Air Ministry consistently overestimated the size of the German air enemy and the productive capacity of the German aviation industry. As the battle was fought, both sides exaggerated the losses inflicted on the other by an equally large margin. The intelligence picture formed before the battle encouraged the Luftwaffe to believe that such losses pushed Fighter Command to the very edge of defeat, while the exaggerated picture of German air strength persuaded the RAF that the threat it faced was larger and more dangerous than was the case. This led the British to the conclusion that another fortnight of attacks on airfields might force Fighter Command to withdraw their squadrons from the south of England. The German misconception, on the other hand, encouraged first complacency, then strategic misjudgement. The shift of targets from air bases to industry and communications was taken because it was assumed that Fighter Command was virtually eliminated.

Between 24 August and 4 September, German serviceability rates, which were acceptable at &quot;Stuka&quot; units, were running at 75% with Bf 109s, 70% with bombers and 65% with Bf 110s, indicating a shortage of spare parts. All units were well below established strength. The attrition was beginning to affect the fighters in particular. By 14 September, the Luftwaffe&#x27;s Bf 109 &quot;Geschwader&quot; possessed only 67% of their operational crews against authorised aircraft. For Bf 110 units it was 46 per cent; and for bombers it was 59 per cent. A week later the figures had dropped to 64 per cent, 52% and 52 per cent. Serviceability rates in Fighter Command&#x27;s fighter squadrons, between 24 August and 7 September, were listed as: 64.8% on 24 August; 64.7% on 31 August and 64.25% on 7 September 1940.

Due to the failure of the Luftwaffe to establish air supremacy, a conference assembled on 14 September at Hitler&#x27;s headquarters. Hitler concluded that air superiority had not yet been established and &quot;promised to review the situation on 17 September for possible landings on 27 September or 8 October. Three days later, when the evidence was clear that the German Air Force had greatly exaggerated the extent of their successes against the RAF, Hitler postponed &quot;Sea Lion&quot; indefinitely.&quot;

==Propaganda==
Propaganda was an important element of the air war which began to develop over Britain from 18 June 1940 onwards, when the Luftwaffe began small, probing daylight raids to test RAF defences. One of many examples of these small-scale raids was the destruction of a school at Polruan in Cornwall, by a single raider. Into early July, the British media&#x27;s focus on the air battles increased steadily, the press, magazines, BBC radio and newsreels daily conveying the contents of Air Ministry communiques. The German OKW communiques matched Britain&#x27;s efforts in claiming the upper hand.

Central to the propaganda war on both sides of the Channel were aircraft claims, which are discussed under &#x27;Attrition statistics&#x27; (above). These daily claims were important both for sustaining British home front morale and persuading America to support Britain, and were produced by the Air Ministry&#x27;s Air Intelligence branch. Under pressure from American journalists and broadcasters to prove that the RAF&#x27;s claims were genuine, RAF intelligence compared pilots&#x27; claims with actual aircraft wrecks and those seen to crash into the sea. It was soon realised that there was a discrepancy between the two, but the Air Ministry decided not to reveal this. In fact, it was not until May 1947 that the actual figures were released to the public, by which time it was no longer important. Many people refused to believe the revised figures, including Douglas Bader.

The place of the Battle of Britain in British popular memory partly stems from the Air Ministry&#x27;s successful propaganda campaign from July to October 1940, and its praise of the defending fighter pilots from March 1941 onwards. The 3d pamphlet &quot;The Battle of Britain&quot; sold in huge numbers internationally, leading even Goebbels to admire its propaganda value. Focusing only upon the fighter pilots, with no mention of RAF bomber attacks against invasion barges, the Battle of Britain was soon established as a major victory for Fighter Command. This inspired feature films, books, magazines, works of art, poetry, radio plays and MOI short films.

The Air Ministry also developed the Battle of Britain Sunday commemoration, supported a Battle of Britain clasp for issue to the pilots in 1945 and, from 1945, Battle of Britain Week. The Battle of Britain window in Westminster Abbey was also encouraged by the Air Ministry, with Trenchard and Dowding, now lords, on its committee. By July 1947 when the window was unveiled, the Battle of Britain had already attained central prominence as Fighter Command&#x27;s most notable victory, the fighter pilots credited with preventing invasion in 1940. Although given widespread media coverage in September and October 1940, RAF Bomber and Coastal Command raids against invasion barge concentrations were less well-remembered.

==Aftermath==
The Battle of Britain marked the first major defeat of Germany&#x27;s military forces, with air superiority seen as the key to victory. Pre-war theories had led to exaggerated fears of strategic bombing, and UK public opinion was buoyed by coming through the ordeal. For the RAF, Fighter Command had achieved a great victory in successfully carrying out Sir Thomas Inskip&#x27;s 1937 air policy of preventing the Germans from knocking Britain out of the war.

The battle also significantly shifted American opinion. During the battle, many Americans accepted the view promoted by Joseph Kennedy, the American ambassador in London, who believed that the United Kingdom could not survive. Roosevelt wanted a second opinion, and sent William &quot;Wild Bill&quot; Donovan on a brief visit to the UK; he became convinced the UK would survive and should be supported in every possible way. Before the end of the year, American journalist Ralph Ingersoll, after returning from Britain, published a book concluding that &quot;Adolf Hitler met his first defeat in eight years&quot; in what might &quot;go down in history as a battle as important as Waterloo or Gettysburg&quot;. The turning point was when the Germans reduced the intensity of daylight attacks after 15 September. According to Ingersoll, &quot;[a] majority of responsible British officers who fought through this battle believe that if Hitler and Göring had had the courage and the resources to lose 200 planes a day for the next five days, nothing could have saved London&quot;; instead, &quot;[the Luftwaffe&#x27;s] morale in combat is definitely broken, and the RAF has been gaining in strength each week.&quot;

Both sides in the battle made exaggerated claims of numbers of enemy aircraft shot down. In general, claims were two to three times the actual numbers. Postwar analysis of records has shown that between July and September, the RAF claimed 2,698 kills, while the Luftwaffe fighters claimed 3,198 RAF aircraft shot down. Total losses, and start and end dates for recorded losses, vary for both sides. Luftwaffe losses from 10 July to 30 October 1940 total 1,977 aircraft, including 243 twin- and 569 single-engined fighters, 822 bombers and 343 non-combat types. In the same period, RAF Fighter Command aircraft losses number 1,087, including 53 twin-engined fighters. To the RAF figure should be added 376 Bomber Command and 148 Coastal Command aircraft lost conducting bombing, mining, and reconnaissance operations in defence of the country.
Stephen Bungay describes Dowding and Park&#x27;s strategy of choosing when to engage the enemy whilst maintaining a coherent force as vindicated; their leadership, and the subsequent debates about strategy and tactics, had created enmity among RAF senior commanders and both were sacked from their posts in the immediate aftermath of the battle. All things considered, the RAF proved to be a robust and capable organisation that was to use all the modern resources available to it to the maximum advantage. Richard Evans writes:

The Germans launched some spectacular attacks against important British industries, but they could not destroy the British industrial potential, and made little systematic effort to do so. Hindsight does not disguise that the threat to Fighter Command was very real, and for the participants it seemed as if there was a narrow margin between victory and defeat. Nevertheless, even if the German attacks on the 11 Group airfields which guarded southeast England and the approaches to London had continued, the RAF could have withdrawn to the Midlands out of German fighter range and continued the battle from there. The victory was as much psychological as physical. Writes Alfred Price:
The truth of the matter, borne out by the events of 18 August, is more prosaic: neither by attacking the airfields nor by attacking London, was the Luftwaffe likely to destroy Fighter Command. Given the size of the British fighter force and the general high quality of its equipment, training and morale, the Luftwaffe could have achieved no more than a Pyrrhic victory. During the action on 18 August, it had cost the Luftwaffe five trained aircrew killed, wounded or taken prisoner, for each British fighter pilot killed or wounded; the ratio was similar on other days in the battle. And this ratio of 5:1 was very close to that between the number of German aircrew involved in the battle and those in Fighter Command. In other words, the two sides were suffering almost the same losses in trained aircrew, in proportion to their overall strengths. In the Battle of Britain, for the first time during the Second World War, the German war machine had set itself a major task which it patently failed to achieve, and so demonstrated that it was not invincible. In stiffening the resolve of those determined to resist Hitler the battle was an important turning point in the conflict.

Some historians are more cautious in assessing the significance of Germany&#x27;s failure to knock Britain out of the war. Bungay writes, &quot;Victory in the air achieved a modest strategic goal, for it did not bring Britain any closer to victory in the war, but merely avoided her defeat.&quot; Overy says, &quot;The Battle of Britain did not seriously weaken Germany and her allies, nor did it much reduce the scale of the threat facing Britain (and the Commonwealth) in 1940/41 until German and Japanese aggression brought the Soviet Union and the United States into the conflict.&quot;

The British victory in the Battle of Britain was achieved at a heavy cost. Total British civilian losses from July to December 1940 were 23,002 dead and 32,138 wounded, with one of the largest single raids on 19 December 1940, in which almost 3,000 civilians died. With the culmination of the concentrated daylight raids, Britain was able to rebuild its military forces and establish itself as an Allied stronghold, later serving as a base from which the liberation of Western Europe was launched.

==Battle of Britain Day==

Winston Churchill summed up the battle with the words, &quot;Never in the field of human conflict was so much owed by so many to so few&quot;. Pilots who fought in the battle have been known as &quot;The Few&quot; ever since, at times being specially commemorated on 15 September, &quot;Battle of Britain Day&quot;. On this day in 1940, the Luftwaffe embarked on their largest bombing attack yet, forcing the engagement of the entirety of the RAF in defence of London and the South East, which resulted in a decisive British victory that proved to mark a turning point in Britain&#x27;s favour.

Within the Commonwealth, Battle of Britain Day has been observed more usually on the third Sunday in September, and even on the 2nd Thursday in September in some areas in the British Channel Islands.

==Memorials and museums==
Plans for the Battle of Britain window in Westminster Abbey were begun during wartime, the committee chaired by Lords Trenchard and Dowding. Public donations paid for the window itself, which replaced a window destroyed during the campaign, this officially opened by King George VI on 10 July 1947. Although not actually an &#x27;official&#x27; memorial to the Battle of Britain in the sense that government paid for it, the window and chapel have since been viewed as such. During the late 1950s and 1960, various proposals were advanced for a national monument to the Battle of Britain, this also the focus of several letters in &quot;The Times&quot;. In 1960 the Conservative government decided against a further monument, taking the view that the credit should be shared more broadly than Fighter Command alone, and there was little public appetite for one. All subsequent memorials are the result of private subscription and initiative, as discussed below.

There are numerous memorials to the battle. The most important ones are the Battle of Britain Monument in London and the Battle of Britain Memorial at Capel-le-Ferne in Kent. As well as Westminster Abbey, St James&#x27;s Church, Paddington also has a memorial window to the battle, replacing a window destroyed during it. There is also a memorial at the former Croydon Airport, one of the RAF bases during the battle, and a memorial to the pilots at Armadale Castle on the Isle of Skye in Scotland, which is topped by a raven sculpture. The Polish pilots who served in the battle are among the names on the Polish War Memorial in west London.

There are also two museums to the battle: one at Hawkinge in Kent and one at Stanmore in London, at the former RAF Bentley Priory.

In 2015 the RAF created an online &#x27;Battle of Britain 75th Anniversary Commemorative Mosaic&#x27; composed of pictures of &quot;the few&quot; – the pilots and aircrew who fought in the battle – and &quot;the many&quot; – &#x27;the often unsung others whose contribution during the Battle of Britain was also vital to the RAF&#x27;s victory in the skies above Britain&#x27;, submitted by participants and their families.
==In popular culture==

===Film and television depictions===
* The battle was the subject of the film &quot;Battle of Britain&quot; (1969), starring Laurence Olivier as Hugh Dowding and Trevor Howard as Keith Park. It also starred Michael Caine, Christopher Plummer and Robert Shaw as squadron leaders. Former participants of the battle served as technical advisers, including Adolf Galland and Robert Stanford Tuck.
* In the 2001 film &quot;Pearl Harbor&quot;, American participation in the Battle of Britain was exaggerated, as none of the &quot;Eagle Squadrons&quot; of American volunteers saw action in Europe before 1941.
* , a Hollywood film named &quot;The Few&quot; was in preparation for release in 2008, based on the story of real-life US pilot Billy Fiske, who ignored his country&#x27;s neutrality rules and volunteered for the RAF. Bill Bond, who conceived the Battle of Britain Monument in London, described a &quot;Variety&quot; magazine outline of the film&#x27;s historical content as &quot;Totally wrong. The whole bloody lot.&quot;
* &quot;First Light&quot; (BBC drama 2010).
* In 2010, actor Julian Glover played a 101-year-old Polish veteran RAF pilot in the short film &quot;Battle for Britain&quot;.
* The 2018 war film &quot;Hurricane&quot; depicted the experiences of a group of Polish pilots of No. 303 Squadron RAF in the Battle of Britain.

=== Documentaries ===
* The 1941 Allied propaganda film &quot;Churchill&#x27;s Island&quot; was the winner of the first Academy Award for Documentary Short Subject.
* It was also included in an episode of the 2019 series &quot;Greatest Events of WWII in Colour&quot;.

==See also==

* List of Battle of Britain airfields
* List of Battle of Britain squadrons
* List of RAF aircrew in the Battle of Britain
* Non-British personnel in the RAF during the Battle of Britain
* Operation Banquet, a British plan to use every available aircraft against a German invasion
* Operation Lucid, a British plan to use fire ships to attack invasion barges
* Coventry Blitz
* Evacuations of civilians in Britain during World War II
* Polish Air Forces in France and Great Britain
* The Darkest Hour
* The Few
* Post-war memorials
** Battle of Britain Class steam locomotives of the Southern Railway
** Battle of Britain Memorial Flight
** Battle of Britain Memorial, Capel-le-Ferne
** Battle of Britain Monument, London
** Kent Battle of Britain Museum
** Polish War Memorial
** Spirit of the Few Monument
* Radio direction finding

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==

===General===
* 
* 
* Buckley, John. &quot;Air Power in the Age of Total War&quot;. London: UCL Press, 1999. .
* Buell, Thomas. &quot;The Second World War: Europe and the Mediterranean&quot;. New York: Square One Publishers, 2002. .
* (hardcover), 2002, (paperback). (2015 paperback edition)
* Collier, Basil. &quot;The Defence of the United Kingdom&quot; (1962, Official history)
* Collier, Basil. &quot;The Battle of Britain&quot; (1962, Batsford&#x27;s British Battles series)
* Collier, Richard. &quot;Eagle Day: The Battle of Britain, 6 August – 15 September 1940&quot;. London: Pan Books, 1968.
* Churchill, Winston S. &quot;The Second World War – The Grand Alliance (Volume 3)&quot;. Bantam Books, 1962.
* (Originally published: London: Jonathan Cape, 1977.) .
* 
* Ellis, John. &quot;Brute Force: Allied Strategy and Tactics in the Second World War&quot;. London: Andre Deutsch, 1990. .
* Evans, Michael. &quot;Never in the field of human conflict was so much owed by so many to ... the Navy.&quot; &quot;The Times&quot;, 24 August 2006. Retrieved: 3 March 2007.
* Goodenough, Simon. &quot;War Maps: World War II, From September 1939 to August 1945, Air, Sea, and Land, Battle by Battle&quot;. New York: St. Martin&#x27;s Press, 1982, .
* Harding, Thomas. &quot;Battle of Britain was won at sea.&quot; &quot;The Telegraph&quot;, 25 August 2006. Retrieved: 25 August 2006.
* 
* Keegan, John. &quot;The Second World War&quot; London: Pimlico, 1997. .
* 
* (hardcover, paperback, 2002)
* Owen, R.E, New Zealanders with the Royal Air Force Government Printer, Wellington, New Zealand 1953.
* 
* Pope, Stephan. &quot;Across the Ether: Part One&quot;. &quot;Aeroplane&quot;, Vol. 23, No. 5, Issue No. 265, May 1995.
* 
* 
* Robinson, Derek, &quot;Invasion, 1940: Did the Battle of Britain Alone Stop Hitler?&quot; New York: Carroll &amp; Graf, 2005. .
* Shulman, Milton. &quot;Defeat in the West&quot;. London: Cassell, 2004 (First edition 1947). .
* Stacey, C P. (1970) Arms, Men and Governments: The War Policies of Canada, 1939–1945 Queen&#x27;s Printer, Ottawa (Downloadable PDF)
* 
* Terraine, John, &quot;A Time for Courage: The Royal Air Force in the European War, 1939–1945&quot;. London: Macmillan, 1985. .
* 

===Luftwaffe===
* 
* Corum, James. &quot;The Luftwaffe: Creating the Operational Air War, 1918–1940&quot;. Lawrence, Kansas: Kansas University Press, 1997. .
* de Zeng, Henry L., Doug G. Stankey and Eddie J. Creek. &quot;Bomber Units of the Luftwaffe 1933–1945: A Reference Source, Volume 1&quot;. Hersham, Surrey, UK: Ian Allan Publishing, 2007. .
* Dildy, Douglas C. &quot;The Air Battle for England: The Truth Behind the Failure of the Luftwaffe&#x27;s Counter-Air Campaign in 1940.&quot; &quot;Air Power History&quot; 63.2 (2016): 27.
* Dönitz, Karl. &quot;Ten years and Twenty Days&quot;. New York: Da Capo Press, First Edition, 1997. .
* 
* Kieser, Egbert. &quot;Operation Sea Lion; The German Plan to Invade Britain 1940.&quot; London: Cassel Military Paperbacks, 1999. .
* Macksey, Kenneth. &quot;Invasion: The German Invasion of England, July 1940&quot;. London: Greenhill Books, 1990. .
* Mason, Francis K. &quot;Battle Over Britain: A History of the German Air Assaults on Great Britain, 1917–18 and July–December 1940, and the Development of Air Defences Between the World Wars&quot;. New York: Doubleday, 1969. .
* 
* Raeder, Erich. &quot;Erich Rader, Grand Admiral&quot;. New York: Da Capo Press; United States Naval Institute, 2001. .
* 
* 

===Autobiographies and biographies===
* Brew, Steve. &quot;A Ruddy Awful Waste: Eric Lock DSO, DFC &amp; Bar; The Brief Life of a Battle of Britain Fighter Ace&quot;. London: Fighting High, 2016.
* Collier, Basil. &quot;Leader of the Few: the Authorised Biography of Air Chief Marshal Lord Dowding of Bentley Priory&quot;. London: Jarrolds, 1957.
* 
* Franks, Norman, &quot;Wings of Freedom: Twelve Battle of Britain Pilots&quot;. London: William Kimber, 1980. .
* Halpenny, Bruce, &quot;Fight for the Sky: Stories of Wartime Fighter Pilots.&quot; Cambridge, UK: Patrick Stephens, 1986. .
* Halpenny, Bruce, &quot;Fighter Pilots in World War II: True Stories of Frontline Air Combat (paperback)&quot;. Barnsley, UK: Pen and Sword Books Ltd, 2004. .

===Aircraft===
* de Zeng, Henry L., Doug G. Stankey and Eddie J. Creek, &quot;Bomber Units of the Luftwaffe 1933–1945: A Reference Source, Volume 2&quot;. Hersham, Surrey, UK: Ian Allan Publishing, 2007. .
* Goss, Chris, &quot; Dornier 17: In Focus&quot;. Surrey, UK: Red Kite Books, 2005. .
* 
* 
* Huntley, Ian D., &quot;Fairey Battle, Aviation Guide 1&quot;. Bedford, UK: SAM Publications, 2004. .
* 
* Mason, Francis K., &quot;Hawker Aircraft since 1920.&quot; London: Putnam, 1991. .
* Molson, Kenneth M. &quot;et al.&quot;, &quot;Canada&#x27;s National Aviation Museum: Its History and Collections&quot;. Ottawa: National Aviation Museum, 1988. .
* Moyes, Philip, J. R., &quot;The Fairey Battle.&quot; &quot;Aircraft in Profile, Volume 2 (nos. 25–48)&quot;. Windsor, Berkshire, UK: Profile Publications, 1971. 
* Parry, Simon W., &quot;Intruders over Britain: The Story of the Luftwaffe&#x27;s Night Intruder Force, the Fernnachtjager&quot;. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Books, 1989. .
* 
* Scutts, Jerry, &quot;Messerschmitt Bf 109: The Operational Record&quot;. Sarasota, Florida: Crestline Publishers, 1996. .
* 

===Additional references===
====Books====
* Addison, Paul and Jeremy Crang. &quot;The Burning Blue: A New History of the Battle of Britain&quot;. London: Pimlico, 2000. .
* Bergström, Christer. &quot;Barbarossa – The Air Battle: July–December 1941&quot;. London: Chevron/Ian Allan, 2007. .
* Bergström, Christer. &quot;The Battle of Britain – An Epic Battle Revisited&quot;. Eskilstuna: Vaktel Books/Casemate, 2010. .
* Bishop, Patrick. &quot;Fighter Boys: The Battle of Britain, 1940&quot;. New York: Viking, 2003 (hardcover, ); Penguin Books, 2004. . As &quot;Fighter Boys: Saving Britain 1940&quot;. London: Harper Perennial, 2004. .
* Brittain, Vera. &quot;England&#x27;s Hour&quot;. London: Continuum International Publishing Group, 2005 (paperback, ); Obscure Press (paperback, ).
* 
* Cooper, Matthew. &quot;The German Air Force 1933–1945: An Anatomy of Failure&quot;. New York: Jane&#x27;s Publishing Incorporated, 1981. .
* Craig, Phil and Tim Clayton. &quot;Finest Hour: The Battle of Britain&quot;. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster, 2000. (hardcover); 2006, (paperback).
* Cumming, Anthony J. &quot;The Royal Navy and The Battle of Britain.&quot; Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press, 2010. .
* Fiedler, Arkady. &quot;303 Squadron: The Legendary Battle of Britain Fighter Squadron&quot;. Los Angeles: Aquila Polonica, 2010. .
* Fisher, David E. &quot;A Summer Bright and Terrible: Winston Churchill, Lord Dowding, Radar and the Impossible Triumph of the Battle of Britain&quot;. Emeryville, CA: Shoemaker &amp; Hoard, 2005. (hardcover, ); 2006, (paperback).
* Gaskin, Margaret. &quot;Blitz: The Story of 29 December 1940&quot;. New York: Harcourt, 2006. .
* 
* Haining, Peter. &quot;Where the Eagle Landed: The Mystery of the German Invasion of Britain, 1940&quot;. London: Robson Books, 2004. .
* Halpenny, Bruce Barrymore. &quot;Action Stations: Military Airfields of Greater London v. 8&quot;. Cambridge, UK: Patrick Stephens, 1984. .
* Harding, Thomas. &quot;It&#x27;s baloney, say RAF aces&quot;. &quot;The Telegraph&quot;, 24 August 2006. Retrieved: 3 March 2007.
* Hough, Richard. &quot;The Battle of Britain: The Greatest Air Battle of World War II&quot;. New York: W.W. Norton, 1989. (hardcover); 2005, (paperback).
* James, T.C.G. &quot;The Battle of Britain (Air Defence of Great Britain; vol. 2)&quot;. London/New York: Frank Cass Publishers, 2000. (hardcover); (paperback, ).
* James, T.C.G. &quot;Growth of Fighter Command, 1936–1940 (Air Defence of Great Britain; vol. 1)&quot;. London; New York: Frank Cass Publishers, 2000. .
* James, T.C.G. &quot;Night Air Defence During the Blitz&quot;. London/New York: Frank Cass Publishers, 2003. .
* McGlashan, Kenneth B. with Owen P. Zupp. &quot;Down to Earth: A Fighter Pilot Recounts His Experiences of Dunkirk, the Battle of Britain, Dieppe, D-Day and Beyond&quot;. London: Grub Street Publishing, 2007. .
* March, Edgar J. &quot;British Destroyers; a History of Development 1892–1953.&quot; London: Seely Service &amp; Co. Limited, 1966.
* . NB: This book is also published under the following title:
** &quot;For Your Freedom and Ours: The Kościuszko Squadron – Forgotten Heroes of World War II&quot;.
* Mason, Francis K. &quot;Battle over Britain&quot;. McWhirter Twins Ltd. 1969 {A day by day accounting of RaF and Luftwaffe losses}
* Prien, Jochen and Peter Rodeike.&quot;Messerschmitt Bf 109 F, G, and K: An Illustrated Study.&quot; Atglen, Pennsylvania: Schiffer Publishing, 1995. .
* Ray, John Philip. &quot;The Battle of Britain: New Perspectives: Behind the Scenes of the Great Air War&quot;. London: Arms &amp; Armour Press, 1994 (hardcover, ); London: Orion Publishing, 1996 (paperback, ).
* Rongers, Eppo H. &quot;De oorlog in mei &#x27;40&quot;, Utrecht/Antwerpen: Uitgeverij Het Spectrum N.V., 1969, No ISBN
* Townsend, Peter. &quot;Duel of Eagles (new edition)&quot;. London: Phoenix, 2000. .
* Wellum, Geoffrey. &quot;First Light: The Story of the Boy Who Became a Man in the War-Torn Skies Above Britain&quot;. New York: Viking Books, 2002. (hardcover); Hoboken, NJ: Wiley &amp; Sons, 2003. (hardcover); London: Penguin Books, 2003. (paperback).

====General====
* The Battle of Britain Historical Timeline
* Day by Day blog charting the progress of the Battle by ex RAF veteran
* Battle Of Britain Historical Society 
* video: , (52 min.) complete film documentary by Frank Capra made for U.S. Army
* The Battle of Britain &quot;In Photos&quot;
* Royal Air Force history
* Battle of Britain Memorial
* BBC History Overview of Battle
* Historical recording BBC: Churchill&#x27;s &quot;This Was Their Finest Hour&quot; speech 
* Radio New Zealand &#x27;Sounds Historical&#x27; ANZAC Day, 25 April 2008: Historical recording of Sir Keith Park describing the Battle of Britain. (Scroll down to 10:50 am).
* Air Chief Marshal Hugh Dowding on the Battle of Britain (despatch to the Secretary of State, August 1941) 
* Royal Engineers Museum: Royal Engineers during the Second World War (airfield repair)
* Shoreham Aircraft Museum
* Tangmere Military Aviation Museum
* Kent Battle of Britain Museum
* ADLG Visits RAF Uxbridge Battle of Britain Operations Room
* British Invasion Defences
* The Falco and Regia Aeronautica in the Battle of Britain
* History of North Weald Airfield
* The Royal Mint Memorial website
* New Zealanders in the Battle of Britain (NZHistory.net.nz) 
* New Zealanders in the Battle of Britain (official history)
* Battle for Britain, short film starring Julian Glover
* Interactive map showing Battle of Britain airfields and squadrons by date
* https://web.archive.org/web/20161220201254/http://garry-campion.com/</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="4" end="21" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q831663" start="31" end="48" title="military campaign" label="military campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="56" end="72" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="87" end="102" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427735" start="117" end="130" title="Fleet Air Arm" label="Fleet Air Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="144" end="154" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="168" end="182" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="219" end="231" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="254" end="263" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="506" end="515" title="the Blitz" label="the Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q625298" start="807" end="823" title="peace settlement" label="peace settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="979" end="989" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q898788" start="1042" end="1057" title="air superiority" label="air superiority"/>
<link wikidata="Q657723" start="1103" end="1122" title="RAF Fighter Command" label="RAF Fighter Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057725" start="1124" end="1137" title="Adlertag" label="12 days later"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="1183" end="1197" title="Military infrastructure" label="infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036440" start="1275" end="1294" title="World War II aircraft production" label="aircraft production"/>
<link wikidata="Q841418" start="1349" end="1363" title="terror bombing" label="terror bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="1490" end="1506" title="Battle of France" label="Battle of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q152412" start="1567" end="1586" title="Oberkommando der Wehrmacht" label="German high command"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="1672" end="1687" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="1696" end="1705" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q153341" start="1753" end="1771" title="Operation Sea Lion" label="Operation Sea Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q348120" start="1787" end="1797" title="amphibious assault" label="amphibious"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479665" start="1802" end="1810" title="Fallschirmjäger (Nazi Germany)" label="airborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235891" start="1912" end="1930" title="RAF Bomber Command" label="RAF Bomber Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="2307" end="2318" title="air defence" label="air defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375242" start="2449" end="2459" title="This was their finest hour" label="the speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="2484" end="2501" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="2509" end="2525" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q170357" start="2549" end="2564" title="Maxime Weygand" label="General Weygand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621825" start="2691" end="2727" title="Strategic bombing during World War I" label="Strategic bombing during World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="2867" end="2882" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q776938" start="2900" end="2922" title="Chief of the Air Staff (United Kingdom)" label="Chief of the Air Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q336065" start="2924" end="2938" title="Hugh Trenchard, 1st Viscount Trenchard" label="Hugh Trenchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q364463" start="2994" end="3007" title="Giulio Douhet" label="Giulio Douhet"/>
<link wikidata="Q241059" start="3078" end="3092" title="trench warfare" label="trench warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3228376" start="3211" end="3245" title="the bomber will always get through" label="the bomber will always get through"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="3680" end="3700" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q624161" start="3763" end="3775" title="gliding" label="sport flying"/>
<link wikidata="Q290162" start="3810" end="3829" title="Deutsche Luft Hansa" label="Deutsche Luft Hansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q26066" start="3881" end="3894" title="Junkers Ju 52" label="Junkers Ju 52"/>
<link wikidata="Q662071" start="4001" end="4029" title="Lipetsk fighter-pilot school" label="Lipetsk fighter-pilot school"/>
<link wikidata="Q57169" start="4074" end="4086" title="Erhard Milch" label="Erhard Milch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684105" start="4137" end="4158" title="Nazi seizure of power" label="Nazi seizure of power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949683" start="4203" end="4220" title="deterrence theory" label="deterrence theory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4259" end="4297" title="Alfred von Tirpitz#Second Naval Bill" label="Tirpitz&amp;#x27;s &amp;quot;risk theory&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3534114" start="4324" end="4336" title="heavy bomber" label="heavy bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508200" start="4432" end="4440" title="Military simulation" label="war game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="4541" end="4550" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q62236" start="4580" end="4593" title="Walther Wever (general)" label="Walther Wever"/>
<link wikidata="Q898788" start="4814" end="4829" title="Air supremacy" label="air superiority"/>
<link wikidata="Q841418" start="4891" end="4908" title="Strategic bombing" label="Strategic bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235891" start="5659" end="5673" title="RAF Bomber Command" label="Bomber Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q954113" start="5675" end="5690" title="RAF Coastal Command" label="Coastal Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275638" start="5692" end="5708" title="RAF Training Command" label="Training Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q657723" start="5713" end="5728" title="RAF Fighter Command" label="Fighter Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q263128" start="5749" end="5761" title="Hugh Dowding, 1st Baron Dowding" label="Hugh Dowding"/>
<link wikidata="Q333019" start="6044" end="6057" title="Thomas Inskip, 1st Viscount Caldecote" label="Thomas Inskip"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="6294" end="6311" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q153324" start="6343" end="6356" title="Condor Legion" label="Condor Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q57177" start="6429" end="6451" title="Wolfram Freiherr von Richthofen" label="Wolfram von Richthofen"/>
<link wikidata="Q57179" start="6582" end="6592" title="Ernst Udet" label="Ernst Udet"/>
<link wikidata="Q678321" start="6635" end="6646" title="dive bomber" label="dive bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q384768" start="6683" end="6693" title="Battle of the Beams" label="Knickebein"/>
<link wikidata="Q583131" start="6811" end="6854" title="Ural bomber" label="a long-range, four-engined strategic bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q819274" start="7214" end="7220" title="German occupation of Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q128535" start="7309" end="7322" title="Norway Debate" label="Norway Debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="7372" end="7386" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q10664" start="7387" end="7406" title="Neville Chamberlain" label="Neville Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="7432" end="7449" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969407" start="7685" end="7698" title="British Air Forces in France" label="Air Component"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277777" start="7706" end="7733" title="British Expeditionary Force (World War II)" label="British Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q911972" start="7953" end="8007" title="Dunkirk evacuation" label="evacuation of British and French soldiers from Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="8120" end="8132" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="8421" end="8438" title="Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q333426" start="8440" end="8452" title="E. F. L. Wood, 1st Earl of Halifax" label="Lord Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375242" start="8888" end="8914" title="This was their finest hour" label="This was their finest hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="8966" end="8982" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q152412" start="10017" end="10043" title="Oberkommando der Wehrmacht" label="Oberkommando der Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511740" start="10108" end="10128" title="List of Adolf Hitler&amp;#x27;s directives" label="series of directives"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="10275" end="10293" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26078" start="10312" end="10319" title="Fall Weiss (1939)" label="planned"/>
<link wikidata="Q151701" start="10920" end="10932" title="Kriegsmarine" label="Kriegsmarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q57123" start="11629" end="11640" title="Alfred Jodl" label="Alfred Jodl"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="12100" end="12114" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q153341" start="12512" end="12530" title="Operation Sea Lion" label="Operation Sea Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q57154" start="12716" end="12728" title="Erich Raeder" label="Erich Raeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="12939" end="12969" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Soviet Union was to be invaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057725" start="13451" end="13459" title="Adlertag" label="Adlertag"/>
<link wikidata="Q48244" start="14276" end="14286" title="Mein Kampf" label="Mein Kampf"/>
<link wikidata="Q333426" start="14641" end="14653" title="Edward Wood, 1st Earl of Halifax" label="Lord Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q101886" start="14674" end="14688" title="Joachim von Ribbentrop" label="von Ribbentrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796272" start="15375" end="15402" title="May 1940 War Cabinet Crisis" label="May 1940 War Cabinet Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q699837" start="16544" end="16556" title="Luftflotte 3" label="Luftflotte 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q189929" start="16661" end="16671" title="naval mine" label="naval mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q110105" start="16674" end="16687" title="Joseph Schmid" label="Joseph Schmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q115702" start="16933" end="16964" title="Blockade of Germany (1939–45)" label="counter to the British blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q157627" start="17085" end="17106" title="Battle of the Atlantic" label="with naval assistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548213" start="18453" end="18463" title="Home Fleet" label="Home Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="18491" end="18506" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q701923" start="18530" end="18541" title="German Army (Wehrmacht)" label="German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q505274" start="19513" end="19525" title="Len Deighton" label="Len Deighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q57140" start="19869" end="19884" title="Walther von Brauchitsch" label="von Brauchitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q57174" start="19889" end="19895" title="Franz Halder" label="Halder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050818" start="21263" end="21280" title="close air support" label="close air support"/>
<link wikidata="Q715695" start="21330" end="21347" title="Strategic bombing during World War II" label="strategic bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q975670" start="21677" end="21691" title="1st Air Corps (Germany)" label="Fliegercorps I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6821917" start="22635" end="22656" title="Bf 109E" label="Messerschmitt Bf 109E"/>
<link wikidata="Q155642" start="22661" end="22668" title="Messerschmitt Bf 110" label="Bf 110C"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22709" end="22723" title="Hawker Hurricane variants#Hurricane Mk I" label="Hurricane Mk I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22746" end="22759" title="Supermarine Spitfire (early Merlin powered variants)#Mk I (Type 300)" label="Spitfire Mk I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412885" start="23227" end="23233" title="Rolls-Royce Merlin" label="Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3909519" start="23364" end="23388" title="War emergency power" label="Emergency Boost Override"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122513" start="23756" end="23765" title="Jagdwaffe" label="Jagdwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q259255" start="23919" end="23923" title=".303 British" label=".303"/>
<link wikidata="Q680704" start="23989" end="24001" title="MG FF cannon" label="20mm cannons"/>
<link wikidata="Q318028" start="24009" end="24024" title="explosive shell" label="explosive shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q259287" start="24047" end="24053" title="7.92 x 57mm Mauser" label="7.92mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q901252" start="24418" end="24424" title="Daimler-Benz DB 601" label="DB 601"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761910" start="24437" end="24451" title="Gasoline direct injection" label="fuel injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q165435" start="24524" end="24535" title="Carburetor" label="carburettor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24771" end="24775" title="Luftflotte 3#JABO (Fighter-Bombers/Incursion strike groups)" label="Jabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q385642" start="24807" end="24821" title="fighter-bomber" label="fighter-bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q26795" start="24971" end="24976" title="Junkers Ju 87" label="Stuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q185785" start="25049" end="25057" title="Ordnance ammunition" label="ordnance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25910" end="25942" title="Schnellkampfgeschwader 210#Origins 1940" label="&amp;quot;Erprobungsgruppe 210&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5395463" start="25994" end="26012" title="Erprobungskommando" label="Erprobungskommando"/>
<link wikidata="Q313597" start="26063" end="26069" title="Messerschmitt Me 210" label="Me 210"/>
<link wikidata="Q895128" start="26198" end="26218" title="Boulton Paul Defiant" label="Boulton Paul Defiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q154532" start="26858" end="26872" title="Heinkel He 111" label="Heinkel He 111"/>
<link wikidata="Q156742" start="26874" end="26887" title="Dornier Do 17" label="Dornier Do 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q155661" start="26893" end="26906" title="Junkers Ju 88" label="Junkers Ju 88"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515123" start="27855" end="27872" title="RAF Tangmere" label="Tangmere airfield"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28357" end="28382" title="Junkers Ju 88#Dive bomber" label="designed as a dive bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q155639" start="28496" end="28504" title="Messerschmitt Bf 109" label="Bf 109Es"/>
<link wikidata="Q689463" start="28917" end="28944" title="Armstrong Whitworth Whitley" label="Armstrong Whitworth Whitley"/>
<link wikidata="Q617016" start="28950" end="28970" title="Handley-Page Hampden" label="Handley-Page Hampden"/>
<link wikidata="Q850244" start="28979" end="28997" title="Vickers Wellington" label="Vickers Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q330417" start="29127" end="29143" title="Bristol Blenheim" label="Bristol Blenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330167" start="29179" end="29192" title="Fairey Battle" label="Fairey Battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053865" start="29885" end="29906" title="RAF Volunteer Reserve" label="RAF Volunteer Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373778" start="30037" end="30062" title="Royal Auxiliary Air Force" label="Royal Auxiliary Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6564791" start="31030" end="31047" title="List of British Commonwealth Air Training Plan facilities in Canada" label="offered in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q750583" start="31055" end="31072" title="Southern Rhodesia" label="Southern Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084679" start="31587" end="31596" title="Battle of Norway" label="in Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866042" start="31770" end="31786" title="Minister of Aircraft Production" label="lack of aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053865" start="31952" end="31969" title="Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve" label="Volunteer Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q55633520" start="33155" end="33161" title="sortie" label="sortie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427735" start="33198" end="33211" title="Fleet Air Arm" label="Fleet Air Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="33268" end="33273" title="Poland" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594990" start="33279" end="33292" title="Dominion of New Zealand" label="New Zealander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="33299" end="33308" title="Canadians" label="Canadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010024" start="33313" end="33326" title="Second Czechoslovak Republic" label="Czechoslovaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="33357" end="33365" title="Belgium" label="Belgians"/>
<link wikidata="Q193619" start="33370" end="33384" title="Union of South Africa" label="South Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526023" start="33453" end="33460" title="Colony of Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206741" start="33462" end="33470" title="Colony of Barbados" label="Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q38610" start="33475" end="33487" title="Dominion of Newfoundland" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275228" start="34122" end="34146" title="Battle of Britain Chapel" label="Battle of Britain Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269413" start="34484" end="34515" title="No. 303 Polish Fighter Squadron" label="No. 303 Polish Fighter Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q263128" start="34803" end="34815" title="Hugh Dowding" label="Hugh Dowding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517242" start="35049" end="35066" title="Regia Aeronautica" label="Regia Aeronautica"/>
<link wikidata="Q645887" start="35256" end="35266" title="Fiat BR.20 Cicogna" label="Fiat BR.20"/>
<link wikidata="Q700332" start="35592" end="35595" title="Oberkommando der Luftwaffe" label="OKL"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35601" end="35611" title="#German aims and directives" label="what to do"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050818" start="35700" end="35717" title="close air support" label="close air support"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="35767" end="35773" title="Polish September Campaign" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q150939" start="35775" end="35793" title="Operation Weserübung" label="Denmark and Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q189929" start="36336" end="36346" title="naval mine" label="naval mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821007" start="36720" end="36730" title="Kanalkampf" label="Kanalkampf"/>
<link wikidata="Q28939" start="36800" end="36815" title="Hans Jeschonnek" label="Hans Jeschonnek"/>
<link wikidata="Q153341" start="36913" end="36931" title="Operation Sea Lion" label="Operation Sea Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q898788" start="37098" end="37111" title="air supremacy" label="air supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37481" end="37493" title="Organization of the Luftwaffe (1933–45)#Fliegerkorps and Fliegerdivision" label="Fliegerkorps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057725" start="37819" end="37827" title="Adlertag" label="Adlertag"/>
<link wikidata="Q57134" start="37851" end="37861" title="Albert Kesselring" label="Kesselring"/>
<link wikidata="Q58651" start="37863" end="37870" title="Hugo Sperrle" label="Sperrle"/>
<link wikidata="Q57727" start="37875" end="37882" title="Hans-Jürgen Stumpff" label="Stumpff"/>
<link wikidata="Q153341" start="38507" end="38525" title="Operation Sea Lion" label="Operation Sea Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="38737" end="38746" title="the Blitz" label="the Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q841418" start="38849" end="38866" title="strategic bombing" label="strategic bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q699708" start="39274" end="39298" title="Luftflotte 2" label="&amp;quot;Luftflotte&amp;quot; 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="39415" end="39421" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q699837" start="39428" end="39452" title="Luftflotte 3" label="&amp;quot;Luftflotte&amp;quot; 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q58651" start="39487" end="39499" title="Hugo Sperrle" label="Hugo Sperrle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344070" start="39521" end="39533" title="West Country" label="West Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="39535" end="39540" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q702684" start="39579" end="39603" title="Luftflotte 5" label="&amp;quot;Luftflotte&amp;quot; 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q12789691" start="39611" end="39624" title="Generaloberst" label="Generaloberst"/>
<link wikidata="Q57727" start="39631" end="39650" title="Hans-Jürgen Stumpff" label="Hans-Jürgen Stumpff"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="39677" end="39683" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="39719" end="39727" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q841418" start="40888" end="40902" title="terror bombing" label="terror bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q636182" start="41601" end="41621" title="Organization of the Luftwaffe (1933–1945)" label="Luftwaffe formations"/>
<link wikidata="Q13583449" start="41662" end="41679" title="Schwarm" label="&amp;quot;Rotte&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353795" start="42164" end="42175" title="Blind spot (vehicle)" label="blind spots"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="42300" end="42315" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q222982" start="42316" end="42319" title="flying ace" label="ace"/>
<link wikidata="Q57716" start="42320" end="42334" title="Oswald Boelcke" label="Oswald Boelcke"/>
<link wikidata="Q847492" start="42356" end="42373" title="Finnish Air Force" label="Finnish Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="42571" end="42588" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q61913" start="42597" end="42611" title="Günther Lützow" label="Günther Lützow"/>
<link wikidata="Q58641" start="42616" end="42630" title="Werner Mölders" label="Werner Mölders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077448" start="42957" end="42964" title="Finger-four" label="Schwarm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6699597" start="43645" end="43662" title="Lufbery circle" label="defensive circles"/>
<link wikidata="Q57166" start="47056" end="47069" title="Adolf Galland" label="Adolf Galland"/>
<link wikidata="Q336368" start="47169" end="47178" title="drop tank" label="drop tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150701" start="47294" end="47303" title="Combat endurance" label="endurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6360524" start="47729" end="47743" title="Kanalkrankheit" label="Kanalkrankheit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168000" start="47847" end="47868" title="military intelligence" label="military intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139327" start="47960" end="47967" title="rivalry" label="rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q869296" start="48109" end="48150" title="Double-Cross System" label="insert spies into the country were foiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q557119" start="48354" end="48367" title="LZ 130 Graf Zeppelin" label="Graf Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="48650" end="48655" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253051" start="48769" end="48783" title="Dowding system" label="Dowding system"/>
<link wikidata="Q9304299" start="49137" end="49151" title="Oberstleutnant" label="Oberstleutnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q110105" start="49158" end="49182" title="Joseph Schmid" label="&amp;quot;Beppo&amp;quot; Schmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413038" start="51563" end="51579" title="radio navigation" label="radio navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q384768" start="51658" end="51668" title="Knickebein (navigation)" label="Knickebein"/>
<link wikidata="Q739192" start="51899" end="51913" title="air-sea rescue" label="air-sea rescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445921" start="51959" end="51971" title="Seenotdienst" label="Seenotdienst"/>
<link wikidata="Q550020" start="52007" end="52020" title="Heinkel He 59" label="Heinkel He 59"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="52074" end="52083" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="52085" end="52100" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q159898" start="52109" end="52122" title="Dover Straits" label="Dover Straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q410922" start="52250" end="52261" title="fluorescein" label="fluorescein"/>
<link wikidata="Q133536" start="52366" end="52383" title="Geneva Convention" label="Geneva Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q407586" start="52909" end="52921" title="Air Ministry" label="Air Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059083" start="53388" end="53398" title="Chain Home" label="Chain Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253051" start="53577" end="53591" title="Dowding system" label="Dowding system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374637" start="53828" end="53842" title="Royal Observer Corps" label="Observer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="54547" end="54570" title="anti-aircraft warfare" label="anti-aircraft batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467476" start="55321" end="55341" title="force multiplication" label="force multiplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q150758" start="56077" end="56090" title="Enigma cipher" label="Enigma cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q825712" start="56165" end="56170" title="Ultra (cryptography)" label="Ultra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424088" start="56312" end="56330" title="F. W. Winterbotham" label="F. W. Winterbotham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043496" start="57080" end="57115" title="No. 421 (Reconnaissance) Flight RAF" label="No. 421 (Reconnaissance) Flight RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043870" start="57147" end="57166" title="No. 91 Squadron RAF" label="No. 91 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497482" start="57352" end="57361" title="Y-stations" label="Y Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516353" start="57843" end="57860" title="vic formation" label="v-shaped sections"/>
<link wikidata="Q11912077" start="57964" end="57979" title="squadron leader" label="squadron leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664006" start="59118" end="59129" title="No. 74 Squadron RAF" label="74 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538748" start="59152" end="59183" title="Adolph Malan" label="Adolph &amp;quot;Sailor&amp;quot; Malan"/>
<link wikidata="Q858346" start="60470" end="60478" title="Big Wing" label="Big Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q348780" start="60591" end="60604" title="Douglas Bader" label="Douglas Bader"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="62063" end="62072" title="the Blitz" label="the Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235891" start="62313" end="62327" title="RAF Bomber Command" label="Bomber Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q954113" start="62332" end="62347" title="RAF Coastal Command" label="Coastal Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q850244" start="62697" end="62715" title="Vickers Wellington" label="Vickers Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3857" start="62761" end="62774" title="Wilhelmshaven" label="Wilhelmshaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330167" start="62800" end="62813" title="Fairey Battle" label="Fairey Battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q129006" start="63206" end="63220" title="Clement Attlee" label="Clement Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q151993" start="63507" end="63516" title="Ruhr" label="Ruhr area"/>
<link wikidata="Q12996" start="64196" end="64202" title="Ostend" label="Ostend"/>
<link wikidata="Q45797" start="64227" end="64234" title="Dunkirk" label="Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455960" start="64508" end="64519" title="Freya radar" label="Freya radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q330417" start="64734" end="64750" title="Bristol Blenheim" label="Bristol Blenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q600855" start="65002" end="65011" title="Haamstede" label="Haamstede"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416936" start="65016" end="65021" title="Haren Airport" label="Evere"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="65023" end="65031" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386940" start="65127" end="65141" title="Staffelkapitän" label="Staffelkapitän"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366972" start="65170" end="65179" title="Hauptmann" label="Hauptmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q25410" start="65616" end="65623" title="Aalborg" label="Aalborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="65641" end="65648" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043832" start="65667" end="65678" title="No. 82 Squadron RAF" label="82 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673260" start="67149" end="67156" title="The Few" label="The Few"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275228" start="67390" end="67414" title="Battle of Britain Chapel" label="Battle of Britain Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="67418" end="67435" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262971" start="69135" end="69143" title="Personal flotation device" label="Mae West"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="69286" end="69301" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q159898" start="69306" end="69319" title="Dover Straits" label="Dover Straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q410922" start="69511" end="69522" title="fluorescein" label="fluorescein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373850" start="69763" end="69772" title="Westland Lysander" label="Lysanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q16910978" start="70380" end="70402" title="Royal Air Force Museum" label="Royal Air Force Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821007" start="70659" end="70669" title="Kanalkampf" label="Kanalkampf"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="70683" end="70694" title="English Channel" label="the Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057725" start="70964" end="70976" title="Adlerangriff" label="Adlerangriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="71265" end="71274" title="the Blitz" label="the Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q128147" start="72905" end="72922" title="Kingston upon Hull" label="Hull in Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012502" start="72927" end="72942" title="Wick, Caithness" label="Wick, Caithness"/>
<link wikidata="Q213465" start="73040" end="73049" title="Guildford" label="Guildford"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821007" start="73540" end="73550" title="Kanalkampf" label="Kanalkampf"/>
<link wikidata="Q58651" start="73677" end="73684" title="Hugo Sperrle" label="Sperrle"/>
<link wikidata="Q156742" start="74064" end="74077" title="Dornier Do 17" label="Dornier Do 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042951" start="74177" end="74189" title="No. 141 Squadron RAF" label="141 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q895128" start="74190" end="74198" title="Boulton Paul Defiant" label="Defiants"/>
<link wikidata="Q194251" start="74273" end="74283" title="Hawker Hurricane" label="Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q26795" start="74387" end="74392" title="Junkers Ju 87" label="Stuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q678321" start="74393" end="74404" title="dive bomber" label="dive bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="74415" end="74424" title="British Admiralty" label="Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057725" start="75720" end="75728" title="Adlertag" label="Adlertag"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75905" end="75937" title="Erprobungskommando#Erprobungsgruppe 210" label="&amp;quot;Erprobungsgruppe&amp;quot; 210"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059083" start="75952" end="75966" title="Chain Home" label="radar stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415044" start="76687" end="76694" title="RAF Manston" label="Manston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275366" start="76699" end="76707" title="RAF Hawkinge" label="Hawkinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275284" start="77386" end="77405" title="RAF Driffield" label="RAF Great Driffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738879" start="77877" end="77892" title="The Hardest Day" label="The Hardest Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q699837" start="78937" end="78949" title="Luftflotte 3" label="Luftflotte 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q12689" start="79040" end="79053" title="Pas-de-Calais" label="Pas-de-Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q2435929" start="79339" end="79358" title="Geschwaderkommodore" label="Geschwaderkommodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q58641" start="79428" end="79442" title="Werner Mölders" label="Werner Mölders"/>
<link wikidata="Q170168" start="79556" end="79571" title="Reichsmarschall" label="Reichsmarschall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836057" start="79816" end="79823" title="Tommy Atkins" label="Tommies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6576101" start="79947" end="79967" title="Walter Rubensdörffer" label="Walter Rubensdörffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431914" start="80027" end="80043" title="Croydon Airport" label="Croydon airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415041" start="80105" end="80115" title="RAF Kenley" label="RAF Kenley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80305" end="80316" title="London Biggin Hill Airport#History" label="Biggin Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213391" start="80857" end="80864" title="Croydon" label="Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q736742" start="80866" end="80875" title="Wimbledon, London" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936164" start="80880" end="80891" title="Municipal Borough of Malden and Coombe" label="the Maldens"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="80934" end="80942" title="Aberdeen" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="80944" end="80951" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286223" start="80956" end="80967" title="South Wales" label="South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q54961" start="81005" end="81011" title="Harrow, London" label="Harrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589602" start="81016" end="81026" title="Wealdstone" label="Wealdstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q537692" start="81120" end="81126" title="Filton" label="Filton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471100" start="81295" end="81306" title="Fort Dunlop" label="Fort Dunlop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="81323" end="81333" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="81459" end="81469" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q739700" start="81528" end="81536" title="East End of London" label="East End"/>
<link wikidata="Q154532" start="81669" end="81683" title="Heinkel He 111" label="Heinkel He 111"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280322" start="81844" end="81852" title="Banstead" label="Banstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537297" start="81854" end="81862" title="Lewisham" label="Lewisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552816" start="81864" end="81872" title="Uxbridge" label="Uxbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q54961" start="81874" end="81880" title="Harrow, London" label="Harrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q678138" start="81885" end="81890" title="Hayes, Hillingdon" label="Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150217" start="81971" end="81979" title="Finchley" label="Finchley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065416" start="81981" end="81991" title="St Pancras, London" label="St Pancras"/>
<link wikidata="Q146858" start="81993" end="82000" title="Wembley" label="Wembley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992780" start="82002" end="82012" title="Wood Green" label="Wood Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q2678895" start="82014" end="82023" title="Southgate, London" label="Southgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q14820036" start="82025" end="82038" title="Old Kent Road" label="Old Kent Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q149688" start="82040" end="82049" title="Mill Hill" label="Mill Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297044" start="82051" end="82057" title="Ilford" label="Ilford"/>
<link wikidata="Q944734" start="82059" end="82067" title="Chigwell" label="Chigwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q149787" start="82072" end="82078" title="Hendon" label="Hendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431935" start="82789" end="82800" title="RAF Biggin Hill" label="Biggin Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275393" start="82805" end="82815" title="RAF Hornchurch" label="Hornchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415037" start="82833" end="82839" title="RAF Debden" label="Debden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875884" start="82844" end="82855" title="North Weald airfield" label="North Weald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431914" start="82868" end="82875" title="Croydon Airport" label="Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597911" start="82877" end="82886" title="Gravesend Airport" label="Gravesend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415441" start="82888" end="82896" title="London Southend Airport" label="Rochford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275366" start="82898" end="82906" title="RAF Hawkinge" label="Hawkinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415044" start="82911" end="82918" title="RAF Manston" label="Manston"/>
<link wikidata="Q954113" start="82951" end="82966" title="Coastal Command" label="Coastal Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415039" start="82974" end="82984" title="RAF Eastchurch" label="Eastchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097768" start="83378" end="83404" title="Operational Conversion Unit" label="Operational Training Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048727" start="83517" end="83556" title="Battle of Britain Foreign Contribution" label="multinational nature of Fighter Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="83631" end="83640" title="British Dominions" label="Dominions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595951" start="83654" end="83673" title="List of Royal Air Force aircraft squadrons" label="attached to the RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="83748" end="83756" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29879557" start="83832" end="83843" title="Free French Forces" label="Free French"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="83881" end="83909" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="British mandate of Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209859" start="83973" end="83989" title="Polish Air Forces in France and Great Britain" label="Polish squadrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q918504" start="84198" end="84214" title="Polish Air Force" label="Polish Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q636944" start="84303" end="84309" title="World War II crimes in Poland" label="brutal"/>
<link wikidata="Q700120" start="84310" end="84327" title="Occupation of Poland (1939–1945)" label="German occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269413" start="84343" end="84368" title="No. 303 Polish Fighter Squadron" label="No. 303 (Polish) Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q981023" start="84457" end="84472" title="Josef František" label="Josef František"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="84558" end="84568" title="Invasion of Poland" label="the Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482034" start="85474" end="85488" title="Combat stress reaction" label="combat fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608805" start="85710" end="85724" title="Stephen Bungay" label="Stephen Bungay"/>
<link wikidata="Q336065" start="85750" end="85764" title="Hugh Trenchard" label="Hugh Trenchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q122241" start="86018" end="86029" title="Biggin Hill" label="Biggin Hill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="86343" end="86352" title="Peter Dye" label="Peter Dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124725" start="87105" end="87133" title="Civilian Repair Organisation" label="Civilian Repair Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376016" start="87279" end="87292" title="Richard Overy" label="Richard Overy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262475" start="88466" end="88476" title="Derek Wood (author)" label="Derek Wood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88481" end="88495" title="Derek Dempster" label="Derek Dempster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257482" start="89175" end="89189" title="Denis Richards" label="Denis Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q107145857" start="89254" end="89285" title="History of the Second World War" label="History of the Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90615" end="90629" title="The Blitz#Loge and Seeschlange" label="Operation Loge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545354" start="90708" end="90722" title="Port of London" label="Port of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235891" start="91300" end="91318" title="RAF Bomber Command" label="RAF Bomber Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q57134" start="92000" end="92017" title="Albert Kesselring" label="Albert Kesselring"/>
<link wikidata="Q858346" start="92892" end="92900" title="Big Wing" label="Big Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q34775" start="94621" end="94638" title="Focke-Wulf Fw 190" label="Focke-Wulf Fw 190"/>
<link wikidata="Q155639" start="94857" end="94877" title="Messerschmitt Bf 109" label="Messerschmitt Bf 109"/>
<link wikidata="Q336368" start="95017" end="95026" title="drop tank" label="drop tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q57169" start="95265" end="95277" title="Erhard Milch" label="Erhard Milch"/>
<link wikidata="Q28939" start="95364" end="95379" title="Hans Jeschonnek" label="Hans Jeschonnek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870555" start="96416" end="96437" title="Battle of Britain Day" label="Battle of Britain Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q153341" start="96620" end="96638" title="Operation Sea Lion" label="Operation Sea Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q57154" start="96667" end="96673" title="Erich Raeder" label="Raeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q28939" start="96854" end="96864" title="Hans Jeschonnek" label="Jeschonnek"/>
<link wikidata="Q841418" start="97241" end="97258" title="strategic bombing" label="strategic bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="98021" end="98034" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="98053" end="98076" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="invade the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q180087" start="98498" end="98511" title="night fighter" label="night fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q330417" start="98521" end="98530" title="Bristol Blenheim" label="Blenheims"/>
<link wikidata="Q831463" start="98535" end="98547" title="Bristol Beaufighter" label="Beaufighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="98619" end="98637" title="Anti-aircraft warfare" label="Anti-aircraft guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q6821917" start="98814" end="98829" title="Messerschmitt Bf 109 variants" label="Bf 109 fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="99757" end="99761" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871136" start="99795" end="99819" title="Battle of Graveney Marsh" label="Battle of Graveney Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q76361" start="100008" end="100022" title="Wilhelm Keitel" label="Wilhelm Keitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q157627" start="100084" end="100101" title="Battle of the Atlantic" label="submarine warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="100946" end="100960" title="George VI" label="King George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q10633" start="100974" end="100989" title="Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother" label="Queen Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="101156" end="101173" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="101232" end="101246" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="101295" end="101300" title="Elizabeth II" label="queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143510" start="101696" end="101708" title="George Cross" label="George Cross"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="101924" end="101936" title="Otto Bechtle" label="Otto Bechtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q683442" start="101949" end="101953" title="KG 2" label="KG 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698018" start="101990" end="102011" title="Air Historical Branch" label="Air Historical Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q700591" start="106803" end="106818" title="Wehrmachtbericht" label="OKW communiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q841418" start="109349" end="109366" title="strategic bombing" label="strategic bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q333019" start="109518" end="109542" title="Thomas Inskip, 1st Viscount Caldecote" label="Sir Thomas Inskip&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q313696" start="109744" end="109758" title="Joseph Kennedy" label="Joseph Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q541981" start="109895" end="109932" title="William J. Donovan" label="William &amp;quot;Wild Bill&amp;quot; Donovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287683" start="110097" end="110112" title="Ralph Ingersoll (PM publisher)" label="Ralph Ingersoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q48314" start="110305" end="110313" title="Battle of Waterloo" label="Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33132" start="110317" end="110327" title="Battle of Gettysburg" label="Gettysburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608805" start="111681" end="111695" title="Stephen Bungay" label="Stephen Bungay"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="115125" end="115157" title="Operation Overlord" label="the liberation of Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="115200" end="115217" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3160794" start="115302" end="115335" title="Never was so much owed by so many to so few" label="so much owed by so many to so few"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673260" start="115400" end="115407" title="The Few" label="The Few"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870555" start="115487" end="115508" title="Battle of Britain Day" label="Battle of Britain Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="115807" end="115819" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314" start="115979" end="115994" title="Channel Islands" label="Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="116065" end="116082" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="116295" end="116304" title="George VI" label="George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="116660" end="116669" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919484" start="117062" end="117098" title="Battle of Britain Monument in London" label="Battle of Britain Monument in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q811006" start="117107" end="117151" title="Battle of Britain Memorial, Capel-le-Ferne" label="Battle of Britain Memorial at Capel-le-Ferne"/>
<link wikidata="Q16684477" start="117191" end="117225" title="St James&amp;#x27;s Church, Paddington" label="St James&amp;#x27;s Church, Paddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431914" start="117347" end="117362" title="Croydon Airport" label="Croydon Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q676462" start="117436" end="117451" title="Armadale Castle" label="Armadale Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q107393" start="117459" end="117471" title="Skye" label="Isle of Skye"/>
<link wikidata="Q961348" start="117593" end="117612" title="Polish War Memorial" label="Polish War Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391619" start="117691" end="117695" title="Kent Battle of Britain Museum" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279685" start="117707" end="117715" title="Stanmore" label="Stanmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275171" start="117741" end="117759" title="RAF Bentley Priory" label="RAF Bentley Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q714989" start="118294" end="118311" title="Battle of Britain (film)" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q55245" start="118335" end="118351" title="Laurence Olivier" label="Laurence Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q343037" start="118372" end="118385" title="Trevor Howard" label="Trevor Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q123351" start="118417" end="118430" title="Michael Caine" label="Michael Caine"/>
<link wikidata="Q190523" start="118432" end="118451" title="Christopher Plummer" label="Christopher Plummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q313727" start="118456" end="118467" title="Robert Shaw (actor)" label="Robert Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q57166" start="118563" end="118576" title="Adolf Galland" label="Adolf Galland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349995" start="118581" end="118601" title="Robert Stanford Tuck" label="Robert Stanford Tuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q194413" start="118628" end="118640" title="Pearl Harbor (film)" label="Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046345" start="118734" end="118749" title="Eagle Squadrons" label="Eagle Squadrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q863100" start="118941" end="118952" title="Billy Fiske" label="Billy Fiske"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919484" start="119060" end="119096" title="Battle of Britain Monument in London" label="Battle of Britain Monument in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="119116" end="119123" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q499644" start="119298" end="119311" title="Julian Glover" label="Julian Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q56327355" start="119435" end="119444" title="Hurricane (2018 film)" label="Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561008" start="119588" end="119610" title="Allied propaganda film" label="Allied propaganda film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089904" start="119617" end="119640" title="Churchill&amp;#x27;s Island" label="Churchill&amp;#x27;s Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425151" start="119675" end="119718" title="Academy Award for Documentary Short Subject" label="Academy Award for Documentary Short Subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q6563471" start="119840" end="119875" title="List of Battle of Britain airfields" label="List of Battle of Britain airfields"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631600" start="119878" end="119913" title="List of Battle of Britain squadrons" label="List of Battle of Britain squadrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056673" start="119916" end="119960" title="List of RAF aircrew in the Battle of Britain" label="List of RAF aircrew in the Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048727" start="119963" end="120024" title="Non-British personnel in the RAF during the Battle of Britain" label="Non-British personnel in the RAF during the Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354641" start="120027" end="120044" title="Operation Banquet" label="Operation Banquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q968103" start="120121" end="120136" title="Operation Lucid" label="Operation Lucid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875586" start="120199" end="120213" title="Coventry Blitz" label="Coventry Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917386" start="120216" end="120271" title="Evacuations of civilians in Britain during World War II" label="Evacuations of civilians in Britain during World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209859" start="120274" end="120319" title="Polish Air Forces in France and Great Britain" label="Polish Air Forces in France and Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729039" start="120322" end="120338" title="The Darkest Hour" label="The Darkest Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673260" start="120341" end="120348" title="The Few" label="The Few"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869272" start="120373" end="120438" title="SR West Country and Battle of Britain classes" label="Battle of Britain Class steam locomotives of the Southern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870562" start="120442" end="120475" title="Battle of Britain Memorial Flight" label="Battle of Britain Memorial Flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q811006" start="120479" end="120521" title="Battle of Britain Memorial, Capel-le-Ferne" label="Battle of Britain Memorial, Capel-le-Ferne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919484" start="120525" end="120559" title="Battle of Britain Monument, London" label="Battle of Britain Monument, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391619" start="120563" end="120592" title="Kent Battle of Britain Museum" label="Kent Battle of Britain Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q961348" start="120596" end="120615" title="Polish War Memorial" label="Polish War Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q115938808" start="120619" end="120645" title="Spirit of the Few Monument" label="Spirit of the Few Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367488" start="120648" end="120671" title="Radio direction finding" label="Radio direction finding"/>
<link wikidata="Q17310468" start="121010" end="121024" title="Basil Collier" label="Collier, Basil"/>
<link wikidata="Q363722" start="122101" end="122113" title="John Keegan" label="Keegan, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131760" start="122959" end="122971" title="James Corum" label="Corum, James"/>
<link wikidata="Q17310468" start="124393" end="124407" title="Basil Collier" label="Collier, Basil"/>
<link wikidata="Q15460885" start="124547" end="124561" title="Norman Franks" label="Franks, Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q587332" start="124660" end="124675" title="Bruce Barrymore Halpenny" label="Halpenny, Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q587332" start="124786" end="124801" title="Bruce Barrymore Halpenny" label="Halpenny, Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q587332" start="127880" end="127905" title="Bruce Barrymore Halpenny" label="Halpenny, Bruce Barrymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314412" start="129868" end="129883" title="Peter Townsend (RAF officer)" label="Townsend, Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q51492" start="130430" end="130441" title="Frank Capra" label="Frank Capra"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="57975" wikidata="Q1788226" url="?curid=57975" title="Time Team">
<text>Time Team is a British television programme that originally aired on Channel 4 from 16 January 1994 to 7 September 2014. It returned in 2022 on online platforms YouTube and Patreon. Created by television producer Tim Taylor and presented by actor Tony Robinson, each episode features a team of specialists carrying out an archaeological dig over a period of three days, with Robinson explaining the process in lay terms. The specialists changed throughout the programme&#x27;s run, although it consistently included professional archaeologists such as Mick Aston, Carenza Lewis, Francis Pryor and Phil Harding. The sites excavated ranged in date from the Palaeolithic to the Second World War.

In October 2012, Channel 4 announced that the final series would be broadcast in 2013. Series 20 was screened from January–March 2013 and nine specials were screened between May 2013 and September 2014. In May 2021, Taylor announced the return of the series, with free episodes to be shown on YouTube. The first episodes of the revival began appearing on YouTube in 2022.

==Format==

At the start of the programme, Tony Robinson explains, in an opening &quot;piece to camera&quot;, the reasons for the team&#x27;s visit to the site. During the dig, he enthusiastically encourages the archaeologists to explain their decisions, discoveries and conclusions, while trying to ensure that everything is comprehensible to the archaeologically uninitiated. The site is frequently suggested by a member of the viewing public. &quot;Time Team&quot; uncover as much as they can of the archaeology and history of the site in three days.

Excavations are not just carried out to entertain viewers. Robinson claims that the archaeologists involved with &quot;Time Team&quot; have published more scientific papers on excavations carried out in the programme than all British university archaeology departments over the same period, and that by 2013, the programme had become the biggest funder of field archaeology in the country.

==Team members==
A team of archaeologists, usually led by Mick Aston or Francis Pryor (the latter usually heading Bronze Age and Iron Age digs), and including field archaeologist Phil Harding, congregate at a site, usually in Britain. The original &quot;Time Team&quot; line-up from 1994 changed over the years. Historian and archivist Robin Bush was a regular in the first nine series, having been involved with the programme through his long friendship with Aston. Architectural historian Beric Morley featured in ten episodes between 1995 and 2002. In 2005, Carenza Lewis left to pursue other interests and was replaced by Helen Geake, an Anglo-Saxon specialist. The regular team also included Stewart Ainsworth, landscape investigator; John Gater and Chris Gaffney, archaeological geophysicists; Henry Chapman, surveyor; and Victor Ambrus, illustrator.

The team was supplemented by experts appropriate for the period and type of site. Guy de la Bédoyère has often been present for Roman digs, as well as those involving the Second World War (such as D-Day), and aircraft (such as the Spitfire). Architectural historian Jonathan Foyle has appeared in episodes relating to excavations of country estates. Paul Blinkhorn (pottery), Mark Corney (coins), Carl Thorpe (pottery), and Jackie McKinley (bones) have appeared from time to time. Mick &#x27;the dig&#x27; Worthington, an excavator in the early series, occasionally returned as a dendrochronologist, whereupon he was dubbed &#x27;Mick the twig&#x27;. Osteoarcheologist Margaret Cox often assisted with forensic archaeology, mainly between 1998 and 2005. Other specialists who appeared from time to time include historian Bettany Hughes, archaeologist Gustav Milne, East of England specialist Ben Robinson, architectural historian Richard K. Morriss, and David S. Neal, expert on Roman mosaics. Local historians also joined in.

In February 2012, it was announced that Aston had left the show because of format changes. The disputed changes included hiring anthropologist Mary-Ann Ochota as a co-presenter, dispensing with other archaeologists and what he thought were plans to &quot;cut down the informative stuff about the archaeology&quot;. &quot;The time had come to leave. I never made any money out of it, but a lot of my soul went into it. I feel really, really angry about it,&quot; he told &quot;British Archaeology&quot; magazine. &quot;Time Team&quot; producer Tim Taylor released a statement in response to the news reports saying &quot;His concerns are of great importance to me. We have addressed some of them&quot; and that &quot;you&#x27;ve not heard the last of Mick on &quot;Time Team&quot;&quot;.

Regular team members in later years included archaeologist Neil Holbrook, Roman coins specialist Philippa Walton, and historian Sam Newton. Younger members of &quot;Time Team&quot; who made regular appearances include Jenni Butterworth, Raksha Dave, Kerry Ely, Brigid Gallagher, Rob Hedge, Katie Hirst, Alex Langlands, Cassie Newland, Ian Powlesland, Alice Roberts, Faye Simpson, Barney Sloane, Tracey Smith, and Matt Williams.&lt;ref name=&quot;shropshirestar/2015/time-team&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=&quot;wessexarch/new-wales&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

==Production==
&quot;Time Team&quot; developed from an earlier Channel 4 programme, &quot;Time Signs&quot;, first broadcast in 1991. Produced by Taylor, &quot;Time Signs&quot; had featured Aston and Harding, who went on to appear on &quot;Time Team&quot;. Following &quot;Time Signs&quot;&#x27; cancellation, Taylor went on to develop a more attractive format, producing the idea for &quot;Time Team&quot;, which Channel 4 also picked up, broadcasting the first series in 1994. &quot;Time Team&quot; has had many companion shows during its run, including &quot;Time Team Extra&quot; (1998), &quot;History Hunters&quot; (1998–1999) and &quot;Time Team Digs&quot; (2002),
whilst several spin-off books have been published. The programme features special episodes, often documentaries on history or archaeology and live episodes. The programme has been exported to 35 other countries.
&quot;Time Team America&quot;, a US version of the programme, was broadcast on PBS in 2009.

On 13 September 2007, during the filming of a jousting reenactment for a special episode of &quot;Time Team&quot;, a splinter from a balsa wood lance went through the eye-slit in the helmet of one of the participants and entered his eye socket. 54 year-old Paul Anthony Allen, a member of a re-enactment society, died a week later in hospital. Channel 4 stated that the programme would be shown, but without the re-enactment sequence. The episode, dedicated to Allen, was transmitted on 25 February 2008.

== Cancellation ==
In 2012, Aston announced he was leaving the show after criticising format changes that focused less on archaeological activities. Channel 4 subsequently announced that the final &quot;Time Team&quot; series would be broadcast in 2013. Viewing figures had been in decline from 2.5 million in 2008 to 1.5 million in November 2011. The regular &quot;Time Team&quot; programme ended on 24 March 2013. Aston died unexpectedly on 24 June 2013.

In October 2013, Robinson said in an interview with &quot;Radio Times&quot; that he believed &quot;Time Team&quot; still had life in it and suggested that after a three- or four-year absence it could make a return. He also expressed support for a fan-organised Facebook campaign to bring the &quot;Time Team&quot; crew together again to carry out a dig in memory of Aston. The final &quot;Time Team&quot; special aired on 7 September 2014.

== Revival ==
In December 2020, producer Tim Taylor announced that &quot;Time Team&quot; would begin airing episodes on a YouTube channel called &quot;Time Team Classics&quot;. Taylor also announced the launch of the &quot;Time Team&quot; Patreon page, allowing fans to financially support efforts to revive the series. On 29 January 2021, the project exceeded its goal of 3,000 patrons.

On 17 May 2021, Taylor made an announcement on the return of the series, with episodes planned to air for free on the YouTube channel. Confirmed team members included Carenza Lewis, John Gater, Helen Geake, Stewart Ainsworth, Raysan Al-Kubaisi, Neil Emmanuel, Naomi Sewpaul, Matt Williams, Henry Chapman, Dani Wootton, Brigid Gallagher, Neil Holbrook, Suzannah Lipscomb, Jimmy Adcock, Natalie Haynes, Derek Pitman, Lawrence Shaw, Hilde van der Heul, Pete Spencer, and several returning production team members.

In September 2021, it was announced that Gus Casely-Hayford and Natalie Haynes would present the revived series.

Series 21 featured two three-part episodes, each covering a new dig conducted in 2021. The first of these episodes, which premiered between 18 and 20 March 2022, covered the excavation of an Iron Age settlement on the Lizard Peninsula in Cornwall. The second episode premiered between 8 and 10 April 2022 and featured the excavation of a Roman villa in the grounds of Broughton Castle in Oxfordshire, discovered by metal detectorist and amateur archaeologist Keith Westcott in 2016.

Time Team returned to Broughton Castle to answer questions related to a mysterious stone sarcophagus. The first of this two-part episode premiered on 22 December 2022.

Further episodes were released in 2023 and 2024:

*24 March 2023 – Halston Hall, Shropshire – three parts
*1 April 2023 – Central Greece – two parts
*10 June 2023 – Shipwreck off the Isle of Purbeck, Dorset – one part
*30 June 2023 – Diss, Norfolk – three parts
*5 April 2024 – Modbury, Devon – three parts

On 8 March 2024, the Time Team YouTube channel announced plans to dig Sutton Hoo, near Woodbridge, Suffolk, in June 2024. A feature-length documentary of the dig will be presented by Tony Robinson and is to be released in 2025.

==Music==
The series&#x27; original theme music was composed by Paul Greedus.

The majority of the incidental tracks and main themes for the show, and for many of the specials (Dinosaur Hunting in Montana, D-Day, The Big Dig etc.) were composed by Steve Day.

==Other formats==
&quot;Time Team&#x27;s Big Dig&quot; was an expansion on the live format. A weekend of live broadcasts in June 2003 was preceded by a week of daily short programmes. It involved about a thousand members of the public in excavating test pits each one metre square by fifty centimetres deep. Most of these pits were in private gardens and the project stirred up controversies about approaches to public archaeology.

&quot;Time Team&#x27;s Big Roman Dig&quot; (2005) saw this format altered, in an attempt to avoid previous controversies, through the coverage of nine archaeological sites around the UK which were already under investigation by professional archaeologists. &quot;Time Team&quot; covered the action through live link-ups based at a Roman Villa at Dinnington in Somerset – itself a &quot;Time Team&quot; excavation from 2003. Over 60 other professionally supervised excavations were supported by &quot;Time Team&quot; and carried out around the country in association with the programme. A further hundred activities relating to Roman history were carried out by schools and other institutions around the UK.

&quot;Time Team Specials&quot; are documentary programmes about topics in history and archaeology made by the same production company. They are generally presented by Robinson and often feature one or more of the familiar faces from the regular programme of &quot;Time Team&quot;. In some cases the programme makers have followed the process of discovery at a large commercial or research excavation by another body, such as that to commemorate the 90th anniversary of the ending of the First World War at the Vampire dugout in Belgium. &quot;Time Team&quot; usually does not carry out excavations for these programmes, but may contribute a reconstruction.

&quot;Time Team History of Britain&quot; saw Robinson and the team document everything they have learned up to now and show a history of Britain. &quot;Behind the Scenes of Time Team&quot; showed meetings of the archaeologists, and material not transmitted during the episode of the dig. &quot;10 Years of Time Team&quot; presented a round-up of what has happened in Time Team over the past 10 years and what they expect to happen in the future.

The Time Team website (editor Steve Platt) won a BAFTA for interactive entertainment (factual) in 2002.

==Influence==
&quot;Time Team&quot; has been credited with promoting archaeology in the UK. In a 2008 report produced by English Heritage, a working group of Palaeolithic specialists recognised the importance of the show in &quot;promoting public awareness&quot; of Palaeolithic Britain, something which they argued was to be encouraged.

==DVD releases==
Complete series have been released in Australia starting with Series 15 in 2010.
Since then, Series 12 (2014),
Series 14 (2012),
Series 16 (2010),
Series 17 (2011),
Series 18 (2012),
Series 19 (2012)
and Series 20 (2013) have all been released in Australia. &#x27;Best Of&#x27; DVDs were released in the UK over the years; however, a complete series had never been released until Series 18 was released by Acorn Media UK on 6 February 2012. On 15 May 2012, Acorn Media released a collection of Roman-themed episodes on Region One DVD.

==Footnotes==
==References==

===Bibliography===
* &quot;Current Archaeology&quot; magazine
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* 
* — contains latest news from digs
* 
*&quot;Time Team geophysics: from pits to palaces&quot; – The Past, 1 February 2011</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="69" end="78" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804376" start="213" end="223" title="Tim Taylor (producer)" label="Tim Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593718" start="247" end="260" title="Tony Robinson" label="Tony Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="322" end="336" title="archaeology" label="archaeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q959782" start="337" end="340" title="Excavation (archaeology)" label="dig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326175" start="552" end="562" title="Mick Aston" label="Mick Aston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039038" start="564" end="577" title="Carenza Lewis" label="Carenza Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482233" start="579" end="592" title="Francis Pryor" label="Francis Pryor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932817" start="597" end="609" title="Phil Harding (archaeologist)" label="Phil Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="655" end="667" title="Palaeolithic" label="Palaeolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805125" start="837" end="845" title="Time Team (specials)" label="specials"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="2040" end="2053" title="archaeologist" label="archaeologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326175" start="2071" end="2081" title="Mick Aston" label="Mick Aston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482233" start="2085" end="2098" title="Francis Pryor" label="Francis Pryor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="2127" end="2137" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="2142" end="2150" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932817" start="2192" end="2204" title="Phil Harding (archaeologist)" label="Phil Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352290" start="2349" end="2359" title="Robin Bush (historian)" label="Robin Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q11486702" start="2480" end="2503" title="Architectural historian" label="Architectural historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q21932142" start="2504" end="2516" title="Beric Morley" label="Beric Morley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039038" start="2574" end="2587" title="Carenza Lewis" label="Carenza Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5702339" start="2639" end="2650" title="Helen Geake" label="Helen Geake"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="2655" end="2666" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615711" start="2710" end="2727" title="Stewart Ainsworth" label="Stewart Ainsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621486" start="2729" end="2751" title="landscape archaeology" label="landscape investigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6234964" start="2753" end="2763" title="John Gater" label="John Gater"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112386" start="2768" end="2781" title="Christopher Gaffney (archaeologist)" label="Chris Gaffney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610005" start="2783" end="2811" title="Geophysical survey (archaeology)" label="archaeological geophysicists"/>
<link wikidata="Q816425" start="2828" end="2836" title="Surveyor (surveying)" label="surveyor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925680" start="2842" end="2855" title="Victor Ambrus" label="Victor Ambrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q644687" start="2857" end="2868" title="illustrator" label="illustrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566547" start="2953" end="2971" title="Guy de la Bédoyère" label="Guy de la Bédoyère"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="2999" end="3004" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="3068" end="3073" title="D-Day" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q29190" start="3102" end="3110" title="Supermarine Spitfire" label="Spitfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16208089" start="3137" end="3151" title="Jonathan Foyle" label="Jonathan Foyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q80205" start="3451" end="3469" title="dendrochronology" label="dendrochronologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q28065" start="3573" end="3593" title="forensic archaeology" label="forensic archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898381" start="3692" end="3706" title="Bettany Hughes" label="Bettany Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q56191459" start="3722" end="3734" title="Gustav Milne" label="Gustav Milne"/>
<link wikidata="Q28061573" start="3763" end="3775" title="Ben Robinson" label="Ben Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q133067" start="3856" end="3862" title="mosaic" label="mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160621" start="3865" end="3881" title="Local history" label="Local historians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778903" start="4042" end="4057" title="Mary-Ann Ochota" label="Mary-Ann Ochota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998867" start="4375" end="4394" title="British Archaeology" label="British Archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804376" start="4442" end="4452" title="Tim Taylor (producer)" label="Tim Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q56876394" start="4784" end="4799" title="Philippa Walton (archaeologist)" label="Philippa Walton"/>
<link wikidata="Q61632608" start="4924" end="4935" title="Raksha Dave" label="Raksha Dave"/>
<link wikidata="Q20054065" start="4990" end="5004" title="Alex Langlands" label="Alex Langlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q107118661" start="5006" end="5020" title="Cassie Newland" label="Cassie Newland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836657" start="5038" end="5051" title="Alice Roberts" label="Alice Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805093" start="5337" end="5347" title="Time Signs" label="Time Signs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805152" start="5808" end="5823" title="Time Team Extra" label="Time Team Extra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774701" start="5844" end="5859" title="History Hunters" label="History Hunters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805151" start="5888" end="5902" title="Time Team Digs" label="Time Team Digs"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="6015" end="6028" title="Documentary film" label="documentaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q431102" start="6059" end="6063" title="live television" label="live"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805150" start="6135" end="6152" title="Time Team America" label="Time Team America"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="6208" end="6211" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777568" start="6268" end="6288" title="jousting reenactment" label="jousting reenactment"/>
<link wikidata="Q12302824" start="6355" end="6365" title="balsa wood" label="balsa wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003053" start="6366" end="6371" title="lance" label="lance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461827" start="7244" end="7255" title="Radio Times" label="Radio Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="7749" end="7756" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q15861362" start="7866" end="7873" title="Patreon" label="Patreon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039038" start="8183" end="8196" title="Carenza Lewis" label="Carenza Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6234964" start="8198" end="8208" title="John Gater" label="John Gater"/>
<link wikidata="Q5702339" start="8210" end="8221" title="Helen Geake" label="Helen Geake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615711" start="8223" end="8240" title="Stewart Ainsworth" label="Stewart Ainsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650747" start="8368" end="8385" title="Suzannah Lipscomb" label="Suzannah Lipscomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6968175" start="8401" end="8415" title="Natalie Haynes" label="Natalie Haynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q104617767" start="8417" end="8429" title="Derek Pitman" label="Derek Pitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q104642733" start="8431" end="8444" title="Lawrence Shaw (archaeologist)" label="Lawrence Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8446" end="8464" title="Hilde van der Heul" label="Hilde van der Heul"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620629" start="8569" end="8587" title="Gus Casely-Hayford" label="Gus Casely-Hayford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6968175" start="8592" end="8606" title="Natalie Haynes" label="Natalie Haynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="8833" end="8841" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q602760" start="8860" end="8876" title="The Lizard" label="Lizard Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q918230" start="8980" end="8991" title="Roman villa" label="Roman villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3645409" start="9010" end="9026" title="Broughton Castle" label="Broughton Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q211959" start="9057" end="9074" title="metal detectorist" label="metal detectorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17529595" start="9362" end="9374" title="Halston Hall" label="Halston Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q514259" start="9478" end="9493" title="Isle of Purbeck" label="Isle of Purbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229288" start="9529" end="9542" title="Diss, Norfolk" label="Diss, Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242590" start="9573" end="9580" title="Modbury" label="Modbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q503256" start="9673" end="9683" title="Sutton Hoo" label="Sutton Hoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021350" start="9690" end="9709" title="Woodbridge, Suffolk" label="Woodbridge, Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763411" start="9896" end="9908" title="The Settlers (band)" label="Paul Greedus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3645429" start="10504" end="10522" title="public archaeology" label="public archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298458" start="10871" end="10881" title="Dinnington, Somerset" label="Dinnington"/>
<link wikidata="Q14833625" start="11743" end="11757" title="Vampire dugout" label="Vampire dugout"/>
<link wikidata="Q936287" start="12564" end="12580" title="English Heritage" label="English Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q27493" start="12584" end="12597" title="working group" label="working group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12709" end="12729" title="Prehistoric Britain#Palaeolithic" label="Palaeolithic Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674554" start="13205" end="13219" title="Acorn Media UK" label="Acorn Media UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q949117" start="13392" end="13411" title="Current Archaeology" label="Current Archaeology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="57976" wikidata="Q876581" url="?curid=57976" title="Eusko Abendaren Ereserkia">
<text>&quot;&#x27;&quot; (&quot;Anthem of the Basque Race&quot;), also known as &quot;&#x27;&quot; (&quot;Anthem of the Basque Country&quot;), is the official anthem of the Basque Country in northern Spain. The lyrics were written by Basque nationalist writer Sabino Arana, and its melody is based on an old Basque tune. The anthem was originally used for the Basque Nationalist Party (BNP/PNV), and it was adopted by the first Basque Government in the 1930s. Its re-proclamation by the Basque Parliament on 14 April 1983 was opposed by several parties that deemed it still to be bound to the PNV rather than to the rest of the Basques.

Like the national anthem of Spain, &quot;Marcha Real&quot;, the lyrics are not officially sung. The law makes official the music with no lyrics, since opposition parties felt the Arana text too religious and linked to the BNP.

==Unofficial lyrics==
==See also==
* Anthems of the autonomous communities of Spain

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*Symbols of the Basque Country: The Official Basque Anthem, at the Basque Government site (Spanish).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q541947" start="153" end="159" title="anthem" label="anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3995" start="167" end="181" title="Basque Country (autonomous community)" label="Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="194" end="199" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336983" start="228" end="246" title="Basque nationalist" label="Basque nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q332663" start="254" end="266" title="Sabino Arana" label="Sabino Arana"/>
<link wikidata="Q43093" start="354" end="378" title="Basque Nationalist Party" label="Basque Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554299" start="422" end="439" title="Basque Government" label="Basque Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253965" start="481" end="498" title="Basque Parliament" label="Basque Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q126756" start="622" end="629" title="Basques" label="Basques"/>
<link wikidata="Q130940" start="673" end="684" title="Marcha Real" label="Marcha Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771614" start="897" end="943" title="Anthems of the autonomous communities of Spain" label="Anthems of the autonomous communities of Spain"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="57977" wikidata="Q614130" url="?curid=57977" title="Mad scientist">
<text>The mad scientist (also mad doctor or mad professor) is a stock character of a scientist who is perceived as &quot;mad, bad and dangerous to know&quot; or &quot;insane&quot; owing to a combination of unusual or unsettling personality traits and the unabashedly ambitious, taboo or hubristic nature of their experiments. As a motif in fiction, the mad scientist may be villainous (evil genius) or antagonistic, benign, or neutral; may be insane, eccentric, or clumsy; and often works with fictional technology or fails to recognise or value common human objections to attempting to play God. Some may have benevolent intentions, even if their actions are dangerous or questionable, which can make them accidental antagonists.

==History==
===Prototypes===

The prototypical fictional mad scientist was Victor Frankenstein, creator of his eponymous monster, who made his first appearance in 1818, in the novel &quot;Frankenstein, or the Modern Prometheus&quot; by Mary Shelley. Though the novel&#x27;s title character, Victor Frankenstein, is a sympathetic character, the critical element of conducting experiments that cross &quot;boundaries that ought not to be crossed&quot;, heedless of the consequences, is present in Shelley&#x27;s novel. Frankenstein was trained as both an alchemist and a modern scientist, which makes him the bridge between two eras of an evolving archetype. The book is said to be a precursor of a new genre, science fiction, although as an example of gothic horror it is connected with other antecedents as well.

The year 1896 saw the publication of H. G. Wells&#x27;s &quot;The Island of Doctor Moreau,&quot; in which the titular doctor—a controversial vivisectionist—has isolated himself entirely from civilisation in order to continue his experiments in surgically reshaping animals into humanoid forms, heedless of the suffering he causes. In 1925, the novelist Alexander Belyaev introduced mad scientists to the Russian people through the novel &quot;Professor Dowell&#x27;s Head&quot;, in which the antagonist performs experimental head transplants on bodies stolen from the morgue, and reanimates the corpses.

===Cinema depictions===

Fritz Lang&#x27;s movie &quot;Metropolis&quot; (1927) brought the archetypical mad scientist to the screen in the form of Rotwang, the evil genius whose machines had originally given life to the dystopian city of the title. Rotwang&#x27;s laboratory influenced many subsequent movie sets with its electrical arcs, bubbling apparatus, and bizarrely complicated arrays of dials and controls. Portrayed by actor Rudolf Klein-Rogge, Rotwang himself is the prototypically conflicted mad scientist; though he is master of almost mystical scientific power, he remains a slave to his own desires for power and revenge. Rotwang&#x27;s appearance was also influential—the character&#x27;s shock of flyaway hair, wild-eyed demeanor, and his quasi-fascist laboratory garb have all been adopted as shorthand for the mad scientist &quot;look.&quot; Even his mechanical right hand has become a mark of twisted scientific power, echoed notably in Stanley Kubrick&#x27;s film &quot;Dr. Strangelove or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb&quot; and in the novel &quot;The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch&quot; (1965) by Philip K. Dick.

A recent survey of 1,000 horror films distributed in the UK between the 1930s and 1980s reveals mad scientists or their creations have been the villains of 30 percent of the films; scientific research has produced 39 percent of the threats; and, by contrast, scientists have been the heroes of a mere 11 percent. Boris Karloff played mad scientists in several of his 1930s and 1940s films.

===Movie serials===
The Mad scientist was a staple of the Republic/Universal/Columbia movie serials of the 1930s and 40s. Examples include:
*&quot;Dr. Zorka&quot; (&quot;The Phantom Creeps&quot;, 1939)
*&quot;Dr. Fu Manchu&quot; (&quot;Drums of Fu Manchu&quot;, Republic, 1940)
*&quot;Dr. Satan&quot; (&quot;Mysterious Doctor Satan&quot;, 1940)
*&quot;Dr. Vulcan&quot; (&quot;King of the Rocket Men&quot;, 1949)
*&quot;Atom Man/Lex Luthor&quot; &quot;Atom Man vs. Superman&quot;, 1950)

===Post–World War II depictions===
Mad scientists were most conspicuous in popular culture after World War II. The sadistic human experimentation conducted under the auspices of the Nazis, especially those of Josef Mengele, and the invention of the atomic bomb, gave rise in this period to genuine fears that science and technology had gone out of control. That the scientific and technological build-up during the Cold War brought about increasing threats of unparalleled destruction of the human species did not lessen the impression. Mad scientists frequently figure in science fiction and motion pictures from the period.

===Animation===
Mad scientists in animation include Professor Frink, Professor Farnsworth, Rick Sanchez, Rintaro Okabe, and Dr. Heinz Doofenshmirtz.

Walt Disney Pictures had Mickey Mouse trying to save his dog Pluto from &quot;The Mad Doctor&quot; (1933).

Depictions of mad scientists in Warner Brothers&#x27; &quot;Merrie Melodies&quot;/&quot;Looney Tunes&quot; cartoons include:
*&quot;Hair-Raising Hare&quot; (1946, based on Peter Lorre)
*&quot;Birth of a Notion&quot; (1947, again based on Lorre)
*&quot;Water, Water Every Hare&quot; (1952, based on Boris Karloff)

While both Tom and Jerry dabbled in mad science in some of the Hanna-Barbera cartoons, an actual mad scientist did not appear until &quot;Switchin&#x27; Kitten&quot; (1961).

==See also==
* Absent-minded professor
* Boffin
* British scientists (meme)
* Creativity techniques
* Creativity and mental illness
* Edisonade, a similar trope, about a brilliant inventor, but of positive attitudes
* Egghead
* Faust
* Fringe science
* Girl Genius
* List of mad scientists
* Mad scientists of Stanislaw Lem

==References==
==Further reading==
* Allen, Glen Scott (2009). &quot;Master Mechanics and Wicked Wizards: Images of the American Scientist from Colonial Times to the Present&quot;. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press. .
* Garboden, Nick (2007). &quot;Mad Scientist or Angry Lab Tech: How to Spot Insanity&quot;. Portland: Doctored Papers. .
* Haynes, Roslynn Doris (1994). &quot;From Faust to Strangelove: Representations of the Scientist in Western Literature&quot;. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. .
* Junge, Torsten; Doerthe Ohlhoff (2004). &quot;Wahnsinnig genial: Der Mad Scientist Reader&quot;. Aschaffenburg: Alibri. .
* Norton, Trevor (2010). &quot;Smoking Ears and Screaming Teeth. (A witty celebration of the great eccentrics...)&quot;. Century. .
* Schlesinger, Judith (2012). &quot;The Insanity Hoax: Exposing the Myth of the Mad Genius&quot;. Ardsley-on-Hudson, N.Y. Shrinktunes Media .
* Schneider, Reto U. (2008). &quot;The Mad Science Book. 100 Amazing Experiments from the History of Science&quot;. London: Quercus. .
* Tudor, Andrew (1989). &quot;Monsters and Mad Scientists: A Cultural History of the Horror Movie&quot;. Oxford: Blackwell. .
* Weart, Spencer R. (1988). &quot;Nuclear Fear: A History of Images&quot;. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
* Levi, Pfaff J. (1956). &quot;Wahnsinnig genial: Der Mad Scientist Reader&quot;. Aschaffenburg: Alibri. .

== External links ==

* Gary Hoppenstand, &quot;Dinosaur Doctors and Jurassic Geniuses: The Changing Image of the Scientist in the Lost World Adventure&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q614130" start="4" end="17" title="Mad scientist" label="mad scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q614130" start="24" end="34" title="Mad scientist" label="mad doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q614130" start="38" end="51" title="Mad scientist" label="mad professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q636497" start="58" end="73" title="stock character" label="stock character"/>
<link wikidata="Q901" start="79" end="88" title="scientist" label="scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q505619" start="161" end="167" title="insanity" label="insane"/>
<link wikidata="Q171180" start="272" end="277" title="taboo" label="taboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q735766" start="281" end="287" title="hubris" label="hubris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1697305" start="325" end="330" title="motif (narrative)" label="motif"/>
<link wikidata="Q290691" start="368" end="375" title="villain" label="villain"/>
<link wikidata="Q614130" start="380" end="391" title="Mad scientist" label="evil genius"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="437" end="443" title="psychosis" label="insane"/>
<link wikidata="Q50013" start="445" end="454" title="eccentricity (behaviour)" label="eccentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q115802622" start="488" end="508" title="fictional technology" label="fictional technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203394" start="581" end="589" title="Playing God (ethics)" label="play God"/>
<link wikidata="Q245204" start="712" end="722" title="antagonist" label="antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320164" start="801" end="820" title="Victor Frankenstein" label="Victor Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021531" start="837" end="854" title="Frankenstein&amp;#x27;s monster" label="eponymous monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q150827" start="914" end="952" title="Frankenstein" label="Frankenstein, or the Modern Prometheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47152" start="962" end="974" title="Mary Shelley" label="Mary Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="1279" end="1288" title="alchemist" label="alchemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="1434" end="1449" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669641" start="1477" end="1490" title="Gothic fiction" label="gothic horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="1577" end="1588" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q718268" start="1602" end="1629" title="The Island of Doctor Moreau" label="The Island of Doctor Moreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q259567" start="1681" end="1692" title="vivisection" label="vivisection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980086" start="1795" end="1832" title="Uplift (science fiction)" label="reshaping animals into humanoid forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q497925" start="1893" end="1910" title="Alexander Belyaev" label="Alexander Belyaev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499596" start="1983" end="2011" title="Professor Dowell&amp;#x27;s Head" label="Professor Dowell&amp;#x27;s Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q19504" start="2170" end="2180" title="Fritz Lang" label="Fritz Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q151599" start="2200" end="2210" title="Metropolis (1927 movie)" label="Metropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q848086" start="2218" end="2222" title="1927 in film" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q131714" start="2236" end="2248" title="archetype" label="archetypical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370722" start="2292" end="2299" title="Rotwang" label="Rotwang"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="2365" end="2373" title="dystopia" label="dystopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q483242" start="2409" end="2419" title="laboratory" label="laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2467" end="2482" title="Electric arc#Visual entertainment" label="electrical arcs"/>
<link wikidata="Q65154" start="2579" end="2597" title="Rudolf Klein-Rogge" label="Rudolf Klein-Rogge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="2906" end="2913" title="fascist" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001" start="3101" end="3116" title="Stanley Kubrick" label="Stanley Kubrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q105702" start="3135" end="3203" title="Dr. Strangelove" label="Dr. Strangelove or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193211" start="3233" end="3270" title="The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch" label="The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch"/>
<link wikidata="Q171091" start="3287" end="3301" title="Philip K. Dick" label="Philip K. Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q203219" start="3617" end="3630" title="Boris Karloff" label="Boris Karloff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751682" start="3781" end="3794" title="Serial film" label="movie serials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822915" start="3865" end="3883" title="The Phantom Creeps" label="The Phantom Creeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179767" start="3931" end="3949" title="Drums of Fu Manchu" label="Drums of Fu Manchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948776" start="4003" end="4026" title="Mysterious Doctor Satan" label="Mysterious Doctor Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412386" start="4071" end="4093" title="King of the Rocket Men" label="King of the Rocket Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817223" start="4146" end="4167" title="Atom Man vs. Superman" label="Atom Man vs. Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="4257" end="4272" title="popular culture" label="popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4279" end="4291" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q31896" start="4306" end="4327" title="Nazi human experimentation" label="human experimentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="4364" end="4369" title="Nazism" label="Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q57109" start="4391" end="4404" title="Josef Mengele" label="Josef Mengele"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="4431" end="4442" title="atomic bomb" label="atomic bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="4597" end="4605" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="4755" end="4770" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="4775" end="4790" title="film" label="motion pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458159" start="4861" end="4876" title="Professor Frink" label="Professor Frink"/>
<link wikidata="Q874924" start="4878" end="4898" title="Professor Farnsworth" label="Professor Farnsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q24207815" start="4900" end="4912" title="Rick Sanchez" label="Rick Sanchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936121" start="4914" end="4927" title="Rintaro Okabe" label="Rintaro Okabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996360" start="4933" end="4956" title="Dr. Heinz Doofenshmirtz" label="Dr. Heinz Doofenshmirtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q191224" start="4959" end="4979" title="Walt Disney Pictures" label="Walt Disney Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q11934" start="4984" end="4996" title="Mickey Mouse" label="Mickey Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q108732" start="5020" end="5025" title="Pluto (Disney)" label="Pluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136500" start="5037" end="5051" title="The Mad Doctor (1933 film)" label="The Mad Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750628" start="5127" end="5142" title="Merrie Melodies" label="Merrie Melodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q622435" start="5155" end="5167" title="Looney Tunes" label="Looney Tunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125781" start="5199" end="5216" title="Hair-Raising Hare" label="Hair-Raising Hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q78505" start="5239" end="5250" title="Peter Lorre" label="Peter Lorre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917026" start="5259" end="5276" title="Birth of a Notion (film)" label="Birth of a Notion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973214" start="5319" end="5342" title="Water, Water Every Hare" label="Water, Water Every Hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q203219" start="5365" end="5378" title="Boris Karloff" label="Boris Karloff"/>
<link wikidata="Q131144" start="5392" end="5405" title="Tom and Jerry" label="Tom and Jerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q736464" start="5444" end="5457" title="Hanna-Barbera" label="Hanna-Barbera"/>
<link wikidata="Q462595" start="5519" end="5540" title="Switchin&amp;#x27; Kitten" label="Switchin&amp;#x27; Kitten"/>
<link wikidata="Q897028" start="5571" end="5594" title="Absent-minded professor" label="Absent-minded professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937281" start="5597" end="5603" title="Boffin" label="Boffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28811381" start="5606" end="5631" title="British scientists (meme)" label="British scientists (meme)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426250" start="5634" end="5655" title="Creativity techniques" label="Creativity techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183597" start="5658" end="5687" title="Creativity and mental illness" label="Creativity and mental illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719227" start="5690" end="5699" title="Edisonade" label="Edisonade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285026" start="5774" end="5781" title="Egghead" label="Egghead"/>
<link wikidata="Q332885" start="5784" end="5789" title="Faust" label="Faust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140308" start="5792" end="5806" title="Fringe science" label="Fringe science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639409" start="5809" end="5820" title="Girl Genius" label="Girl Genius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5823" end="5845" title="List of fictional scientists and engineers#Mad scientists" label="List of mad scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206956" start="5848" end="5879" title="Mad scientists of Stanislaw Lem" label="Mad scientists of Stanislaw Lem"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="57979" wikidata="Q331662" url="?curid=57979" title="Disarmament">
<text>Disarmament is the act of reducing, limiting, or abolishing weapons. Disarmament generally refers to a country&#x27;s military or specific type of weaponry. Disarmament is often taken to mean total elimination of weapons of mass destruction, such as nuclear arms. General and Complete Disarmament was defined by the United Nations General Assembly as the elimination of all WMD, coupled with the “balanced reduction of armed forces and conventional armaments, based on the principle of undiminished security of the parties with a view to promoting or enhancing stability at a lower military level, taking into account the need of all States to protect their security.”

==History==
At the Hague Peace Conferences in 1899 and 1907 government delegations debated about disarmament and the creation of an international court with binding powers. The court was considered necessary because it was understood that nation-states could not disarm into a vacuum. After World War I revulsion at the futility and tremendous cost of the war was widespread. A commonly held belief was that the cause of the war had been the escalating buildup of armaments in the previous half century among the great powers (see Anglo-German naval arms race). Although the Treaty of Versailles effectively disarmed Germany, a clause was inserted that called on all the great powers to likewise progressively disarm over a period of time. The newly formed League of Nations made this an explicit goal in the covenant of the league, which committed its signatories to reduce armaments &#x27;to the lowest point consistent with national safety and the enforcement by common action of international obligations&#x27;.


One of the earliest successful achievements in disarmament was obtained with the Washington Naval Treaty. Signed by the governments of Great Britain, the United States, Japan, France, and Italy, it prevented the continued construction of capital ships and limited ships of other classification to under 10,000 tons displacement. The size of the three country&#x27;s navies (the Royal Navy, United States Navy and Imperial Japanese Navy) was set at the ratio 5-5-3.

In 1921, the Temporary Mixed Commission on Armaments was set up by the League of Nations to explore possibilities for disarmament. It was made up not of government representatives but of famous individuals who rarely agreed. Proposals ranged from abolishing chemical warfare and strategic bombing to the limitation of more conventional weapons, such as tanks. A draft treaty was assembled in 1923 that made aggressive war illegal and bound the member states to defend victims of aggression by force. Since the onus of responsibility would, in practice, be on the great powers of the League, it was opposed by the First MacDonald ministry of the British government, whose opposition to the treaty, made official on 5 July 1924, &quot;effectively buried the proposal for good.&quot; 

Another commission in 1926, set up to explore the possibilities for the reduction of army size, met similar difficulties. However acting outside the League. French Foreign Minister Aristide Briand and US Secretary of State Frank Kellogg drafted a treaty known as the Kellogg–Briand Pact, which denounced war of aggression. There were 65 signatories to the pact, but it set out no guidelines for action in the event of a war. It was in 1946 used to convict and execute Nazi leaders of war crimes.

A final attempt was made at the Geneva Disarmament Conference from 1932 to 1937, chaired by former British Foreign Secretary Arthur Henderson. Germany demanded the revision of the Versailles Treaty and the granting of military parity with the other powers, while France was determined to keep Germany demilitarised for its own security. Meanwhile, the British and Americans were not willing to offer France security commitments in exchange for conciliation with Germany. The talks broke down in 1933, when Adolf Hitler withdrew Germany from the conference.

===Nuclear disarmament===

Nuclear disarmament refers to both the act of reducing or eliminating nuclear weapons and to the end state of a nuclear-free world, in which nuclear weapons are completely eliminated.

In the United Kingdom, the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND) held an inaugural public meeting at Central Hall, Westminster, on 17 February 1958, attended by five thousand people. After the meeting a few hundred left to demonstrate at Downing Street.

CND&#x27;s declared policies were the unconditional renunciation of the use, production of or dependence upon nuclear weapons by Britain and the bringing about of a general disarmament convention. The first Aldermaston March was organised by the CND and took place at Easter 1958, when several thousand people marched for four days from Trafalgar Square, London, to the Atomic Weapons Research Establishment close to Aldermaston in Berkshire, England, to demonstrate their opposition to nuclear weapons. The Aldermaston marches continued into the late 1960s when tens of thousands of people took part in the four-day marches.

In 1961, US President John F. Kennedy gave a speech before the UN General Assembly where he announced the US &quot;intention to challenge the Soviet Union, not to an arms race, but to a peace race – to advance together step by step, stage by stage, until general and complete disarmament has been achieved.&quot; He went on to call for a global general and complete disarmament, offering a rough outline for how this could be accomplished:

Major nuclear disarmament groups include Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, Greenpeace and International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War. There have been many large anti-nuclear demonstrations and protests. On June 12, 1982, one million people demonstrated in New York City&#x27;s Central Park against nuclear weapons and for an end to the Cold War arms race. It was the largest anti-nuclear protest and the largest political demonstration in American history. Following decades of campaigning the New Zealand government banned nuclear-armed and powered ships from entering the country&#x27;s territorial waters in 1984 with the ban later extended to cover land and airspace.

===Police disarmament===

The police disarmament movement is a political movement that advocates disarming police officers and law enforcement officers who regularly carry weaponry, such as those in the United States. Proposed police disarmament methods range from simply emphasizing de-escalation and less-lethal alternatives over lethal force; to limiting police access to firearms to specific units (such as police tactical units or authorised firearms officers) or to when authorized or necessary; to defunding or replacing police with other systems of public safety. The concept dates back to the 1900s and has historically been championed by anarchists and libertarians alike.

Proponents of police disarmament cite police brutality and militarization, safety and trust concerns, and the potential in other public safety apparatuses instead of armed police, as factors that make police disarmament ideal or necessary. Critics of police disarmament argue the concept is unrealistic, citing the need for police officers to defend themselves, the inability of unarmed public safety agents to effectively handle violent crime.

==Disarmament conferences and treaties==
* 1520: Field of the Cloth of Gold Summit 
* 1675: Strasbourg Agreement (1675)
* 1899: Hague Peace Conference
* 1919: Treaty of Versailles
* 1927: Kellogg–Briand Pact
* 1932–1934: World Disarmament Conference
* 1960: Ten Nation Disarmament Committee
* 1962–1968: Eighteen Nation Disarmament Committee
* 1969–1978: Conference of the Committee on Disarmament
* 1979–present: Conference on Disarmament (CD)

===Naval===
* 1908–1909: London Naval Conference
* 1921–1922: Washington Naval Conference
* 1927: Geneva Naval Conference
* 1930: London Naval Conference leading to the London Naval Treaty
* 1935: London Naval Conference leading to the Second London Naval Treaty

===Weapons of Mass Destruction===

* 1970: Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT)
* 1975: Biological Weapons Convention (BWC)
* 1997: Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC)

===Space===

* 1967: Outer Space Treaty

==Definitions of disarmament==
In his definition of &quot;disarmament&quot;, David Carlton writes in the Oxford University Press political dictionary, &quot;But confidence in such measures of arms control, especially when unaccompanied by extensive means of verification, has not been strengthened by the revelation that the Soviet Union in its last years successfully concealed consistent and systematic cheating on its obligations under the Biological Weapons Convention.&quot; He also notes, &quot;Now a freeze or a mutually agreed increase is not strictly speaking disarmament at all. And such measures may not even be intended to be a first step towards any kind of reduction or abolition. For the aim may simply be to promote stability in force structures. Hence a new term to cover such cases has become fashionable since the 1960s, namely, arms control.&quot;

==See also==
* 1923 Draft Treaty of Mutual Assistance
* Arms control
* Arms embargo
* Chemical weapons
* Guns versus butter model
* List of chemical arms control agreements
* Military Keynesianism
* Nuclear disarmament
** Decommissioning of Russian nuclear-powered vessels
* Peace dividend
* United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs

==References==
==Further reading==
* Cuthbertson, Ian, and Peter ME Volten. &quot;The Guns Fall Silent: The End of the Cold War and the Future of Conventional Disarmament&quot; (Routledge, 2019).
* Dupuy, Trevor N., and Gay M. Hammerman, eds. &quot;A Documentary History of Arms Control and Disarmament&quot; (1973), 629 pp.
* Eloranta, Jari. &quot;Why did the League of Nations fail?.&quot; &quot;Cliometrica&quot; 5.1 (2011): 27–52. online on League of Nations

* Feldman, Jonathan M. &quot;From the From Warfare State to &#x27;Shadow State&#x27;: Militarism, Economic Depletion and Reconstruction,&quot; &quot;Social Text&quot;, 91, Volume 25, Number 22 Summer, 2007.
* Kitching, Carolyn J. &quot;Britain and the Problem of International Disarmament: 1919–1934&quot; (Routledge, 2003.)
* Marks, Sally. &quot;The Illusion of Peace: International Relations in Europe 1918–1933&quot; (Macmillan, 2003).
* Melman, Seymour, ed. &quot;Inspection for Disarmament&quot; (New York: Columbia University Press, 1958).
* Myrdal, Alva. &quot;The Game of Disarmament: How the United States and Russia run the arms race&quot; (New York: Pantheon, 1978).
* Marcus G. Raskin. &quot;Draft Treaty for a Comprehensive Program for Common Security and General Disarmament,&quot; in &quot;Essays of a Citizen: From National Security State to Democracy&quot; (Armonk, New York: M. E. Sharpe, Inc., 1991): 227–291.
* Wittner, Lawrence S. &quot;Confronting the Bomb: A Short History of the World Disarmament Movement&quot; (Stanford University Press, 2009). 254pp online review

==External links==
* United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs
* EU Non-Proliferation and Disarmament eLearning Course
* Disarmament Insight Blogsite 
* Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
* Archive of Related Writings, Seymour Melman Website
* Archive of Related Writings, Economic Reconstruction Website
* Armament and Disarmament, Stockholm International Peace Research Institute
* League of Nations conference listing 
* &quot;Naval conference&quot;, &quot;Columbia Encyclopedia&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q331662" start="0" end="11" title="Disarmament" label="Disarmament"/>
<link wikidata="Q728" start="60" end="67" title="Weapon" label="weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="118" end="126" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q49394" start="213" end="240" title="weapons of mass destruction" label="weapons of mass destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="250" end="262" title="Nuclear weapon" label="nuclear arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="316" end="347" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q185145" start="1183" end="1194" title="great power" label="great power"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763720" start="1201" end="1229" title="Anglo-German naval arms race" label="Anglo-German naval arms race"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="1245" end="1265" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="1427" end="1444" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769635" start="1479" end="1501" title="Covenant of the League of Nations" label="covenant of the league"/>
<link wikidata="Q696550" start="1769" end="1792" title="Washington Naval Treaty" label="Washington Naval Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194368" start="1926" end="1938" title="capital ship" label="capital ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="2066" end="2076" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="2078" end="2096" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="2101" end="2123" title="Imperial Japanese Navy" label="Imperial Japanese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q483610" start="2412" end="2428" title="chemical warfare" label="chemical warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q841418" start="2433" end="2450" title="strategic bombing" label="strategic bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453246" start="2767" end="2791" title="First MacDonald ministry" label="First MacDonald ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q179888" start="3118" end="3133" title="Aristide Briand" label="Aristide Briand"/>
<link wikidata="Q193009" start="3160" end="3173" title="Frank Kellogg" label="Frank Kellogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q205073" start="3204" end="3223" title="Kellogg–Briand Pact" label="Kellogg–Briand Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q691249" start="3466" end="3495" title="Geneva Disarmament Conference" label="Geneva Disarmament Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q208665" start="3559" end="3575" title="Arthur Henderson" label="Arthur Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185641" start="3735" end="3748" title="demilitarisation" label="demilitarised"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="3940" end="3952" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="4089" end="4104" title="nuclear weapons" label="nuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q178511" start="4231" end="4263" title="Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament" label="Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament"/>
<link wikidata="Q81473" start="4306" end="4331" title="Central Hall, Westminster" label="Central Hall, Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q192687" start="4443" end="4457" title="Downing Street" label="Downing Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q51244015" start="4667" end="4684" title="Aldermaston Marches" label="Aldermaston March"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="4728" end="4734" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q129143" start="4797" end="4813" title="Trafalgar Square" label="Trafalgar Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q757609" start="4830" end="4867" title="Atomic Weapons Establishment" label="Atomic Weapons Research Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q258642" start="4877" end="4888" title="Aldermaston" label="Aldermaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q23220" start="4892" end="4901" title="Berkshire" label="Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="5109" end="5124" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774422" start="5534" end="5560" title="List of anti-nuclear groups" label="nuclear disarmament groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q178511" start="5569" end="5601" title="Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament" label="Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament"/>
<link wikidata="Q81307" start="5603" end="5613" title="Greenpeace" label="Greenpeace"/>
<link wikidata="Q245385" start="5618" end="5676" title="International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War" label="International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War"/>
<link wikidata="Q175331" start="5718" end="5732" title="Demonstration (people)" label="demonstrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q273120" start="5737" end="5744" title="protest" label="protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="5821" end="5833" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="5842" end="5857" title="nuclear weapons" label="nuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="5880" end="5888" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q322348" start="5889" end="5898" title="arms race" label="arms race"/>
<link wikidata="Q175331" start="5932" end="5939" title="Demonstration (people)" label="protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q35535" start="6247" end="6253" title="police" label="police"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738074" start="6280" end="6298" title="political movement" label="political movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q384593" start="6324" end="6339" title="Police officer" label="police officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503343" start="6344" end="6368" title="Law enforcement officer" label="law enforcement officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365622" start="6407" end="6433" title="Law enforcement in the United States" label="those in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182511" start="6501" end="6514" title="de-escalation" label="de-escalation"/>
<link wikidata="Q911881" start="6519" end="6543" title="Non-lethal weapon" label="less-lethal alternatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q896527" start="6549" end="6561" title="Deadly force" label="lethal force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209526" start="6604" end="6618" title="Police tactical unit" label="specific units"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209526" start="6628" end="6649" title="Police tactical unit" label="police tactical units"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872434" start="6653" end="6681" title="Authorised firearms officer" label="authorised firearms officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q96150192" start="6722" end="6731" title="Defund the police" label="defunding"/>
<link wikidata="Q96123999" start="6735" end="6751" title="Police abolition movement" label="replacing police"/>
<link wikidata="Q294240" start="6774" end="6787" title="Public security" label="public safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="6865" end="6875" title="Anarchism" label="anarchists"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="6880" end="6892" title="Libertarianism" label="libertarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996993" start="6939" end="6955" title="police brutality" label="police brutality"/>
<link wikidata="Q20728055" start="6960" end="6974" title="Militarization of police" label="militarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520311" start="7331" end="7344" title="violent crime" label="violent crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030061" start="7396" end="7429" title="Field of the Cloth of Gold" label="Field of the Cloth of Gold Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q977414" start="7439" end="7466" title="Strasbourg Agreement (1675)" label="Strasbourg Agreement (1675)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566316" start="7475" end="7497" title="Hague Peace Conference" label="Hague Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="7506" end="7526" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q205073" start="7535" end="7554" title="Kellogg–Briand Pact" label="Kellogg–Briand Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q691249" start="7568" end="7596" title="World Disarmament Conference" label="World Disarmament Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699267" start="7605" end="7637" title="Ten Nation Disarmament Committee" label="Ten Nation Disarmament Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349057" start="7651" end="7688" title="Eighteen Nation Disarmament Committee" label="Eighteen Nation Disarmament Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159932" start="7702" end="7744" title="Conference of the Committee on Disarmament" label="Conference of the Committee on Disarmament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931500" start="7761" end="7786" title="Conference on Disarmament" label="Conference on Disarmament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869135" start="7818" end="7841" title="London Naval Conference (1908–1909)" label="London Naval Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050213" start="7855" end="7882" title="Washington Naval Conference" label="Washington Naval Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533024" start="7891" end="7914" title="Geneva Naval Conference" label="Geneva Naval Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q704536" start="7962" end="7981" title="London Naval Treaty" label="London Naval Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632944" start="8029" end="8055" title="Second London Naval Treaty" label="Second London Naval Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q186444" start="8100" end="8124" title="Non-Proliferation Treaty" label="Non-Proliferation Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q803887" start="8139" end="8168" title="Biological Weapons Convention" label="Biological Weapons Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q547896" start="8183" end="8210" title="Chemical Weapons Convention" label="Chemical Weapons Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q256608" start="8239" end="8257" title="Outer Space Treaty" label="Outer Space Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="8364" end="8387" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3974052" start="8580" end="8637" title="Soviet program of biological weapons" label="the Soviet Union in its last years successfully concealed"/>
<link wikidata="Q803887" start="8702" end="8731" title="Biological Weapons Convention" label="Biological Weapons Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q125784728" start="9143" end="9181" title="1923 Draft Treaty of Mutual Assistance" label="1923 Draft Treaty of Mutual Assistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q364056" start="9184" end="9196" title="Arms control" label="Arms control"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793859" start="9199" end="9211" title="Arms embargo" label="Arms embargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639228" start="9214" end="9230" title="Chemical weapons" label="Chemical weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11937141" start="9233" end="9257" title="Guns versus butter model" label="Guns versus butter model"/>
<link wikidata="Q12810364" start="9260" end="9300" title="List of chemical arms control agreements" label="List of chemical arms control agreements"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109232" start="9303" end="9324" title="Military Keynesianism" label="Military Keynesianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200085" start="9327" end="9346" title="Nuclear disarmament" label="Nuclear disarmament"/>
<link wikidata="Q757631" start="9350" end="9400" title="Decommissioning of Russian nuclear-powered vessels" label="Decommissioning of Russian nuclear-powered vessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456716" start="9403" end="9417" title="Peace dividend" label="Peace dividend"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928381" start="9420" end="9465" title="United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs" label="United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758404" start="10611" end="10627" title="Marcus Raskin" label="Marcus G. Raskin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="57980" wikidata="Q368646" url="?curid=57980" title="Shortwave radio">
<text>Shortwave radio is radio transmission using radio frequencies in the shortwave bands (SW). There is no official definition of the band range, but it always includes all of the high frequency band (HF), which extends from 3 to 30 MHz (approximately 100 to 10 metres in wavelength). It lies between the medium frequency band (MF) and the bottom of the VHF band.

Radio waves in the shortwave band can be reflected or refracted from a layer of electrically charged atoms in the atmosphere called the ionosphere. Therefore, short waves directed at an angle into the sky can be reflected back to Earth at great distances, beyond the horizon. This is called skywave or &quot;skip&quot; propagation. Thus shortwave radio can be used for communication over very long distances, in contrast to radio waves of higher frequency, which travel in straight lines (line-of-sight propagation) and are generally limited by the visual horizon, about 64 km (40 miles).
Shortwave broadcasts of radio programs played an important role in international broadcasting for many decades, serving both to provide news and information and as a propaganda tool for an international audience. The heyday of international shortwave broadcasting was during the Cold War between 1960 and 1990. 

With the wide implementation of other technologies for the long-distance distribution of radio programs, such as satellite radio, cable broadcasting and IP-based transmissions, shortwave broadcasting lost importance. Initiatives for the digitization of broadcasting did not bear fruit either, and , relatively few broadcasters continue to broadcast programs on shortwave. 

However, shortwave remains important in war zones, such as in the Russo-Ukrainian war, and shortwave broadcasts can be transmitted over thousands of miles from a single transmitter, making it difficult for government authorities to censor them. Shortwave radio is also often used by aircraft.

==History==
===Development===

The name &quot;shortwave&quot; originated during the beginning of radio in the early 20th century, when the radio spectrum was divided into long wave (LW), medium wave (MW), and short wave (SW) bands based on the length of the wave. Shortwave radio received its name because the wavelengths in this band are shorter than 200 m (1,500 kHz) which marked the original upper limit of the medium frequency band first used for radio communications. The broadcast medium wave band now extends above the 200 m / 1,500 kHz limit.

Early long-distance radio telegraphy used long waves, below 300 kilohertz (kHz) / above 1000 m. The drawbacks to this system included a very limited spectrum available for long-distance communication, and the very expensive transmitters, receivers and gigantic antennas. Long waves are also difficult to beam directionally, resulting in a major loss of power over long distances. Prior to the 1920s, the shortwave frequencies above 1.5 MHz were regarded as useless for long-distance communication and were designated in many countries for amateur use.

Guglielmo Marconi, pioneer of radio, commissioned his assistant Charles Samuel Franklin to carry out a large-scale study into the transmission characteristics of short-wavelength waves and to determine their suitability for long-distance transmissions. Franklin rigged up a large antenna at Poldhu Wireless Station, Cornwall, running on 25 kW of power. In June and July 1923, wireless transmissions were completed during nights on 97 meters (about 3 MHz) from Poldhu to Marconi&#x27;s yacht &quot;Elettra&quot; in the Cape Verde Islands.

In September 1924, Marconi arranged for transmissions to be made day and night on 32 meters (about 9.4 MHz) from Poldhu to his yacht in the harbour at Beirut, to which he had sailed, and was &quot;astonished&quot; to find he could receive signals &quot;throughout the day&quot;. Franklin went on to refine the directional transmission by inventing the curtain array aerial system. In July 1924, Marconi entered into contracts with the British General Post Office (GPO) to install high-speed shortwave telegraphy circuits from London to Australia, India, South Africa and Canada as the main element of the Imperial Wireless Chain. The UK-to-Canada shortwave &quot;Beam Wireless Service&quot; went into commercial operation on 25 October 1926. Beam Wireless Services from the UK to Australia, South Africa and India went into service in 1927.

Shortwave communications began to grow rapidly in the 1920s. By 1928, more than half of long-distance communications had moved from transoceanic cables and longwave wireless services to shortwave, and the overall volume of transoceanic shortwave communications had vastly increased. Shortwave stations had cost and efficiency advantages over massive longwave wireless installations. However, some commercial longwave communications stations remained in use until the 1960s. Long-distance radio circuits also reduced the need for new cables, although the cables maintained their advantages of high security and a much more reliable and better-quality signal than shortwave.

The cable companies began to lose large sums of money in 1927. A serious financial crisis threatened viability of cable companies that were vital to strategic British interests. The British government convened the Imperial Wireless and Cable Conference in 1928 &quot;to examine the situation that had arisen as a result of the competition of Beam Wireless with the Cable Services&quot;. It recommended and received government approval for all overseas cable and wireless resources of the Empire to be merged into one system controlled by a newly formed company in 1929, Imperial and International Communications Ltd. The name of the company was changed to Cable and Wireless Ltd. in 1934.

A resurgence of long-distance cables began in 1956 with the laying of TAT-1 across the Atlantic Ocean, the first voice frequency cable on this route. This provided 36 high-quality telephone channels and was soon followed by even higher-capacity cables all around the world. Competition from these cables soon ended the economic viability of shortwave radio for commercial communication.

===Amateur use of shortwave propagation===

Amateur radio operators also discovered that long-distance communication was possible on shortwave bands. Early long-distance services used surface wave propagation at very low frequencies, which are attenuated along the path at wavelengths shorter than 1,000 meters. Longer distances and higher frequencies using this method meant more signal loss. This, and the difficulties of generating and detecting higher frequencies, made discovery of shortwave propagation difficult for commercial services.

Radio amateurs may have conducted the first successful transatlantic tests in December 1921, operating in the 200 meter mediumwave band (near 1,500 kHz, inside the modern AM broadcast band), which at that time was the shortest wavelength / highest frequency available to amateur radio. In 1922 hundreds of North American amateurs were heard in Europe on 200 meters and at least 20 North American amateurs heard amateur signals from Europe. The first two-way communications between North American and Hawaiian amateurs began in 1922 at 200 meters. Although operation on wavelengths shorter than 200 meters was technically illegal (but tolerated at the time as the authorities mistakenly believed that such frequencies were useless for commercial or military use), amateurs began to experiment with those wavelengths using newly available vacuum tubes shortly after World War I.

Extreme interference at the longer edge of the 150–200 meter band – the official wavelengths allocated to amateurs by the Second National Radio Conference in 1923 – forced amateurs to shift to shorter and shorter wavelengths; however, amateurs were limited by regulation to wavelengths longer than 150 meters (2 MHz). A few fortunate amateurs who obtained special permission for experimental communications at wavelengths shorter than 150 meters completed hundreds of long-distance two-way contacts on 100 meters (3 MHz) in 1923 including the first transatlantic two-way contacts.

By 1924 many additional specially licensed amateurs were routinely making transoceanic contacts at distances of 6,000 miles (9,600 km) and more. On 21 September 1924 several amateurs in California completed two-way contacts with an amateur in New Zealand. On 19 October amateurs in New Zealand and England completed a 90 minute two-way contact nearly halfway around the world. On 10 October the Third National Radio Conference made three shortwave bands available to U.S. amateurs at 80 meters (3.75 MHz), 40 meters (7 MHz) and 20 meters (14 MHz). These were allocated worldwide, while the 10 meter band (28 MHz) was created by the Washington International Radiotelegraph Conference on 25 November 1927. The 15 meter band (21 MHz) was opened to amateurs in the United States on 1 May 1952.

==Propagation characteristics==

Shortwave radio frequency energy is capable of reaching any location on the Earth as it is influenced by ionospheric reflection back to Earth by the ionosphere, (a phenomenon known as &quot;skywave propagation&quot;). A typical phenomenon of shortwave propagation is the occurrence of a skip zone where reception fails. With a fixed working frequency, large changes in ionospheric conditions may create skip zones at night.

As a result of the multi-layer structure of the ionosphere, propagation often simultaneously occurs on different paths, scattered by the ‘E’ or ‘F’ layer and with different numbers of hops, a phenomenon that may be disturbed for certain techniques. Particularly for lower frequencies of the shortwave band, absorption of radio frequency energy in the lowest ionospheric layer, the ‘D’ layer, may impose a serious limit. This is due to collisions of electrons with neutral molecules, absorbing some of a radio frequency&#x27;s energy and converting it to heat. Predictions of skywave propagation depend on:
* The distance from the transmitter to the target receiver.
* Time of day. During the day, frequencies higher than approximately 12 MHz can travel longer distances than lower ones. At night, this property is reversed.
* With lower frequencies the dependence on the time of the day is mainly due to the lowest ionospheric layer, the ‘D’ Layer, forming only during the day when photons from the sun break up atoms into ions and free electrons.
* Season. During the winter months of the Northern or Southern hemispheres, the AM/MW broadcast band tends to be more favorable because of longer hours of darkness.
* Solar flares produce a large increase in D region ionization – so great, sometimes for periods of several minutes, that skywave propagation is nonexistent.

==Types of modulation==
Several different types of modulation are used to incorporate information in a short-wave signal.

===Audio modes===
====AM====
Amplitude modulation is the simplest type and the most commonly used for shortwave broadcasting. The instantaneous amplitude of the carrier is controlled by the amplitude of the signal (speech, or music, for example). At the receiver, a simple detector recovers the desired modulation signal from the carrier.

====SSB====
Single-sideband transmission is a form of amplitude modulation but in effect filters the result of modulation. An amplitude-modulated signal has frequency components both above and below the carrier frequency. If one set of these components is eliminated as well as the residual carrier, only the remaining set is transmitted. This reduces power in the transmission, as roughly of the energy sent by an AM signal is in the carrier, which is not needed to recover the information contained in the signal. It also reduces signal bandwidth, enabling less than one-half the AM signal bandwidth to be used.

The drawback is the receiver is more complicated, since it must re-create the carrier to recover the signal. Small errors in the detection process greatly affect the pitch of the received signal. As a result, single sideband is not used for music or general broadcast. Single sideband is used for long-range voice communications by ships and aircraft, citizen&#x27;s band, and amateur radio operators. In amateur radio operation lower sideband (LSB) is customarily used below 10 MHz and USB (upper sideband) above 10 MHz, non-amateur services use USB regardless of frequency.

====VSB====
Vestigial sideband transmits the carrier and one complete sideband, but filters out most of the other sideband. It is a compromise between AM and SSB, enabling simple receivers to be used, but requires almost as much transmitter power as AM. Its main advantage is that only half the bandwidth of an AM signal is used. It is used by the Canadian standard time signal station CHU. Vestigial sideband was used for analog television and by ATSC, the digital TV system used in North America.

====NFM====
Narrow-band frequency modulation (NBFM or NFM) is used typically above 20 MHz. Because of the larger bandwidth required, NBFM is commonly used for VHF communication. Regulations limit the bandwidth of a signal transmitted in the HF bands, and the advantages of frequency modulation are greatest if the FM signal has a wide bandwidth. NBFM is limited to short-range transmissions due to the multiphasic distortions created by the ionosphere.

====DRM====
Digital Radio Mondiale (DRM) is a digital modulation for use on bands below 30 MHz. It is a digital signal, like the data modes, below, but is for transmitting audio, like the analog modes above.

===Data modes===
====CW====
Continuous wave (CW) is on-and-off keying of a sine-wave carrier, used for Morse code communications and Hellschreiber facsimile-based teleprinter transmissions. It is a data mode, although often listed separately. It is typically received via lower or upper SSB modes.

====RTTY, FAX, SSTV====
Radioteletype, fax, digital, slow-scan television, and other systems use forms of frequency-shift keying or audio subcarriers on a shortwave carrier. These generally require special equipment to decode, such as software on a computer equipped with a sound card.

Note that on modern computer-driven systems, digital modes are typically sent by coupling a computer&#x27;s sound output to the SSB input of a radio.

==Users==

Some established users of the shortwave radio bands may include:
* International broadcasting primarily by government-sponsored propaganda, or international news (for example, the BBC World Service), religious or cultural stations to foreign audiences: The most common use of all.
* Domestic broadcasting: to widely dispersed populations with few longwave, mediumwave and FM stations serving them; or for speciality political, religious and alternative media networks; or of individual commercial and non-commercial paid broadcasts.
* Oceanic air traffic control uses the HF/shortwave band for long-distance communication to aircraft over the oceans and poles, which are far beyond the range of traditional VHF frequencies. Modern systems also include satellite communications, such as ADS-C/CPDLC.
* Two-way radio communications by marine and maritime HF stations, aeronautical users, and ground based stations. For example, two way shortwave communication is still used in remote regions by the Royal Flying Doctor Service of Australia.
* &quot;Utility&quot; stations transmitting messages not intended for the general public, such as merchant shipping, marine weather, and ship-to-shore stations; for aviation weather and air-to-ground communications; for military communications; for long-distance governmental purposes, and for other non-broadcast communications.
* Amateur radio operators at the 80/75, 60, 40, 30, 20, 17, 15, 12, and 10–meter bands. Licenses are granted by authorized government agencies.
* Time signal and radio clock stations: In North America, WWV radio and WWVH radio transmit at these frequencies: 2.5 MHz, 5 MHz, 10 MHz, and 15 MHz; and WWV also transmits on 20 MHz. The CHU radio station in Canada transmits on the following frequencies: 3.33 MHz, 7.85 MHz, and 14.67 MHz. Other similar radio clock stations transmit on various shortwave and longwave frequencies around the world. The shortwave transmissions are primarily intended for human reception, while the longwave stations are generally used for automatic synchronization of watches and clocks.

Sporadic or non-traditional users of the shortwave bands may include:
* Clandestine stations. These are stations that broadcast on behalf of various political movements such as rebel or insurrectionist forces. They may advocate civil war, insurrection, rebellion against the government-in-charge of the country to which they are directed. Clandestine broadcasts may emanate from transmitters located in rebel-controlled territory or from outside the country entirely, using another country&#x27;s transmission facilities.
* Numbers stations. These stations regularly appear and disappear all over the shortwave radio band, but are unlicensed and untraceable. It is believed that numbers stations are operated by government agencies and are used to communicate with clandestine operatives working within foreign countries. However, no definitive proof of such use has emerged. Because the vast majority of these broadcasts contain nothing but the recitation of blocks of numbers, in various languages, with occasional bursts of music, they have become known colloquially as &quot;number stations&quot;. Perhaps the most noted number station is called the &quot;Lincolnshire Poacher&quot;, named after the 18th century English folk song, which is transmitted just before the sequences of numbers.
* Unlicensed two way radio activity by individuals such as taxi drivers, bus drivers and fishermen in various countries can be heard on various shortwave frequencies. Such unlicensed transmissions by &quot;pirate&quot; or &quot;bootleg&quot; two way radio operators can often cause signal interference to licensed stations. Unlicensed business radio (taxis, trucking companies, among numerous others) land mobile systems may be found in the 20-30 MHz region while unlicensed marine mobile and other similar users may be found over the entire shortwave range.
* Pirate radio broadcasters who feature programming such as music, talk and other entertainment, can be heard sporadically and in various modes on the shortwave bands. Pirate broadcasters take advantage of the better propagation characteristics to achieve more range compared to the AM or FM broadcast bands.
* Over-the-horizon radar: From 1976 to 1989, the Soviet Union&#x27;s Russian Woodpecker over-the-horizon radar system blotted out numerous shortwave broadcasts daily.
* Ionospheric heaters used for scientific experimentation such as the High Frequency Active Auroral Research Program in Alaska, and the Sura ionospheric heating facility in Russia.

==Shortwave broadcasting==
* &quot;See International broadcasting for details on the history and practice of broadcasting to foreign audiences.&quot;
* &quot;See List of shortwave radio broadcasters for a list of international and domestic shortwave radio broadcasters.&quot;
* &quot;See Shortwave relay station for the actual kinds of integrated technologies used to bring high power signals to listeners.&quot;

===Frequency allocations===

The World Radiocommunication Conference (WRC), organized under the auspices of the International Telecommunication Union, allocates bands for various services in conferences every few years. The last WRC took place in 2023.

As of WRC-97 in 1997, these bands were allocated for international broadcasting. AM shortwave broadcasting channels are allocated with a 5 kHz separation for traditional analog audio broadcasting:


Although countries generally follow the assigned bands, there may be small differences between countries or regions. For example, in the official bandplan of the Netherlands, the 49 m band starts at 5.95 MHz, the 41 m band ends at 7.45 MHz, the 11 m band starts at 25.67 MHz, and the 120 m, 90 m, and 60 m bands are absent altogether. International broadcasters sometimes operate outside the normal the WRC-allocated bands or use off-channel frequencies. This is done for practical reasons, or to attract attention in crowded bands (60 m, 49 m, 40 m, 41 m, 31 m, 25 m).

The new digital audio broadcasting format for shortwave DRM operates 10 kHz or 20 kHz channels. There are some ongoing discussions with respect to specific band allocation for DRM, as it mainly transmitted in 10 kHz format.

The power used by shortwave transmitters ranges from less than one watt for some experimental and amateur radio transmissions to 500 kilowatts and higher for intercontinental broadcasters and over-the-horizon radar. Shortwave transmitting centers often use specialized antenna designs (like the ALLISS antenna technology) to concentrate radio energy at the target area.

===Advantages===

Shortwave possesses a number of advantages over newer technologies:
* Difficulty of censoring programming by authorities in restrictive countries. Unlike their relative ease in monitoring and censoring the Internet, over-the air television, cable television, satellite television, satellite radio, mobile phones, landline phones, and satellite phones, government authorities face technical difficulties monitoring which stations (sites) are being listened to (accessed). For example, during the attempted coup against Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev, when his access to communications was limited (e.g. his phones, television and radio were cut off), Gorbachev was able to stay informed by means of the BBC World Service on shortwave.
* Low-cost shortwave radios are widely available in all but the most repressive countries in the world. Simple shortwave regenerative receivers can be easily built with a few parts.
* In many countries (particularly in most developing nations and in the Eastern bloc during the Cold War era) ownership of shortwave receivers has been and continues to be widespread (in many of these countries some domestic stations also used shortwave).
* Many newer shortwave receivers are portable and can be battery-operated, making them useful in difficult circumstances. Newer technology includes hand-cranked radios which provide power without batteries.
* Shortwave radios can be used in situations where over-the-air television, cable television, satellite television, landline phones, mobile phones, satellite phones, satellite communications, or the Internet is temporarily, long-term or permanently unavailable (or unaffordable).
* Shortwave radio travels much farther than broadcast FM (88–108 MHz). Shortwave broadcasts can be easily transmitted over a distance of several thousand miles, including from one continent to another.
* Particularly in tropical regions, SW is somewhat less prone to interference from thunderstorms than medium wave radio, and is able to cover a large geographic area with relatively low power (and hence cost). Therefore, in many of these countries it is widely used for domestic broadcasting.
* Very little infrastructure is required for long-distance two-way communications using shortwave radio. All one needs is a pair of transceivers, each with an antenna, and a source of energy (such as a battery, a portable generator, or the electrical grid). This makes shortwave radio one of the most robust means of communications, which can be disrupted only by interference or bad ionospheric conditions. Modern digital transmission modes such as MFSK and Olivia are even more robust, allowing successful reception of signals well below the noise floor of a conventional receiver.

===Disadvantages===
Shortwave radio&#x27;s benefits are sometimes regarded as being outweighed by its drawbacks, including:
* In most Western countries, shortwave radio ownership is usually limited to enthusiasts, since most new standard radios do not receive the shortwave band. Therefore, Western audiences are limited.
* In the developed world, shortwave reception is very difficult in urban areas because of excessive noise from switched-mode power adapters, fluorescent or LED light sources, internet modems and routers, computers and many other sources of radio interference.
* Audio quality may be limited due to interference and the modes that are used.

==Shortwave listening==
The Asia-Pacific Telecommunity estimates that there are approximately 600 million shortwave broadcast-radio receivers in use in 2002. WWCR claims that there are 1.5 billion shortwave receivers worldwide.

Many hobbyists listen to shortwave broadcasters. In some cases, the goal is to hear as many stations from as many countries as possible &quot;(DXing)&quot;; others listen to specialized shortwave utility, or &quot;ute&quot;, transmissions such as maritime, naval, aviation, or military signals. Others focus on intelligence signals from numbers stations, stations which transmit strange broadcast usually for intelligence operations, or the two way communications by amateur radio operators. Some short wave listeners behave analogously to &quot;lurkers&quot; on the Internet, in that they listen only, and never attempt to send out their own signals. Other listeners participate in clubs, or actively send and receive QSL cards, or become involved with amateur radio and start transmitting on their own.

Many listeners tune the shortwave bands for the programmes of stations broadcasting to a general audience (such as Radio Taiwan International, China Radio International, Voice of America, Radio France Internationale, BBC World Service, Voice of Korea, Radio Free Sarawak etc.). Today, through the evolution of the Internet, the hobbyist can listen to shortwave signals via remotely controlled or web controlled shortwave receivers around the world, even without owning a shortwave radio. Many international broadcasters offer live streaming audio on their websites and a number have closed their shortwave service entirely, or severely curtailed it, in favour of internet transmission.

Shortwave listeners, or SWLs, can obtain QSL cards from broadcasters, utility stations or amateur radio operators as trophies of the hobby. Some stations even give out special certificates, pennants, stickers and other tokens and promotional materials to shortwave listeners.

==Shortwave broadcasts and music==

Some musicians have been attracted to the unique aural characteristics of shortwave radio which – due to the nature of amplitude modulation, varying propagation conditions, and the presence of interference – generally has lower fidelity than local broadcasts (particularly via FM stations). Shortwave transmissions often have bursts of distortion, and &quot;hollow&quot; sounding loss of clarity at certain aural frequencies, altering the harmonics of natural sound and creating at times a strange &quot;spacey&quot; quality due to echoes and phase distortion. Evocations of shortwave reception distortions have been incorporated into rock and classical compositions, by means of delays or feedback loops, equalizers, or even playing shortwave radios as live instruments. Snippets of broadcasts have been mixed into electronic sound collages and live musical instruments, by means of analogue tape loops or digital samples. Sometimes the sounds of instruments and existing musical recordings are altered by remixing or equalizing, with various distortions added, to replicate the garbled effects of shortwave radio reception.

The first attempts by serious composers to incorporate radio effects into music may be those of the Russian physicist and musician Léon Theremin, who perfected a form of radio oscillator as a musical instrument in 1928 (regenerative circuits in radios of the time were prone to breaking into oscillation, adding various tonal harmonics to music and speech); and in the same year, the development of a French instrument called the Ondes Martenot by its inventor Maurice Martenot, a French cellist and former wireless telegrapher. Karlheinz Stockhausen used shortwave radio and effects in works including &quot;Hymnen&quot; (1966–1967), &quot;Kurzwellen&quot; (1968) – adapted for the Beethoven Bicentennial in &quot;Opus 1970&quot; with filtered and distorted snippets of Beethoven pieces – &quot;Spiral&quot; (1968), &quot;Pole&quot;, &quot;Expo&quot; (both 1969–1970), and &quot;Michaelion&quot; (1997).

Cypriot composer Yannis Kyriakides incorporated shortwave numbers station transmissions in his 1999 &quot;ConSPIracy cantata&quot;.

Holger Czukay, a student of Stockhausen, was one of the first to use shortwave in a rock music context. In 1975, German electronic music band Kraftwerk recorded a full length concept album around simulated radiowave and shortwave sounds, entitled &quot;Radio-Activity&quot;. The The&#x27;s Radio Cineola monthly broadcasts drew heavily on shortwave radio sound.

==Shortwave&#x27;s future==

The development of direct broadcasts from satellites has reduced the demand for shortwave receiver hardware, but there are still a great number of shortwave broadcasters. A new digital radio technology, Digital Radio Mondiale (DRM), is expected to improve the quality of shortwave audio from very poor to adequate. The future of shortwave radio is threatened by the rise of power line communication (PLC), also known as Broadband over Power Lines (BPL), which uses a data stream transmitted over unshielded power lines. As the BPL frequencies used overlap with shortwave bands, severe distortions can make listening to analog shortwave radio signals near power lines difficult or impossible.

According to Andy Sennitt, former editor of the World Radio TV Handbook,

However, Thomas Witherspoon, editor of shortwave news site &quot;SWLingPost.com&quot; wrote that

In 2018, Nigel Fry, head of Distribution for the BBC World Service Group,

During the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, the BBC World Service launched two new shortwave frequencies for listeners in Ukraine and Russia, broadcasting English-language news updates in an effort to avoid censorship by the Russian state. American commercial shortwave broadcasters WTWW and WRMI also redirected much of their programming to Ukraine.

==See also==

* ALLISS–a very large rotatable antenna system used in international broadcasting
* List of American shortwave broadcasters
* List of European short wave transmitters
* List of shortwave radio broadcasters

== References ==
== External links ==
* 
* View live and historical data and images of space weather and radio propagation.
* article describing pros and cons of short wave radio since the Cold War.
* describes experiments carried out for the French and British governments.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q368646" start="0" end="15" title="Shortwave radio" label="Shortwave radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="19" end="24" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396184" start="44" end="61" title="radio frequencies" label="radio frequencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152721" start="69" end="84" title="shortwave bands" label="shortwave bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q15115271" start="176" end="200" title="High frequency" label="high frequency band (HF)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931155" start="301" end="327" title="Medium frequency" label="medium frequency band (MF)"/>
<link wikidata="Q152466" start="350" end="358" title="Very high frequency" label="VHF band"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262" start="361" end="371" title="Radio wave" label="Radio wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q162219" start="497" end="507" title="ionosphere" label="ionosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639901" start="652" end="659" title="skywave" label="skywave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474701" start="680" end="691" title="radio propagation" label="propagation"/>
<link wikidata="Q605931" start="850" end="875" title="line-of-sight propagation" label="line-of-sight propagation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="1116" end="1131" title="propaganda" label="propaganda tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q779239" start="1177" end="1213" title="International broadcasting" label="international shortwave broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="1229" end="1237" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090081" start="1376" end="1391" title="satellite radio" label="satellite radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255377" start="1393" end="1411" title="Cable radio" label="cable broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q184973" start="1416" end="1438" title="Internet radio" label="IP-based transmissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q946584" start="1500" end="1512" title="DRM30" label="digitization"/>
<link wikidata="Q15860072" start="1703" end="1722" title="Russo-Ukrainian war" label="Russo-Ukrainian war"/>
<link wikidata="Q902174" start="2070" end="2084" title="radio spectrum" label="radio spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082861" start="2102" end="2111" title="long wave" label="long wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q466814" start="2118" end="2129" title="medium wave" label="medium wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931155" start="2346" end="2362" title="medium frequency" label="medium frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517374" start="2368" end="2378" title="History of radio" label="first used"/>
<link wikidata="Q729856" start="2504" end="2520" title="radio telegraphy" label="radio telegraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="2548" end="2557" title="kilohertz" label="kilohertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q190157" start="2708" end="2719" title="transmitter" label="transmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q36488" start="3037" end="3054" title="Guglielmo Marconi" label="Guglielmo Marconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q27369" start="3101" end="3124" title="Charles Samuel Franklin" label="Charles Samuel Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129610" start="3328" end="3351" title="Poldhu" label="Poldhu Wireless Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="3353" end="3361" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011" start="3555" end="3573" title="Cape Verde" label="Cape Verde Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="3727" end="3733" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534042" start="3928" end="3941" title="curtain array" label="curtain array"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325334" start="4019" end="4038" title="General Post Office" label="General Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q16846886" start="4181" end="4204" title="Imperial Wireless Chain" label="Imperial Wireless Chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q506572" start="4550" end="4569" title="Submarine communications cable" label="transoceanic cables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024869" start="5748" end="5771" title="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless plc" label="Cable and Wireless Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q1955931" start="5852" end="5857" title="TAT-1" label="TAT-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q185727" start="6214" end="6237" title="Amateur radio" label="Amateur radio operators"/>
<link wikidata="Q889796" start="6354" end="6366" title="surface wave" label="surface wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q549933" start="6382" end="6402" title="Very low frequency" label="very low frequencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q466814" start="6835" end="6845" title="mediumwave" label="mediumwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="7552" end="7563" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939892" start="7699" end="7707" title="amateur radio operators" label="amateurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="8418" end="8429" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q270936" start="8659" end="8668" title="80-meter band" label="80 meters"/>
<link wikidata="Q231308" start="8681" end="8690" title="40-meter band" label="40 meters"/>
<link wikidata="Q210648" start="8703" end="8712" title="20-meter band" label="20 meters"/>
<link wikidata="Q163860" start="8765" end="8778" title="10-meter band" label="10 meter band"/>
<link wikidata="Q191017" start="8883" end="8896" title="15-meter band" label="15 meter band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639901" start="9104" end="9126" title="ionospheric reflection" label="ionospheric reflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q162219" start="9148" end="9158" title="ionosphere" label="ionosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639901" start="9189" end="9196" title="skywave" label="skywave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422637" start="9286" end="9295" title="skip zone" label="skip zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q162219" start="9472" end="9482" title="ionosphere" label="ionosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q210028" start="9544" end="9553" title="Scattering" label="scattered"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9561" end="9577" title="ionosphere#layers anchor" label="‘E’ or ‘F’ layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q162219" start="9805" end="9814" title="D layer" label="‘D’ layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396184" start="9927" end="9942" title="radio frequency" label="radio frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q162219" start="10362" end="10371" title="D layer" label="‘D’ Layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q119830" start="10639" end="10650" title="Solar flare" label="Solar flare"/>
<link wikidata="Q162219" start="10680" end="10688" title="D layer" label="D region"/>
<link wikidata="Q170474" start="10847" end="10857" title="modulation" label="modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183755" start="10948" end="10968" title="Amplitude modulation" label="Amplitude modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q779239" start="11021" end="11043" title="International broadcasting" label="shortwave broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1834857" start="11192" end="11200" title="Detector (radio)" label="detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q560348" start="11271" end="11286" title="Single-sideband modulation" label="Single-sideband"/>
<link wikidata="Q499193" start="11462" end="11479" title="carrier frequency" label="carrier frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q249998" start="11798" end="11807" title="Bandwidth (signal processing)" label="bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q770588" start="12226" end="12245" title="citizen&amp;#x27;s band" label="citizen&amp;#x27;s band"/>
<link wikidata="Q560348" start="12463" end="12481" title="Vestigial sideband" label="Vestigial sideband"/>
<link wikidata="Q187146" start="12817" end="12828" title="time signal" label="time signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023658" start="12837" end="12840" title="CHU (radio station)" label="CHU"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12842" end="12860" title="Single-sideband modulation#Vestigial sideband (VSB)" label="Vestigial sideband"/>
<link wikidata="Q637801" start="12899" end="12903" title="ATSC standards" label="ATSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645199" start="12909" end="12919" title="8VSB" label="digital TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q181417" start="12975" end="12995" title="frequency modulation" label="frequency modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q152466" start="13110" end="13113" title="VHF" label="VHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q946584" start="13417" end="13439" title="Digital Radio Mondiale" label="Digital Radio Mondiale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129003" start="13642" end="13657" title="Continuous wave" label="Continuous wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136128" start="13666" end="13683" title="on-off keying" label="on-and-off keying"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="13717" end="13727" title="Morse code" label="Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349535" start="13747" end="13760" title="Hellschreiber" label="Hellschreiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q194070" start="13761" end="13770" title="facsimile" label="facsimile"/>
<link wikidata="Q66196" start="13777" end="13788" title="teleprinter" label="teleprinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474408" start="13937" end="13950" title="Radioteletype" label="Radioteletype"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265221" start="13966" end="13986" title="slow-scan television" label="slow-scan television"/>
<link wikidata="Q779239" start="14429" end="14455" title="International broadcasting" label="International broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="14490" end="14500" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q423289" start="14542" end="14559" title="BBC World Service" label="BBC World Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082861" start="14709" end="14717" title="longwave" label="longwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q466814" start="14719" end="14729" title="mediumwave" label="mediumwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q192855" start="14803" end="14820" title="alternative media" label="alternative media"/>
<link wikidata="Q221395" start="14905" end="14924" title="air traffic control" label="air traffic control"/>
<link wikidata="Q152466" start="15069" end="15072" title="VHF" label="VHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165950" start="15154" end="15159" title="CPDLC" label="CPDLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706756" start="15359" end="15399" title="Royal Flying Doctor Service of Australia" label="Royal Flying Doctor Service of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7902856" start="15403" end="15431" title="Utility station" label="&amp;quot;Utility&amp;quot; stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q185727" start="15733" end="15746" title="Amateur radio" label="Amateur radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q270936" start="15764" end="15769" title="80-meter band" label="80/75"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882194" start="15771" end="15773" title="60-meter band" label="60"/>
<link wikidata="Q231308" start="15775" end="15777" title="40-meter band" label="40"/>
<link wikidata="Q203692" start="15779" end="15781" title="30-meter band" label="30"/>
<link wikidata="Q210648" start="15783" end="15785" title="20-meter band" label="20"/>
<link wikidata="Q203692" start="15787" end="15789" title="17-meter band" label="17"/>
<link wikidata="Q191017" start="15791" end="15793" title="15-meter band" label="15"/>
<link wikidata="Q203692" start="15795" end="15797" title="12-meter band" label="12"/>
<link wikidata="Q163860" start="15803" end="15811" title="10-meter band" label="10–meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q187146" start="15877" end="15888" title="Time signal" label="Time signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q904866" start="15893" end="15904" title="radio clock" label="radio clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q753499" start="15933" end="15942" title="WWV (radio station)" label="WWV radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q14479567" start="15947" end="15957" title="WWVH" label="WWVH radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023658" start="16063" end="16080" title="CHU (radio station)" label="CHU radio station"/>
<link wikidata="Q904866" start="16180" end="16191" title="radio clock" label="radio clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q877017" start="16519" end="16539" title="Clandestine radio" label="Clandestine stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q140699" start="16971" end="16986" title="Numbers station" label="Numbers station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825827" start="17601" end="17633" title="Lincolnshire Poacher (numbers station)" label="&amp;quot;Lincolnshire Poacher&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474418" start="17755" end="17768" title="two way radio" label="two way radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137431" start="18024" end="18043" title="Co-channel interference" label="signal interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q877017" start="18303" end="18315" title="Pirate radio" label="Pirate radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q332548" start="18612" end="18634" title="Over-the-horizon radar" label="Over-the-horizon radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="18659" end="18671" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q902605" start="18679" end="18697" title="Duga radar" label="Russian Woodpecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q12282110" start="18779" end="18797" title="Ionospheric heater" label="Ionospheric heater"/>
<link wikidata="Q193320" start="18847" end="18893" title="High Frequency Active Auroral Research Program" label="High Frequency Active Auroral Research Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570660" start="18913" end="18946" title="Sura Ionospheric Heating Facility" label="Sura ionospheric heating facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q779239" start="18998" end="19024" title="International broadcasting" label="International broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q21067958" start="19121" end="19157" title="List of shortwave radio broadcasters" label="List of shortwave radio broadcasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502263" start="19247" end="19270" title="Shortwave relay station" label="Shortwave relay station"/>
<link wikidata="Q680268" start="19406" end="19441" title="World Radiocommunication Conference" label="World Radiocommunication Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="19485" end="19522" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="International Telecommunication Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q779239" start="19680" end="19706" title="international broadcasting" label="international broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="19988" end="19999" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257510" start="20405" end="20431" title="digital audio broadcasting" label="digital audio broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q946584" start="20453" end="20456" title="Digital Radio Mondiale" label="DRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q332548" start="20814" end="20836" title="over-the-horizon radar" label="over-the-horizon radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q131214" start="20891" end="20898" title="antenna (radio)" label="antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652386" start="20917" end="20923" title="ALLISS" label="ALLISS"/>
<link wikidata="Q22696" start="21203" end="21225" title="internet censorship" label="censoring the Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q221382" start="21506" end="21520" title="1991 Soviet coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt" label="attempted coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="21546" end="21563" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q423289" start="21717" end="21734" title="BBC World Service" label="BBC World Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q608052" start="21870" end="21891" title="regenerative receiver" label="regenerative receiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="22003" end="22015" title="Eastern bloc" label="Eastern bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="22027" end="22035" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11014191" start="22335" end="22353" title="hand-cranked radio" label="hand-cranked radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q175122" start="22445" end="22468" title="Terrestrial television" label="over-the-air television"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="22470" end="22486" title="cable television" label="cable television"/>
<link wikidata="Q209588" start="22488" end="22508" title="satellite television" label="satellite television"/>
<link wikidata="Q738621" start="22510" end="22525" title="Landline" label="landline phones"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="22527" end="22540" title="mobile phones" label="mobile phones"/>
<link wikidata="Q248903" start="22542" end="22558" title="satellite phones" label="satellite phones"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="22560" end="22584" title="Communications satellite" label="satellite communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="22593" end="22601" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857578" start="22959" end="22972" title="thunderstorms" label="thunderstorms"/>
<link wikidata="Q466814" start="22978" end="22995" title="medium wave" label="medium wave radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3867059" start="23619" end="23623" title="MFSK" label="MFSK"/>
<link wikidata="Q82415" start="23628" end="23634" title="Olivia MFSK" label="Olivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17083130" start="23713" end="23724" title="noise floor" label="noise floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q587008" start="24187" end="24200" title="Switched-mode power supply" label="switched-mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474513" start="24316" end="24334" title="radio interference" label="radio interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558173" start="24523" end="24558" title="Shortwave receiver" label="shortwave broadcast-radio receivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957149" start="24575" end="24579" title="WWCR" label="WWCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q844865" start="24789" end="24794" title="DXing" label="DXing"/>
<link wikidata="Q140699" start="24983" end="24999" title="numbers stations" label="numbers stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q698884" start="25567" end="25593" title="Radio Taiwan International" label="Radio Taiwan International"/>
<link wikidata="Q375117" start="25595" end="25620" title="China Radio International" label="China Radio International"/>
<link wikidata="Q228389" start="25622" end="25638" title="Voice of America" label="Voice of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q19912" start="25640" end="25667" title="Radio France Internationale" label="Radio France Internationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q423289" start="25669" end="25686" title="BBC World Service" label="BBC World Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q698863" start="25688" end="25702" title="Voice of Korea" label="Voice of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280802" start="25704" end="25722" title="Radio Free Sarawak" label="Radio Free Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q151066" start="26180" end="26188" title="QSL card" label="QSL card"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274615" start="27345" end="27354" title="tape loop" label="tape loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q320002" start="27359" end="27374" title="digital sampler" label="digital samples"/>
<link wikidata="Q333265" start="27710" end="27723" title="Léon Theremin" label="Léon Theremin"/>
<link wikidata="Q608052" start="27799" end="27819" title="regenerative circuit" label="regenerative circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q170475" start="27871" end="27882" title="oscillation" label="oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148098" start="27905" end="27914" title="harmonics" label="harmonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q862501" start="28009" end="28023" title="Ondes Martenot" label="Ondes Martenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333326" start="28040" end="28056" title="Maurice Martenot" label="Maurice Martenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q154556" start="28108" end="28129" title="Karlheinz Stockhausen" label="Karlheinz Stockhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q651868" start="28188" end="28194" title="Hymnen" label="Hymnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6447643" start="28220" end="28230" title="Kurzwellen" label="Kurzwellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577718" start="28375" end="28381" title="Spiral (Stockhausen)" label="Spiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209240" start="28402" end="28406" title="Pole (Stockhausen)" label="Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421467" start="28420" end="28424" title="Expo (Stockhausen)" label="Expo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28459" end="28469" title="Licht#Wednesday" label="Michaelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="28485" end="28492" title="Cyprus" label="Cypriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381520" start="28502" end="28519" title="Yannis Kyriakides" label="Yannis Kyriakides"/>
<link wikidata="Q140699" start="28543" end="28558" title="numbers station" label="numbers station"/>
<link wikidata="Q699355" start="28618" end="28631" title="Holger Czukay" label="Holger Czukay"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="28702" end="28712" title="rock music" label="rock music"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="28738" end="28754" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q44892" start="28760" end="28769" title="Kraftwerk" label="Kraftwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q207393" start="28793" end="28806" title="concept album" label="concept album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139716" start="28871" end="28885" title="Radioactivity (album)" label="Radio-Activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354463" start="28893" end="28900" title="The The" label="The The"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257510" start="29187" end="29200" title="digital radio" label="digital radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q946584" start="29213" end="29235" title="Digital Radio Mondiale" label="Digital Radio Mondiale"/>
<link wikidata="Q271870" start="29384" end="29408" title="power line communication" label="power line communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866694" start="29430" end="29456" title="Broadband over Power Lines" label="Broadband over Power Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112472" start="29751" end="29774" title="World Radio TV Handbook" label="World Radio TV Handbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q423289" start="29924" end="29941" title="BBC World Service" label="BBC World Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="29961" end="29993" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="30073" end="30080" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="30085" end="30091" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30158" end="30189" title="Media freedom in Russia#Coverage on Ukraine" label="censorship by the Russian state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956503" start="30234" end="30238" title="WTWW" label="WTWW"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564785" start="30243" end="30247" title="WRMI" label="WRMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652386" start="30319" end="30325" title="ALLISS" label="ALLISS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502252" start="30401" end="30440" title="List of American shortwave broadcasters" label="List of American shortwave broadcasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q60518449" start="30443" end="30483" title="List of European short wave transmitters" label="List of European short wave transmitters"/>
<link wikidata="Q21067958" start="30486" end="30522" title="List of shortwave radio broadcasters" label="List of shortwave radio broadcasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q584093" start="30611" end="30624" title="space weather" label="space weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474701" start="30629" end="30646" title="radio propagation" label="radio propagation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="30713" end="30721" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="57983" wikidata="Q30959" url="?curid=57983" title="Datura stramonium">
<text>Datura stramonium, known by the common names thornapple, jimsonweed (jimson weed), or devil&#x27;s trumpet, is a poisonous flowering plant in the &quot;Daturae&quot; tribe of the nightshade family Solanaceae. Its likely origin was in Central America, and it has been introduced in many world regions.&lt;ref name= &#x27;NPGS/GRIN&#x27;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; It is an aggressive invasive weed in temperate climates and tropical climates across the world. &quot;D. stramonium&quot; has frequently been employed in traditional medicine to treat a variety of ailments. It has also been used as a hallucinogen (of the anticholinergic/antimuscarinic, deliriant type), taken entheogenically to cause intense, sacred or occult visions. It is unlikely ever to become a major drug of abuse owing to effects upon both mind and body frequently perceived as being highly unpleasant, giving rise to a state of profound and long-lasting disorientation or delirium (anticholinergic syndrome) with a potentially fatal outcome. It contains tropane alkaloids which are responsible for the psychoactive effects, and may be severely toxic.

==Description==
&quot;Datura stramonium&quot; is an erect, annual, freely branching herb that forms a bush tall.

The root is long, thick, fibrous, and white. The stem is stout, erect, leafy, smooth, and pale yellow-green to reddish purple in color. The stem forks off repeatedly into branches and each fork forms a leaf and a single, erect flower.

The leaves are about long, smooth, toothed, soft, and irregularly undulated. The upper surface of the leaves is a darker green, and the bottom is a light green. The leaves have a bitter and nauseating taste, which is imparted to extracts of the herb, and remains even after the leaves have been dried.

&quot;Datura stramonium&quot; generally flowers throughout the summer. The fragrant flowers have a pleasing odour; are trumpet-shaped, white to creamy or violet, and long; and grow on short stems from either the axils of the leaves or the places where the branches fork. The calyx is long and tubular, swollen at the bottom, and sharply angled, surmounted by five sharp teeth. The corolla, which is folded and only partially open, is white, funnel-shaped, and has prominent ribs. The flowers open at night, emitting a pleasant fragrance, and are fed upon by nocturnal moths.

The egg-shaped seed capsule is in diameter and either covered with spines or bald. At maturity, it splits into four chambers, each with dozens of small, black seeds.

==Etymology and common names==

The genus name is derived from the plant&#x27;s Hindi name, , ultimately from Sanskrit , &#x27;white thorn-apple&#x27;. The origin of Neo-Latin &quot;stramonium&quot; is unknown; the name &quot;Stramonia&quot; was used in the 17th century for various &quot;Datura&quot; species. There is some evidence that &quot;Stramonium&quot; is originally from Greek , &#x27;nightshade&#x27; and , &#x27;which makes mad&#x27;. It is called () in Telugu, and () in Tamil.; both of which are believed to have derived from the Sanskrit word (), meaning &#x27;mad&#x27; or &#x27;insane&#x27;.

In the United States, the plant commonly known as &quot;Jimsonweed&quot; (or, more rarely, &quot;Jamestown weed&quot;). This name derives from Jamestown, Virginia, where soldiers sent to suppress Bacon&#x27;s Rebellion in the English colony of Virginia reportedly consumed the plant and spent eleven days in altered mental states:

Common names for &quot;Datura stramonium&quot; vary by region and include thornapple, moon flower, hell&#x27;s bells, devil&#x27;s trumpet, devil&#x27;s weed, &quot;tolguacha&quot;, Jamestown weed, stinkweed, locoweed, pricklyburr, false castor oil plant, and devil&#x27;s cucumber.

==Range and habitat==
&quot;Datura stramonium&quot; is native to Central America, but was spread widely to the Old World early where it has also become naturalized. It was scientifically described and named by Swedish botanist Carl Linnaeus in 1753, although it had been described a century earlier by botanists such as Nicholas Culpeper. Today, it grows wild in all the world&#x27;s warm and temperate regions, where it is found along roadsides and at dung-rich livestock enclosures. In Europe, it is found as a weed in garbage dumps and wastelands, and is toxic to animals consuming it. In South Africa, it is colloquially known by the Afrikaans name (&#x27;mad seeds&#x27;).

Through observation, the seed is thought to be carried by birds and spread in their droppings. Its seeds can lie dormant underground for years and germinate when the soil is disturbed. The Royal Horticultural Society has advised worried gardeners to dig it up or have it otherwise removed, while wearing gloves to handle it.

==Toxicity==
All parts of &quot;Datura&quot; plants contain dangerous levels of the tropane alkaloids atropine, hyoscyamine, and scopolamine, all of which are classified as deliriants, or anticholinergics. The risk of fatal overdose is high among uninformed users, and many hospitalizations occur among recreational users who ingest the plant for its psychoactive effects. Deliberate or inadvertent poisoning resulting from smoking jimsonweed and other related species has been reported. Numerous other alkaloids have been detected at lower levels in the plant including methylecgonine in the roots, apoatropine in the stems, leaves, and other parts, and tropine in the flowers and other parts.

The amount of toxins varies widely from plant to plant. As much as a 20:1 variation can be found between plants, and a given plant&#x27;s toxicity depends on its age, where it is growing, and the local weather conditions. A particularly strong difference has been found between plants growing in their native ranges and plants that have adjusted to growing in non-native ranges: in the latter, the atropine and scopolamine concentration may be up to 20–40 times lower than in the native range. It is suspected that this is an evolutionary response to lower predatory pressures. Additionally, within a given plant, toxin concentration varies by part and even from leaf to leaf. When the plant is younger, the ratio of scopolamine to atropine is about 3:1; after flowering, this ratio is reversed, with the amount of scopolamine continuing to decrease as the plant gets older. In traditional cultures, a great deal of experience and detailed knowledge of &quot;Datura&quot; was critical to minimize harm. An individual seed contains about 0.1 mg of atropine, and the approximate fatal dose for adult humans is &gt;10 mg atropine or &gt;2–4 mg scopolamine.

&quot;Datura&quot; intoxication typically produces delirium, hallucination, hyperthermia, tachycardia, bizarre behavior, urinary retention, and severe mydriasis, with resultant painful photophobia that can last several days. Pronounced amnesia is another commonly reported effect. The onset of symptoms generally occurs around 30 to 60 minutes after ingesting the herb. These symptoms generally last from 24 to 48 hours, but have been reported in some cases to last as long as two weeks.

As with other cases of anticholinergic poisoning, intravenous physostigmine can be administered in severe cases as an antidote.

=== Natural defenses ===
These chemical production responses present in &quot;Datura stramonium&quot; function as a natural defense for the plant against dangers. Such dangers can range from biotic factors such as herbivores, pathogens, viruses, fungi and oomycetes to abiotic conditions such as drought, light, temperature, and nutrient deprivation. &quot;Datura stramonium&quot; can adjust to all these conditions through protein activity that is correlated with specific domains. Examples of this are terpenoid production to target herbivores present in multiple sites and abiotic stress responses. The abiotic responses are driven primarily by protein kinase regulatory subunits which are over-represented, expanded, and positively selected. These traits also show signs of physicochemical divergence, which put emphasis on the plant&#x27;s overall adaptability. In addition to this, terpenoids play a key role in mediating plant defense responses, as they trigger terpene metabolite activity. Such activity has the effect of defending against herbivore damage through a (SK) domain that reduces sensitivity of taste receptors for certain insects that come into contact with the plant. Additionally, terpenoids serve as attractants for carnivorous entities that would then attack these same herbivores. Gene domains relating to this immune response have been seen in positively selected and expanded proteins in Datura stramonium. Overall, these compounds target the central nervous systems of organisms that ingest them, to deter the herbivorous behavior. Terpenoids are also used for plant-to-plant communication, which could be used for a community-wide threat response. &quot;Datura stramonium&quot; also features leaf trichomes as a defensive trait to prevent herbivory.

The physiology of the plant itself is important for understanding patterns of defense as its status as an annual plant limits opportunities for biomass regrowth post-destruction, due to its inability to engage regrowth meristems. This results in the leaves being susceptible to injury from even small instances of attacks. To compensate, they have a large initial size for redundancy. These leaves also have a greater longevity and ability to metabolize even when damaged. However, the way these plants have evolved to display these characteristics differs from traditional defense mechanisms, as &quot;Datura stramonium&quot; uses a combination of both resistance and growth simultaneously to address these issues, instead of relying exclusively on one or the other. It has been hypothesized that this is due to the fact that these two methods have no negative correlation between them in experimental conditions. However, resource limitations may result in a tradeoff between one method of defense versus the other. In addition, herbivores are not solely the driving force that triggers these responses within the plant. Another factor that impacts behavior is the fact that due to the wide habitat range, a number of different, region-specific response patterns have been observed. However, these defensive responses have been observed to have varying impacts on growth and fitness when put to the test against predators. Studies in ecological reserves have shown that herbivore presence can either increase or decrease plant growth, fitness, and resistance. These results can be attributed to the significant genetic variation of the individual variants present in testing.

=== Regional variation ===
The &quot;Datura&quot; genus itself has seen little research done in regards to its various genomic sequences. As such, it is difficult to track the evolution of its traits (aside from a few instances of model species), which results in a limited understanding of how it has evolved to adapt to various environmental conditions. However, some limited studies have been done into &quot;Datura&quot; diversity. &quot;Datura stramonium&quot; diverged from the rest of the &quot;Datura&quot; genus around 30million years ago. This terminal branch has the most rapidly significant, evolving gene families compared to other members of the Solanaceae family. The most recent contractions in the tree also correspond with the most recent common ancestor of the &quot;Datura&quot; species clade. However, the subspecies of &quot;Datura stramonium&quot; tend to vary greatly in regards to both gene family contractions and expansions. Variables such as immunity, response to abiotic stress, and defense against biotic threats determine gene expansion signaling, positive selection, and physicochemical divergence. Despite this, &quot;Datura&quot; genomes have high amounts of repetitive DNA elements even compared to other Solanaceae species&#x27; genomes, in addition to a recent, yet independent surge in retrotransposon expansion. Major genomic variations have been witnessed, most likely through the rapid spread of the plant&#x27;s range due to human behavior. An example of this is a 59-fold difference in tropane alkaloid concentration present in different regions of Mexico. &quot;Datura stramonium&quot; regional variants have been observed to have an overall similar genome size to each other.

=== Tropane alkaloid evolution and implementation ===
Tropane alkaloid biosynthesis is another avenue of defense with codons positively selected and expanded in the &quot;Datura&quot; branch. It is aided by the tropane alkaloid Littorine rearrangement which is very important to scopolamine and atropine/hyoscyamine production, all of which serve to debilitate any organism that would come into contact with them. &quot;Datura stramonium&quot; has the highest tropane alkaloid production level in all the Solanaceae family, with scopolamine, atropine, and anisodamine being the primary tropane alkaloids found in the plant that inhibit neurotransmitters. The &quot;pmt&quot; gene family responsible for tropane alkaloid development has been observed to have significant gene expansion in the &quot;Datura&quot; genus evolution. The least common ancestor had only one gene copy, while modern variants have a range of three to two present, which results in higher mutation rates for traits involved with these various alkaloids. Use of tropane alkaloids, however, has had development spread out around many angiosperm families and evolutionary distances. Their presence has been reported to have arisen multiple times in Solanaceae lineages, some instances of which being independent of each other. This gives credence to the same diversification of tropane alkaloid production witnessed in the &quot;Datura stramonium&quot; regional variants. Another aspect of these varying Solanaceae lineages is that enzymes from completely different protein groups have been observed to be utilized to form similar biosynthesis reactions. In addition to this, differing protein folds and domain expressions correlate to different levels of tropane alkaloid production.

===Poisoning incidents===
In Australia in December 2022, around 200 people reported becoming ill after eating products containing spinach, sold mostly through Costco. &quot;Datura stramonium&quot; was identified as the contaminant, whose young leaves had been picked alongside the spinach leaves. The weed had spread due to increased rainfall. The grower, Riviera Farms, is from the Gippsland region of Victoria, and acted promptly to eradicate the weed.

==Uses==
===Traditional medicine===
One of the primary active agents in &quot;Datura&quot; is atropine, which has been used in traditional medicine and for recreation over centuries. The leaves are generally smoked, either in a cigarette or a pipe.

During the late 18th century, James Anderson, the English Physician General of the East India Company, learned of the practice and popularized it in Europe. The Chinese also used it as a form of anesthesia during surgery.

===Early folk medicine===
John Gerard&#x27;s &quot;Herball&quot; (1597) states,

William Lewis reported, in the late 18th century, that the juice could be made into &quot;a very powerful remedy in various convulsive and spasmodic disorders, epilepsy and mania,&quot; and was also &quot;found to give ease in external inflammations and haemorrhoids&quot;.

Henry Hyde Salter discusses &quot;D. stramonium&quot; as a treatment for asthma in his 19th-century work &quot;On Asthma: its Pathology and Treatment&quot;. Smoking of herbs, including &quot;D. stramonium&quot;, was thought to provide relief for asthmatics since antiquity and into the early 20th century. The use of smoking &quot;D. stramonium&quot; to treat asthma would later wane following new understandings of asthma as an allergic inflammatory reaction, and developments in pharmacology that provided more effective treatments.

===Spiritualism and the occult===
Across the Americas, indigenous peoples, such as the Algonquian, Aztecs, Navajo, Cherokee, Luiseño and the indigenous peoples of Marie-Galante used this plant or other &quot;Datura&quot; species in sacred ceremonies for its hallucinogenic properties. In Ethiopia, some students and &quot;debtrawoch&quot; (lay priests), use &quot;D. stramonium&quot; to &quot;open the mind&quot; to be more receptive to learning, and creative and imaginative thinking.

The common name &quot;datura&quot; has its origins in India, where the sister species &quot;Datura metel&quot; is considered particularly sacred – believed to be a favorite of Shiva in Shaivism. Both &quot;Datura stramonium&quot; and &quot;D. metel&quot; have reportedly been used by some sadhus and charnel ground ascetics, such as the Aghori, as both an entheogen and ritual poison. It was sometimes mixed with cannabis, as well as highly poisonous plants like &quot;Aconitum ferox&quot;, to intentionally create dysphoric experiences. The ascetics have used unpleasant or toxic plants such as these in order to achieve spiritual liberation (&quot;moksha&quot;), in settings of extreme horror and discomfort.

Among its visionary purposes, jimsonweed also garnered a reputation for supposed magical uses in various cultures throughout history. In his book, &quot;The Serpent and the Rainbow&quot;, Wade Davis identified &quot;D. stramonium&quot;, called &quot;zombi cucumber&quot; in Haiti, as a central ingredient of the concoction vodou priests use to create zombies. However, it has been noted that the process of &quot;zombification&quot; is not directly performed by vodou priests of the loa but rather by &quot;bokors&quot;. In European witchcraft, &quot;D. stramonium&quot; was also supposedly a common ingredient used for making witches&#x27; flying ointment along with other poisonous plants of the nightshade family. It was often responsible for the hallucinogenic effects of magical or lycanthropic salves and potions. During the witch-phobia craze in Early Modern times in England and parts of the colonial Northeastern United States, it was often considered unlucky or inappropriate to grow the plant in one&#x27;s garden, as it was considered to be an aid to incantations.

==Cultivation==
&quot;Datura stramonium&quot; prefers rich, calcareous soil. Adding nitrogen fertilizer to the soil increases the concentration of alkaloids present in the plant. &quot;D. stramonium&quot; can be grown from seed, which is sown with several feet between plants. It is sensitive to frost, so should be sheltered during cold weather. The plant is harvested when the fruits are ripe, but still green. To harvest, the entire plant is cut down, the leaves are stripped from the plant, and everything is left to dry. When the fruits begin to burst open, the seeds are harvested. For intensive plantations, leaf yields of and seed yields of are possible.

== References ==
==External links==
* 
* USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service PLANTS Profile: &quot;Datura stramonium&quot; L.
* &quot;Datura stramonium&quot; at Liber Herbarum II
* &quot;Datura&quot; spp. at Erowid
* &quot;Datura stramonium&quot; Pictures and information</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q30959" start="45" end="55" title="Datura stramonium" label="thornapple"/>
<link wikidata="Q30959" start="57" end="67" title="Datura stramonium" label="jimsonweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q30959" start="69" end="80" title="Datura stramonium" label="jimson weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q30959" start="86" end="106" title="Datura stramonium" label="devil&amp;#x27;s trumpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="123" end="138" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013609" start="152" end="159" title="Datureae" label="Daturae"/>
<link wikidata="Q227936" start="166" end="171" title="Tribe (botany)" label="tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q134172" start="197" end="207" title="Solanaceae" label="Solanaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="234" end="249" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="372" end="385" title="invasive species" label="invasive weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="389" end="406" title="temperate climate" label="temperate climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q135712" start="412" end="428" title="tropical climate" label="tropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q113259" start="607" end="622" title="anticholinergic" label="anticholinergic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001265" start="623" end="637" title="antimuscarinic" label="antimuscarinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q901434" start="639" end="648" title="deliriant" label="deliriant"/>
<link wikidata="Q310491" start="662" end="671" title="entheogen" label="entheogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q290620" start="852" end="862" title="Dysphoria" label="unpleasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q160796" start="934" end="942" title="delirium" label="delirium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="944" end="968" title="Toxidrome#Anticholinergic" label="anticholinergic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832080" start="1016" end="1032" title="tropane alkaloid" label="tropane alkaloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q192691" start="1173" end="1179" title="Annual plant" label="annual"/>
<link wikidata="Q41500" start="1232" end="1236" title="root" label="root"/>
<link wikidata="Q134267" start="1277" end="1281" title="Plant stem" label="stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="1979" end="1984" title="axils" label="axils"/>
<link wikidata="Q107216" start="2042" end="2047" title="calyx (botany)" label="calyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q107412" start="2148" end="2155" title="corolla (flower)" label="corolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q147768" start="2363" end="2370" title="Capsule (botany)" label="capsule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="2590" end="2595" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="2620" end="2628" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q8097" start="2976" end="2982" title="Telugu language" label="Telugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="2994" end="2999" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q323813" start="3263" end="3282" title="Jamestown, Virginia" label="Jamestown, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q798594" start="3316" end="3338" title="Bacon&amp;#x27;s Rebellion" label="Bacon&amp;#x27;s Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="3354" end="3372" title="colony of Virginia" label="colony of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878495" start="3888" end="3899" title="Naturalisation (biology)" label="naturalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="3963" end="3976" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="4038" end="4047" title="botany" label="botanists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334667" start="4056" end="4073" title="Nicholas Culpeper" label="Nicholas Culpeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="4374" end="4383" title="Afrikaans" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032739" start="4604" end="4631" title="Royal Horticultural Society" label="Royal Horticultural Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q26272" start="4843" end="4851" title="atropine" label="atropine"/>
<link wikidata="Q413762" start="4853" end="4864" title="hyoscyamine" label="hyoscyamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q337188" start="4870" end="4881" title="scopolamine" label="scopolamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q901434" start="4914" end="4924" title="deliriants" label="deliriants"/>
<link wikidata="Q113259" start="4929" end="4944" title="anticholinergic" label="anticholinergic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505252" start="4965" end="4973" title="overdose" label="overdose"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706669" start="5092" end="5104" title="psychoactive" label="psychoactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q27095434" start="5312" end="5326" title="methylecgonine" label="methylecgonine"/>
<link wikidata="Q25099870" start="5341" end="5352" title="apoatropine" label="apoatropine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467410" start="5396" end="5403" title="tropine" label="tropine"/>
<link wikidata="Q865968" start="6611" end="6623" title="Substance intoxication" label="intoxication"/>
<link wikidata="Q242165" start="6668" end="6680" title="hyperthermia" label="hyperthermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q209583" start="6682" end="6693" title="tachycardia" label="tachycardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366695" start="6713" end="6730" title="urinary retention" label="urinary retention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128283" start="6743" end="6752" title="mydriasis" label="mydriasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q281289" start="6777" end="6788" title="photophobia" label="photophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11072" start="6828" end="6835" title="amnesia" label="amnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q410595" start="7143" end="7156" title="physostigmine" label="physostigmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q59099" start="7424" end="7433" title="herbivore" label="herbivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="7436" end="7444" title="pathogen" label="pathogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="7447" end="7452" title="virus" label="virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="7456" end="7461" title="Fungus" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q223597" start="7466" end="7474" title="oomycete" label="oomycete"/>
<link wikidata="Q426694" start="7714" end="7723" title="terpenoid" label="terpenoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q421851" start="7866" end="7872" title="kinase" label="kinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q11372" start="7988" end="8003" title="physicochemical" label="physicochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q407595" start="8187" end="8197" title="metabolite" label="metabolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612119" start="8547" end="8562" title="immune response" label="immune response"/>
<link wikidata="Q207604" start="9210" end="9218" title="meristem" label="meristem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="9434" end="9444" title="Metabolism" label="metabolize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052390" start="11415" end="11442" title="most recent common ancestor" label="most recent common ancestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="11477" end="11482" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650834" start="11723" end="11737" title="Insertion (genetics)" label="gene expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11372" start="11773" end="11788" title="physicochemical" label="physicochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q413988" start="11994" end="12009" title="retrotransposon" label="retrotransposon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832080" start="12199" end="12215" title="tropane alkaloid" label="tropane alkaloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q851162" start="12463" end="12475" title="biosynthesis" label="biosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="12510" end="12516" title="codons" label="codons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6653346" start="12620" end="12629" title="Littorine" label="Littorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q337188" start="12671" end="12682" title="scopolamine" label="scopolamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q26272" start="12687" end="12695" title="atropine" label="atropine"/>
<link wikidata="Q413762" start="12696" end="12707" title="hyoscyamine" label="hyoscyamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4765340" start="12948" end="12959" title="anisodamine" label="anisodamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q162657" start="13028" end="13044" title="neurotransmitter" label="neurotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13057" end="13060" title="PMT (gene)" label="pmt"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="13497" end="13507" title="angiosperm" label="angiosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="13894" end="13900" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251477" start="14048" end="14061" title="protein folds" label="protein folds"/>
<link wikidata="Q715583" start="14307" end="14313" title="Costco" label="Costco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526531" start="14531" end="14540" title="Gippsland" label="Gippsland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="14551" end="14559" title="Victoria (state)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q26272" start="14698" end="14706" title="atropine" label="atropine"/>
<link wikidata="Q771035" start="14731" end="14751" title="traditional medicine" label="traditional medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="14937" end="14955" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q131130" start="15049" end="15059" title="anesthesia" label="anesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333338" start="15103" end="15114" title="John Gerard" label="John Gerard"/>
<link wikidata="Q903246" start="15158" end="15171" title="William Lewis (scientist)" label="William Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41478" start="15412" end="15424" title="haemorrhoids" label="haemorrhoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="15506" end="15512" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="15679" end="15685" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q41493" start="15696" end="15705" title="Ancient History" label="antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="15849" end="15855" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621197" start="16056" end="16066" title="Algonquian peoples" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="16068" end="16074" title="Aztecs" label="Aztecs"/>
<link wikidata="Q108266" start="16076" end="16082" title="Navajo" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="16084" end="16092" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090691" start="16094" end="16101" title="Luiseño" label="Luiseño"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334492" start="16132" end="16145" title="Marie-Galante" label="Marie-Galante"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="16257" end="16265" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q796790" start="16285" end="16307" title="debtera" label="&amp;quot;debtrawoch&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="16510" end="16515" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q715019" start="16548" end="16560" title="Datura metel" label="Datura metel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11378" start="16632" end="16637" title="Shiva" label="Shiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q234953" start="16641" end="16649" title="Shaivism" label="Shaivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q654776" start="16745" end="16751" title="sadhus" label="sadhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251370" start="16756" end="16770" title="charnel ground" label="charnel ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q393529" start="16793" end="16799" title="Aghori" label="Aghori"/>
<link wikidata="Q310491" start="16812" end="16821" title="entheogen" label="entheogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="16869" end="16877" title="Cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647500" start="16925" end="16939" title="Aconitum ferox" label="Aconitum ferox"/>
<link wikidata="Q183379" start="17106" end="17112" title="moksha" label="moksha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763376" start="17315" end="17354" title="The Serpent and the Rainbow (book)" label="&amp;quot;The Serpent and the Rainbow&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959036" start="17356" end="17366" title="Wade Davis (anthropologist)" label="Wade Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="17442" end="17447" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q302729" start="17491" end="17496" title="Haitian Vodou" label="vodou"/>
<link wikidata="Q9406" start="17519" end="17525" title="zombie" label="zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q752920" start="17651" end="17654" title="loa" label="loa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713215" start="17675" end="17680" title="bokor" label="bokor"/>
<link wikidata="Q356966" start="17795" end="17824" title="Flying ointment" label="witches&amp;#x27; flying ointment"/>
<link wikidata="Q134172" start="17866" end="17883" title="nightshade family" label="nightshade family"/>
<link wikidata="Q9410" start="17955" end="17967" title="lycanthropic" label="lycanthropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="17999" end="18004" title="witch" label="witch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="18021" end="18033" title="Early Modern" label="Early Modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="18077" end="18103" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeastern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999796" start="18231" end="18243" title="incantations" label="incantations"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005941" start="18306" end="18316" title="calcareous" label="calcareous"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="18330" end="18349" title="nitrogen fertilizer" label="nitrogen fertilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q70702" start="18393" end="18401" title="alkaloid" label="alkaloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430691" start="19126" end="19132" title="Erowid" label="Erowid"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="57985" wikidata="Q82104" url="?curid=57985" title="Ian Fleming">
<text>Ian Lancaster Fleming (28 May 1908 – 12 August 1964) was an English writer, best known for his postwar &quot;James Bond&quot; series of spy novels. Fleming came from a wealthy family connected to the merchant bank Robert Fleming &amp; Co., and his father was the Member of Parliament (MP) for Henley from 1910 until his death on the Western Front in 1917. Educated at Eton, Sandhurst, and, briefly, the universities of Munich and Geneva, Fleming moved through several jobs before he started writing.

While working for Britain&#x27;s Naval Intelligence Division during the Second World War, Fleming was involved in planning Operation Goldeneye and in the planning and oversight of two intelligence units: 30 Assault Unit and T-Force. He drew from his wartime service and his career as a journalist for much of the background, detail, and depth of his &quot;James Bond&quot; novels.

Fleming wrote his first Bond novel, &quot;Casino Royale&quot;, in 1952, at age 44. It was a success, and three print runs were commissioned to meet the demand. Eleven Bond novels and two collections of short stories followed between 1953 and 1966. The novels centre around James Bond, an officer in the Secret Intelligence Service, commonly known as MI6. Bond is also known by his code number, 007, and was a commander in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve. The Bond stories rank among the best-selling series of fictional books of all time, having sold over 100 million copies worldwide. Fleming also wrote the children&#x27;s story &quot;Chitty-Chitty-Bang-Bang&quot; (1964) and two works of non-fiction. In 2008, &quot;The Times&quot; ranked Fleming 14th on its list of &quot;The 50 greatest British writers since 1945&quot;.

Fleming was married to Anne Charteris. She had divorced her husband, the 2nd Viscount Rothermere, because of her affair with the author. Fleming and Charteris had a son, Caspar. Fleming was a heavy smoker and drinker for most of his life and succumbed to heart disease in 1964 at the age of 56. Two of his James Bond books were published posthumously; other writers have since produced Bond novels. Fleming&#x27;s creation has appeared in film twenty-seven times, portrayed by six actors in the official film series.
== Biography ==

=== Birth and family ===

Ian Lancaster Fleming was born on 28 May 1908, at 27 Green Street in the wealthy London district of Mayfair. His mother was Evelyn &quot;Eve&quot; Fleming, &quot;&quot; Rose, and his father was Valentine Fleming, the Member of Parliament for Henley from 1910 to 1917. As an infant he briefly lived with his family at Braziers Park in Oxfordshire. Fleming was a grandson of the Scottish financier Robert Fleming, who co-founded the Scottish American Investment Company and the merchant bank Robert Fleming &amp; Co.

In 1914, with the start of the First World War, Valentine Fleming joined &quot;C&quot; Squadron of Queen&#x27;s Own Oxfordshire Hussars, and rose to the rank of major. He was killed by German shelling on the Western Front on 20 May 1917. Winston Churchill wrote an obituary for him that appeared in &quot;The Times&quot;. Because Valentine had owned an estate at Arnisdale, his death was commemorated on the Glenelg War Memorial.

Fleming&#x27;s elder brother Peter became a travel writer and married actress Celia Johnson. Peter served with the Grenadier Guards during the Second World War, was later commissioned under Colin Gubbins to help establish the Auxiliary Units, and became involved in behind-the-lines operations in Norway and Greece during the war.

Fleming had two younger brothers, Richard and Michael, who also served in the Second World War. Richard served with Scottish regiments (Lovat Scouts and Seaforth Highlanders) and was the father of author, James Fleming. Michael died of wounds in October 1940 after being captured at Normandy while serving with the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry. Fleming also had a younger maternal half-sister born out of wedlock, the cellist Amaryllis Fleming (1925–1999), whose father was the artist Augustus John. Amaryllis was conceived during a long-term affair between John and Evelyn which had started in 1923, six years after the death of Valentine.

=== Education and early life ===
In 1914 Fleming attended Durnford School, a preparatory school on the Isle of Purbeck in Dorset. He did not enjoy his time at Durnford; he suffered unpalatable food, physical hardship and bullying.

In 1921 Fleming enrolled at Eton College. Not a high achiever academically, he excelled at athletics and held the title of &quot;Victor Ludorum&quot; (&quot;Winner of the Games&quot;) for two years between 1925 and 1927. He also edited a school magazine, &quot;The Wyvern&quot;. His lifestyle at Eton brought him into conflict with his housemaster, E. V. Slater, who disapproved of Fleming&#x27;s attitude, his hair oil, his ownership of a car and his relations with women. Slater persuaded Fleming&#x27;s mother to remove him from Eton a term early for a crammer course to gain entry to the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. He spent less than a year there, leaving in 1927 without gaining a commission, after contracting gonorrhea.

In 1927, to prepare Fleming for possible entry into the Foreign Office, his mother sent him to the Tennerhof in Kitzbühel, Austria, a small private school run by the Adlerian disciple and former British spy Ernan Forbes Dennis and his novelist wife, Phyllis Bottome. After improving his language skills there, he studied briefly at Munich University and the University of Geneva. While in Geneva, Fleming began a romance with Monique Panchaud de Bottens and the couple became engaged just before he returned to London in September 1931 to take the Foreign Office exam. He scored an adequate pass standard, but failed to get a job offer. His mother intervened in his affairs, lobbying Sir Roderick Jones, head of Reuters News Agency, and in October 1931 he was given a position as a sub-editor and journalist for the company. In April 1933 Fleming spent time in Moscow, where he covered the Stalinist show trial of six engineers from the British company Metropolitan-Vickers. While there he applied for an interview with Soviet premier Joseph Stalin, and was amazed to receive a personally signed note apologising for not being able to attend. Upon returning from Moscow he ended the engagement to Monique after his mother threatened to cut off his trust fund allowance.

Fleming bowed to family pressure again in October 1933, and went into banking with a position at the financiers Cull &amp; Co. In 1935 he moved to Rowe and Pitman on Bishopsgate as a stockbroker. Fleming was unsuccessful in both roles. The same year, Fleming met Muriel Wright whilst skiing in Kitzbühel, and began a long-term relationship with her. After her death during a World War II bombing raid in 1944, Fleming was overcome with guilt and remorse, and it is generally thought that she provided the inspiration for the women he was to create for his future novels. Early in 1939 Fleming began an affair with Ann O&#x27;Neill, &quot;&quot; Charteris, who was married to the 3rd Baron O&#x27;Neill; she was also having an affair with Esmond Harmsworth, the heir to Lord Rothermere, owner of the &quot;Daily Mail&quot;.

=== Second World War ===

In May 1939 Fleming was recruited by Rear Admiral John Godfrey, Director of Naval Intelligence of the Royal Navy, to become his personal assistant. He joined the organisation full-time in August 1939, with the codename &quot;17F&quot;, and worked out of a Room 39 at the Admiralty. Fleming&#x27;s biographer, Andrew Lycett, notes that Fleming had &quot;no obvious qualifications&quot; for the role. As part of his appointment, Fleming was commissioned into the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve in July 1939, initially as lieutenant, but was promoted to lieutenant commander a few months later.

Fleming proved invaluable as Godfrey&#x27;s personal assistant and excelled in administration. Godfrey was known as an abrasive character who made enemies within government circles. He frequently used Fleming as a liaison with other sections of the government&#x27;s wartime administration, such as the Secret Intelligence Service, the Political Warfare Executive, the Special Operations Executive (SOE), the Joint Intelligence Committee and the Prime Minister&#x27;s staff.

On 29 September 1939, soon after the start of the war, Godfrey circulated a memorandum that, &quot;bore all the hallmarks of ... Lieutenant Commander Ian Fleming&quot;, according to historian Ben Macintyre. It was called the Trout Memo and compared the deception of an enemy in wartime to fly fishing. The memo contained several schemes to be considered for use against the Axis powers to lure U-boats and German surface ships towards minefields. Number 28 on the list was an idea to plant misleading papers on a corpse that would be found by the enemy; the suggestion is similar to Operation Mincemeat, the 1943 plan to conceal the intended invasion of Italy from North Africa, which was developed by Charles Cholmondoley in October 1942. The recommendation in the Trout Memo was titled: &quot;A Suggestion (not a very nice one)&quot;, and continued: &quot;The following suggestion is used in a book by Basil Thomson: a corpse dressed as an airman, with despatches in his pockets, could be dropped on the coast, supposedly from a parachute that has failed. I understand there is no difficulty in obtaining corpses at the Naval Hospital, but, of course, it would have to be a fresh one.&quot;

In 1940 Fleming and Godfrey contacted Kenneth Mason, Professor of Geography at Oxford University, about the preparation of reports on the geography of countries involved in military operations. These reports were the precursors of the &quot;Naval Intelligence Division Geographical Handbook Series&quot; produced between 1941 and 1946.

Operation Ruthless, a plan aimed at obtaining details of the Enigma codes used by the German Navy, was instigated by a memo written by Fleming to Godfrey on 12 September 1940. The idea was to &quot;obtain&quot; a Nazi bomber, man it with a German-speaking crew dressed in Luftwaffe uniforms, and crash it into the English Channel. The crew would then attack their German rescuers and bring their boat and Enigma machine back to England. Much to the annoyance of Alan Turing and Peter Twinn at Bletchley Park, the mission was never carried out. According to Fleming&#x27;s niece, Lucy, an official of the Royal Air Force pointed out that if they were to drop a downed Heinkel bomber in the English Channel, it would probably sink rather quickly.

Fleming also worked with Colonel &quot;Wild Bill&quot; Donovan, President Franklin D. Roosevelt&#x27;s special representative on intelligence co-operation between London and Washington. In May 1941 Fleming accompanied Godfrey to the United States, where he assisted in writing a blueprint for the Office of the Coordinator of Information, the department that turned into the Office of Strategic Services and eventually became the CIA.

Admiral Godfrey put Fleming in charge of Operation Goldeneye between 1941 and 1942; Goldeneye was a plan to maintain an intelligence framework in Spain in the event of a German takeover of the territory. Fleming&#x27;s plan involved maintaining communication with Gibraltar and launching sabotage operations against the Nazis. In 1941 he liaised with Donovan over American involvement in a measure intended to ensure the Germans did not dominate the seaways.

==== 30 Assault Unit ====
In 1942 Fleming formed a unit of commandos, known as No. 30 Commando or 30 Assault Unit (30AU), composed of specialist intelligence troops. 30AU&#x27;s job was to be near the front line of an advance—sometimes in front of it—to seize enemy documents from previously targeted headquarters. The unit was based on a German group headed by Otto Skorzeny, who had undertaken similar activities in the Battle of Crete in May 1941. The German unit was thought by Fleming to be &quot;one of the most outstanding innovations in German intelligence&quot;.

Fleming did not fight in the field with the unit, but selected targets and directed operations from the rear. On its formation the unit was 30 strong, but it grew to five times that size. The unit was filled with men from other commando units, and trained in unarmed combat, safe-cracking and lock-picking at the SOE facilities. In late 1942 Captain (later Rear-Admiral) Edmund Rushbrooke replaced Godfrey as head of the Naval Intelligence Division, and Fleming&#x27;s influence in the organisation declined, although he retained control over 30AU. Fleming was unpopular with the unit&#x27;s members, who disliked his referring to them as &quot;his&quot; &quot;Red Indians&quot;.

Before the 1944 Normandy landings, most of 30AU&#x27;s operations were in the Mediterranean, although it is possible that it secretly participated in the Dieppe Raid in a failed pinch raid for an Enigma machine and related materials. Fleming observed the raid from HMS &quot;Fernie&quot;, 700 yards offshore. Because of its successes in Sicily and Italy, 30AU became greatly trusted by naval intelligence.

In March 1944 Fleming oversaw the distribution of intelligence to Royal Navy units in preparation for Operation Overlord. He was replaced as head of 30AU on 6 June 1944, but maintained some involvement. He visited 30AU in the field during and after Overlord, especially following an attack on Cherbourg for which he was concerned that the unit had been incorrectly used as a regular commando force rather than an intelligence-gathering unit. This wasted the men&#x27;s specialist skills, risked their safety on operations that did not justify the use of such skilled operatives, and threatened the vital gathering of intelligence. Afterwards, the management of these units was revised. He also followed the unit into Germany after it located, in Tambach Castle, the German naval archives from 1870.

In December 1944 Fleming was posted on an intelligence fact-finding trip to the Far East on behalf of the Director of Naval Intelligence. Much of the trip was spent identifying opportunities for 30AU in the Pacific; the unit saw little action because of the Japanese surrender.

==== T-Force ====
The success of 30AU led to the August 1944 decision to establish a &quot;Target Force&quot;, which became known as T-Force. The official memorandum, held at The National Archives in London, describes the unit&#x27;s primary role: &quot;T-Force = Target Force, to guard and secure documents, persons, equipment, with combat and Intelligence personnel, after capture of large towns, ports etc. in liberated and enemy territory.&quot;

Fleming sat on the committee that selected the targets for the T-Force unit, and listed them in the &quot;Black Books&quot; that were issued to the unit&#x27;s officers. The infantry component of T-Force was in part made up of the 5th Battalion, King&#x27;s Regiment, which supported the Second Army. It was responsible for securing targets of interest for the British military, including nuclear laboratories, gas research centres and individual rocket scientists. The unit&#x27;s most notable discoveries came during the advance on the German port of Kiel, in the research centre for German engines used in the V-2 rocket, Messerschmitt Me 163 fighters and high-speed U-boats. Fleming later used elements of the activities of T-Force in his writing, particularly in his 1955 Bond novel &quot;Moonraker&quot;.

In 1942 Fleming attended an Anglo-American intelligence summit in Jamaica and, despite the constant heavy rain during his visit, he decided to live on the island once the war was over. His friend Ivar Bryce helped find a plot of land in Saint Mary Parish where, in 1945, Fleming had a house built, which he named Goldeneye. (His main residence remained in London, in Victoria). The name of the house and estate where he wrote his novels has many possible sources. Fleming himself mentioned both his wartime Operation Goldeneye and Carson McCullers&#x27; 1941 novel &quot;Reflections in a Golden Eye&quot;, which described the use of British naval bases in the Caribbean by the American navy.

Fleming was demobilised in May 1945, but remained in the RNVR for several years, receiving a promotion to substantive lieutenant-commander (Special Branch) on 26 July 1947. In October 1947, he was awarded the King Christian X&#x27;s Liberty Medal for his contribution in assisting Danish officers escaping from Denmark to Britain during the occupation of Denmark. He ended his service on 16 August 1952, when he was removed from the active list of the RNVR with the rank of lieutenant-commander.

=== Post-war ===
Upon Fleming&#x27;s demobilisation in May 1945, he became the foreign manager in the Kemsley newspaper group, which at the time owned &quot;The Sunday Times&quot;. In this role he oversaw the paper&#x27;s worldwide network of correspondents. His contract allowed him to take three months&#x27; holiday every winter, which he took in Jamaica. Fleming worked full-time for the paper until December 1959, but continued to write articles and attend the Tuesday weekly meetings until at least 1961.

After Anne Charteris&#x27;s first husband died in the war, she expected to marry Fleming, but he decided to remain a bachelor. On 28 June 1945, she married the second Viscount Rothermere. Nevertheless, Charteris continued her affair with Fleming, travelling to Jamaica to see him under the pretext of visiting his friend and neighbour Noël Coward. In 1948 she gave birth to Fleming&#x27;s daughter, Mary, who was stillborn. Rothermere divorced Charteris in 1951 because of her relationship with Fleming, and the couple married on 24 March 1952 in Jamaica, a few months before their son Caspar was born in August. Both Fleming and Ann had affairs during their marriage, she with Hugh Gaitskell, the Leader of the Labour Party and Leader of the Opposition. Fleming had a long-term affair in Jamaica with one of his neighbours, Blanche Blackwell, the mother of Chris Blackwell of Island Records.

Fleming was also friends with British Prime Minister Anthony Eden whom he allowed to stay at Goldeneye in late November 1953 due to Eden&#x27;s deteriorating health.

=== 1950s ===
Fleming had first mentioned to friends during the war that he wanted to write a spy novel, an ambition he achieved within two months with &quot;Casino Royale&quot;. He started writing the book at Goldeneye on 15 January 1952, and was finished writing no later than 16 February 1952, averaging more than 2,000 words per day. He claimed afterwards that he wrote the novel to distract himself from his forthcoming wedding to the pregnant Charteris, and called the work his &quot;dreadful oafish opus&quot;. His manuscript was typed in London by Joan Howe (mother of travel writer Rory MacLean), Fleming&#x27;s red-haired secretary at &quot;The Times&quot; on whom the character Miss Moneypenny was partially based. Clare Blanchard, a former girlfriend, advised him not to publish the book, or at least to do so under a pseudonym.

During &quot;Casino Royale&#x27;s&quot; final draft stages, Fleming allowed his friend William Plomer to see a copy, and remarked &quot;so far as I can see the element of suspense is completely absent&quot;. Despite this, Plomer thought the book had sufficient promise and sent a copy to the publishing house Jonathan Cape. At first, they were unenthusiastic about the novel, but Fleming&#x27;s brother Peter, whose books they managed, persuaded the company to publish it. On 13 April 1953 &quot;Casino Royale&quot; was released in the UK in hardcover, priced at 10s 6d, with a cover designed by Fleming. It was a success and three print runs were needed to cope with the demand.

The novel centres on the exploits of James Bond, an officer in the Secret Intelligence Service, commonly known as MI6. Bond is also known by his code number, 007, and was a commander in the Royal Naval Reserve. Fleming took the name for his character from that of the American ornithologist James Bond, an expert on Caribbean birds and author of the definitive field guide &quot;Birds of the West Indies&quot;. Fleming, himself a keen birdwatcher, had a copy of Bond&#x27;s guide, and later told the ornithologist&#x27;s wife, &quot;that this brief, unromantic, Anglo-Saxon and yet very masculine name was just what I needed, and so a second James Bond was born&quot;. In a 1962 interview in &quot;The New Yorker&quot;, he further explained: &quot;When I wrote the first one in 1953, I wanted Bond to be an extremely dull, uninteresting man to whom things happened; I wanted him to be a blunt instrument ... when I was casting around for a name for my protagonist I thought by God, [James Bond] is the dullest name I ever heard.&quot;
Fleming based his creation on individuals he met during his time in the Naval Intelligence Division, and admitted that Bond &quot;was a compound of all the secret agents and commando types I met during the war&quot;. Among those types were his brother Peter, whom he worshipped, and who had been involved in behind-the-lines operations in Norway and Greece during the war. Fleming envisaged that Bond would resemble the composer, singer and actor Hoagy Carmichael; others, such as author and historian Ben Macintyre, identify aspects of Fleming&#x27;s own looks in his description of Bond. General references in the novels describe Bond as having &quot;dark, rather cruel good looks&quot;.

Fleming also modelled aspects of Bond on Conrad O&#x27;Brien-ffrench, a spy whom Fleming had met while skiing in Kitzbühel in the 1930s, Patrick Dalzel-Job, who served with distinction in 30AU during the war, and Bill &quot;Biffy&quot; Dunderdale, station head of MI6 in Paris, who wore cufflinks and handmade suits and was chauffeured around Paris in a Rolls-Royce. Sir Fitzroy Maclean was another possible model for Bond, based on his wartime work behind enemy lines in the Balkans, as was the MI6 double agent Duško Popov. Fleming also endowed Bond with many of his own traits, including the same golf handicap, his taste for scrambled eggs, his love of gambling, and use of the same brand of toiletries.

After the publication of &quot;Casino Royale&quot;, Fleming used his annual holiday at his house in Jamaica to write another Bond story. Twelve Bond novels and two short-story collections were published between 1953 and 1966, the last two (&quot;The Man with the Golden Gun&quot; and &quot;Octopussy and The Living Daylights&quot;) posthumously. Much of the background to the stories came from Fleming&#x27;s previous work in the Naval Intelligence Division or from events he knew of from the Cold War. The plot of &quot;From Russia, with Love&quot; uses a fictional Soviet Spektor decoding machine as a lure to trap Bond; the Spektor had its roots in the wartime German Enigma machine. The novel&#x27;s plot device of spies on the Orient Express was based on the story of Eugene Karp, a US naval attaché and intelligence agent based in Budapest who took the Orient Express from Budapest to Paris in February 1950, carrying papers about blown US spy networks in the Eastern Bloc. Soviet assassins already on the train drugged the conductor, and Karp&#x27;s body was found shortly afterwards in a railway tunnel south of Salzburg.
Many of the names used in the Bond works came from people Fleming knew: Scaramanga, the principal villain in &quot;The Man with the Golden Gun&quot;, was named after a fellow Eton schoolboy with whom Fleming fought; Goldfinger, from the eponymous novel, was named after British architect Ernő Goldfinger, whose work Fleming abhorred; Sir Hugo Drax, the antagonist of &quot;Moonraker&quot;, was named after Fleming&#x27;s acquaintance Admiral Sir Reginald Aylmer Ranfurly Plunkett-Ernle-Erle-Drax; Drax&#x27;s assistant, Krebs, bears the same name as Hitler&#x27;s last Chief of Staff; and one of the homosexual villains from &quot;Diamonds Are Forever&quot;, &quot;Boofy&quot; Kidd, was named after one of Fleming&#x27;s close friends—and a relative of his wife—Arthur Gore, 8th Earl of Arran, known as Boofy to his friends.

Fleming&#x27;s first work of non-fiction, &quot;The Diamond Smugglers&quot;, was published in 1957 and was partly based on background research for his fourth Bond novel, &quot;Diamonds Are Forever&quot;. Much of the material had appeared in &quot;The Sunday Times&quot; and was based on Fleming&#x27;s interviews with John Collard, a member of the International Diamond Security Organisation who had previously worked in MI5. The book received mixed reviews in the UK and US.

For the first five books (&quot;Casino Royale&quot;, &quot;Live and Let Die&quot;, &quot;Moonraker&quot;, &quot;Diamonds Are Forever&quot; and &quot;From Russia, with Love&quot;) Fleming received broadly positive reviews. That began to change in March 1958 when Bernard Bergonzi, in the journal &quot;Twentieth Century&quot;, attacked Fleming&#x27;s work as containing &quot;a strongly marked streak of voyeurism and sado-masochism&quot; and wrote that the books showed &quot;the total lack of any ethical frame of reference&quot;. The article compared Fleming unfavourably with John Buchan and Raymond Chandler on both moral and literary criteria. A month later, &quot;Dr. No&quot; was published, and Fleming received harsh criticism from reviewers who, in the words of Ben Macintyre, &quot;rounded on Fleming, almost as a pack&quot;. The most strongly worded of the critiques came from Paul Johnson of the &quot;New Statesman&quot;, who, in his review &quot;Sex, Snobbery and Sadism&quot;, called the novel &quot;without doubt, the nastiest book I have ever read&quot;. Johnson went on to say that &quot;by the time I was a third of the way through, I had to suppress a strong impulse to throw the thing away&quot;. Johnson recognised that in Bond there &quot;was a social phenomenon of some importance&quot;, but this was seen as a negative element, as the phenomenon concerned &quot;three basic ingredients in &quot;Dr No&quot;, all unhealthy, all thoroughly English: the sadism of a schoolboy bully, the mechanical, two-dimensional sex-longings of a frustrated adolescent, and the crude, snob-cravings of a suburban adult.&quot; Johnson saw no positives in &quot;Dr. No&quot;, and said, &quot;Mr Fleming has no literary skill, the construction of the book is chaotic, and entire incidents and situations are inserted, and then forgotten, in a haphazard manner.&quot;

Lycett notes that Fleming &quot;went into a personal and creative decline&quot; after marital problems and the attacks on his work. &quot;Goldfinger&quot; had been written before the publication of &quot;Dr. No&quot;; the next book Fleming produced after the criticism was &quot;For Your Eyes Only&quot;, a collection of short stories derived from outlines written for a television series that did not come to fruition. Lycett noted that, as Fleming was writing the television scripts and the short stories, &quot;Ian&#x27;s mood of weariness and self-doubt was beginning to affect his writing&quot;, which can be seen in Bond&#x27;s thoughts.

=== 1960s ===
In 1960 Fleming was commissioned by the Kuwait Oil Company to write a book on the country and its oil industry. The Kuwaiti government disapproved of the typescript, &quot;State of Excitement: Impressions of Kuwait&quot;, and it was never published. According to Fleming: &quot;The Oil Company expressed approval of the book but felt it their duty to submit the typescript to members of the Kuwait Government for their approval. The Sheikhs concerned found unpalatable certain mild comments and criticisms and particularly the passages referring to the adventurous past of the country which now wishes to be &#x27;civilised&#x27; in every respect and forget its romantic origins.&quot;

Fleming followed the disappointment of &quot;For Your Eyes Only&quot; with &quot;Thunderball&quot;, the novelisation of a film script on which he had worked with others. The work had started in 1958 when Fleming&#x27;s friend Ivar Bryce introduced him to a young Irish writer and director, Kevin McClory, and the three, together with Fleming and Bryce&#x27;s friend Ernest Cuneo, worked on a script. In October McClory introduced experienced screenwriter Jack Whittingham to the newly formed team, and by December 1959 McClory and Whittingham sent Fleming a script. Fleming had been having second thoughts on McClory&#x27;s involvement and, in January 1960, explained his intention of delivering the screenplay to MCA, with a recommendation from him and Bryce that McClory act as producer. He additionally told McClory that if MCA rejected the film because of McClory&#x27;s involvement, then McClory should either sell himself to MCA, back out of the deal, or file a suit in court.

Working at Goldeneye between January and March 1960, Fleming wrote the novel &quot;Thunderball&quot;, based on the screenplay written by himself, Whittingham and McClory. In March 1961 McClory read an advance copy, and he and Whittingham immediately petitioned the High Court in London for an injunction to stop publication. After two court actions, the second in November 1961, Fleming offered McClory a deal, settling out of court. McClory gained the literary and film rights for the screenplay, while Fleming was given the rights to the novel, provided it was acknowledged as &quot;based on a screen treatment by Kevin McClory, Jack Whittingham and the Author&quot;.

Fleming&#x27;s books had always sold well, but in 1961 sales increased dramatically. On 17 March 1961, four years after its publication and three years after the heavy criticism of &quot;Dr. No&quot;, an article in &quot;Life&quot; listed &quot;From Russia, with Love&quot; as one of US President John F. Kennedy&#x27;s 10 favourite books. Kennedy and Fleming had previously met in Washington. This accolade and the associated publicity led to a surge in sales that made Fleming the biggest-selling crime writer in the US. Fleming considered &quot;From Russia, with Love&quot; to be his best novel; he said &quot;the great thing is that each one of the books seems to have been a favourite with one or other section of the public and none has yet been completely damned.&quot;

In April 1961, shortly before the second court case on &quot;Thunderball&quot;, Fleming had a heart attack during a regular weekly meeting at &quot;The Sunday Times&quot;. While he was convalescing, one of his friends, Duff Dunbar, gave him a copy of Beatrix Potter&#x27;s &quot;The Tale of Squirrel Nutkin&quot; and suggested that he take the time to write up the bedtime story that Fleming used to tell to his son Caspar each evening. Fleming attacked the project with gusto and wrote to his publisher, Michael Howard of Jonathan Cape, joking that &quot;There is not a moment, even on the edge of the tomb, when I am not slaving for you&quot;; the result was Fleming&#x27;s only children&#x27;s novel, &quot;Chitty-Chitty-Bang-Bang&quot;, which was published in October 1964, two months after his death.

In June 1961 Fleming sold a six-month option on the film rights to his published and future James Bond novels and short stories to Harry Saltzman. Saltzman formed the production vehicle Eon Productions along with Albert R. &quot;Cubby&quot; Broccoli, and after an extensive search, they hired Sean Connery on a six-film deal, later reduced to five beginning with &quot;Dr. No&quot; (1962). Connery&#x27;s depiction of Bond affected the literary character; in &quot;You Only Live Twice&quot;, the first book written after &quot;Dr. No&quot; was released, Fleming gave Bond a sense of humour that was not present in the previous stories.

Fleming&#x27;s second non-fiction book was published in November 1963: &quot;Thrilling Cities&quot;, a reprint of a series of &quot;Sunday Times&quot; articles based on Fleming&#x27;s impressions of world cities in trips taken during 1959 and 1960. Approached in 1964 by producer Norman Felton to write a spy series for television, Fleming provided several ideas, including the names of characters Napoleon Solo and April Dancer, for the series &quot;The Man from U.N.C.L.E.&quot; However, Fleming withdrew from the project following a request from Eon Productions, who were keen to avoid any legal problems that might occur if the project overlapped with the Bond films.

In January 1964 Fleming went to Goldeneye for what proved to be his last holiday and wrote the first draft of &quot;The Man with the Golden Gun&quot;. He was dissatisfied with it and wrote to William Plomer, the copy editor of his novels, asking for it to be rewritten. Fleming became increasingly unhappy with the book and considered rewriting it, but was dissuaded by Plomer, who considered it viable for publication.

=== Death ===

Fleming was a heavy smoker and drinker throughout his adult life, and suffered from heart disease. In 1961, aged 53, he suffered a heart attack and struggled to recuperate. On 11 August 1964, while staying at a hotel in Canterbury, Fleming went to the Royal St George&#x27;s Golf Club for lunch and later dined at his hotel with friends. The day had been tiring for him, and he collapsed with another heart attack shortly after the meal. Fleming died at age 56 at Kent and Canterbury Hospital in the early morning of 12 August 1964—his son Caspar&#x27;s 12th birthday. His last recorded words were an apology to the ambulance drivers for having inconvenienced them, saying &quot;I am sorry to trouble you chaps. I don&#x27;t know how you get along so fast with the traffic on the roads these days.&quot; Fleming was buried in the churchyard of Sevenhampton, near Swindon. His will was proved on 4 November, with his estate valued at £302,147 (equivalent to £ in ).

Fleming&#x27;s last two books, &quot;The Man with the Golden Gun&quot; and &quot;Octopussy and The Living Daylights&quot;, were published posthumously. &quot;The Man with the Golden Gun&quot; was published eight months after Fleming&#x27;s death and had not been through the full editing process by Fleming. As a result, the novel was thought by publishing company Jonathan Cape to be thin and &quot;feeble&quot;. The publishers had passed the manuscript to Kingsley Amis to read on holiday, but did not use his suggestions. Fleming&#x27;s biographer Henry Chandler observes that the novel &quot;received polite and rather sad reviews, recognising that the book had effectively been left half-finished, and as such did not represent Fleming at the top of his game&quot;. The final Bond book, containing two short stories, &quot;Octopussy and The Living Daylights&quot;, was published in Britain on 23 June 1966.

In October 1975 Fleming&#x27;s son Caspar, aged 23, killed himself by drug overdose and was buried with his father. Fleming&#x27;s widow, Ann, died in 1981 and was buried with her husband and their son.

== Writing ==
The author Raymond Benson, who later wrote a series of Bond novels, noted that Fleming&#x27;s books fall into two stylistic periods. Those books written between 1953 and 1960 tend to concentrate on &quot;mood, character development, and plot advancement&quot;, while those released between 1961 and 1966 incorporate more detail and imagery. Benson argues that Fleming had become &quot;a master storyteller&quot; by the time he wrote &quot;Thunderball&quot; in 1961.

Jeremy Black divides the series based on the villains Fleming created, a division supported by fellow academic Christoph Lindner. Thus the early books from &quot;Casino Royale&quot; to &quot;For Your Eyes Only&quot; are classed as &quot;Cold War stories&quot;, with SMERSH as the antagonists. These were followed by Blofeld and SPECTRE as Bond&#x27;s opponents in the three novels &quot;Thunderball&quot;, &quot;On Her Majesty&#x27;s Secret Service&quot; and &quot;You Only Live Twice&quot;, after the thawing of East–West relations. Black and Lindner classify the remaining books—&quot;The Man with the Golden Gun&quot;, &quot;Octopussy and The Living Daylights&quot; and &quot;The Spy Who Loved Me&quot;—as &quot;the later Fleming stories&quot;.

=== Style and technique ===
Fleming said of his work, &quot;while thrillers may not be Literature with a capital L, it is possible to write what I can best describe as &#x27;thrillers designed to be read as literature. He named Raymond Chandler, Dashiell Hammett, Eric Ambler and Graham Greene as influences. William Cook in the &quot;New Statesman&quot; considered James Bond to be &quot;the culmination of an important but much-maligned tradition in English literature. As a boy, Fleming devoured the Bulldog Drummond tales of Lieutenant Colonel H. C. McNeile (aka &quot;Sapper&quot;) and the Richard Hannay stories of John Buchan. His genius was to repackage these antiquated adventures to fit the fashion of postwar Britain ... In Bond, he created a Bulldog Drummond for the jet age.&quot; Umberto Eco considered Mickey Spillane to have been another major influence.

In May 1963 Fleming wrote a piece for &quot;Books and Bookmen&quot; magazine in which he described his approach to writing Bond books: &quot;I write for about three hours in the morning ... and I do another hour&#x27;s work between six and seven in the evening. I never correct anything and I never go back to see what I have written ... By following my formula, you write 2,000 words a day.&quot; Benson identified what he described as the &quot;Fleming Sweep&quot;, the use of &quot;hooks&quot; at the end of chapters to heighten tension and pull the reader into the next. The hooks combine with what Anthony Burgess calls &quot;a heightened journalistic style&quot; to produce &quot;a speed of narrative, which hustles the reader past each danger point of mockery&quot;.

Umberto Eco analysed Fleming&#x27;s works from a structuralist point of view, and identified a series of oppositions within the storylines that provide structure and narrative, including:

* Bond—M
* Bond—Villain
* Villain—Woman
* Woman—Bond
* Free World—Soviet Union
* Great Britain—non-Anglo-Saxon countries
* Duty—Sacrifice
* Cupidity—Ideals
* Love—Death
* Chance—Planning
* Luxury—Discomfort
* Excess—Moderation
* Perversion—Innocence
* Loyalty—Dishonour
Eco also noted that the Bond villains tend to come from Central Europe or from Slavic or Mediterranean countries and have a mixed heritage and &quot;complex and obscure origins&quot;. Eco found that the villains were generally asexual or homosexual, inventive, organisationally astute, and wealthy. Black observed the same point: &quot;Fleming did not use class enemies for his villains instead relying on physical distortion or ethnic identity ... Furthermore, in Britain foreign villains used foreign servants and employees ... This racism reflected not only a pronounced theme of interwar adventure writing, such as the novels of Buchan, but also wider literary culture.&quot; Writer Louise Welsh found that the novel &quot;Live and Let Die&quot; &quot;taps into the paranoia that some sectors of white society were feeling&quot; as the civil rights movements challenged prejudice and inequality.

Fleming used well-known brand names and everyday details to support a sense of realism. Kingsley Amis called this &quot;the Fleming effect&quot;, describing it as &quot;the imaginative use of information, whereby the pervading fantastic nature of Bond&#x27;s world ... [is] bolted down to some sort of reality, or at least counter-balanced.&quot;

=== Major themes ===

==== Britain&#x27;s position in the world ====
The Bond books were written in post-war Britain, when the country was still an imperial power. As the series progressed, the British Empire was in decline; journalist William Cook observed that &quot;Bond pandered to Britain&#x27;s inflated and increasingly insecure self-image, flattering us with the fantasy that Britannia could still punch above her weight.&quot; This decline of British power was referred to in several of the novels; in &quot;From Russia, with Love&quot;, it manifested itself in Bond&#x27;s conversations with Darko Kerim, when Bond admits that in England, &quot;we don&#x27;t show teeth any more—only gums.&quot; The theme is strongest in one of the later books of the series, the 1964 novel &quot;You Only Live Twice&quot;, in conversations between Bond and the head of Japan&#x27;s secret intelligence service, Tiger Tanaka. Fleming was acutely aware of the loss of British prestige in the 1950s and early 60s, particularly during the Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation, when he had Tanaka accuse Britain of throwing away the empire &quot;with both hands&quot;.

Black points to the defections of four members of MI6 to the Soviet Union as having a major impact on how Britain was viewed in US intelligence circles. The last of the defections was that of Kim Philby in January 1963, while Fleming was still writing the first draft of &quot;You Only Live Twice&quot;. The briefing between Bond and M is the first time in the twelve books that Fleming acknowledges the defections. Black contends that the conversation between M and Bond allows Fleming to discuss the decline of Britain, with the defections and the Profumo affair of 1963 as a backdrop. Two of the defections had taken place shortly before Fleming wrote &quot;Casino Royale&quot;, and the book can be seen as the writer&#x27;s &quot;attempt to reflect the disturbing moral ambiguity of a post-war world that could produce traitors like Burgess and Maclean&quot;, according to Lycett.

By the end of the series, in the 1965 novel, &quot;The Man with the Golden Gun&quot;, Black notes that an independent inquiry was undertaken by the Jamaican judiciary, while the CIA and MI6 were recorded as acting &quot;under the closest liaison and direction of the Jamaican CID&quot;: this was the new world of a non-colonial, independent Jamaica, further underlining the decline of the British Empire. The decline was also reflected in Bond&#x27;s use of US equipment and personnel in several novels. Uncertain and shifting geopolitics led Fleming to replace the Russian organisation SMERSH with the international terrorist group SPECTRE in &quot;Thunderball&quot;, permitting &quot;evil unconstrained by ideology&quot;. Black argues that SPECTRE provides a measure of continuity to the remaining stories in the series.

==== Effects of the war ====
A theme throughout the series was the effect of the Second World War. &quot;The Times&quot; journalist Ben Macintyre considers that Bond was &quot;the ideal antidote to Britain&#x27;s postwar austerity, rationing and the looming premonition of lost power&quot;, at a time when coal and many items of food were still rationed. Fleming often used the war as a signal to establish good or evil in characters: in &quot;For Your Eyes Only&quot;, the villain, Hammerstein, is a former Gestapo officer, while the sympathetic Royal Canadian Mounted Police officer, Colonel Johns, served with the British under Montgomery in the Eighth Army. Similarly, in &quot;Moonraker&quot;, Drax (Graf Hugo von der Drache) is a &quot;megalomaniac German Nazi who masquerades as an English gentleman&quot;, and his assistant, Krebs, bears the same name as Hitler&#x27;s last Chief of Staff. In this, Fleming &quot;exploits another British cultural antipathy of the 1950s. Germans, in the wake of the Second World War, made another easy and obvious target for bad press.&quot; As the series progressed, the threat of a re-emergent Germany was overtaken by concerns about the Cold War, and the novels changed their focus accordingly.

==== Comradeship ====
Periodically in the series, the topic of comradeship or friendship arises, with a male ally who works with Bond on his mission. Raymond Benson believes that the relationships Bond has with his allies &quot;add another dimension to Bond&#x27;s character, and ultimately, to the thematic continuity of the novels&quot;. In &quot;Live and Let Die&quot;, agents Quarrel and Leiter represent the importance of male friends and allies, seen especially in Bond&#x27;s response to the shark attack on Leiter; Benson observes that &quot;the loyalty Bond feels towards his friends is as strong as his commitment to his job&quot;. In &quot;Dr. No&quot;, Quarrel is &quot;an indispensable ally&quot;. Benson sees no evidence of discrimination in their relationship and notes Bond&#x27;s genuine remorse and sadness at Quarrel&#x27;s death.

==== The &quot;traitor within&quot; ====
From the opening novel in the series, the theme of treachery was strong. Bond&#x27;s target in &quot;Casino Royale&quot;, Le Chiffre, was the paymaster of a French communist trade union, and the overtones of a fifth column struck a chord with the largely British readership, as Communist influence in the trade unions had been an issue in the press and parliament, especially after the defections of Burgess and Maclean in 1951. The &quot;traitor within&quot; theme continued in &quot;Live and Let Die&quot; and &quot;Moonraker&quot;.

==== Good versus evil ====
Raymond Benson considered the most obvious theme of the series to be good versus evil. This crystallised in &quot;Goldfinger&quot; with the Saint George motif, which is stated explicitly in the book: &quot;Bond sighed wearily. Once more into the breach, dear friend! This time, it really was St George and the dragon. And St George had better get a move on and do something&quot;; Black notes that the image of St. George is an English, rather than British personification.

==== Anglo-American relations ====
The Bond novels also dealt with the question of Anglo-American relations, reflecting the central role of the US in the defence of the West. In the aftermath of the Second World War, tensions surfaced between a British government trying to retain its empire and the American desire for a capitalist new world order, but Fleming did not focus on this directly, instead creating &quot;an impression of the normality of British imperial rule and action&quot;. Author and journalist Christopher Hitchens observed that &quot;the central paradox of the classic Bond stories is that, although superficially devoted to the Anglo-American war against communism, they are full of contempt and resentment for America and Americans&quot;. Fleming was aware of this tension between the two countries, but did not focus on it strongly. Kingsley Amis, in his exploration of Bond in &quot;The James Bond Dossier&quot;, pointed out that &quot;Leiter, such a nonentity as a piece of characterization ... he, the American, takes orders from Bond, the Britisher, and that Bond is constantly doing better than he&quot;.

For three of the novels, &quot;Goldfinger&quot;, &quot;Live and Let Die&quot; and &quot;Dr. No&quot;, it is Bond the British agent who has to sort out what turns out to be an American problem, and Black points out that although it is American assets that are under threat in &quot;Dr. No&quot;, a British agent and a British warship, HMS &quot;Narvik&quot;, are sent with British soldiers to the island at the end of the novel to settle the matter. Fleming became increasingly jaundiced about America, and his comments in the penultimate novel &quot;You Only Live Twice&quot; reflect this; Bond&#x27;s responses to Tanaka&#x27;s comments reflect the declining relationship between Britain and America—in sharp contrast to the warm, co-operative relationship between Bond and Leiter in the earlier books.

== Legacy ==
In the late 1950s, the author Geoffrey Jenkins had suggested to Fleming that he write a Bond novel set in South Africa, and sent him his own idea for a plot outline which, according to Jenkins, Fleming felt had great potential. After Fleming&#x27;s death, Jenkins was commissioned by Bond publishers Glidrose Productions to write a continuation Bond novel, &quot;Per Fine Ounce&quot;, but it was never published. Starting with Kingsley Amis&#x27;s &quot;Colonel Sun&quot;, under the pseudonym &quot;Robert Markham&quot; in 1968, several authors have been commissioned to write Bond novels, including Sebastian Faulks, who was asked by Ian Fleming Publications to write a new Bond novel in observance of what would have been Fleming&#x27;s 100th birthday in 2008.

During his lifetime Fleming sold thirty million books; double that number were sold in the two years following his death. In 2008 &quot;The Times&quot; ranked Fleming fourteenth on its list of &quot;The 50 greatest British writers since 1945&quot;. In 2002 Ian Fleming Publications announced the launch of the CWA Ian Fleming Steel Dagger award, presented by the Crime Writers&#x27; Association to the best thriller, adventure or spy novel originally published in the UK.

The Eon Productions series of Bond films, which started in 1962 with &quot;Dr. No&quot;, continued after Fleming&#x27;s death. Along with two non-Eon produced films, there have been twenty-five Eon films, with the most recent, &quot;No Time to Die&quot;, released in September 2021. The Eon Productions series has grossed over $6.2 billion worldwide, making it one of the highest-grossing film series.

The influence of Bond in the cinema and in literature is evident in films and books including the &quot;Austin Powers&quot; series, &quot;Carry On Spying&quot; and the Jason Bourne character. In 2011 Fleming became the first English-language writer to have an international airport named after him: Ian Fleming International Airport, near Oracabessa, Jamaica, was officially opened on 12 January 2011 by Jamaican Prime Minister Bruce Golding and Fleming&#x27;s niece, Lucy. The Lilly Library at Indiana University houses a collection of Fleming manuscripts and first editions as well as his personal library of rare books.

In 2023, it was reported that Fleming&#x27;s &quot;James Bond&quot; series was being re-published, removing a number of racial slurs and references. A disclaimer was added at the beginning of each book, reading &quot;This book was written at a time when terms and attitudes which might be considered offensive by modern readers were commonplace. A number of updates have been made in this edition, while keeping as close as possible to the original text and the period in which it is set.&quot; Most of the original versions are available from Project Gutenberg Canada.

Fleming&#x27;s life is the subject of the 2024 biography, &quot;Ian Fleming: The Complete Man&quot;, that spans 864 pages and was completed with the help of Fleming&#x27;s estate. It was written by British novelist and biographer Nicholas Shakespeare.

== Works ==

*James Bond novels
** &quot;Casino Royale&quot; (1953)
** &quot;Live and Let Die&quot; (1954)
** &quot;Moonraker&quot; (1955)
** &quot;Diamonds Are Forever&quot; (1956)
** &quot;From Russia, with Love&quot; (1957)
** &quot;Dr. No&quot; (1958)
** &quot;Goldfinger&quot; (1959)
** &quot;Thunderball&quot; (1961)
** &quot;The Spy Who Loved Me&quot; (1962)
** &quot;On Her Majesty&#x27;s Secret Service&quot; (1963)
** &quot;You Only Live Twice&quot; (1964)
** &quot;The Man with the Golden Gun&quot; (1965)

*James Bond short story collections
** &quot;For Your Eyes Only&quot; (1960)
** &quot;Octopussy and The Living Daylights&quot; (1966)
*Other works
** &quot;The Diamond Smugglers&quot; (1957)
** &quot;Thrilling Cities&quot; (1963)
** &quot;Chitty-Chitty-Bang-Bang&quot; (1964)
** &quot;The Poppy Is Also a Flower&quot; (1966), story
== Biographical films ==
* &quot;Goldeneye: The Secret Life of Ian Fleming&quot;, 1989. A television film starring Charles Dance as Fleming. The film focuses on Fleming&#x27;s life during the Second World War, his love life and the writing of James Bond.
* &quot;&quot;, 1990. A television film starring Jason Connery (son of Sean) as Fleming in a Bond-like adventure set during World War II.
* &quot;Ian Fleming: Bondmaker&quot;, 2005. A television drama-documentary, first broadcast on BBC on 28 August 2005. Ben Daniels portrayed Fleming.
* &quot;Ian Fleming: Where Bond Began&quot;, 2008. Television documentary about the life of Ian Fleming, broadcast 19 October 2008 by the BBC. Presented by former Bond girl, Joanna Lumley.
* The 2011 film &quot;Age of Heroes&quot; is based on the exploits of 30 Commando; James D&#x27;Arcy played Fleming.
* &quot;&quot;, a BBC America television four-episode mini-series, broadcast in January and February 2014, starring Dominic Cooper in the title role.

== See also ==
* Outline of James Bond

==Notes==
==References==

== Sources ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== Further reading ==
* J.C. &quot;The Agent&#x27;s Secret.&quot; &quot;The Times Literary Supplement&quot; no. 5946 (2017): 36. 
*Gilbert, Jon. (2023). &quot;A Bibliography of Biographies of Ian Fleming.&quot; &quot;The Book Collector&quot; 72 no.4 (winter): 704–709.
* Lett, Brian (2012). &quot;Ian Fleming and SOE&#x27;s Operation Postmaster: The Top Secret Story Behind 007&quot;. 
* Lycett, Andrew (2020). &quot;Ian Fleming: The Man Who Created James Bond&quot;. Orion Publishing Group. .
* Muir, P. H.(1965). &quot;Ian Fleming: A Personal Memoir.&quot; &quot;The Book Collector&quot; 14 no. 1 (Spring): 24–33.

== External links ==
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q82104" start="0" end="21" title="Ian Fleming" label="Ian Lancaster Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="109" end="119" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q20664331" start="136" end="145" title="spy novel" label="spy novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344380" start="214" end="238" title="Robert Fleming &amp;amp; Co." label="Robert Fleming &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="263" end="283" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080330" start="293" end="299" title="Henley (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Henley"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="333" end="346" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="368" end="372" title="Eton College" label="Eton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020147" start="374" end="383" title="Royal Military College, Sandhurst" label="Sandhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q55044" start="419" end="425" title="Munich University" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q503473" start="430" end="436" title="University of Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q598332" start="534" end="561" title="Naval Intelligence Division (United Kingdom)" label="Naval Intelligence Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097077" start="624" end="643" title="Operation Goldeneye" label="Operation Goldeneye"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045388" start="705" end="720" title="30 Assault Unit" label="30 Assault Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7667799" start="725" end="732" title="T-Force" label="T-Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566859" start="851" end="880" title="List of James Bond novels and short stories" label="&amp;quot;James Bond&amp;quot; novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047711" start="925" end="938" title="Casino Royale (novel)" label="Casino Royale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009573" start="1156" end="1166" title="James Bond (literary character)" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q184560" start="1233" end="1236" title="MI6" label="MI6"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152182" start="1292" end="1301" title="Commander (Royal Navy)" label="commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778989" start="1309" end="1338" title="Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve" label="Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1368" end="1410" title="List of best-selling books#More than 100 million copies" label="the best-selling series of fictional books"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940145" start="1522" end="1545" title="Chitty-Chitty-Bang-Bang" label="Chitty-Chitty-Bang-Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="1604" end="1613" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q764912" start="1677" end="1692" title="British literature" label="British writers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18526481" start="1735" end="1749" title="Anne Fleming (socialite)" label="Anne Charteris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398564" start="1781" end="1808" title="Esmond Harmsworth, 2nd Viscount Rothermere" label="the 2nd Viscount Rothermere"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129980" start="2139" end="2155" title="James Bond filmography" label="appeared in film"/>
<link wikidata="Q28963284" start="2325" end="2337" title="Green Street, Mayfair" label="Green Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q124184" start="2372" end="2379" title="Mayfair" label="Mayfair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416448" start="2396" end="2426" title="Evelyn St. Croix Fleming" label="Evelyn &amp;quot;Eve&amp;quot; Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q19787773" start="2466" end="2483" title="Valentine Fleming" label="Valentine Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="2489" end="2509" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080330" start="2514" end="2520" title="Henley (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Henley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958609" start="2589" end="2602" title="Braziers Park" label="Braziers Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344386" start="2668" end="2682" title="Robert Fleming (financier)" label="Robert Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437619" start="2703" end="2739" title="Scottish American Investment Company" label="Scottish American Investment Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344380" start="2762" end="2786" title="Robert Fleming &amp;amp; Co." label="Robert Fleming &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q252280" start="2861" end="2883" title="Squadron (army)" label="&amp;quot;C&amp;quot; Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3413989" start="2887" end="2923" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Own Oxfordshire Hussars" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Own Oxfordshire Hussars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896145" start="2949" end="2954" title="Major (United Kingdom)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="2996" end="3009" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="3026" end="3043" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="3093" end="3102" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253375" start="3151" end="3160" title="Arnisdale" label="Arnisdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q260405" start="3196" end="3203" title="Glenelg, Highland" label="Glenelg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605075" start="3248" end="3253" title="Peter Fleming (writer)" label="Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q272075" start="3297" end="3310" title="Celia Johnson" label="Celia Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q772054" start="3334" end="3350" title="Grenadier Guards" label="Grenadier Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739613" start="3409" end="3422" title="Colin Gubbins" label="Colin Gubbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400296" start="3445" end="3460" title="Auxiliary Units" label="Auxiliary Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931374" start="3687" end="3699" title="Lovat Scouts" label="Lovat Scouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124484" start="3704" end="3724" title="Seaforth Highlanders" label="Seaforth Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133980" start="3756" end="3769" title="James Fleming (author)" label="James Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115609" start="3866" end="3912" title="Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry" label="Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740365" start="3995" end="4012" title="Amaryllis Fleming" label="Amaryllis Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q562540" start="4054" end="4067" title="Augustus John" label="Augustus John"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316700" start="4269" end="4284" title="Durnford School" label="Durnford School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4367464" start="4288" end="4306" title="Preparatory school (United Kingdom)" label="preparatory school"/>
<link wikidata="Q514259" start="4314" end="4329" title="Isle of Purbeck" label="Isle of Purbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="4333" end="4339" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="4471" end="4483" title="Eton College" label="Eton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926108" start="4572" end="4586" title="Victor Ludorum" label="Victor Ludorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q118547" start="4999" end="5006" title="Cram school" label="crammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020147" start="5035" end="5068" title="Royal Military College, Sandhurst" label="Royal Military College, Sandhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q101896" start="5167" end="5176" title="gonorrhea" label="gonorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q358834" start="5235" end="5249" title="Foreign Office" label="Foreign Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q264665" start="5291" end="5300" title="Kitzbühel" label="Kitzbühel"/>
<link wikidata="Q835792" start="5345" end="5353" title="Adlerian" label="Adlerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089198" start="5429" end="5444" title="Phyllis Bottome" label="Phyllis Bottome"/>
<link wikidata="Q55044" start="5511" end="5528" title="Munich University" label="Munich University"/>
<link wikidata="Q503473" start="5537" end="5557" title="University of Geneva" label="University of Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485224" start="5863" end="5881" title="Roderick Jones (journalist)" label="Sir Roderick Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="5891" end="5910" title="Reuters" label="Reuters News Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224389" start="5961" end="5971" title="sub-editor" label="sub-editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="6040" end="6046" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="6069" end="6078" title="Stalinism" label="Stalinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q177253" start="6079" end="6089" title="show trial" label="show trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468032" start="6132" end="6152" title="Metropolitan-Vickers" label="Metropolitan-Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="6214" end="6227" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q779444" start="6616" end="6627" title="Bishopsgate" label="Bishopsgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q952209" start="6825" end="6850" title="World War II bombing raid" label="World War II bombing raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q19667324" start="7129" end="7151" title="Shane O&amp;#x27;Neill, 3rd Baron O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="3rd Baron O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398564" start="7188" end="7205" title="Esmond Harmsworth, 2nd Viscount Rothermere" label="Esmond Harmsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q210534" start="7255" end="7265" title="Daily Mail" label="Daily Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q156945" start="7337" end="7349" title="Rear Admiral" label="Rear Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181737" start="7350" end="7362" title="John Henry Godfrey" label="John Godfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q598332" start="7364" end="7394" title="Naval Intelligence Division (United Kingdom)" label="Director of Naval Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="7402" end="7412" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096316" start="7428" end="7446" title="personal assistant" label="personal assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="7567" end="7580" title="British Admiralty" label="the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757811" start="7609" end="7622" title="Andrew Lycett" label="Andrew Lycett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778989" start="7761" end="7790" title="Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve" label="Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q457271" start="7818" end="7828" title="Lieutenant (navy)" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832151" start="7850" end="7870" title="Lieutenant commander (Royal Navy)" label="lieutenant commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q184560" start="8195" end="8222" title="Secret Intelligence Service" label="Secret Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101420" start="8228" end="8255" title="Political Warfare Executive" label="Political Warfare Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q240390" start="8261" end="8289" title="Special Operations Executive" label="Special Operations Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059360" start="8301" end="8329" title="Joint Intelligence Committee (United Kingdom)" label="Joint Intelligence Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="8338" end="8352" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895507" start="8560" end="8573" title="Ben Macintyre" label="Ben Macintyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846632" start="8593" end="8603" title="Trout Memo" label="Trout Memo"/>
<link wikidata="Q898886" start="8657" end="8668" title="fly fishing" label="fly fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="8742" end="8753" title="Axis powers" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q428661" start="8762" end="8768" title="U-boat" label="U-boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130522" start="8951" end="8970" title="Operation Mincemeat" label="Operation Mincemeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="9001" end="9027" title="operation Husky" label="intended invasion of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867265" start="9272" end="9285" title="Basil Thomson" label="Basil Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390449" start="9600" end="9613" title="Kenneth Mason (geographer)" label="Kenneth Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="9641" end="9658" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981846" start="9797" end="9865" title="Naval Intelligence Handbooks" label="&amp;quot;Naval Intelligence Division Geographical Handbook Series&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607616" start="9899" end="9917" title="Operation Ruthless" label="Operation Ruthless"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9960" end="9972" title="Cryptanalysis of the Enigma#German Navy 3-rotor Enigma" label="Enigma codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q151701" start="9985" end="9996" title="Kriegsmarine" label="German Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q150758" start="10304" end="10318" title="Enigma machine" label="Enigma machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251" start="10361" end="10372" title="Alan Turing" label="Alan Turing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290979" start="10377" end="10388" title="Peter Twinn" label="Peter Twinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q155921" start="10392" end="10406" title="Bletchley Park" label="Bletchley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q734202" start="10478" end="10482" title="Lucy Fleming" label="Lucy"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="10503" end="10518" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q155296" start="10566" end="10573" title="Heinkel" label="Heinkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q541981" start="10678" end="10707" title="William Joseph Donovan" label="&amp;quot;Wild Bill&amp;quot; Donovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="10719" end="10740" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q422321" start="10924" end="10933" title="blueprint" label="blueprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790854" start="10942" end="10982" title="Office of the Coordinator of Information" label="Office of the Coordinator of Information"/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="11020" end="11048" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="Office of Strategic Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="11075" end="11078" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097077" start="11122" end="11141" title="Operation Goldeneye" label="Operation Goldeneye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="11345" end="11354" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347548" start="11600" end="11609" title="British Commandos" label="commandos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045388" start="11620" end="11635" title="No. 30 Commando" label="No. 30 Commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q89383" start="11903" end="11916" title="Otto Skorzeny" label="Otto Skorzeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q153316" start="11963" end="11978" title="Battle of Crete" label="Battle of Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q163500" start="12456" end="12463" title="Captain (naval)" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995864" start="12471" end="12483" title="Rear-Admiral of the United Kingdom" label="Rear-Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="12811" end="12828" title="Normandy landings" label="Normandy landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q270517" start="12949" end="12960" title="Dieppe Raid" label="Dieppe Raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11860972" start="13060" end="13082" title="HMS Fernie (L11)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Fernie&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="13304" end="13322" title="Operation Overlord" label="Operation Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667188" start="13495" end="13504" title="Cherbourg" label="Cherbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540361" start="14260" end="14278" title="Surrender of Japan" label="Japanese surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q7667799" start="14414" end="14421" title="T-Force" label="T-Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q392703" start="14456" end="14477" title="The National Archives (United Kingdom)" label="The National Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q85845274" start="14963" end="14976" title="5th Battalion, King&amp;#x27;s Regiment (Liverpool)" label="5th Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411069" start="14978" end="14998" title="King&amp;#x27;s Regiment" label="King&amp;#x27;s Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q209514" start="15020" end="15031" title="Second Army (United Kingdom)" label="Second Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707" start="15285" end="15289" title="Kiel" label="Kiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q174640" start="15345" end="15355" title="V-2 rocket" label="V-2 rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q155360" start="15357" end="15377" title="Messerschmitt Me 163" label="Messerschmitt Me 163"/>
<link wikidata="Q603310" start="15526" end="15535" title="Moonraker (novel)" label="Moonraker"/>
<link wikidata="Q633565" start="15781" end="15798" title="Saint Mary Parish, Jamaica" label="Saint Mary Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773063" start="15857" end="15866" title="Goldeneye (estate)" label="Goldeneye"/>
<link wikidata="Q985210" start="15911" end="15919" title="London Victoria station" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q230591" start="16075" end="16091" title="Carson McCullers" label="Carson McCullers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658454" start="16115" end="16142" title="Reflections in a Golden Eye (novel)" label="Reflections in a Golden Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801501" start="16446" end="16483" title="King Christian X&amp;#x27;s Liberty Medal" label="King Christian X&amp;#x27;s Liberty Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255465" start="16771" end="16785" title="Demobilisation of the British Armed Forces after the Second World War" label="demobilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q103478468" start="16836" end="16859" title="Kemsley Newspapers" label="Kemsley newspaper group"/>
<link wikidata="Q221986" start="16891" end="16907" title="The Sunday Times" label="The Sunday Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398564" start="17406" end="17432" title="Esmond Harmsworth, 2nd Viscount Rothermere" label="second Viscount Rothermere"/>
<link wikidata="Q298388" start="17581" end="17592" title="Noël Coward" label="Noël Coward"/>
<link wikidata="Q745832" start="17659" end="17668" title="Stillbirth" label="stillborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q337380" start="17924" end="17938" title="Hugh Gaitskell" label="Hugh Gaitskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3615378" start="17944" end="17970" title="Leader of the Labour Party (UK)" label="Leader of the Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741536" start="17975" end="17999" title="Leader of the Opposition (United Kingdom)" label="Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q36343643" start="18071" end="18088" title="Blanche Blackwell" label="Blanche Blackwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q861129" start="18104" end="18119" title="Chris Blackwell" label="Chris Blackwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q190585" start="18123" end="18137" title="Island Records" label="Island Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q128995" start="18193" end="18205" title="Anthony Eden" label="Anthony Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047711" start="18459" end="18484" title="Casino Royale (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Casino Royale&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q283598" start="18898" end="18910" title="Rory MacLean" label="Rory MacLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q211414" start="18996" end="19011" title="Miss Moneypenny" label="Miss Moneypenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282985" start="19236" end="19250" title="William Plomer" label="William Plomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277534" start="19458" end="19471" title="Jonathan Cape" label="Jonathan Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q123344782" start="19712" end="19718" title="£sd" label="10s 6d"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009573" start="19867" end="19877" title="James Bond (literary character)" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q184560" start="19944" end="19947" title="MI6" label="MI6"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152182" start="20003" end="20012" title="Commander (Royal Navy)" label="commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778989" start="20020" end="20039" title="Royal Naval Reserve" label="Royal Naval Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q241031" start="20121" end="20131" title="James Bond (ornithologist)" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="20146" end="20155" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916128" start="20209" end="20233" title="Birds of the West Indies" label="Birds of the West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q685629" start="20265" end="20276" title="Birdwatching" label="birdwatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="20528" end="20542" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q460662" start="21312" end="21328" title="Hoagy Carmichael" label="Hoagy Carmichael"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895507" start="21367" end="21380" title="Ben Macintyre" label="Ben Macintyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162578" start="21597" end="21624" title="Conrad O&amp;#x27;Brien-ffrench" label="Conrad O&amp;#x27;Brien-ffrench"/>
<link wikidata="Q321008" start="21693" end="21711" title="Patrick Dalzel-Job" label="Patrick Dalzel-Job"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568176" start="21769" end="21802" title="Wilfred Dunderdale" label="Bill &amp;quot;Biffy&amp;quot; Dunderdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q679888" start="21910" end="21921" title="Rolls-Royce Limited" label="Rolls-Royce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263302" start="21923" end="21942" title="Sir Fitzroy Maclean, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Fitzroy Maclean"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="22032" end="22039" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058375" start="22056" end="22068" title="double agent" label="double agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409128" start="22069" end="22080" title="Duško Popov" label="Duško Popov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195639" start="22511" end="22538" title="The Man with the Golden Gun (novel)" label="The Man with the Golden Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544697" start="22555" end="22589" title="Octopussy and The Living Daylights" label="Octopussy and The Living Daylights"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="22758" end="22766" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165753" start="22780" end="22814" title="From Russia, with Love (novel)" label="&amp;quot;From Russia, with Love&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q191985" start="22997" end="23011" title="Orient Express" label="Orient Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="23231" end="23243" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q34713" start="23385" end="23393" title="Salzburg" label="Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q642549" start="23467" end="23477" title="Francisco Scaramanga" label="Scaramanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q924817" start="23611" end="23621" title="Auric Goldfinger" label="Goldfinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q655293" start="23683" end="23698" title="Ernő Goldfinger" label="Ernő Goldfinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079238" start="23733" end="23742" title="Hugo Drax" label="Hugo Drax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592881" start="23829" end="23890" title="Reginald Drax" label="Admiral Sir Reginald Aylmer Ranfurly Plunkett-Ernle-Erle-Drax"/>
<link wikidata="Q57455" start="23959" end="23978" title="Hans Krebs (Wehrmacht general)" label="last Chief of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q659731" start="24020" end="24052" title="Diamonds Are Forever (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Diamonds Are Forever&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798855" start="24157" end="24187" title="Arthur Gore, 8th Earl of Arran" label="Arthur Gore, 8th Earl of Arran"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730087" start="24269" end="24290" title="The Diamond Smugglers" label="The Diamond Smugglers"/>
<link wikidata="Q210175" start="24642" end="24645" title="MI5" label="MI5"/>
<link wikidata="Q368432" start="24751" end="24779" title="Live and Let Die (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Live and Let Die&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819359" start="24960" end="24976" title="Bernard Bergonzi" label="Bernard Bergonzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q333004" start="25277" end="25288" title="John Buchan" label="John Buchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q26541" start="25368" end="25374" title="Dr. No (novel)" label="Dr. No"/>
<link wikidata="Q45997" start="25586" end="25598" title="Paul Johnson (writer)" label="Paul Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566255" start="25612" end="25625" title="New Statesman" label="New Statesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777426" start="26703" end="26725" title="Goldfinger (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Goldfinger&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q161191" start="26844" end="26874" title="For Your Eyes Only (short story collection)" label="&amp;quot;For Your Eyes Only&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113538" start="27270" end="27288" title="Kuwait Oil Company" label="Kuwait Oil Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q185166" start="27663" end="27669" title="Sheikh" label="Sheikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952957" start="27992" end="28015" title="Thunderball (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Thunderball&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421000" start="28021" end="28033" title="novelization" label="novelisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368243" start="28207" end="28220" title="Kevin McClory" label="Kevin McClory"/>
<link wikidata="Q15440156" start="28283" end="28295" title="Ernest Cuneo" label="Ernest Cuneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157340" start="28372" end="28388" title="Jack Whittingham" label="Jack Whittingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q304509" start="28631" end="28634" title="Music Corporation of America" label="MCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617747" start="29166" end="29176" title="High Court of Justice" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29232" end="29249" title="Thunderball (novel)#Controversy" label="two court actions"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="29793" end="29797" title="Life (magazine)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="29856" end="29868" title="President of the United States" label="US President"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="29869" end="29884" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q214565" start="30601" end="30615" title="Beatrix Potter" label="Beatrix Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272152" start="30629" end="30656" title="The Tale of Squirrel Nutkin" label="The Tale of Squirrel Nutkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940145" start="31060" end="31083" title="Chitty-Chitty-Bang-Bang" label="Chitty-Chitty-Bang-Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q287887" start="31288" end="31302" title="Harry Saltzman" label="Harry Saltzman"/>
<link wikidata="Q219135" start="31343" end="31358" title="Eon Productions" label="Eon Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q72652" start="31370" end="31406" title="Albert R. Broccoli" label="Albert R. &amp;quot;Cubby&amp;quot; Broccoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573" start="31450" end="31462" title="Sean Connery" label="Sean Connery"/>
<link wikidata="Q102754" start="31526" end="31532" title="Dr. No (film)" label="Dr. No"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262456" start="31622" end="31641" title="You Only Live Twice (novel)" label="You Only Live Twice"/>
<link wikidata="Q543790" start="31871" end="31887" title="Thrilling Cities" label="Thrilling Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566970" start="32074" end="32087" title="Norman Felton" label="Norman Felton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965049" start="32192" end="32205" title="Napoleon Solo" label="Napoleon Solo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247482" start="32210" end="32222" title="The Girl from U.N.C.L.E." label="April Dancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264983" start="32245" end="32268" title="The Man from U.N.C.L.E." label="The Man from U.N.C.L.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q1282985" start="32659" end="32673" title="William Plomer" label="William Plomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7212330" start="32923" end="32929" title="tobacco smoking" label="smoker"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="32934" end="32941" title="alcoholism" label="drinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="32987" end="33000" title="heart disease" label="heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="33034" end="33046" title="myocardial infarction" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581290" start="33064" end="33074" title="recuperation (recovery)" label="recuperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q29303" start="33123" end="33133" title="Canterbury" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586134" start="33155" end="33187" title="Royal St George&amp;#x27;s Golf Club" label="Royal St George&amp;#x27;s Golf Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q30280359" start="33367" end="33395" title="Kent and Canterbury Hospital" label="Kent and Canterbury Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457578" start="33747" end="33759" title="Sevenhampton, Wiltshire" label="Sevenhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q200942" start="33766" end="33773" title="Swindon" label="Swindon"/>
<link wikidata="Q220078" start="34327" end="34340" title="Kingsley Amis" label="Kingsley Amis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505252" start="34852" end="34865" title="drug overdose" label="drug overdose"/>
<link wikidata="Q721999" start="35011" end="35025" title="Raymond Benson" label="Raymond Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975504" start="35467" end="35479" title="Jeremy Black (historian)" label="Jeremy Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q158363" start="35733" end="35739" title="SMERSH" label="SMERSH"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104987" start="35783" end="35790" title="Ernst Stavro Blofeld" label="Blofeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069518" start="35795" end="35802" title="SPECTRE" label="SPECTRE"/>
<link wikidata="Q180377" start="36444" end="36460" title="Raymond Chandler" label="Raymond Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q186335" start="36462" end="36478" title="Dashiell Hammett" label="Dashiell Hammett"/>
<link wikidata="Q508452" start="36480" end="36491" title="Eric Ambler" label="Eric Ambler"/>
<link wikidata="Q128560" start="36496" end="36509" title="Graham Greene" label="Graham Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566255" start="36551" end="36564" title="New Statesman" label="New Statesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004222" start="36719" end="36735" title="Bulldog Drummond" label="Bulldog Drummond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134064" start="36764" end="36777" title="H. C. McNeile" label="H. C. McNeile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326250" start="36811" end="36825" title="Richard Hannay" label="Richard Hannay"/>
<link wikidata="Q12807" start="37010" end="37021" title="Umberto Eco" label="Umberto Eco"/>
<link wikidata="Q336081" start="37033" end="37048" title="Mickey Spillane" label="Mickey Spillane"/>
<link wikidata="Q217619" start="37691" end="37706" title="Anthony Burgess" label="Anthony Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q179168" start="37912" end="37925" title="Structuralism" label="structuralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q447658" start="39009" end="39021" title="Louise Welsh" label="Louise Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="39162" end="39183" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="39765" end="39779" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304007" start="40477" end="40489" title="Tiger Tanaka" label="Tiger Tanaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361929" start="40601" end="40633" title="Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation" label="Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation"/>
<link wikidata="Q656544" start="40761" end="40780" title="Cambridge Five" label="four members of MI6"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="40788" end="40800" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q296313" start="40919" end="40929" title="Kim Philby" label="Kim Philby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401251" start="41277" end="41291" title="Profumo affair" label="Profumo affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q918668" start="41564" end="41571" title="Guy Burgess" label="Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q523120" start="41576" end="41583" title="Donald Maclean (spy)" label="Maclean"/>
<link wikidata="Q161191" start="42875" end="42905" title="For Your Eyes Only (short story)" label="&amp;quot;For Your Eyes Only&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="42945" end="42952" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q335175" start="42984" end="43013" title="Royal Canadian Mounted Police" label="Royal Canadian Mounted Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q152025" start="43068" end="43078" title="Bernard Montgomery" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q270202" start="43086" end="43097" title="Eighth Army (United Kingdom)" label="Eighth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779543" start="44069" end="44075" title="Felix Leiter" label="Leiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136439" start="44691" end="44701" title="Le Chiffre" label="Le Chiffre"/>
<link wikidata="Q48438" start="45272" end="45284" title="Saint George" label="Saint George"/>
<link wikidata="Q49081" start="46120" end="46140" title="Christopher Hitchens" label="Christopher Hitchens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742928" start="46514" end="46536" title="The James Bond Dossier" label="The James Bond Dossier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254450" start="47589" end="47605" title="Geoffrey Jenkins" label="Geoffrey Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262061" start="47859" end="47879" title="Ian Fleming Publications" label="Glidrose Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206177" start="47891" end="47903" title="continuation novel" label="continuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166681" start="47922" end="47936" title="Per Fine Ounce" label="Per Fine Ounce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448628" start="48013" end="48024" title="Colonel Sun" label="Colonel Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142721" start="48058" end="48072" title="Robert Markham" label="Robert Markham"/>
<link wikidata="Q443055" start="48159" end="48175" title="Sebastian Faulks" label="Sebastian Faulks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262061" start="48194" end="48218" title="Ian Fleming Publications" label="Ian Fleming Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="48459" end="48468" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336530" start="48633" end="48661" title="CWA Ian Fleming Steel Dagger" label="CWA Ian Fleming Steel Dagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185131" start="48686" end="48717" title="Crime Writers&amp;#x27; Association" label="Crime Writers&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q21534241" start="49029" end="49043" title="No Time to Die" label="No Time to Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500001" start="49303" end="49316" title="Austin Powers" label="Austin Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580616" start="49337" end="49352" title="Carry On Spying" label="Carry On Spying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059919" start="49367" end="49379" title="Jason Bourne" label="Jason Bourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220544" start="49498" end="49531" title="Ian Fleming International Airport" label="Ian Fleming International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099213" start="49538" end="49548" title="Oracabessa" label="Oracabessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q315662" start="49627" end="49640" title="Bruce Golding" label="Bruce Golding"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548368" start="49677" end="49690" title="Lilly Library" label="Lilly Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608367" start="49694" end="49712" title="Indiana University" label="Indiana University"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="49874" end="49884" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249125" start="50367" end="50391" title="Project Gutenberg Canada" label="Project Gutenberg Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q731036" start="50624" end="50644" title="Nicholas Shakespeare" label="Nicholas Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047711" start="50682" end="50707" title="Casino Royale (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Casino Royale&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q368432" start="50724" end="50740" title="Live and Let Die (novel)" label="Live and Let Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q603310" start="50757" end="50778" title="Moonraker (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Moonraker&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q659731" start="50789" end="50821" title="Diamonds Are Forever (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Diamonds Are Forever&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165753" start="50832" end="50866" title="From Russia, with Love (novel)" label="&amp;quot;From Russia, with Love&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q26541" start="50877" end="50895" title="Dr. No (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Dr. No&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777426" start="50906" end="50928" title="Goldfinger (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Goldfinger&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952957" start="50939" end="50962" title="Thunderball (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Thunderball&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q545151" start="50973" end="51005" title="The Spy Who Loved Me (novel)" label="&amp;quot;The Spy Who Loved Me&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136755" start="51016" end="51064" title="On Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Secret Service (novel)" label="&amp;quot;On Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Secret Service&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262456" start="51075" end="51106" title="You Only Live Twice (novel)" label="&amp;quot;You Only Live Twice&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195639" start="51117" end="51156" title="The Man with the Golden Gun (novel)" label="&amp;quot;The Man with the Golden Gun&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q161191" start="51204" end="51234" title="For Your Eyes Only (short story collection)" label="&amp;quot;For Your Eyes Only&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544697" start="51251" end="51285" title="Octopussy and The Living Daylights" label="Octopussy and The Living Daylights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730087" start="51321" end="51342" title="The Diamond Smugglers" label="The Diamond Smugglers"/>
<link wikidata="Q543790" start="51365" end="51381" title="Thrilling Cities" label="Thrilling Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940145" start="51404" end="51427" title="Chitty-Chitty-Bang-Bang" label="Chitty-Chitty-Bang-Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q680846" start="51450" end="51476" title="The Poppy Is Also a Flower" label="The Poppy Is Also a Flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q309690" start="51612" end="51625" title="Charles Dance" label="Charles Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q538123" start="51801" end="51814" title="Jason Connery" label="Jason Connery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573" start="51823" end="51827" title="Sean Connery" label="Sean"/>
<link wikidata="" start="51898" end="51920" title="Ian Fleming: Bondmaker" label="Ian Fleming: Bondmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q622370" start="51947" end="51964" title="docudrama" label="drama-documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="51985" end="51988" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q609458" start="52008" end="52019" title="Ben Daniels" label="Ben Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="" start="52047" end="52076" title="Ian Fleming: Where Bond Began" label="Ian Fleming: Where Bond Began"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649366" start="52202" end="52211" title="Bond girl" label="Bond girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q392287" start="52250" end="52263" title="Age of Heroes (film)" label="Age of Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q717194" start="52311" end="52328" title="James D&amp;#x27;Arcy" label="James D&amp;#x27;Arcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876747" start="52363" end="52374" title="BBC America" label="BBC America"/>
<link wikidata="Q317761" start="52461" end="52475" title="Dominic Cooper" label="Dominic Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112309" start="52513" end="52534" title="Outline of James Bond" label="Outline of James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768060" start="52689" end="52718" title="The Times Literary Supplement" label="The Times Literary Supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719159" start="52834" end="52852" title="The Book Collector" label="The Book Collector"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719159" start="53182" end="53200" title="The Book Collector" label="The Book Collector"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="57986" wikidata="Q274556" url="?curid=57986" title="Gladius">
<text>Gladius () is a Latin word properly referring to the type of sword that was used by ancient Roman foot soldiers starting from the 3rd century BC and until the 3rd century AD. Linguistically, within Latin, the word also came to mean &quot;sword&quot;, regardless of the type used. 

Early ancient Roman swords were similar to those of the Greeks, called &quot;xiphe&quot; (, : &quot;xiphos&quot;). From the 3rd century BC, however, the Romans adopted a weapon based on the sword of the Celtiberians of Hispania in service to Carthage during the Punic Wars, known in Latin as the &quot;gladius hispaniensis&quot;, meaning &quot;Hispanic-type sword&quot;. The Romans improved the weapon and modified it depending on how their battle units waged war, and created over time new types of &quot;gladii&quot; such as the &quot;Mainz gladius&quot; and the &quot;Pompeii gladius&quot;. Finally, in the third century AD the heavy Roman infantry replaced the &quot;gladius&quot; with the &quot;spatha&quot; (already common among Roman cavalrymen), relegating the &quot;gladius&quot; as a weapon for light Roman infantry.

A fully equipped Roman legionary after the consulships of Gaius Marius was armed with a sword (&quot;gladius&quot;), a shield (&quot;scutum&quot;), one or two javelins (&quot;pila&quot;), often a dagger (&quot;pugio&quot;), and perhaps, in the later empire period, darts (&quot;plumbatae&quot;). Conventionally, soldiers threw &quot;pila&quot; to disable the enemy&#x27;s shields and disrupt enemy formations before engaging in close combat, for which they drew the . A soldier generally led with the shield and thrust with the sword.

==Etymology==

&quot;Gladius&quot; is a Latin masculine noun. The nominative plural of it is . However, in Latin refers to any sword, not only the sword described here. The word appears in literature as early as the plays of Plautus (&quot;Casina&quot;, &quot;Rudens&quot;).

&quot;Gladius&quot; is generally believed to be a Celtic loan in Latin (perhaps via an Etruscan intermediary), derived from ancient Celtic or &quot;sword&quot; (whence modern Welsh &quot;sword&quot;, modern Breton , Old Irish /Modern Irish [itself perhaps a loan from Welsh]; the root of the word may survive in the Old Irish verb &quot;claidid&quot; &quot;digs, excavates&quot; and anciently attested in the Gallo-Brittonic place name element &quot;cladia&quot;/&quot;clado&quot; &quot;ditch, trench, valley hollow&quot;).

Modern English words derived from include gladiator (&quot;swordsman&quot;) and &quot;gladiolus&quot; (&quot;little sword&quot;, from the diminutive form of &quot;gladius&quot;), a flowering plant with sword-shaped leaves.

==Predecessors and origins==

According to Polybius, the sword used by the Roman army during the Battle of Telamon in 225 BC, though deemed superior to the cumbersome Gallic swords, was mainly useful to thrust. These thrusting swords used before the adoption of the Gladius were possibly based on the Greek &quot;xiphos&quot;. Later, during the Battle of Cannae in 216 BC, they found Hannibal&#x27;s Celtiberian mercenaries wielding swords that excelled at both slashing and thrusting. A text attributed to Polybius describes the adoption of this design by the Romans even before the end of the war, which canonical Polybius reaffirms by calling the later Roman sword &quot;gladius hispaniensis&quot; in Latin and &quot;iberiké machaira&quot; in Greek. It is believed Scipio Africanus was the promoter of the change after the Battle of Cartagena in 209 BC, after which he set the inhabitants to produce weapons for the Roman army.

In 70 BC, both Claudius Quadrigarius and Livy relate the story of Titus Manlius Torquatus using a &quot;Hispanic sword&quot; (&quot;gladius Hispanus&quot;) in a duel with a Gaul in 361 BC. However, the Gladius was not yet used by the Romans in the 4th century BC, and because of that this has been traditionally considered a terminological anachronism caused by the long established naming convention. It&#x27;s possible that the Celtiberian sword was first adopted by Romans after encounters with Carthaginian mercenaries of that nationality during the First Punic War (264-241 BC), not the second. In any case, the &quot;gladius hispaniensis&quot; became particularly known in 200 BC during the Second Macedonian War, in which Macedonian soldiers became horrified at what Roman swords could do after an early cavalry skirmish. It has been suggested that the sword used by Roman cavalrymen was different from the infantry model, but most academics have discarded this view.

Arguments for the Celtiberian source of the weapon have been reinforced in recent decades by discovery of early Roman &quot;gladii&quot; that seem to highlight that they were copies of Celtiberian models. The weapon developed in Iberia after La Tène I models, which were adapted to traditional Celtiberian techniques during the late 4th and early 3rd centuries BC. These weapons are quite original in their design, so that they cannot be confused with Gallic types. As for the origin of the word &quot;gladius&quot;, one theory proposes the borrowing of the word from *&quot;kladi&quot;- during the Gallic wars, relying on the principle that &quot;K&quot; often became &quot;G&quot; in Latin. Ennius attests the word &quot;gladius&quot; may have replaced &quot;ensis&quot;, which until then was used mainly by poets.

==Manufacturing==
===Technique===

By the time of the Roman Republic, which flourished during the Iron Age, steel and the steel-making process was known to the classical world. Pure iron is relatively soft, but pure iron is never found in nature. Natural iron ore contains various impurities in solid solution, which harden the reduced metal by producing irregular-shaped metallic crystals. The &quot;gladius&quot; was generally made out of steel.

In Roman times, workers reduced ore in a bloomery furnace. The resulting pieces were called &quot;blooms&quot;, which they further worked to remove slag inclusions from the porous surface.

A recent metallurgical study of two Etrurian swords, one in the form of a Greek &quot;kopis&quot; from 7th century BC Vetulonia, the other in the form of a &quot;gladius Hispaniensis&quot; from 4th century BC Clusium (Chiusi), gives insight concerning the manufacture of Roman swords. The Chiusi sword comes from Romanized &quot;etruria&quot;; thus, regardless of the names of the forms (which the authors do not identify), the authors believe the process was continuous from the Etruscans to the Romans.

The Vetulonian sword was crafted by the pattern welding process from five blooms reduced at a temperature of . Five strips of varying carbon content were created. A central core of the sword contained the highest: 0.15–0.25% carbon. On its edges were placed four strips of low-carbon steel, 0.05–0.07%, and the whole thing was welded together by forging on the pattern of hammer blows. A blow increased the temperature sufficiently to produce a friction weld at that spot. Forging continued until the steel was cold, producing some central annealing. The sword was long.

The Chiusian sword was created from a single bloom by forging from a temperature of . The carbon content increased from 0.05–0.08% at the back side of the sword to 0.35–0.4% on the blade, from which the authors deduce that some form of carburization may have been used. The sword was long and was characterized by a wasp-waist close to the hilt.

Romans continued to forge swords, both as composites and from single pieces. Inclusions of sand and rust weakened the two swords in the study, and no doubt limited the strength of swords during the Roman period.

===Production===

The craftsmen with the strategic task of making the &quot;gladii&quot; were called &quot;gladiarii&quot;. They were part of the Roman legions as &quot;fabri&quot;, enjoying the status of &quot;immunes&quot;. There were also public workshops, &quot;fabricae&quot;, dedicated to the making of the &quot;gladii&quot;. Epigraphic attestations of the &quot;gladiarii&quot; have been found in Italy, especially in areas of ancient metallurgic tradition such as Capua and Aquileia.

==Description==
The word &quot;gladius&quot; acquired a general meaning as any type of sword. This use appears as early as the 1st century AD in the &quot;Biography of Alexander the Great&quot; by Quintus Curtius Rufus. The republican authors, however, appear to mean a specific type of sword, which is now known from archaeology to have had variants.

&quot;Gladii&quot; were two-edged for cutting and had a tapered point for stabbing during thrusting. A solid grip was provided by a knobbed hilt added on, possibly with ridges for the fingers. Blade strength was achieved by welding together strips, in which case the sword had a channel down the centre, or by fashioning a single piece of high-carbon steel, rhomboidal in cross-section. The owner&#x27;s name was often engraved or punched on the blade.

The hilt of a Roman sword was the &quot;capulus&quot;. It was often ornate, especially the sword-hilts of officers and dignitaries.

Stabbing was a very efficient technique, as stabbing wounds, especially in the abdominal area, were almost always deadly. However, the &quot;gladius&quot; in some circumstances was used for cutting or slashing, as is indicated by Livy&#x27;s account of the Macedonian Wars, wherein the Macedonian soldiers were horrified to see dismembered bodies.

Though the primary infantry attack was thrusting at stomach height, they were trained to take any advantage, such as slashing at kneecaps beneath the shield wall.

The &quot;gladius&quot; was sheathed in a scabbard mounted on a belt or shoulder strap. Some say the soldier reached across his body to draw it, and others claim that the position of the shield made this method of drawing impossible. A centurion wore it on the opposite side as a mark of distinction.

Towards the end of the 2nd century AD and during the 3rd century the &quot;spatha&quot; gradually took the place of the &quot;gladius&quot; in the Roman legions.

==Types==
Several different designs were used; among collectors and historical reenactors, the three primary kinds are known as the &quot;Mainz gladius&quot;, the &quot;Fulham gladius&quot;, and the &quot;Pompeii gladius&quot; (these names refer to where or how the canonical example was found). More recent archaeological finds have uncovered an earlier version, the &quot;gladius Hispaniensis&quot;.

The differences between these varieties are subtle. The original Hispanic sword, which was used during the republic, had a slight &quot;wasp-waist&quot; or &quot;leaf-blade&quot; curvature. The Mainz variety came into use on the frontier in the early empire. It kept the curvature, but shortened and widened the blade and made the point triangular. At home, the less battle-effective Pompeii version came into use. It eliminated the curvature, lengthened the blade, and diminished the point. The Fulham was a compromise, with straight edges and a long point.

=== &quot;Gladius Hispaniensis&quot; ===
&quot;The gladius Hispaniensis&quot; was a Roman sword used from around 216 BC until 20 BC. Its blade had a length of , and the sword was long. The width of the sword was . It was the largest and heaviest of the &quot;gladii&quot;, weighing or . This gladius was also the earliest and longest blade. It had a pronounced leaf-shape.

=== &quot;Mainz Gladius&quot; ===
&quot;The Mainz Gladius&quot; is made of heavily corroded iron and a sheath made of tinned and gilded bronze. The blade was long and in width. The sword was long. The sword weighed . The point of the sword was more triangular than the Gladius Hispaniensis. The Mainz Gladius still had wasp-waisted curves. The decoration on the scabbard illustrates the ceding of military victory to Augustus by Tiberius after a successful Alpine campaign. Augustus is semi-nude, and sits in the pose of Jupiter, flanked by the Roman gods of Victory and Mars Ultor, while Tiberius, in military dress, presents Augustus with a statuette of Victory.

=== &quot;Fulham gladius&quot; ===
The &quot;Fulham gladius&quot; or &quot;Mainz-Fulham gladius&quot; was a Roman sword that was used after Aulus Plautius&#x27; invasion of Britain in 43 AD. The Romans used it until the end of the 1st century. The &quot;Fulham gladius&quot; has a triangular tip. The length of the blade is . The length of the sword is . The width of the blade is . The swords weighs (wooden hilt). A full size replica can be seen at Fulham Palace, Fulham.

=== &quot;Pompeii gladius&quot; ===

The &quot;Pompeii gladius&quot; was named by modern historians after the Roman town of Pompeii. This type of &quot;gladius&quot; was by far the most popular one. Four examples of the sword type were found in Pompeii, with others turning up elsewhere. The sword has parallel cutting edges and a triangular tip. This is the shortest of the &quot;gladii&quot;. It is often confused with the &quot;spatha&quot;, which was a longer, slashing weapon used initially by mounted &quot;auxilians&quot;. Over the years, the Pompeii got longer, and these later versions are called semi-&quot;spathes&quot;. The length of the blade was . The length of the sword is . The width of the blade is . The sword weighs (wooden hilt).

==See also==

* Iron Age sword
* Model 1816 French artillery short sword
* Model 1832 foot artillery sword
* Qama
* Roman military personal equipment

==Notes==

This is only true for the nominative case; For more information, see the Latin declension page.

==References==
* Significant Contributions in the Study of European Arms and Armor, bibliography by the Arms and Armor Society of America.
* Armamentarium: subject bibliographies: swords
* John William Humphrey, John Peter Oleson, Andrew Neil Sherwood, Greek and Roman Technology: a sourcebook

==External links==

The articles in the links below often differ both in theory and in detail. They should not necessarily be understood as fully professional articles but should be appreciated for their presentational value.

===Pictures of ancient swords===
* Roman Military Equipment at the Roman Numismatic Gallery (romancoins.info)

===Reenactments, reconstructions, experimental archaeology===
* Legio IX Hispana: photos of historical reconstructionists drawing and holding gladii.
* 

===Articles on the history or manufacture of the sword===
* Ross Cowan, Gladius Gallicus, an introduction to the Gallic-type swords used by the Romans prior to the adoption of the &quot;gladius Hispaniensis&quot;
* Iron of the Empire: The History and Development of the Roman Gladius (myArmoury.com article)
* Janet Lang, Study of the Metallography of Some Roman Swords
* Niko Silvester, From Rapier to Langsax: Sword Structure in the British Isles in the Bronze and Iron Ages
* Richard F. Burton, The Sword Amongst the Barbarians (Early Roman Empire).
*Taylor, Michael J. &quot;Panoply and Identity during the Roman Republic.&quot; &quot;Papers of the British School at Rome&quot; 88 (2020), 31-65. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="16" end="21" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12791" start="61" end="66" title="sword" label="sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="84" end="97" title="Ancient Rome" label="ancient Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500165" start="359" end="364" title="xiphos" label="xiphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="435" end="441" title="Roman Republic" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011445" start="485" end="497" title="Celtiberians" label="Celtiberians"/>
<link wikidata="Q186513" start="501" end="509" title="Hispania" label="Hispania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="524" end="532" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q124988" start="544" end="554" title="Punic Wars" label="Punic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q186513" start="626" end="634" title="Hispania" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q60870" start="982" end="988" title="spatha" label="spatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q17346959" start="1133" end="1142" title="legionary" label="legionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q177975" start="1168" end="1180" title="Gaius Marius" label="Gaius Marius"/>
<link wikidata="Q745446" start="1243" end="1249" title="scutum" label="scutum"/>
<link wikidata="Q308989" start="1285" end="1289" title="Pilum" label="pila"/>
<link wikidata="Q221410" start="1320" end="1325" title="pugio" label="pugio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135087" start="1388" end="1396" title="plumbata" label="plumbata"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1686" end="1691" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131105" start="1712" end="1722" title="nominative" label="nominative"/>
<link wikidata="Q47160" start="1871" end="1878" title="Plautus" label="Plautus"/>
<link wikidata="Q215566" start="1972" end="1978" title="Continental Celtic" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q309197" start="2129" end="2135" title="Bretons" label="Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519116" start="2331" end="2346" title="Gallo-Brittonic" label="Gallo-Brittonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q482999" start="2489" end="2498" title="gladiator" label="gladiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q156207" start="2533" end="2542" title="gladiolus" label="gladiolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q108709" start="2585" end="2595" title="diminutive" label="diminutive"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="2628" end="2643" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q131169" start="2714" end="2722" title="Polybius" label="Polybius"/>
<link wikidata="Q175985" start="2768" end="2785" title="Battle of Telamon" label="Battle of Telamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500165" start="2984" end="2990" title="xiphos" label="xiphos"/>
<link wikidata="Q179591" start="3016" end="3032" title="Battle of Cannae" label="Battle of Cannae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011445" start="3071" end="3082" title="Celtiberians" label="Celtiberian"/>
<link wikidata="Q65044966" start="3083" end="3094" title="Mercenaries of the ancient Iberian peninsula" label="mercenaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271" start="3266" end="3269" title="Second Punic War" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3375" end="3380" title="Latin-language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="3417" end="3422" title="Ancient greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253" start="3439" end="3455" title="Scipio Africanus" label="Scipio Africanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591145" start="3497" end="3516" title="Battle of Cartagena (209 BC)" label="Battle of Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q445928" start="3618" end="3639" title="Quintus Claudius Quadrigarius" label="Claudius Quadrigarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q714821" start="3669" end="3692" title="Titus Manlius Torquatus (347 BC)" label="Titus Manlius Torquatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189203" start="3943" end="3954" title="anachronism" label="anachronism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286" start="4157" end="4172" title="First Punic War" label="First Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q75665" start="4300" end="4321" title="Second Macedonian War" label="Second Macedonian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q47130" start="5272" end="5278" title="Ennius" label="Ennius"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="5451" end="5465" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="5495" end="5503" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="5505" end="5510" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q787619" start="5692" end="5706" title="solid solution" label="solid solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313218" start="5870" end="5881" title="Direct reduced iron" label="reduced ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q964257" start="5887" end="5895" title="bloomery" label="bloomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q206730" start="6072" end="6079" title="Etruria" label="Etruria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542452" start="6122" end="6127" title="kopis" label="kopis"/>
<link wikidata="Q633467" start="6154" end="6163" title="Vetulonia" label="Vetulonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q843729" start="6245" end="6252" title="Clusium" label="Clusium"/>
<link wikidata="Q91185" start="6254" end="6260" title="Chiusi" label="Chiusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148394" start="6582" end="6597" title="pattern welding" label="pattern welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q187360" start="7082" end="7091" title="Annealing (metallurgy)" label="annealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q759800" start="7350" end="7363" title="carburization" label="carburization"/>
<link wikidata="Q850361" start="7885" end="7892" title="immunes" label="immunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q58477" start="8147" end="8152" title="Capua" label="Capua"/>
<link wikidata="Q53216" start="8157" end="8165" title="Aquileia" label="Aquileia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5959" start="8365" end="8386" title="Quintus Curtius Rufus" label="Quintus Curtius Rufus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593696" start="8979" end="8983" title="hilt" label="hilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039" start="9338" end="9342" title="Titus Livius" label="Livy"/>
<link wikidata="Q75813" start="9365" end="9380" title="Macedonian Wars" label="Macedonian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q661140" start="9663" end="9671" title="scabbard" label="scabbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q26409" start="9857" end="9866" title="centurion" label="centurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q60870" start="9998" end="10004" title="spatha" label="spatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q657069" start="10154" end="10175" title="Historical reenactment" label="historical reenactors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257211" start="11467" end="11480" title="Mainz Gladius" label="Mainz Gladius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="11840" end="11848" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="12012" end="12020" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q352489" start="12229" end="12249" title="Aulus Plautius" label="Aulus Plautius&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507927" start="12540" end="12553" title="Fulham Palace" label="Fulham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367868" start="12555" end="12561" title="Fulham" label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q43332" start="12688" end="12695" title="Pompeii" label="Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q60870" start="12995" end="13001" title="spatha" label="spatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965849" start="13332" end="13346" title="Iron Age sword" label="Iron Age sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888162" start="13349" end="13388" title="Model 1816 French artillery short sword" label="Model 1816 French artillery short sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888176" start="13391" end="13422" title="Model 1832 foot artillery sword" label="Model 1832 foot artillery sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q7266394" start="13425" end="13429" title="Qama" label="Qama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701964" start="13432" end="13465" title="Roman military personal equipment" label="Roman military personal equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q131105" start="13504" end="13519" title="nominative case" label="nominative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q601360" start="13551" end="13567" title="Latin declension" label="Latin declension"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252646" start="13787" end="13804" title="John Peter Oleson" label="John Peter Oleson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="57987" wikidata="Q76519" url="?curid=57987" title="Rudolf Carnap">
<text>Rudolf Carnap (; ; 18 May 1891 – 14 September 1970) was a German-language philosopher who was active in Europe before 1935 and in the United States thereafter. He was a major member of the Vienna Circle and an advocate of logical positivism.

==Biography==

Carnap&#x27;s father rose from being a poor ribbon-weaver to be the owner of a ribbon-making factory. His mother came from an academic family; her father was an educational reformer and her oldest brother was the archaeologist Wilhelm Dörpfeld. As a ten-year-old, Carnap accompanied Wilhelm Dörpfeld on an expedition to Greece. Carnap was raised in a profoundly religious Protestant family, but later became an atheist.

He began his formal education at the Barmen Gymnasium and the Gymnasium in Jena. From 1910 to 1914, he attended the University of Jena, intending to write a thesis in physics. He also intently studied Immanuel Kant&#x27;s &quot;Critique of Pure Reason&quot; during a course taught by Bruno Bauch, and was one of very few students to attend Gottlob Frege&#x27;s courses in mathematical logic.

During his university years he became enthralled with the German Youth Movement.

While Carnap held moral and political opposition to World War I, he felt obligated to serve in the German army. After three years of service, he was given permission to study physics at the University of Berlin, 1917–18, where Albert Einstein was a newly appointed professor. Carnap then attended the University of Jena, where he wrote a thesis defining an axiomatic theory of space and time. The physics department said it was too philosophical, and Bruno Bauch of the philosophy department said it was pure physics. Carnap then wrote another thesis in 1921, under Bauch&#x27;s supervision, on the theory of space in a more orthodox Kantian style, and published as &quot;Der Raum&quot; (&quot;Space&quot;) in a supplemental issue of &quot;Kant-Studien&quot; (1922).

Frege&#x27;s course exposed him to Bertrand Russell&#x27;s work on logic and philosophy, which put a sense of the aims to his studies. He accepted the effort to surpass traditional philosophy with logical innovations that inform the sciences. He wrote a letter to Russell, who responded by copying by hand long passages from his &quot;Principia Mathematica&quot; for Carnap&#x27;s benefit, as neither Carnap nor his university could afford a copy of this epochal work. In 1924 and 1925, he attended seminars led by Edmund Husserl, the founder of phenomenology, and continued to write on physics from a logical positivist perspective.

Carnap discovered a kindred spirit when he met Hans Reichenbach at a 1923 conference. Reichenbach introduced Carnap to Moritz Schlick, a professor at the University of Vienna who offered Carnap a position in his department, which Carnap accepted in 1926. Carnap thereupon joined an informal group of Viennese intellectuals that came to be known as the Vienna Circle, directed largely by Schlick and including Hans Hahn, Friedrich Waismann, Otto Neurath, and Herbert Feigl, with occasional visits by Hahn&#x27;s student Kurt Gödel. When Wittgenstein visited Vienna, Carnap would meet with him. He (with Hahn and Neurath) wrote the 1929 manifesto of the Circle, and (with Hans Reichenbach) initiated the philosophy journal &quot;Erkenntnis&quot;.

In February 1930 Alfred Tarski lectured in Vienna, and during November 1930 Carnap visited Warsaw. On these occasions he learned much about Tarski&#x27;s model theoretic method of semantics. Rose Rand, another philosopher in the Vienna Circle, noted, &quot;Carnap&#x27;s conception of semantics starts from the basis given in Tarski&#x27;s work but a distinction is made between logical and non-logical constants and between logical and factual truth... At the same time he worked with the concepts of intension and extension and took these two concepts as a basis of a new method of semantics.&quot;

In 1931, Carnap was appointed Professor at the German University of Prague. In 1933, W. V. Quine met Carnap in Prague and discussed the latter&#x27;s work at some length. Thus began the lifelong mutual respect these two men shared, one that survived Quine&#x27;s eventual forceful disagreements with a number of Carnap&#x27;s philosophical conclusions.

Carnap, whose socialist and pacifist beliefs put him at risk in Nazi Germany, emigrated to the United States in 1935 and became a naturalized citizen in 1941. Meanwhile, back in Vienna, Schlick was murdered in 1936. From 1936 to 1952, Carnap was a professor of philosophy at the University of Chicago. During the late 1930s, Carnap offered an assistant position in philosophy to Carl Gustav Hempel, who accepted and became one of his most significant intellectual collaborators. Thanks partly to Quine&#x27;s help, Carnap spent the years 1939–41 at Harvard University, where he was reunited with Tarski. Carnap (1963) later expressed some irritation about his time at Chicago, where he and Charles W. Morris were the only members of the department committed to the primacy of science and logic. (Their Chicago colleagues included Richard McKeon, Charles Hartshorne, and Manley Thompson.) Carnap&#x27;s years at Chicago were nonetheless very productive ones. He wrote books on semantics (Carnap 1942, 1943, 1956), modal logic, and on the philosophical foundations of probability and inductive logic (Carnap 1950, 1952).

After a stint at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton (1952–1954), he joined the UCLA Department of Philosophy in 1954, Hans Reichenbach having died the previous year. He had earlier refused an offer of a similar job at the University of California, Berkeley, because accepting that position required that he sign a loyalty oath, a practice to which he was opposed on principle. While at UCLA, he wrote on scientific knowledge, the analytic–synthetic distinction, and the verification principle. His writings on thermodynamics and on the foundations of probability and inductive logic, were published posthumously as Carnap (1971, 1977, 1980).

Carnap taught himself Esperanto when he was 14 years of age. He later attended the World Congress of Esperanto in Dresden in 1908. He also attended the 1924 Congress in Vienna, where he met his fellow Esperantist Otto Neurath for the first time.

In the USA Carnap was somewhat politically involved. Carnap was a signatory of an open appeal distributed by the National Committee to Secure Justice in the Rosenberg Case to appeal for clemency in the case. He was listed as a &#x27;sponsor&#x27; for the &quot;National Conference to Appeal the Walter-McCarran Law and Defend Its Victims&quot; organised by the American Committee for the Protection of the Foreign Born, and also for the &quot;Scientific and Cultural Conference for World Peace&quot; organised by the National Council of Arts, Sciences and Professions.

Carnap had four children by his first marriage to Elizabeth Schöndube, which ended in divorce in 1929. He married his second wife, Elizabeth Ina Stöger, in 1933. Ina committed suicide in 1964.

== Philosophical work ==

Below is an examination of the main topics in the evolution of the philosophy of Rudolf Carnap. It is not exhaustive, but it outlines Carnap&#x27;s main works and contributions to modern epistemology and philosophy of logic.

=== &quot;Der Raum&quot; ===
From 1919 to 1921, Carnap worked on a doctoral thesis called &quot;Der Raum: Ein Beitrag zur Wissenschaftslehre&quot; (&quot;Space: A Contribution to the Theory of Science&quot;, 1922). In this dissertation on the philosophical foundations of geometry, Carnap tried to provide a logical basis for a theory of space and time in physics. Considering that Carnap was interested in pure mathematics, natural sciences and philosophy, his dissertation can be seen as an attempt to build a bridge between the different disciplines that are geometry, physics and philosophy. For Carnap thought that in many instances those disciplines use the same concepts, but with totally different meanings. The main objective of Carnap&#x27;s dissertation was to show that the inconsistencies between theories concerning space only existed because philosophers, as well as mathematicians and scientists, were talking about different things while using the same &quot;space&quot; word. Hence, Carnap characteristically argued that there had to be three separate notions of space. &quot;Formal&quot; space is space in the sense of mathematics: it is an abstract system of relations. &quot;Intuitive&quot; space is made of certain contents of intuition independent of single experiences. &quot;Physical&quot; space is made of actual spatial facts given in experience. The upshot is that those three kinds of &quot;space&quot; imply three different kinds of knowledge and thus three different kinds of investigations. It is interesting to note that it is in this dissertation that the main themes of Carnap&#x27;s philosophy appear, most importantly the idea that many philosophical contradictions appear because of a misuse of language, and a stress on the importance of distinguishing formal and material modes of speech.

=== &quot;Der Logische Aufbau der Welt&quot; ===
From 1922 to 1925, Carnap worked on a book which became one of his major works, namely &quot;Der logische Aufbau der Welt&quot; (translated as &quot;The Logical Structure of the World&quot;, 1967), which was accepted in 1926 as his habilitation thesis at the University of Vienna and published as a book in 1928. That achievement has become a landmark in modern epistemology and can be read as a forceful statement of the philosophical thesis of logical positivism. Indeed, the &quot;Aufbau&quot; suggests that epistemology, based on modern symbolic logic, is concerned with the logical analysis of scientific propositions, while science itself, based on experience, is the only source of knowledge of the external world, i.e. the world outside the realm of human perception. According to Carnap, philosophical propositions are statements about the language of science; they aren&#x27;t true or false, but merely consist of definitions and conventions about the use of certain concepts. In contrast, scientific propositions are factual statements about the external reality. They are meaningful because they are based on the perceptions of the senses. In other words, the truth or falsity of those propositions can be verified by testing their content with further observations.

In the &quot;Aufbau&quot;, Carnap wants to display the logical and conceptual structure with which all scientific (factual) statements can be organized. Carnap gives the label &quot;constitution theory&quot; to this epistemic-logical project. It is a constructive undertaking that systematizes scientific knowledge according to the notions of symbolic logic. Accordingly, the purpose of this constitutional system is to identify and discern different classes of scientific concepts and to specify the logical relations that link them. In the Aufbau, concepts are taken to denote objects, relations, properties, classes and states. Carnap argues that all concepts must be ranked over a hierarchy. In that hierarchy, all concepts are organized according to a fundamental arrangement where concepts can be reduced and converted to other basic ones. Carnap explains that a concept can be reduced to another when all sentences containing the first concept can be transformed into sentences containing the other. In other words, every scientific sentence should be translatable into another sentence such that the original terms have the same reference as the translated terms. Most significantly, Carnap argues that the basis of this system is psychological. Its content is the &quot;immediately given&quot;, which is made of basic elements, namely perceptual experiences. These basic elements consist of conscious psychological states of a single human subject. In the end, Carnap argues that his constitutional project demonstrates the possibility of defining and uniting all scientific concepts in a single conceptual system on the basis of a few fundamental concepts.

=== Overcoming metaphysics ===

From 1928 to 1934, Carnap published papers (&quot;Scheinprobleme in der Philosophie&quot;, 1928; translated as &quot;Pseudoproblems in Philosophy&quot;, 1967) in which he appears overtly skeptical of the aims and methods of metaphysics, i.e. the traditional philosophy that finds its roots in mythical and religious thought. Indeed, he discusses how, in many cases, metaphysics is made of meaningless discussions of pseudo-problems. For Carnap, a pseudo-problem is a philosophical question which, on the surface, handles concepts that refer to our world while, in fact, these concepts do not actually denote real and attested objects. In other words, these pseudo-problems concern statements that do not, in any way, have empirical implications. They do not refer to states of affairs and the things they denote cannot be perceived. Consequently, one of Carnap&#x27;s main aim has been to redefine the purpose and method of philosophy. According to him, philosophy should not aim at producing any knowledge transcending the knowledge of science. In contrast, by analyzing the language and propositions of science, philosophers should define the logical foundations of scientific knowledge. Using symbolic logic, they should explicate the concepts, methods and justificatory processes that exist in science.

Carnap believed that the difficulty with traditional philosophy lay in the use of concepts that are not useful for science. For Carnap, the scientific legitimacy of these concepts was doubtful, because the sentences containing them do not express facts. Indeed, a logical analysis of those sentences proves that they do not convey the meaning of states of affairs. In other words, these sentences are meaningless. Carnap explains that to be meaningful, a sentence should be factual. It can be so, for one thing, by being based on experience, i.e. by being formulated with words relating to direct observations. For another, a sentence is factual if one can clearly state what are the observations that could confirm or disconfirm that sentence. After all, Carnap presupposes a specific criterion of meaning, namely the Wittgensteinian principle of verifiability. Indeed, he requires, as a precondition of meaningfulness, that all sentences be verifiable, which implies that a sentence is meaningful only if there is a way to verify if it is true or false. To verify a sentence, one needs to expound the empirical conditions and circumstances that would establish the truth of the sentence. As a result, it is clear for Carnap that metaphysical sentences are meaningless. They include concepts like &quot;god&quot;, &quot;soul&quot; and &quot;the absolute&quot; that transcend experience and cannot be traced back or connected to direct observations. Because those sentences cannot be verified in any way, Carnap suggests that science, as well as philosophy, should neither consider nor contain them.

=== The logical analysis of language ===
At that point in his career, Carnap attempted to develop a full theory of the logical structure of scientific language. This theory, exposed in &quot;Logische Syntax der Sprache&quot; (1934; translated as &quot;The Logical Syntax of Language&quot;, 1937) gives the foundations to his idea that scientific language has a specific formal structure and that its signs are governed by the rules of deductive logic. Moreover, the theory of logical syntax expounds a method with which one can talk about a language: it is a formal meta-theory about the pure forms of language. In the end, because Carnap argues that philosophy aims at the logical analysis of the language of science and thus is the logic of science, the theory of the logical syntax can be considered as a definite language and a conceptual framework for philosophy.

The logical syntax of language is a formal theory. It is not concerned with the contextualized meaning or the truth-value of sentences. In contrast, it considers the general structure of a given language and explores the different structural relations that connect the elements of that language. Hence, by explaining the different operations that allow specific transformations within the language, the theory is a systematic exposition of the rules that operate within that language. In fact, the basic function of these rules is to provide the principles to safeguard coherence, to avoid contradictions and to deduce justified conclusions. Carnap sees language as a calculus. This calculus is a systematic arrangement of symbols and relations. The symbols of the language are organized according to the class that they belong to---and it is through their combination that we can form sentences. The relations are different conditions under which a sentence can be said to follow, or to be the consequence, of another sentence. The definitions included in the calculus state the conditions under which a sentence can be considered of a certain type and how those sentences can be transformed. We can see the logical syntax as a method of formal transformation, i.e. a method for calculating and reasoning with symbols.

Finally, Carnap introduces his well known &quot;principle of tolerance.&quot; This principle suggests that there is no moral in logic. When it comes to using a language, there is no good or bad, fundamentally true or false. In this perspective, the philosopher&#x27;s task is not to bring authoritative interdicts prohibiting the use of certain concepts. In contrast, philosophers should seek general agreements over the relevance of certain logical devices. According to Carnap, those agreements are possible only through the detailed presentation of the meaning and use of the expressions of a language. In other words, Carnap believes that every logical language is correct only if this language is supported by exact definitions and not by philosophical presumptions. Carnap embraces a formal conventionalism. That implies that formal languages are constructed and that everyone is free to choose the language it finds more suited to his purpose. There should not be any controversy over which language is the correct language; what matters is agreeing over which language best suits a particular purpose. Carnap explains that the choice of a language should be guided according to the security it provides against logical inconsistency. Furthermore, practical elements like simplicity and fruitfulness in certain tasks influence the choice of a language. Clearly enough, the principle of tolerance was a sophisticated device introduced by Carnap to dismiss any form of dogmatism in philosophy.

=== Inductive logic ===
After having considered problems in semantics, i.e. the theory of the concepts of meaning and truth (&quot;Foundations of Logic and Mathematics&quot;, 1939; &quot;Introduction to Semantics&quot;, 1942; &quot;Formalization of Logic&quot;, 1943), Carnap turned his attention to the subject of probability and inductive logic. His views on that subject are for the most part exposed in &quot;Logical foundations of probability&quot; (1950) where Carnap aims to give a sound logical interpretation of probability. Carnap thought that according to certain conditions, the concept of probability had to be interpreted as a purely logical concept. In this view, probability is a basic concept anchored in all inductive inferences, whereby the conclusion of every inference that holds without deductive necessity is said be more or less likely to be the case. In fact, Carnap claims that the problem of induction is a matter of finding a precise explanation of the logical relation that holds between a hypothesis and the evidence that supports it. An inductive logic is thus based on the idea that probability is a logical relation between two types of statements: the hypothesis (conclusion) and the premises (evidence). Accordingly, a theory of induction should explain how, by pure logical analysis, we can ascertain that certain evidence establishes a degree of confirmation strong enough to confirm a given hypothesis.

Carnap was convinced that there was a logical as well as an empirical dimension in science. He believed that one had to isolate the experiential elements from the logical elements of a given body of knowledge. Hence, the empirical concept of frequency used in statistics to describe the general features of certain phenomena can be distinguished from the analytical concepts of probability logic that merely describe logical relations between sentences. For Carnap, the statistical and the logical concepts must be investigated separately. Having insisted on this distinction, Carnap defines two concepts of probability. The first one is logical and deals with the degree to which a given hypothesis is confirmed by a piece of evidence. It is the &quot;degree of confirmation&quot;. The second is empirical, and relates to the long run rate of one observable feature of nature relative to another. It is the &quot;relative frequency.&quot; Statements belonging to the second concepts are about reality and describe states of affairs. They are empirical and, therefore, must be based on experimental procedures and the observation of relevant facts. On the contrary, statements belonging to the first concept do not say anything about facts. Their meaning can be grasped solely with an analysis of the signs they contain. They are analytical sentences, i.e. true by virtue of their logical meaning. Even though these sentences could refer to states of affairs, their meaning is given by the symbols and relations they contain. In other words, the probability of a conclusion is given by the logical relation it has to the evidence. The evaluation of the degree of confirmation of a hypothesis is thus a problem of meaning analysis.

Clearly, the probability of a statement about relative frequency can be unknown; because it depends on the observation of certain phenomena, one may not possess the information needed to establish the value of that probability. Consequently, the value of that statement can be confirmed only if it is corroborated with facts. In contrast, the probability of a statement about the degree of confirmation could be unknown, in the sense that one may miss the correct logical method to evaluate its exact value. But, such a statement can always receive a certain logical value, given the fact that this value only depends on the meaning of its symbols.

==Primary source materials==
The Rudolf Carnap Papers contain thousands of letters, notes and drafts, and diaries. The majority of his papers were purchased from his daughter, Hanna Carnap-Thost in 1974, by the University of Pittsburgh, with subsequent further accessions. Documents that contain financial, medical, and personal information are restricted. These were written over his entire life and career. Carnap used the mail regularly to discuss philosophical problems with hundreds of others. The most notable were: Herbert Feigl, Carl Gustav Hempel, Felix Kaufmann, Otto Neurath, and Moritz Schlick. Photographs are also part of the collection and were taken throughout his life. Family pictures and photographs of his peers and colleagues are also stored in the collection. Some of the correspondence is considered notable and consist of his student notes, his seminars with Frege, (describing the &quot;Begriffsschrift&quot; and the logic in mathematics). Carnap&#x27;s notes from Russell&#x27;s seminar in Chicago, and notes he took from discussions with Tarski, Heisenberg, Quine, Hempel, Gödel, and Jeffrey are also part of the University of Pittsburgh Library System&#x27;s Archives and Special Collections. Digitized contents include:

*Notes (old), 1958–1966

*More than 1,000 pages of lecture outlines are preserved that cover the courses that Carnap taught in the United States, Prague, and Vienna. Drafts of his published works and unpublished works are part of the collection. Additional Carnap materials can be found throughout the Archives of Scientific Philosophy at the University of Pittsburgh.
*Manuscript drafts and typescripts both for his published works and for many unpublished papers and books. A partial listing include his first formulations of his &quot;Aufbau&quot;.

Much material is written in an older German shorthand, the Stolze-Schrey system. He employed this writing system extensively beginning in his student days. Some of the content has been digitized and is available through the finding aid. The University of California also maintains a collection of Rudolf Carnap Papers. Microfilm copies of his papers are maintained by the Philosophical Archives at the University of Konstanz in Germany.

==Selected publications==
*1922. &quot;Der Raum: Ein Beitrag zur Wissenschaftslehre&quot;, &quot;Kant-Studien&quot;, &quot;Ergänzungshefte&quot;. 56 (his 1921 doctoral thesis, published as a monograph supplement to the &quot;Kant-Studien&quot; journal).
**&quot;English translation:&quot; &quot;Space: A Contribution to the Theory of Science&quot; (2005 draft), published version in: &quot;The Collected Works of Rudolf Carnap, Volume 1: Early Writings&quot; (2019) pp. 21–208 
*1926. &quot;Physikalische Begriffsbildung&quot;. Karlsruhe: Braun.
**&quot;English translation&quot;: &quot;Physical Concept Formation&quot; (1992 draft), published version in: &quot;Collected Works&quot; (2019) pp. 339–440
*1928. &quot;&quot; (&quot;Pseudoproblems in Philosophy&quot;). Berlin: Weltkreis-Verlag.
*1928. (his habilitation thesis). Leipzig: Felix Meiner Verlag.
**&quot;English translation:&quot; Rolf A. George, 1967. &quot;&quot;. University of California Press. 
*1929. &quot;&quot;.
**(&quot;Revised) English translation: &quot; (1958)
*1931. 
**&quot;English translation: &quot; Pap, Arthur (trans.) in: Ayer, A.J (ed.) &quot;&quot; (1965) pp. 60–81 
*1934. &quot;Logische Syntax der Sprache&quot;. 
**&quot;English translation:&quot; 1937, &quot;&quot;. Kegan Paul.
*1935. &quot;Philosophy and Logical Syntax&quot;. Bristol UK: Thoemmes. Excerpt.
*1939, &quot;&quot; in &quot;International Encyclopedia of Unified Science,&quot; Vol. I, No. 3. University of Chicago Press.
*1942. &quot;&quot;. Harvard Uni. Press.
*1943. . Harvard Uni. Press.
*1945. &quot;On Inductive Logic&quot; in &quot;Philosophy of Science&quot;, Vol. 12, pp. 72–97.
*1945. &quot;The Two Concepts of Probability&quot; &quot;Philosophy and Phenomenological Research&quot;, Vol. 5, No. 4, pp.513–532.
*1947. &quot;On the Application of Inductive Logic&quot; in &quot;Philosophy and Phenomenological Research&quot;, Vol. 8, pp.133–148.
*1947. &quot;Meaning and Necessity: a Study in Semantics and Modal Logic&quot;. University of Chicago Press. [enlarged edition published in 1956]
*1950, (1962 2nd ed:) &quot;&quot;. University of Chicago Press. pp. 3–15.
*1950. &quot;Empiricism, Semantics, Ontology&quot;, &quot;Revue Internationale de Philosophie&quot; 4: 20–40. reprinted in: Paul Benacerraf &amp; Hilary Putnam (eds.), (1964) 
*1952. &quot;The Continuum of Inductive Methods&quot;. University of Chicago Press.
*1958. &quot;&quot;. trans. W. H. Myer and J. Wilkinson, Dover publications, New York. [revised and translated version of &quot;&quot; (1929)]
*1962. &quot;The Aim of Inductive Logic&quot; in (eds.) Nagel, Suppes, and Tarski, &quot;&quot; Stanford, pp 303–318 (revised and expanded in Carnap &amp; Jeffrey 1971).
*1963, in Schilpp. Paul A. (ed.) &quot;,&quot; Library Of Living Philosophers V. XI, Open Court p. 3–83 (1963) 
*1964. &quot;The Logicist Foundations of Mathematics&quot; in Paul Benacerraf &amp; Hilary Putnam (eds.), &quot;&quot;. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA: Cambridge University Press. pp. 41--52 
*1966. Basic Books.
*1966. &quot;&quot;. Martin Gardner, ed. Basic Books. Online excerpt.
*1971. &quot;Studies in Inductive Logic and Probability, Vol. 1&quot;. with Jeffrey, R. C, University of California Press.
*1973 &quot;Notes on probability and induction&quot; &quot;Synthese&quot; 25 (3-4):269 - 298, reprinted with slight revision in 

*1975 “Observation Language and Theoretical Language”, in Jaakko Hintikka (ed.), &quot;&quot;. Boston: D. Reidel Pub. Co.. pp. 75--85 [translation of “Beobachtungssprache und Theoretische Sprache”, &quot;Dialectica&quot;, 12(3–4): 236–248 1958]
*1977. &quot;Two Essays on Entropy&quot;. Shimony, Abner, ed. University of California Press.
* 1980. &quot;A Basic System of Inductive Logic Part II&quot; in: Jeffrey, R. C. (ed.) &quot;Studies in Inductive Logic and Probability, Vol. 2&quot;. . University of California Press.
* 2000. &quot;Untersuchungen zur Allgemeinen Axiomatik&quot;. Edited from unpublished manuscript by T. Bonk and J. Mosterín. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft. 167  ..
* 2017, “Value Concepts (1958)”, &quot;Synthese&quot;, 194(1): 185–194. 
* 2019. &quot;Rudolf Carnap: Early Writings&quot;, A.W. Carus, Michael Friedman, Wolfgang Kienzler, Alan Richardson, and Sven Schlotter (eds.), (The Collected Works of Rudolf Carnap, 1), New York: Oxford University Press.

*For a more complete listing see Carnap’s Works in &quot;Linked bibliography&quot;&quot;.&quot;

==Filmography==
* &quot;Interview with Rudolf Carnap&quot;, German TV, 1964

==See also==
* Definitions of philosophy
* Second Conference on the Epistemology of the Exact Sciences
* Second Davos Hochschulkurs

==References==
==Sources==
*
*Ivor Grattan-Guinness, 2000. &quot;In Search of Mathematical Roots&quot;. Princeton Uni. Press.
*Thomas Mormann, 2000. &quot;Rudolf Carnap&quot;. C. H. Beck.
*Willard Quine
**1951, &quot;Two Dogmas of Empiricism.&quot; &quot;The Philosophical Review&quot; 60: 20–43. Reprinted in his 1953 &quot;From a Logical Point of View&quot;. Harvard University Press.
**1985, &quot;The Time of My Life: An Autobiography&quot;. MIT Press.
*Richardson, Alan W., 1998. &quot;Carnap&#x27;s construction of the world: the &quot;Aufbau&quot; and the emergence of logical empiricism&quot;. Cambridge Uni. Press.
*Schilpp, P. A., ed., 1963. &quot;&quot;. LaSalle IL: Open Court.
*Spohn, Wolfgang, ed., 1991. &quot;Erkenntnis Orientated: A Centennial Volume for Rudolf Carnap and Hans Reichenbach&quot;. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
*1991. &quot;Logic, Language, and the Structure of Scientific Theories: Proceedings of the Carnap-Reichenbach Centennial, University of Konstanz, May 21–24, 1991&quot;. University of Pittsburgh Press.
*Wagner, Pierre, ed., 2009. &quot;Carnap&#x27;s Logical Syntax of Language&quot;. Palgrave Macmillan.
*Wagner, Pierre, ed., 2012. &quot;Carnap&#x27;s Ideal of Explication and Naturalism&quot;. Palgrave Macmillan.

==Further reading==
* Sarkar, Sahotra &quot;Rudolf Carnap (1891–1970)&quot; in Martinich, A. P.; Sosa, David (eds.) &quot;A Companion to Analytic Philosophy&quot;, Blackwell, (2001&quot;)&quot;
* Holt, Jim, &quot;Positive Thinking&quot; (review of Karl Sigmund, &quot;Exact Thinking in Demented Times: The Vienna Circle and the Epic Quest for the Foundations of Science&quot;, Basic Books, 449 pp.), &quot;The New York Review of Books&quot;, vol. LXIV, no. 20 (21 December 2017), pp. 74–76.
* Psillos, Stathis, &quot;Rudolf Carnap&#x27;s &#x27;Theoretical Concepts in Science&#x27;&quot;, &quot;Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part A&quot; 31(1) (2000):151–172.

==External links==
* 
* Rudolf Carnap Webpage and Directory of Internet Resources
* Homepage of the Collected Works of Rudolf Carnap – Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University
* Precis of Carnap&#x27;s philosophy
* The Life of Rudolf Carnap, Philosophy at RBJones.com
* R. Carnap: &quot;Von der Erkenntnistheorie zur Wissenschaftslogik&quot;, &quot;Paris Congress in 1935&quot;, Paris, 1936.
* R. Carnap: &quot;Über die Einheitssprache der Wissenschaft&quot;, &quot;Paris Congress in 1935&quot;, Paris, 1936.
* R. Carnap: &quot;Wahrheit und Bewährung&quot;, &quot;Paris Congress in 1935&quot;, Paris, 1936.
* Rudolf Carnap Papers: (Rudolf Carnap Papers, 1905–1970, ASP.1974.01, Special Collections Department, University of Pittsburgh.)
* Das Fremdpsychische bei Rudolf Carnap (German) by Robert Bauer.
* FBI file on Rudolph Carnap 
* RUDOLF CARNAP, PHILOSOPHER, DIES obituary in &quot;The New York Times&quot;, 15 September 1970
*&quot;Homage to Rudolf Carnap&quot; (1970) by Feigl, Hempel, Jeffrey, Quine &quot;et al&quot;. reprinted in frontmatter of &quot;RUDOLF CARNAP, LOGICAL EMPIRICIST&quot; (1975)
* on &#x27;Theoretical Concepts in Science&#x27; at the meeting of the American Philosophical Association, Pacific Division, at Santa Barbara, California, on 29 December 1959.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q76519" start="0" end="13" title="Rudolf Carnap" label="Rudolf Carnap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638659" start="58" end="85" title="German-language philosopher" label="German-language philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="104" end="110" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="134" end="147" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q208238" start="189" end="202" title="Vienna Circle" label="Vienna Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q193627" start="222" end="240" title="logical positivism" label="logical positivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="471" end="484" title="archaeologist" label="archaeologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q60239" start="485" end="501" title="Wilhelm Dörpfeld" label="Wilhelm Dörpfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="630" end="640" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q153974" start="716" end="722" title="Barmen" label="Barmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="723" end="732" title="Gymnasium (school)" label="Gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150" start="754" end="758" title="Jena" label="Jena"/>
<link wikidata="Q154561" start="795" end="813" title="University of Jena" label="University of Jena"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="846" end="853" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="880" end="893" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q220002" start="907" end="930" title="Critique of Pure Reason" label="Critique of Pure Reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q72106" start="963" end="974" title="Bruno Bauch" label="Bruno Bauch"/>
<link wikidata="Q60028" start="1019" end="1032" title="Gottlob Frege" label="Gottlob Frege"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166618" start="1051" end="1069" title="mathematical logic" label="mathematical logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q449819" start="1130" end="1151" title="German Youth Movement" label="German Youth Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1206" end="1217" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q152087" start="1344" end="1364" title="University of Berlin" label="University of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="1381" end="1396" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q154561" start="1455" end="1473" title="University of Jena" label="University of Jena"/>
<link wikidata="Q17736" start="1511" end="1527" title="axiom" label="axiomatic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q107" start="1531" end="1536" title="space" label="space"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="1541" end="1545" title="time" label="time"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="1788" end="1792" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q319237" start="1894" end="1906" title="Kant-Studien" label="Kant-Studien"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="1957" end="1973" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q163335" start="2257" end="2278" title="Principia Mathematica" label="Principia Mathematica"/>
<link wikidata="Q58586" start="2437" end="2451" title="Edmund Husserl" label="Edmund Husserl"/>
<link wikidata="Q179235" start="2468" end="2481" title="Phenomenology (philosophy)" label="phenomenology"/>
<link wikidata="Q193627" start="2524" end="2542" title="logical positivism" label="logical positivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q170147" start="2604" end="2620" title="Hans Reichenbach" label="Hans Reichenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q57193" start="2676" end="2690" title="Moritz Schlick" label="Moritz Schlick"/>
<link wikidata="Q165980" start="2711" end="2731" title="University of Vienna" label="University of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q208238" start="2909" end="2922" title="Vienna Circle" label="Vienna Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q84552" start="2966" end="2975" title="Hans Hahn (mathematician)" label="Hans Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q93826" start="2977" end="2995" title="Friedrich Waismann" label="Friedrich Waismann"/>
<link wikidata="Q78570" start="2997" end="3009" title="Otto Neurath" label="Otto Neurath"/>
<link wikidata="Q93678" start="3015" end="3028" title="Herbert Feigl" label="Herbert Feigl"/>
<link wikidata="Q41390" start="3076" end="3086" title="Kurt Gödel" label="Kurt Gödel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9391" start="3093" end="3105" title="Ludwig Wittgenstein" label="Wittgenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q170147" start="3227" end="3243" title="Hans Reichenbach" label="Hans Reichenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q876363" start="3284" end="3294" title="Erkenntnis" label="Erkenntnis"/>
<link wikidata="Q207534" start="3320" end="3333" title="Alfred Tarski" label="Alfred Tarski"/>
<link wikidata="Q467606" start="3457" end="3472" title="model theory" label="model theoretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="3483" end="3492" title="semantics" label="semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367915" start="3494" end="3503" title="Rose Rand" label="Rose Rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q19515659" start="3805" end="3828" title="intension and extension" label="intension and extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q31519" start="3959" end="3979" title="Charles University in Prague" label="University of Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q214969" start="3990" end="4001" title="W. V. Quine" label="W. V. Quine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="4273" end="4282" title="socialism" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="4287" end="4295" title="pacifism" label="pacifist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="4323" end="4335" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="4389" end="4408" title="naturalized citizen" label="naturalized citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="4538" end="4559" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q61885" start="4638" end="4656" title="Carl Gustav Hempel" label="Carl Gustav Hempel"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="4808" end="4826" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q357041" start="4949" end="4966" title="Charles W. Morris" label="Charles W. Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327746" start="5089" end="5103" title="Richard McKeon" label="Richard McKeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064777" start="5105" end="5123" title="Charles Hartshorne" label="Charles Hartshorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="5235" end="5244" title="semantics" label="semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q210841" start="5272" end="5283" title="modal logic" label="modal logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="5325" end="5336" title="probability" label="probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q484511" start="5341" end="5356" title="inductive logic" label="inductive logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q635642" start="5400" end="5428" title="Institute for Advanced Study" label="Institute for Advanced Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q138518" start="5432" end="5441" title="Princeton, New Jersey" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="5469" end="5473" title="UCLA" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603050" start="5474" end="5498" title="UCLA Department of Philosophy" label="Department of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170147" start="5508" end="5524" title="Hans Reichenbach" label="Hans Reichenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="5612" end="5646" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451972" start="5704" end="5716" title="loyalty oath" label="loyalty oath"/>
<link wikidata="Q485413" start="5820" end="5850" title="analytic–synthetic distinction" label="analytic–synthetic distinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297476" start="5860" end="5882" title="verification principle" label="verification principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="5900" end="5914" title="thermodynamics" label="thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q484511" start="5957" end="5972" title="inductive logic" label="inductive logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q143" start="6055" end="6064" title="Esperanto" label="Esperanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q12561" start="6116" end="6143" title="World Congress of Esperanto" label="World Congress of Esperanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q78570" start="6246" end="6258" title="Otto Neurath" label="Otto Neurath"/>
<link wikidata="Q117715438" start="6393" end="6451" title="National Committee to Secure Justice in the Rosenberg Case" label="National Committee to Secure Justice in the Rosenberg Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660068" start="6575" end="6594" title="Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952" label="Walter-McCarran Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q60749242" start="6641" end="6698" title="American Committee for the Protection of the Foreign Born" label="American Committee for the Protection of the Foreign Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971909" start="6797" end="6847" title="National Council of Arts, Sciences and Professions" label="National Council of Arts, Sciences and Professions"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="7257" end="7269" title="epistemology" label="epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476757" start="7274" end="7293" title="philosophy of logic" label="philosophy of logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474574" start="7539" end="7576" title="Foundations of geometry" label="philosophical foundations of geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754940" start="7624" end="7659" title="Philosophy of space and time" label="theory of space and time in physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q837863" start="7703" end="7719" title="pure mathematics" label="pure mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="7721" end="7737" title="natural sciences" label="natural sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q308678" start="9407" end="9419" title="habilitation" label="habilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q165980" start="9434" end="9454" title="University of Vienna" label="University of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="9716" end="9730" title="symbolic logic" label="symbolic logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="12379" end="12390" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13351" end="13365" title="Mathematical logic#Symbolic logic" label="symbolic logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9391" start="14282" end="14294" title="Ludwig Wittgenstein" label="Wittgenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q484511" start="19086" end="19101" title="Inductive reasoning" label="inductive logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q814390" start="23491" end="23506" title="Begriffsschrift" label="Begriffsschrift"/>
<link wikidata="Q319237" start="24917" end="24929" title="Kant-Studien" label="Kant-Studien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266946" start="24979" end="24994" title="doctoral thesis" label="doctoral thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q308678" start="25625" end="25644" title="habilitation thesis" label="habilitation thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799915" start="25899" end="25910" title="Arthur Pap" label="Pap, Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q243757" start="25924" end="25933" title="A. J. Ayer" label="Ayer, A.J"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381241" start="26517" end="26557" title="Philosophy and Phenomenological Research" label="Philosophy and Phenomenological Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381241" start="26658" end="26698" title="Philosophy and Phenomenological Research" label="Philosophy and Phenomenological Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396649" start="27071" end="27086" title="Paul Benacerraf" label="Paul Benacerraf"/>
<link wikidata="Q221697" start="27093" end="27106" title="Hilary Putnam" label="Hilary Putnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q553870" start="27406" end="27411" title="Ernest Nagel" label="Nagel"/>
<link wikidata="Q323107" start="27413" end="27419" title="Patrick Suppes" label="Suppes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356837" start="27530" end="27546" title="Paul Arthur Schilpp" label="Schilpp. Paul A."/>
<link wikidata="Q4086389" start="27567" end="27597" title="Library of Living Philosophers" label="Library Of Living Philosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095992" start="27605" end="27615" title="Open Court Publishing Company" label="Open Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396649" start="27694" end="27709" title="Paul Benacerraf" label="Paul Benacerraf"/>
<link wikidata="Q221697" start="27716" end="27729" title="Hilary Putnam" label="Hilary Putnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q677706" start="27860" end="27874" title="Martin Gardner" label="Martin Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326846" start="27985" end="27998" title="Richard Jeffrey" label="Jeffrey, R. C"/>
<link wikidata="Q288756" start="28220" end="28235" title="Jaakko Hintikka" label="Jaakko Hintikka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903381" start="28449" end="28463" title="Abner Shimony" label="Shimony, Abner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326846" start="28567" end="28581" title="Richard Jeffrey" label="Jeffrey, R. C."/>
<link wikidata="Q6830429" start="29002" end="29018" title="Michael Friedman (philosopher)" label="Michael Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q111165739" start="29351" end="29376" title="Definitions of philosophy" label="Definitions of philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q65056982" start="29379" end="29438" title="Second Conference on the Epistemology of the Exact Sciences" label="Second Conference on the Epistemology of the Exact Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q31836393" start="29441" end="29467" title="Second Davos Hochschulkurs" label="Second Davos Hochschulkurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252931" start="29499" end="29520" title="Ivor Grattan-Guinness" label="Ivor Grattan-Guinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q15055293" start="29596" end="29610" title="Thomas Mormann" label="Thomas Mormann"/>
<link wikidata="Q214969" start="29658" end="29671" title="Willard Quine" label="Willard Quine"/>
<link wikidata="Q232002" start="29686" end="29710" title="Two Dogmas of Empiricism" label="Two Dogmas of Empiricism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7399715" start="30748" end="30763" title="Sahotra Sarkar" label="Sarkar, Sahotra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734711" start="30805" end="30820" title="Aloysius Martinich" label="Martinich, A. P"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239956" start="30823" end="30834" title="David Sosa" label="Sosa, David"/>
<link wikidata="Q13566451" start="30922" end="30931" title="Jim Holt (philosopher)" label="Holt, Jim"/>
<link wikidata="Q88800" start="30974" end="30986" title="Karl Sigmund" label="Karl Sigmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426223" start="31132" end="31160" title="The New York Review of Books" label="The New York Review of Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333738" start="31219" end="31235" title="Stathis Psillos" label="Psillos, Stathis"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="31563" end="31589" title="Carnegie Mellon University" label="Carnegie Mellon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q235034" start="32124" end="32148" title="University of Pittsburgh" label="University of Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="32300" end="32318" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q466035" start="32592" end="32626" title="American Philosophical Association" label="American Philosophical Association"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="57988" wikidata="Q639638" url="?curid=57988" title="Falchion">
<text>A falchion (; Old French: &quot;fauchon&quot;; Latin: &quot;falx&quot;, &quot;sickle&quot;) is a one-handed, single-edged 37-40in. sword of European origin. Falchions are found in different forms from around the 13th century up to and including the 16th century. In some versions, the falchion looks rather like the seax and later the sabre, and in other versions more like a machete with a crossguard.

==Types==

The blade designs of falchions varied widely across the continent and over time. They almost always included a single edge with a slight curve on the blade towards the point on the end and most were also affixed with a quilloned crossguard for the hilt in the manner of the contemporary arming swords. Unlike the double-edged swords of Europe, few actual swords of this type have survived to the present day; fewer than a dozen specimens are currently known. A number of weapons similar to the falchion existed in Western Europe, including the Messer, hanger and the backsword. Two basic types of falchion can be identified:

===Cleaver falchions===
One of the few surviving falchions (the Conyer&#x27;s falchion) is shaped very much like a large cleaver or machete. This type is also illustrated in art. The type seems to be confined to the 13th and 14th centuries. However apart from the profile they present a very thin blade, often only thick spines, from the point with a slight taper leading near to the edge before dropping into a secondary bevel which brings the blade to a very acute edge while maintaining some durability. Current theories are that they were the anti-cloth armour weapon of the day.

===Cusped falchions===
The majority of the depictions in art reflect a design similar to that of the &quot;großes Messer&quot;. The Thorpe Falchion, a surviving example from England&#x27;s 13th century, was just under in weight. Of its length, are the straight blade which bears a cusped or flare-clipped tip similar to the much later kilij of Turkey. This type of sword continued in use into the 16th century.

===Other falchions===
In addition, there are a group of 13th- and early 14th-century weapons sometimes identified with the falchion. These have a falchion-like blade mounted on a wooden shaft long, sometimes ending in a curve like an umbrella. These are seen in numerous illustrations in the mid-13th-century Maciejowski Bible.

== Elmslie typology ==
Produced by bladesmith and historian James Elmslie, this typology continuously seeks to systematically classify medieval single edged swords, similar to the way Oakeshott typology addresses double edged swords of the same period. The Elmslie typology covers all types of single edged swords from the period, which encompasses all types of falchion, as well as similar sword types such as falcastro, messers, tessak, storta, early sabres, as well as transitional forms. For more information see Elmslie typology.

==Status==
An unsolved mystery exists as to why there is such a large discrepancy between the frequency of falchions in period art, contrasted with the amazingly few surviving falchions from the medieval period. Currently, there are fewer than 30 confirmed surviving medieval falchions, contrasted with the thousands of straight double edged swords from the same period. Current research by James Elmslie suggests that the overrepresentation in medieval artwork may be a form of artistic short-hand to convey certain meanings, such as indicating who the story enemies are, as falchions are overrepresented in &#x27;villainous&#x27; characters, such as biblical enemies, or non-Christian barbarians.

Falchions are sometimes misunderstood and thought of as being similar to machetes; however, the ancient falchions that have been discovered are very thin and on average, lighter than a double-edged blade. These weapons were therefore not cleaving or chopping weapons similar to the machete, but quick slashing weapons more similar to shamshir or sabres despite their wide blade.

Unlike Central European messers, and smaller fighting knives such as tesak which could be of very crude construction and at times were popular among the peasantry, surviving Falchions display high levels of craftsmanship, oftentimes with intricately decorated pommels of bronze, and may feature inscribed blades of latten. While some forms of falchions may blur the line between sword and tool (in particular early forms Lombardy), and are depicted being used by common infantry, surviving examples are shown to be handsome weapons of status; the Conyers falchion belonged to a landed family, and the falchion is shown in illustrations of combat between mounted knights. Some later falchions were ornate and used by the nobility; there is an elaborately engraved and gold plated falchion from the 1560s in the Wallace Collection, engraved with the personal coat of arms of Cosimo I de&#x27; Medici, Grand Duke of Tuscany.

==Popular culture==
* A falchion was used by the Minotaur General Otmin, leader for the White Witch&#x27;s army in &quot;The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe&quot;.
* In &quot;Sailor Moon&quot;, Sailor Uranus&#x27; Space Sword is themed after a falchion.
* In &quot;Brisingr&quot;, Eragon uses a falchion after he loses his first sword, Zar&#x27;roc, in the climactic battle of Eldest. The weapon is suggested to him on the basis that he has learned to fight with a weapon impervious to damage, and thus requires a weapon more durable against edge damage. Nonetheless, the falchion is later shattered in a fight, and is replaced by Eragon&#x27;s third and final sword, Brisingr.
* In the &quot;Fire Emblem&quot; series, several games feature a magical sword named Falchion. However, the swords themselves feature the more common medieval straight double-edged blade.
* In the video game &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons Online&quot;, the falchion is a curved blade wielded with two hands rather than one.
*Falchions feature in the 2018 video game &quot;Kingdom Come: Deliverance&quot;.

==References==
==External links==
*The Falchion sword – a wonderful curved sword</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q639638" start="2" end="10" title="Falchion" label="falchion"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="14" end="24" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="47" end="52" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q798522" start="109" end="121" title="backsword" label="single-edged"/>
<link wikidata="Q12791" start="131" end="136" title="sword" label="sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="140" end="146" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q58122" start="316" end="320" title="seax" label="seax"/>
<link wikidata="Q231204" start="335" end="340" title="sabre" label="sabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q230711" start="376" end="383" title="machete" label="machete"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355832" start="644" end="654" title="crossguard" label="crossguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593696" start="663" end="667" title="hilt" label="hilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15618382" start="702" end="714" title="arming sword" label="arming sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549202" start="959" end="965" title="Messer (weapon)" label="Messer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344629" start="967" end="973" title="hanger (weapon)" label="hanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q798522" start="982" end="991" title="backsword" label="backsword"/>
<link wikidata="Q938509" start="1162" end="1169" title="cleaver" label="cleaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q230711" start="1173" end="1180" title="machete" label="machete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549202" start="1733" end="1746" title="großes Messer" label="großes Messer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357876" start="1961" end="1966" title="kilij" label="kilij"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="1970" end="1976" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882823" start="2347" end="2364" title="Maciejowski Bible" label="Maciejowski Bible"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2778" end="2787" title="falcastro" label="falcastro"/>
<link wikidata="Q751194" start="2798" end="2804" title="Dusack" label="tessak"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2806" end="2812" title="storta" label="storta"/>
<link wikidata="Q231204" start="2820" end="2825" title="sabre" label="sabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q122612219" start="2884" end="2900" title="Elmslie typology" label="Elmslie typology"/>
<link wikidata="Q751194" start="4052" end="4057" title="Dusack" label="tesak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="4404" end="4412" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327919" start="4793" end="4811" title="Wallace Collection" label="Wallace Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="4840" end="4852" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q48547" start="4856" end="4903" title="Cosimo I de&amp;#x27; Medici, Grand Duke of Tuscany" label="Cosimo I de&amp;#x27; Medici, Grand Duke of Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q129866" start="4955" end="4963" title="Minotaur" label="Minotaur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4964" end="4977" title="List of The Chronicles of Narnia characters#Adaptations" label="General Otmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997439" start="4994" end="5005" title="White Witch" label="White Witch"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5027" end="5089" title="The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe" label="The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643098" start="5108" end="5119" title="Sailor Moon" label="Sailor Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049705" start="5127" end="5140" title="Sailor Uranus" label="Sailor Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q718289" start="5198" end="5206" title="Brisingr" label="Brisingr"/>
<link wikidata="Q372527" start="5214" end="5220" title="Eragon (character)" label="Eragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q308982" start="5310" end="5316" title="Eldest" label="Eldest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768977" start="5626" end="5637" title="Fire Emblem" label="Fire Emblem"/>
<link wikidata="Q15618382" start="5749" end="5797" title="Knightly sword" label="more common medieval straight double-edged blade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196795" start="5825" end="5854" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons Online" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons Online"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5981" end="6006" title="Kingdom Come: Deliverance" label="Kingdom Come: Deliverance"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="57989" wikidata="Q1335389" url="?curid=57989" title="PLUR">
<text>Peace Love Unity Respect, commonly shortened to PLUR, is a set of principles that is associated with rave culture, originating in the United States. It has been commonly used since the early 1990s when it became commonplace in nightclub and rave flyers and especially on club paraphernalia advertising underground outdoor trance music parties. It has since expanded to the larger rave dance music culture as well.

== PLUR and rave culture ==
PLUR can be interpreted as the essential philosophy of life and ethical guideline for ravers and clubbers, at least insomuch as it relates to interpersonal relationships, with basic directions on how people are expected to behave at a rave gathering or in a dance club. This universalist philosophy underpinning the tribal dance culture which began circling the globe with the rise of the internet, theoretically takes precedence over any chemical or musical aspects of the rave scene. Raves represent a modern ritualistic experience, promoting a strong communal sense, where PLUR is considered an ideology. The four terms, among others – &quot;Peace, Love, Freedom, Tolerance, Unity, Harmony, Expression, Responsibility and Respect&quot; – are also part of the anonymous &quot;Raver&#x27;s Manifesto&quot; (claimed to be written by Maria Pike in 2001) which has widely been spread among the international rave subculture.

The PLUR handshake is used in kandi bracelet trading.

== Elements ==
* Peace – The gentle resolution of negative emotions and conflict.
* Love – Performing acts and sharing feelings of goodwill towards others. The exchange of gestures such as hugging occurs frequently at a rave, and is considered a way of &quot;spreading the love.&quot;
* Unity – Welcoming others into the community, and coming together regardless of personal differences.
* Respect – Showing sensitivity for the feelings of others, and accepting one another with tolerance and without judgement. Treating each other as one would like to be treated.

== Origins ==
PLUR is an aggregation of ideas that were part of the earlier hippie and peace movement (&quot;peace&quot;, &quot;love&quot;) and black and hip hop culture (&quot;respect&quot;). Specific use of the term dates to the early 1990s rave scene. One of the most influential uses of the term was made by DJ Frankie Bones in June 1993. In response to a fight in the audience of one of his Storm Raves in Brooklyn, Bones took the microphone and proclaimed: &quot;If you don&#x27;t start showing some peace, love, and unity, I&#x27;ll break your faces.&quot; It is also reported that as early as &quot;on July 4, 1990, [...] Frankie&#x27;s brother and Storm Rave collaborator Adam X painted &#x27;Peace Love Unity&#x27; on a train car&quot;. The fourth term, &quot;Respect&quot; was championed by Laura La Gassa (wife of Brian Behlendorf).

==Variations==
Another variation is PLURR - Peace. Love. Unity. Respect. Responsibility.

Several other variations on the same four words, but in a different order (e.g. LURP), have been proposed. However, none of these are commonly used. 

Another variation is PLUM, with &quot;M&quot; standing for &quot;movement&quot;. Also, the first three elements, &quot;Peace, Love, Unity&quot; are used separately. An example for this is the title of DJ Hype&#x27;s 1996 track &quot;Peace, Love &amp; Unity&quot;. 

Later incarnations and variations of PLUR can be seen in the adoption of Pronoia and also Ubuntu, with PLUR and Pronoia often being interchangeable terms, depending upon one&#x27;s company. 

== References ==
==External links==

* &quot;PLUR&quot; acronym definitions</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1335389" start="0" end="24" title="PLUR" label="Peace Love Unity Respect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335389" start="48" end="52" title="PLUR" label="PLUR"/>
<link wikidata="Q645767" start="101" end="105" title="rave" label="rave"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="134" end="147" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="227" end="236" title="nightclub" label="nightclub"/>
<link wikidata="Q170435" start="322" end="334" title="trance music" label="trance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="484" end="494" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="507" end="514" title="ethics" label="ethical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5136459" start="540" end="548" title="Clubbing (subculture)" label="clubbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19001724" start="718" end="730" title="universalism" label="universalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="832" end="840" title="internet" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q189819" start="954" end="960" title="ritual" label="ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="1041" end="1049" title="ideology" label="ideology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1371" end="1385" title="Kandi bracelet#PLUR handshake" label="PLUR handshake"/>
<link wikidata="Q121433510" start="1397" end="1411" title="kandi bracelet" label="kandi bracelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q454" start="1439" end="1444" title="Peace" label="Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q316" start="1506" end="1510" title="Love" label="Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q28510" start="1812" end="1819" title="Respect" label="Respect"/>
<link wikidata="Q339747" start="2064" end="2070" title="hippie" label="hippie"/>
<link wikidata="Q708312" start="2075" end="2089" title="peace movement" label="peace movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q880483" start="2132" end="2137" title="Black Power" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="2142" end="2149" title="hip hop" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q645767" start="2231" end="2235" title="rave" label="rave"/>
<link wikidata="Q4141264" start="2300" end="2316" title="Frankie Bones" label="DJ Frankie Bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q93016" start="2814" end="2830" title="Brian Behlendorf" label="Brian Behlendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154114" start="3276" end="3283" title="DJ Hype" label="DJ Hype"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249939" start="3414" end="3421" title="Pronoia (psychology)" label="Pronoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213843" start="3431" end="3437" title="Ubuntu (philosophy)" label="Ubuntu"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="57992" wikidata="Q1161151" url="?curid=57992" title="Monocoque">
<text>Monocoque ( ), also called structural skin, is a structural system in which loads are supported by an object&#x27;s external skin, in a manner similar to an egg shell. The word &quot;monocoque&quot; is a French term for &quot;single shell&quot;.

First used for boats, a true monocoque carries both tensile and compressive forces within the skin and can be recognised by the absence of a load-carrying internal frame. Few metal aircraft other than those with milled skins can strictly be regarded as pure monocoques, as they use a metal shell or sheeting reinforced with frames riveted to the skin, but most wooden aircraft are described as monocoques, even though they also incorporate frames.

By contrast, a semi-monocoque is a hybrid combining a tensile stressed skin and a compressive structure made up of longerons and ribs or frames. Other semi-monocoques, not to be confused with true monocoques, include vehicle unibodies, which tend to be composites, and inflatable shells or balloon tanks, both of which are pressure stabilised.

== Aircraft ==
Early aircraft were constructed using frames, typically of wood or steel tubing, which could then be covered (or &quot;skinned&quot;) with fabric such as Irish linen or cotton. The fabric made a minor structural contribution in tension but none in compression and was there for aerodynamic reasons only. By considering the structure as a whole and not just the sum of its parts, monocoque construction integrated the skin and frame into a single load-bearing shell with significant improvements to strength and weight.

To make the shell, thin strips of wood were laminated into a three dimensional shape; a technique adopted from boat hull construction. One of the earliest examples was the Deperdussin Monocoque racer in 1912, which used a laminated fuselage made up of three layers of glued poplar veneer, which provided both the external skin and the main load-bearing structure. This also produced a smoother surface and reduced drag so effectively that it was able to win most of the races it was entered into.

This style of construction was further developed in Germany by LFG Roland using the patented &quot;Wickelrumpf&quot; (wrapped hull) form later licensed by them to Pfalz Flugzeugwerke who used it on several fighter aircraft. Each half of the fuselage shell was formed over a male mold using two layers of plywood strips with fabric wrapping between them. The early plywood used was prone to damage from moisture and delamination.

While all-metal aircraft such as the Junkers J 1 had appeared as early as 1915, these were not monocoques but added a metal skin to an underlying framework.

The first metal monocoques were built by Claudius Dornier, while working for Zeppelin-Lindau. He had to overcome a number of problems, not least was the quality of aluminium alloys strong enough to use as structural materials, which frequently formed layers instead of presenting a uniform material. After failed attempts with several large flying boats in which a few components were monocoques, he built the Zeppelin-Lindau V1 to test out a monocoque fuselage. Although it crashed, he learned a lot from its construction. The Dornier-Zeppelin D.I was built in 1918 and although too late for operational service during the war was the first all metal monocoque aircraft to enter production.

In parallel to Dornier, Zeppelin also employed Adolf Rohrbach, who built the Zeppelin-Staaken E-4/20, which when it flew in 1920 became the first multi-engined monocoque airliner, before being destroyed under orders of the Inter-Allied Commission. At the end of WWI, the Inter-Allied Technical Commission published details of the last Zeppelin-Lindau flying boat showing its monocoque construction. In the UK, Oswald Short built a number of experimental aircraft with metal monocoque fuselages starting with the 1920 Short Silver Streak in an attempt to convince the air ministry of its superiority over wood. Despite advantages, aluminium alloy monocoques would not become common until the mid 1930s as a result of a number of factors, including design conservatism and production setup costs. Short would eventually prove the merits of the construction method with a series of flying boats, whose metal hulls didn&#x27;t absorb water as the wooden hulls did, greatly improving performance. In the United States, Northrop was a major pioneer, introducing techniques used by his own company and Douglas with the Northrop Alpha.

==Vehicles==
===Race cars===
In motor racing, the safety of the driver depends on the car body, which must meet stringent regulations, and only a few cars have been built with monocoque structures. An aluminum alloy monocoque chassis was first used in the 1962 Lotus 25 Formula 1 race car and McLaren was the first to use carbon-fiber-reinforced polymers to construct the monocoque of the 1981 McLaren MP4/1. In 1990 the Jaguar XJR-15 became the first production car with a carbon-fiber monocoque.

===Road cars===
The term &quot;monocoque&quot; is frequently misapplied to unibody cars. Commercial car bodies are almost never true monocoques but instead use the unibody system (also referred to as unitary construction, unitary body–chassis or body–frame integral construction), in which the body of the vehicle, its floor pan, and chassis form a single structure, while the skin adds relatively little strength or stiffness.

=== Armoured vehicles ===
Some armoured fighting vehicles use a monocoque structure with a body shell built up from armour plates, rather than attaching them to a frame. This reduces weight for a given amount of armour. Examples include the German TPz Fuchs and RG-33.

===Two-wheeled vehicles===
French industrialist and engineer Georges Roy attempted in the 1920s to improve on the bicycle-inspired motorcycle frames of the day, which lacked rigidity. This limited their handling and therefore performance. He applied for a patent in 1926, and at the 1929 Paris Automotive Show unveiled his new motorcycle, the Art-Deco styled 1930 Majestic. Its new type of monocoque body solved the problems he had addressed, and along with better rigidity it did double-duty, as frame and bodywork provided some protection from the elements. Strictly considered, it was more of a semi-monocoque, as it used a box-section, pressed-steel frame with twin side rails riveted together via crossmembers, along with floor pans and rear and front bulkheads.

A Piatti light scooter was produced in the 1950s using a monocoque hollow shell of sheet-steel pressings welded together, into which the engine and transmission were installed from underneath. The machine could be tipped onto its side, resting on the bolt-on footboards for mechanical access.
A monocoque framed scooter was produced by Yamaha from 1960–1962. Model MF-1 was powered by a 50 cc engine with a three-speed transmission and a fuel tank incorporated into the frame.

A monocoque-framed motorcycle was developed by Spanish manufacturer Ossa for the 1967 Grand Prix motorcycle racing season. Although the single-cylinder Ossa had less than its rivals, it was lighter and its monocoque frame was much stiffer than conventional motorcycle frames, giving it superior agility on the racetrack. Ossa won four Grands Prix races with the monocoque bike before their rider died after a crash during the 250 cc event at the 1970 Isle of Man TT, causing the Ossa factory to withdraw from Grand Prix competition.

Notable designers such as Eric Offenstadt and Dan Hanebrink created unique monocoque designs for racing in the early 1970s. The F750 event at the 1973 Isle of Man TT races was won by Peter Williams on the monocoque-framed John Player Special that he helped to design based on Norton Commando. Honda also experimented with the NR500, a monocoque Grand Prix racing motorcycle in 1979. The bike had other innovative features, including an engine with oval shaped cylinders, and eventually succumbed to the problems associated with attempting to develop too many new technologies at once. In 1987 John Britten developed the Aero-D One, featuring a composite monocoque chassis that weighed only .

An aluminium monocoque frame was used for the first time on a mass-produced motorcycle from 2000 on Kawasaki&#x27;s ZX-12R, their flagship production sportbike aimed at being the fastest production motorcycle. It was described by &quot;Cycle World&quot; in 2000 as a &quot;monocoque backbone ... a single large diameter beam&quot; and &quot;Fabricated from a combination of castings and sheet-metal stampings&quot;.

Single-piece carbon fiber bicycle frames are sometimes described as monocoques; however as most use components to form a frame structure (even if molded in a single piece), these are frames not monocoques, and the pedal-cycle industry continues to refer to them as framesets.

=== Railroads ===
The P40DC, P42DC and P32ACDM all utilize a monocoque shell.

== Rockets ==

Various rockets have used pressure-stabilized monocoque designs, such as Atlas and Falcon 1. The Atlas was very light since a major portion of its structural support was provided by its single-wall steel balloon fuel tanks, which hold their shape while under acceleration by internal pressure. Balloon tanks are not true monocoques but act in the same way as inflatable shells. A balloon tank skin only handles tensile forces while compression is resisted by internal liquid pressure in a way similar to semi-monocoques braced by a solid frame. This becomes obvious when internal pressure is lost and the structure collapses. Monocoque tanks can also be cheaper to manufacture than more traditional orthogrids. Blue Origin&#x27;s upcoming New Glenn launch vehicle will use monocoque construction on its second stage despite the mass penalty in order to reduce the cost of production. This is especially important when the stage is expendable, as with the New Glenn second stage.

== See also ==
* Backbone chassis
* Body-on-frame
* Coachbuilder
* List of carbon fiber monocoque cars
* Space frame
* Thin-shell structure
* Vehicle frame

== References ==
=== Citations ===
===Bibliography===
* .
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1161151" start="0" end="9" title="Monocoque" label="Monocoque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161151" start="27" end="42" title="Monocoque" label="structural skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="204" end="210" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q24960473" start="711" end="725" title="semi-monocoque" label="semi-monocoque"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623464" start="758" end="771" title="stressed skin" label="stressed skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662372" start="811" end="839" title="longeron" label="longerons and ribs or frames"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="921" end="930" title="Vehicle frame#Unibody" label="unibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162595" start="965" end="982" title="inflatable" label="inflatable shells"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851874" start="986" end="998" title="balloon tank" label="balloon tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="1115" end="1119" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="1123" end="1128" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143424" start="1210" end="1221" title="Irish linen" label="Irish linen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="1225" end="1231" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602349" start="1748" end="1769" title="Deperdussin Monocoque" label="Deperdussin Monocoque"/>
<link wikidata="Q530465" start="2137" end="2147" title="Luft-Fahrzeug-Gesellschaft" label="LFG Roland"/>
<link wikidata="Q324497" start="2237" end="2256" title="Pfalz Flugzeugwerke" label="Pfalz Flugzeugwerke"/>
<link wikidata="Q315769" start="2541" end="2552" title="Junkers J 1" label="Junkers J 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q71007" start="2703" end="2719" title="Claudius Dornier" label="Claudius Dornier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3072" end="3090" title="Zeppelin-Lindau V1" label="Zeppelin-Lindau V1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4024203" start="3190" end="3210" title="Dornier-Zeppelin D.I" label="Dornier-Zeppelin D.I"/>
<link wikidata="Q629536" start="3402" end="3416" title="Rohrbach Metall-Flugzeugbau" label="Adolf Rohrbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q904954" start="3432" end="3455" title="Zeppelin-Staaken E-4/20" label="Zeppelin-Staaken E-4/20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245929" start="3690" end="3717" title="Zeppelin-Lindau Rs.IV" label="Zeppelin-Lindau flying boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108163" start="3765" end="3777" title="Oswald Short" label="Oswald Short"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501913" start="3872" end="3891" title="Short Silver Streak" label="Short Silver Streak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660543" start="4467" end="4481" title="Northrop Alpha" label="Northrop Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q447725" start="4685" end="4699" title="aluminum alloy" label="aluminum alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068107" start="4710" end="4717" title="chassis" label="chassis"/>
<link wikidata="Q583089" start="4745" end="4753" title="Lotus 25" label="Lotus 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q172030" start="4777" end="4784" title="McLaren" label="McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303685" start="4878" end="4891" title="McLaren MP4/1" label="McLaren MP4/1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678533" start="4905" end="4918" title="Jaguar XJR-15" label="Jaguar XJR-15"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5058" end="5065" title="Vehicle frame#Unibody" label="unibody"/>
<link wikidata="Q130368" start="5443" end="5468" title="armoured fighting vehicle" label="armoured fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11886611" start="5528" end="5534" title="armour" label="armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q695206" start="5660" end="5669" title="TPz Fuchs" label="TPz Fuchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037549" start="5674" end="5679" title="RG-33" label="RG-33"/>
<link wikidata="Q34493" start="5813" end="5823" title="motorcycle" label="motorcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132566" start="6453" end="6459" title="Piatti scooter" label="Piatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q193234" start="6466" end="6473" title="Scooter (motorcycle)" label="scooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q193234" start="6763" end="6770" title="Scooter (motorcycle)" label="scooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q188454" start="6787" end="6793" title="Yamaha Corporation" label="Yamaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q971537" start="6997" end="7001" title="Ossa (motorcycle)" label="Ossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q926226" start="7010" end="7050" title="1967 Grand Prix motorcycle racing season" label="1967 Grand Prix motorcycle racing season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949966" start="7186" end="7202" title="motorcycle frame" label="motorcycle frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3996838" start="7375" end="7394" title="1970 Isle of Man TT" label="1970 Isle of Man TT"/>
<link wikidata="Q850292" start="7438" end="7448" title="Grand Prix motorcycle racing" label="Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q178218" start="7591" end="7595" title="Formula 750" label="F750"/>
<link wikidata="Q3996842" start="7609" end="7628" title="1973 Isle of Man TT" label="1973 Isle of Man TT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177728" start="7646" end="7660" title="Peter Williams (motorcyclist)" label="Peter Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q730833" start="7739" end="7754" title="Norton Commando" label="Norton Commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q9584" start="7756" end="7761" title="Honda" label="Honda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5892572" start="7789" end="7794" title="NR500" label="NR500"/>
<link wikidata="Q573155" start="7840" end="7844" title="1979 Grand Prix motorcycle racing season" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223241" start="8056" end="8068" title="John Britten" label="John Britten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382502" start="8272" end="8278" title="Kawasaki Ninja ZX-12R" label="ZX-12R"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089572" start="8335" end="8364" title="fastest production motorcycle" label="fastest production motorcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198151" start="8392" end="8403" title="Cycle World" label="Cycle World"/>
<link wikidata="Q910977" start="8586" end="8598" title="carbon fiber" label="carbon fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q167130" start="8599" end="8612" title="bicycle frame" label="bicycle frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q432842" start="8872" end="8896" title="GE Genesis" label="P40DC, P42DC and P32ACDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q41291" start="8952" end="8958" title="rocket" label="rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q22949" start="9017" end="9022" title="Atlas (rocket family)" label="Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q648606" start="9027" end="9035" title="Falcon 1" label="Falcon 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851874" start="9148" end="9166" title="balloon tank" label="balloon fuel tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162595" start="9303" end="9320" title="inflatable" label="inflatable shells"/>
<link wikidata="Q908584" start="9355" end="9368" title="tensile force" label="tensile force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712821" start="9376" end="9387" title="Compression forces" label="compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q6085786" start="9643" end="9653" title="Orthogrid" label="orthogrids"/>
<link wikidata="Q885836" start="9655" end="9673" title="Blue Origin" label="Blue Origin&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q26869616" start="9683" end="9692" title="New Glenn" label="New Glenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078724" start="9875" end="9885" title="Expendable launch system" label="expendable"/>
<link wikidata="Q26869616" start="9899" end="9908" title="New Glenn" label="New Glenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q12047754" start="9941" end="9957" title="Backbone chassis" label="Backbone chassis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512247" start="9960" end="9973" title="Body-on-frame" label="Body-on-frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734300" start="9976" end="9988" title="Coachbuilder" label="Coachbuilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q21068418" start="9991" end="10026" title="List of carbon fiber monocoque cars" label="List of carbon fiber monocoque cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q578444" start="10029" end="10040" title="Space frame" label="Space frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2230313" start="10043" end="10063" title="Thin-shell structure" label="Thin-shell structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q10709419" start="10066" end="10079" title="Vehicle frame" label="Vehicle frame"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="57993" wikidata="Q80930" url="?curid=57993" title="Tragedy">
<text>A tragedy is a genre of drama based on human suffering and, mainly, the terrible or sorrowful events that befall a main character or cast of characters. Traditionally, the intention of tragedy is to invoke an accompanying catharsis, or a &quot;pain [that] awakens pleasure,” for the audience. While many cultures have developed forms that provoke this paradoxical response, the term &quot;tragedy&quot; often refers to a specific tradition of drama that has played a unique and important role historically in the self-definition of Western civilization. That tradition has been multiple and discontinuous, yet the term has often been used to invoke a powerful effect of cultural identity and historical continuity—&quot;the Greeks and the Elizabethans, in one cultural form; Hellenes and Christians, in a common activity,&quot; as Raymond Williams puts it.

From its origins in the theatre of ancient Greece 2500 years ago, from which there survives only a fraction of the work of Aeschylus, Sophocles and Euripides, as well as many fragments from other poets, and the later Roman tragedies of Seneca; through its singular articulations in the works of Shakespeare, Lope de Vega, Jean Racine, and Friedrich Schiller to the more recent naturalistic tragedy of Henrik Ibsen and August Strindberg; Natyaguru Nurul Momen&#x27;s Nemesis&#x27; tragic vengeance &amp; Samuel Beckett&#x27;s modernist meditations on death, loss and suffering; Heiner Müller postmodernist reworkings of the tragic canon, tragedy has remained an important site of cultural experimentation, negotiation, struggle, and change. A long line of philosophers—which includes Plato, Aristotle, Saint Augustine, Voltaire, Hume, Diderot, Hegel, Schopenhauer, Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Freud, Benjamin, Camus, Lacan, and Deleuze—have analysed, speculated upon, and criticised the genre.

In the wake of Aristotle&#x27;s &quot;Poetics&quot; (335 BCE), tragedy has been used to make genre distinctions, whether at the scale of poetry in general (where the tragic divides against epic and lyric) or at the scale of the drama (where tragedy is opposed to comedy). In the modern era, tragedy has also been defined against drama, melodrama, the tragicomic, and epic theatre. Drama, in the narrow sense, cuts across the traditional division between comedy and tragedy in an anti- or a-generic deterritorialisation from the mid-19th century onwards. Both Bertolt Brecht and Augusto Boal define their epic theatre projects (non-Aristotelian drama and Theatre of the Oppressed, respectively) against models of tragedy. Taxidou, however, reads epic theatre as an incorporation of tragic functions and its treatments of mourning and speculation.

== Etymology ==
The word &quot;tragedy&quot; appears to have been used to describe different phenomena at different times. It derives from Ancient Greek &quot;goat song&quot;, which comes from τράγος &quot;tragos&quot; &quot;he-goat&quot; and ᾠδή &quot;ōidḗ&quot; &quot;singing, ode.&quot; Scholars suspect this may be traced to a time when a goat was either the prize in a competition of choral dancing or was what a chorus danced around prior to the animal&#x27;s ritual sacrifice. In another view on the etymology, Athenaeus of Naucratis (2nd–3rd century CE) says that the original form of the word was &quot;trygodia&quot; from &quot;trygos&quot; (grape harvest) and &quot;ode&quot; (song), because those events were first introduced during grape harvest.

Writing in 335 BCE (long after the Golden Age of 5th-century Athenian tragedy), Aristotle provides the earliest surviving explanation for the origin of the dramatic art form in his &quot;Poetics&quot;, in which he argues that tragedy developed from the improvisations of the leader of choral dithyrambs (hymns sung and danced in praise of Dionysos, the god of wine and fertility):
In the same work, Aristotle attempts to provide a scholastic definition of what tragedy is:
There is some dissent to the dithyrambic origins of tragedy, mostly based on the differences between the shapes of their choruses and styles of dancing. A common descent from pre-Hellenic fertility and burial rites has been suggested. Friedrich Nietzsche discussed the origins of Greek tragedy in his early book &quot;The Birth of Tragedy&quot; (1872). Here, he suggests the name originates in the use of a chorus of goat-like satyrs in the original dithyrambs from which the tragic genre developed.

Scott Scullion writes: 

==Greek==

Athenian tragedy—the oldest surviving form of tragedy—is a type of dance-drama that formed an important part of the theatrical culture of the city-state. Having emerged sometime during the 6th century BCE, it flowered during the 5th century BCE (from the end of which it began to spread throughout the Greek world), and continued to be popular until the beginning of the Hellenistic period. No tragedies from the 6th century and only 32 of the more than a thousand that were performed in the 5th century have survived. We have complete texts extant by Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides. Aeschylus&#x27; &quot;The Persians&quot; is recognized to be the earliest extant Greek tragedy, and as such it is doubly unique among the extant ancient dramas.

Athenian tragedies were performed in late March/early April at an annual state religious festival in honor of Dionysus. The presentations took the form of a contest between three playwrights, who presented their works on three successive days. Each playwright offered a tetralogy consisting of three tragedies and a concluding comic piece called a satyr play. The four plays sometimes featured linked stories. Only one complete trilogy of tragedies has survived, the &quot;Oresteia&quot; of Aeschylus. The Greek theatre was in the open air, on the side of a hill, and performances of a trilogy and satyr play probably lasted most of the day. Performances were apparently open to all citizens, including women, but evidence is scant. The theatre of Dionysus at Athens probably held around 12,000 people.

All of the choral parts were sung (to the accompaniment of an &quot;aulos&quot;) and some of the actors&#x27; answers to the chorus were sung as well. The play as a whole was composed in various verse metres. All actors were male and wore masks. A Greek chorus danced as well as sang, though no one knows exactly what sorts of steps the chorus performed as it sang. Choral songs in tragedy are often divided into three sections: strophe (&quot;turning, circling&quot;), antistrophe (&quot;counter-turning, counter-circling&quot;) and epode (&quot;after-song&quot;).

Many ancient Greek tragedians employed the &quot;ekkyklêma&quot; as a theatrical device, which was a platform hidden behind the scene that could be rolled out to display the aftermath of some event which had happened out of sight of the audience. This event was frequently a brutal murder of some sort, an act of violence which could not be effectively portrayed visually, but an action of which the other characters must see the effects for it to have meaning and emotional resonance. A prime example of the use of the &quot;ekkyklêma&quot; is after the murder of Agamemnon in the first play of Aeschylus&#x27; &quot;Oresteia&quot;, when the king&#x27;s butchered body is wheeled out in a grand display for all to see. Variations on the &quot;ekkyklêma&quot; are used in tragedies and other forms to this day, as writers still find it a useful and often powerful device for showing the consequences of extreme human actions. Another such device was a crane, the mechane, which served to hoist a god or goddess on stage when they were supposed to arrive flying. This device gave origin to the phrase &quot;deus ex machina&quot; (&quot;god out of a machine&quot;), that is, the surprise intervention of an unforeseen external factor that changes the outcome of an event.

==Roman==
Following the expansion of the Roman Republic (509–27 BCE) into several Greek territories between 270 and 240 BCE, Rome encountered Greek tragedy. From the later years of the republic and by means of the Roman Empire (27 BCE-476 CE), theatre spread west across Europe, around the Mediterranean and even reached Britain. While Greek tragedy continued to be performed throughout the Roman period, the year 240 BCE marks the beginning of regular Roman drama. Livius Andronicus began to write Roman tragedies, thus creating some of the first important works of Roman literature. Five years later, Gnaeus Naevius also began to write tragedies (though he was more appreciated for his comedies). No complete early Roman tragedy survives, though it was highly regarded in its day; historians know of three other early tragic playwrights—Quintus Ennius, Marcus Pacuvius and Lucius Accius.

From the time of the empire, the tragedies of two playwrights survive—one is an unknown author, while the other is the Stoic philosopher Seneca. Nine of Seneca&#x27;s tragedies survive, all of which are &quot;fabula crepidata&quot; (tragedies adapted from Greek originals); his &quot;Phaedra&quot;, for example, was based on Euripides&#x27; &quot;Hippolytus&quot;. Historians do not know who wrote the only extant example of the &quot;fabula praetexta&quot; (tragedies based on Roman subjects), &quot;Octavia&quot;, but in former times it was mistakenly attributed to Seneca due to his appearance as a character in the tragedy.

Seneca&#x27;s tragedies rework those of all three of the Athenian tragic playwrights whose work has survived. Probably meant to be recited at elite gatherings, they differ from the Greek versions in their long declamatory, narrative accounts of action, their obtrusive moralising, and their bombastic rhetoric. They dwell on detailed accounts of horrible deeds and contain long reflective soliloquies. Though the gods rarely appear in these plays, ghosts and witches abound. Senecan tragedies explore ideas of revenge, the occult, the supernatural, suicide, blood and gore. The Renaissance scholar Julius Caesar Scaliger (1484–1558), who knew both Latin and Greek, preferred Seneca to Euripides.

==Renaissance==
===Influence of Greek and Roman===
Classical Greek drama was largely forgotten in Western Europe from the Middle Ages to the beginning of the 16th century. Medieval theatre was dominated by mystery plays, morality plays, farces and miracle plays. In Italy, the models for tragedy in the later Middle Ages were Roman, particularly the works of Seneca, interest in which was reawakened by the Paduan Lovato de&#x27; Lovati (1241–1309). His pupil Albertino Mussato (1261–1329), also of Padua, in 1315 wrote the Latin verse tragedy &quot;Eccerinis&quot;, which uses the story of the tyrant Ezzelino III da Romano to highlight the danger to Padua posed by Cangrande della Scala of Verona. It was the first secular tragedy written since Roman times, and may be considered the first Italian tragedy identifiable as a Renaissance work. The earliest tragedies to employ purely classical themes are the &quot;Achilles&quot; written before 1390 by Antonio Loschi of Vicenza (c.1365–1441) and the &quot;Progne&quot; of the Venetian Gregorio Correr (1409–1464) which dates from 1428 to 1429.

In 1515 Gian Giorgio Trissino (1478–1550) of Vicenza wrote his tragedy &quot;Sophonisba&quot; in the vernacular that would later be called Italian. Drawn from Livy&#x27;s account of Sophonisba, the Carthaginian princess who drank poison to avoid being taken by the Romans, it adheres closely to classical rules. It was soon followed by the &quot;Oreste&quot; and &quot;Rosmunda&quot; of Trissino&#x27;s friend, the Florentine Giovanni di Bernardo Rucellai (1475–1525). Both were completed by early 1516 and are based on classical Greek models, &quot;Rosmunda&quot; on the &quot;Hecuba&quot; of Euripides, and &quot;Oreste&quot; on the &quot;Iphigenia in Tauris&quot; of the same author; like &quot;Sophonisba&quot;, they are in Italian and in blank (unrhymed) hendecasyllables. Another of the first of all modern tragedies is &quot;A Castro&quot;, by Portuguese poet and playwright António Ferreira, written around 1550 (but only published in 1587) in polymetric verse (most of it being blank hendecasyllables), dealing with the murder of Inês de Castro, one of the most dramatic episodes in Portuguese history. Although these three Italian plays are often cited, separately or together, as being the first regular tragedies in modern times, as well as the earliest substantial works to be written in blank hendecasyllables, they were apparently preceded by two other works in the vernacular: &quot;Pamfila&quot; or &quot;Filostrato e Panfila&quot; written in 1498 or 1508 by Antonio Cammelli (Antonio da Pistoia); and a &quot;Sophonisba&quot; by Galeotto del Carretto of 1502.

From about 1500 printed copies, in the original languages, of the works of Sophocles, Seneca, and Euripides, as well as comedic writers such as Aristophanes, Terence and Plautus, were available in Europe and the next forty years saw humanists and poets translating and adapting their tragedies. In the 1540s, the European university setting (and especially, from 1553 on, the Jesuit colleges) became host to a Neo-Latin theatre (in Latin) written by scholars. The influence of Seneca was particularly strong in its humanist tragedy. His plays, with their ghosts, lyrical passages and rhetorical oratory, brought a concentration on rhetoric and language over dramatic action to many humanist tragedies.

The most important sources for French tragic theatre in the Renaissance were the example of Seneca and the precepts of Horace and Aristotle (and contemporary commentaries by Julius Caesar Scaliger and Lodovico Castelvetro), although plots were taken from classical authors such as Plutarch, Suetonius, etc., from the Bible, from contemporary events and from short story collections (Italian, French and Spanish). The Greek tragic authors (Sophocles and Euripides) would become increasingly important as models by the middle of the 17th century. Important models were also supplied by the Spanish Golden Age playwrights Pedro Calderón de la Barca, Tirso de Molina and Lope de Vega, many of whose works were translated and adapted for the French stage.

===Britain===


The common forms are the:
* &quot;Tragedy of circumstance&quot;: people are born into their situations, and do not choose them; such tragedies explore the consequences of birthrights, particularly but not always for monarchs. (This particular variant of tragedy was the genre&#x27;s first shift away from stories about characters suffering due to their own faults, but rather due to circumstances out of their control.)
* &quot;Tragedy of miscalculation&quot;: the protagonist&#x27;s error of judgement has tragic consequences
* &quot;Revenge play&quot;

In English, the most famous and most successful tragedies are those of William Shakespeare and his Elizabethan contemporaries. Shakespeare&#x27;s tragedies include:
* &quot;Antony and Cleopatra&quot;
* &quot;Coriolanus&quot;
* &quot;Hamlet&quot;
* &quot;Julius Caesar&quot;
* &quot;King Lear&quot;
* &quot;Macbeth&quot;
* &quot;Othello&quot;
* &quot;Romeo and Juliet&quot;
* &quot;Timon of Athens&quot;
* &quot;Titus Andronicus&quot;
* &quot;Troilus and Cressida&quot;

A contemporary of Shakespeare, Christopher Marlowe, also wrote examples of tragedy in English, notably:
* &quot;The Tragical History of Doctor Faustus&quot;
* &quot;Tamburlaine the Great&quot;

John Webster (1580?–1635?), also wrote famous plays of the genre:
* &quot;The Duchess of Malfi&quot;
* &quot;The White Devil&quot;

===Domestic tragedy===
Domestic tragedies are tragedies in which the tragic protagonists are ordinary middle-class or working-class individuals. This subgenre contrasts with classical and Neoclassical tragedy, in which the protagonists are of kingly or aristocratic rank and their downfall is an affair of state as well as a personal matter.

The Ancient Greek theorist Aristotle had argued that tragedy should concern only great individuals with great minds and souls, because their catastrophic downfall would be more emotionally powerful to the audience; only comedy should depict middle-class people. Domestic tragedy breaks with Aristotle&#x27;s precepts, taking as its subjects merchants or citizens whose lives have less consequence in the wider world.

The advent of the domestic tragedy ushered in the first phase shift of the genre focusing less on the Aristotelian definition of the genre and more on the definition of tragedy on the scale of the drama, where tragedy is opposed to comedy i.e. melancholic stories. Although the utilization of key elements such as suffering, hamartia, morality, and spectacle ultimately ties this variety of tragedy to all the rest. This variant of tragedy noticeably had a larger number of stories that featured characters&#x27; downfalls being due to circumstances out of their control - a feature first established by the tragedies of Shakespeare - and less due to their own personal flaws.

This variant of tragedy has led to the evolution and development of tragedies of the modern era especially those past the mid-1800s such as the works of Arthur Miller, Eugene O&#x27;Neill and Henrik Ibsen. This variant of tragedy is especially popular in the modern age due to its characters being more relatable to mass audiences and is the most common form of tragedy adapted into modern day television programs, books, films, theatrical plays, etc. Newly dealt with themes that sprang forth from the Domestic tragedy movement include: wrongful convictions and executions, poverty, starvation, addiction, alcoholism, debt, structural abuse, child abuse, crime, domestic violence, social shunning, depression, and loneliness.

Classical Domestic tragedies include:
* &quot;Arden of Faversham&quot; (1592)
* &quot;A Woman Killed with Kindness&quot; (1607)
* &quot;A Yorkshire Tragedy&quot; (1608)
* &quot;The Witch of Edmonton&quot; (1621)

===Opera===
Contemporary with Shakespeare, an entirely different approach to facilitating the rebirth of tragedy was taken in Italy. Jacopo Peri, in the preface to his &quot;Euridice&quot; refers to &quot;the ancient Greeks and Romans (who in the opinion of many sang their staged tragedies throughout in representing them on stage).&quot; The attempts of Peri and his contemporaries to recreate ancient tragedy gave rise to the new Italian musical genre of opera. In France, tragic operatic works from the time of Lully to about that of Gluck were not called opera, but &quot;tragédie en musique&quot; (&quot;tragedy in music&quot;) or some similar name; the &quot;tragédie en musique&quot; is regarded as a distinct musical genre. Some later operatic composers have also shared Peri&#x27;s aims: Richard Wagner&#x27;s concept of &quot;Gesamtkunstwerk&quot; (&quot;integrated work of art&quot;), for example, was intended as a return to the ideal of Greek tragedy in which all the arts were blended in service of the drama. Nietzsche, in his &quot;The Birth of Tragedy&quot; (1872) was to support Wagner in his claims to be a successor of the ancient dramatists.

==Neo-classical==

For much of the 17th century, Pierre Corneille, who made his mark on the world of tragedy with plays like &quot;Medée&quot; (1635) and &quot;Le Cid&quot; (1636), was the most successful writer of French tragedies. Corneille&#x27;s tragedies were strangely un-tragic (his first version of &quot;Le Cid&quot; was even listed as a tragicomedy), for they had happy endings. In his theoretical works on theatre, Corneille redefined both comedy and tragedy around the following suppositions:
* The stage—in both comedy and tragedy—should feature noble characters (this would eliminate many low-characters, typical of the farce, from Corneille&#x27;s comedies). Noble characters should not be depicted as vile (reprehensible actions are generally due to non-noble characters in Corneille&#x27;s plays).
* Tragedy deals with affairs of the state (wars, dynastic marriages); comedy deals with love. For a work to be tragic, it need not have a tragic ending.
* Although Aristotle says that catharsis (purgation of emotion) should be the goal of tragedy, this is only an ideal. In conformity with the moral codes of the period, plays should not show evil being rewarded or nobility being degraded.

Corneille continued to write plays through 1674 (mainly tragedies, but also something he called &quot;heroic comedies&quot;) and many continued to be successes, although the &quot;irregularities&quot; of his theatrical methods were increasingly criticised (notably by François Hédelin, abbé d&#x27;Aubignac) and the success of Jean Racine from the late 1660s signalled the end of his preeminence.

Jean Racine&#x27;s tragedies—inspired by Greek myths, Euripides, Sophocles and Seneca—condensed their plot into a tight set of passionate and duty-bound conflicts between a small group of noble characters, and concentrated on these characters&#x27; double-binds and the geometry of their unfulfilled desires and hatreds. Racine&#x27;s poetic skill was in the representation of pathos and amorous passion (like Phèdre&#x27;s love for her stepson) and his impact was such that emotional crisis would be the dominant mode of tragedy to the end of the century. Racine&#x27;s two late plays (&quot;Esther&quot; and &quot;Athalie&quot;) opened new doors to biblical subject matter and to the use of theatre in the education of young women. Racine also faced criticism for his irregularities: when his play, &quot;Bérénice&quot;, was criticised for not containing any deaths, Racine disputed the conventional view of tragedy.

For more on French tragedy of the 16th and 17th centuries, see French Renaissance literature and French literature of the 17th century.

===Later development===

Towards the close of the eighteenth century, having studied her predecessors, Joanna Baillie wanted to revolutionise theatre, believing that it could be used more effectively to affect people&#x27;s lives. To this end she gave a new direction to tragedy, which she as &#x27;the unveiling of the human mind under the dominion of those strong and fixed passions, which seemingly unprovoked by outward circumstances, will from small beginnings brood within the breast, till all the better dispositions, all the fair gifts of nature are borne down before them&#x27;. 
This theory, she put into practice in her &#x27;Series of Plays on the Passions&#x27; in three volumes (commencing in 1798) and in other dramatic works. Her method was to create a series of scenes and incidents intended to capture the audience&#x27;s inquisitiveness and &#x27;trace the progress of the passion, pointing out those stages in the approach of the enemy, when he might have been combated most successfully; and where the suffering him to pass may be considered as occasioning all the misery that ensues.&#x27;

==Bourgeois==
Bourgeois tragedy (German: Bürgerliches Trauerspiel) is a form that developed in 18th-century Europe. It was a fruit of the Enlightenment and the emergence of the bourgeois class and its ideals. It is characterised by the fact that its protagonists are ordinary citizens. The first true bourgeois tragedy was an English play, George Lillo&#x27;s &quot;The London Merchant; or, the History of George Barnwell&quot;, which was first performed in 1731. Usually, Gotthold Ephraim Lessing&#x27;s play &quot;Miss Sara Sampson&quot;, which was first produced in 1755, is said to be the earliest &quot;Bürgerliches Trauerspiel&quot; in Germany.

==Modern development==

In modernist literature, the definition of tragedy has become less precise. The most fundamental change has been the rejection of Aristotle&#x27;s dictum that true tragedy can only depict those with power and high status. Arthur Miller&#x27;s essay &quot;Tragedy and the Common Man&quot; (1949) argues that tragedy may also depict ordinary people in domestic surroundings thus defining Domestic tragedies. British playwright Howard Barker has argued strenuously for the rebirth of tragedy in the contemporary theatre, most notably in his volume &quot;Arguments for a Theatre&quot;. &quot;You emerge from tragedy equipped against lies. After the musical, you&#x27;re anybody&#x27;s fool,&quot; he insists.

Critics such as George Steiner have even been prepared to argue that tragedy may no longer exist in comparison with its former manifestations in classical antiquity. In &quot;The Death of Tragedy&quot; (1961) George Steiner outlined the characteristics of Greek tragedy and the traditions that developed from that period. In the Foreword (1980) to a new edition of his book Steiner concluded that &#x27;the dramas of Shakespeare are not a renascence of or a humanistic variant of the absolute tragic model. They are, rather, a rejection of this model in the light of tragi-comic and &quot;realistic&quot; criteria.&#x27; In part, this feature of Shakespeare&#x27;s mind is explained by his bent of mind or imagination which was &#x27;so encompassing, so receptive to the plurality of diverse orders of experience.&#x27; When compared to the drama of Greek antiquity and French classicism Shakespeare&#x27;s forms are &#x27;richer but hybrid&#x27;.

Numerous books and plays continue to be written in the tradition of tragedy to this day examples include &quot;Froth on the Daydream&quot;, &quot;The Road&quot;, &quot;The Fault in Our Stars&quot;, &quot;Fat City&quot;, &quot;Rabbit Hole&quot;, &quot;Requiem for a Dream&quot;, &quot;The Handmaid&#x27;s Tale.&quot;

==Theories==
Defining tragedy is no simple matter, and there are many definitions, some of which are incompatible with each other. Oscar Mandel, in &quot;A Definition of Tragedy&quot; (1961), contrasted two essentially different means of arriving at a definition. First is what he calls the &quot;derivative&quot; way, in which the tragedy is thought to be an expression of an ordering of the world; &quot;instead of asking what tragedy expresses, the derivative definition tends to ask what expresses itself through tragedy&quot;. The second is the &quot;substantive&quot; way of defining tragedy, which starts with the work of art which is assumed to &quot;contain&quot; the ordering of the world. Substantive critics &quot;are interested in the constituent elements of art, rather than its ontological sources&quot;. He recognizes four subclasses: a. &quot;definition by formal elements&quot; (for instance the supposed &quot;three unities&quot;); b. &quot;definition by situation&quot; (where one defines tragedy for instance as &quot;exhibiting the fall of a good man&quot;); c. &quot;definition by ethical direction&quot; (where the critic is concerned with the meaning, with the &quot;intellectual and moral effect); and d. &quot;definition by emotional effect&quot; (and he cites Aristotle&#x27;s &quot;requirement of pity and fear&quot;).

===Aristotle===
Aristotle wrote in his work &quot;Poetics&quot; that
tragedy is characterised by seriousness and involves a great person who experiences a reversal of fortune (&quot;Peripeteia&quot;). Aristotle&#x27;s definition can include a change of fortune from bad to good as in the &quot;Eumenides&quot;, but he says that the change from good to bad as in &quot;Oedipus Rex&quot; is preferable because this induces pity and fear within the spectators. Tragedy results in a catharsis (emotional cleansing) or healing for the audience through their experience of these emotions in response to the suffering of the characters in the drama.

According to Aristotle, &quot;the structure of the best tragedy should not be simple but complex and one that represents incidents arousing fear and pity—for that is peculiar to this form of art.&quot; This reversal of fortune must be caused by the tragic hero&#x27;s &quot;hamartia&quot;, which is often translated as either a character flaw, or as a mistake (since the original Greek etymology traces back to &quot;hamartanein&quot;, a sporting term that refers to an archer or spear-thrower missing his target). According to Aristotle, &quot;The misfortune is brought about not by [general] vice or depravity, but by some [particular] error or frailty.&quot; The reversal is the inevitable but unforeseen result of some action taken by the hero. It is also a misconception that this reversal can be brought about by a higher power (e.g. the law, the gods, fate, or society), but if a character&#x27;s downfall is brought about by an external cause, Aristotle describes this as a misadventure and not a tragedy.

In addition, the tragic hero may achieve some revelation or recognition (anagnorisis—&quot;knowing again&quot; or &quot;knowing back&quot; or &quot;knowing throughout&quot;) about human fate, destiny, and the will of the gods. Aristotle terms this sort of recognition &quot;a change from ignorance to awareness of a bond of love or hate.&quot;

In &quot;Poetics&quot;, Aristotle gave the following definition in ancient Greek of the word &quot;tragedy&quot; (τραγῳδία):

Common usage of tragedy refers to any story with a sad ending, whereas to be an Aristotelian tragedy the story must fit the set of requirements as laid out by &quot;Poetics&quot;. By this definition social drama cannot be tragic because the hero in it is a victim of circumstance and incidents that depend upon the society in which he lives and not upon the inner compulsions—psychological or religious—which determine his progress towards self-knowledge and death. Exactly what constitutes a &quot;tragedy&quot;, however, is a frequently debated matter.

According to Aristotle, there are four species of tragedy:

# Complex, which involves Peripety and Discovery
# Suffering, tragedies of such nature can be seen in the Greek mythological stories of Ajaxes and Ixions
# Character, a tragedy of moral or ethical character. Tragedies of this nature can be found in Phthiotides and Peleus
# Spectacle, that of a horror-like theme. Examples of this nature are Phorcides and Prometheus

===Hegel===
G.W.F. Hegel, the German philosopher most famous for his dialectical approach to epistemology and history, also applied such a methodology to his theory of tragedy. In his essay &quot;Hegel&#x27;s Theory of Tragedy,&quot; A.C. Bradley first introduced the English-speaking world to Hegel&#x27;s theory, which Bradley called the &quot;tragic collision&quot;, and contrasted against the Aristotelian notions of the &quot;tragic hero&quot; and his or her &quot;hamartia&quot; in subsequent analyses of the Aeschylus&#x27; &quot;Oresteia&quot; trilogy and of Sophocles&#x27; &quot;Antigone&quot;. Hegel himself, however, in his seminal &quot;The Phenomenology of Spirit&quot; argues for a more complicated theory of tragedy, with two complementary branches which, though driven by a single dialectical principle, differentiate Greek tragedy from that which follows Shakespeare. His later lectures formulate such a theory of tragedy as a conflict of ethical forces, represented by characters, in ancient Greek tragedy, but in Shakespearean tragedy the conflict is rendered as one of subject and object, of individual personality which must manifest self-destructive passions because only such passions are strong enough to defend the individual from a hostile and capricious external world:
Hegel&#x27;s comments on a particular play may better elucidate his theory: &quot;Viewed externally, Hamlet&#x27;s death may be seen to have been brought about accidentally... but in Hamlet&#x27;s soul, we understand that death has lurked from the beginning: the sandbank of finitude cannot suffice his sorrow and tenderness, such grief and nausea at all conditions of life... we feel he is a man whom inner disgust has almost consumed well before death comes upon him from outside.&quot;

==See also==

* Classicism
* Tragédies en musique
* She-tragedy
* Revenge tragedy

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* .
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==

* Toscano, Alberto. Tragedy. &quot;Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Literature&quot;.
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q80930" start="2" end="9" title="Tragedy" label="tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25372" start="24" end="29" title="drama" label="drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5780945" start="45" end="54" title="suffering" label="suffering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969230" start="115" end="129" title="tragic hero" label="main character"/>
<link wikidata="Q156296" start="222" end="231" title="catharsis" label="catharsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q483372" start="352" end="359" title="paradox" label="paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207467" start="430" end="439" title="Poetic tradition" label="tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="532" end="552" title="Western culture" label="Western civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368367" start="670" end="687" title="cultural identity" label="cultural identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q844930" start="724" end="730" title="Classical Athens" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q912595" start="739" end="751" title="Elizabethan era" label="Elizabethans"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="775" end="783" title="Hellenistic civilization" label="Hellenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q394628" start="831" end="847" title="Raymond Williams" label="Raymond Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q189072" start="882" end="907" title="theatre of ancient Greece" label="theatre of ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q40939" start="981" end="990" title="Aeschylus" label="Aeschylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="992" end="1001" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="1006" end="1015" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="1094" end="1100" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="1153" end="1164" title="William Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q165257" start="1166" end="1178" title="Lope de Vega" label="Lope de Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q742" start="1180" end="1191" title="Jean Racine" label="Jean Racine"/>
<link wikidata="Q22670" start="1197" end="1215" title="Friedrich Schiller" label="Friedrich Schiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q56001" start="1235" end="1247" title="Naturalism (theatre)" label="naturalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36661" start="1259" end="1271" title="Henrik Ibsen" label="Henrik Ibsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7724" start="1276" end="1293" title="August Strindberg" label="August Strindberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070313" start="1295" end="1304" title="Natyaguru" label="Natyaguru"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070313" start="1305" end="1316" title="Nurul Momen" label="Nurul Momen"/>
<link wikidata="Q185747" start="1324" end="1331" title="Nemesis" label="Nemesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q37327" start="1361" end="1375" title="Samuel Beckett" label="Samuel Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="1383" end="1392" title="Modernism" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q57426" start="1435" end="1448" title="Heiner Müller" label="Heiner Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="1449" end="1462" title="Postmodernism" label="postmodernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="1613" end="1625" title="philosophers" label="philosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="1641" end="1646" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="1648" end="1657" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="1659" end="1674" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Saint Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="1676" end="1684" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="1686" end="1690" title="David Hume" label="Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q448" start="1692" end="1699" title="Denis Diderot" label="Diderot"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="1701" end="1706" title="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel" label="Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q38193" start="1708" end="1720" title="Arthur Schopenhauer" label="Schopenhauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6512" start="1722" end="1733" title="Søren Kierkegaard" label="Kierkegaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="1735" end="1744" title="Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="1746" end="1751" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q61078" start="1753" end="1761" title="Walter Benjamin" label="Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34670" start="1763" end="1768" title="Albert Camus" label="Camus"/>
<link wikidata="Q169906" start="1770" end="1775" title="Jacques Lacan" label="Lacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q184226" start="1781" end="1788" title="Gilles Deleuze" label="Deleuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q264714" start="1886" end="1893" title="Poetics (Aristotle)" label="Poetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="2037" end="2041" title="Epic poetry" label="epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q182357" start="2046" end="2051" title="Lyric poetry" label="lyric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151421" start="2111" end="2117" title="Comedy (drama)" label="comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084414" start="2127" end="2133" title="Modernity" label="modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q191489" start="2184" end="2193" title="melodrama" label="melodrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q192881" start="2195" end="2209" title="Tragicomedy" label="the tragicomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q722600" start="2215" end="2227" title="epic theatre" label="epic theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q483394" start="2338" end="2345" title="Genre" label="generic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405881" start="2346" end="2366" title="deterritorialization" label="deterritorialisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7038541" start="2376" end="2392" title="Nineteenth century theatre" label="mid-19th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q38757" start="2407" end="2421" title="Bertolt Brecht" label="Bertolt Brecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q434805" start="2426" end="2438" title="Augusto Boal" label="Augusto Boal"/>
<link wikidata="Q612513" start="2475" end="2497" title="non-Aristotelian drama" label="non-Aristotelian drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269058" start="2502" end="2526" title="Theatre of the Oppressed" label="Theatre of the Oppressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="2834" end="2847" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601924" start="3084" end="3098" title="Greek dances" label="choral dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q770974" start="3113" end="3119" title="Greek chorus" label="chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189819" start="3161" end="3167" title="ritual" label="ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142916" start="3168" end="3177" title="Animal sacrifice" label="sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q294923" start="3213" end="3222" title="Athenaeus" label="Athenaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000977" start="3491" end="3501" title="Age of Pericles" label="Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q843745" start="3505" end="3516" title="Classical Greece" label="5th-century"/>
<link wikidata="Q844930" start="3517" end="3525" title="Classical Athens" label="Athenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="3536" end="3545" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018526" start="3621" end="3629" title="The arts" label="art form"/>
<link wikidata="Q264714" start="3643" end="3650" title="Poetics (Aristotle)" label="Poetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q214961" start="3709" end="3722" title="improvisation" label="improvisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q770974" start="3741" end="3747" title="Greek chorus" label="choral"/>
<link wikidata="Q262533" start="3748" end="3757" title="dithyramb" label="dithyramb"/>
<link wikidata="Q484692" start="3760" end="3764" title="hymn" label="hymn"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="3795" end="3803" title="Dionysos" label="Dionysos"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="4108" end="4116" title="Ancient Greece" label="Hellenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="4164" end="4183" title="Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Friedrich Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053359" start="4247" end="4267" title="The Birth of Tragedy" label="The Birth of Tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q163709" start="4356" end="4361" title="satyr" label="satyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q262533" start="4379" end="4388" title="dithyramb" label="dithyramb"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="4837" end="4855" title="Hellenistic civilization" label="Hellenistic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q541923" start="5008" end="5014" title="Extant literature" label="extant"/>
<link wikidata="Q40939" start="5018" end="5027" title="Aeschylus" label="Aeschylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="5029" end="5038" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="5044" end="5053" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q788458" start="5077" end="5089" title="The Persians" label="The Persians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050848" start="5565" end="5575" title="satyr play" label="satyr play"/>
<link wikidata="Q249769" start="5690" end="5698" title="Oresteia" label="Oresteia"/>
<link wikidata="Q324299" start="6089" end="6094" title="aulos" label="aulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q770974" start="6269" end="6281" title="Greek chorus" label="Greek chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323193" start="6637" end="6646" title="Ekkyklema" label="ekkyklêma"/>
<link wikidata="Q249769" start="7153" end="7162" title="Agamemnon (play)" label="Agamemnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q268124" start="7551" end="7558" title="mechane" label="mechane"/>
<link wikidata="Q203698" start="7694" end="7709" title="deus ex machina" label="deus ex machina"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="7900" end="7914" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189072" start="8001" end="8014" title="Theatre of ancient Greece" label="Greek tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="8073" end="8085" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203607" start="8312" end="8323" title="Theatre of ancient Rome" label="Roman drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q193058" start="8325" end="8342" title="Livius Andronicus" label="Livius Andronicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184890" start="8426" end="8442" title="Latin literature" label="Roman literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q212667" start="8462" end="8476" title="Gnaeus Naevius" label="Gnaeus Naevius"/>
<link wikidata="Q47130" start="8698" end="8712" title="Quintus Ennius" label="Quintus Ennius"/>
<link wikidata="Q314677" start="8714" end="8729" title="Marcus Pacuvius" label="Marcus Pacuvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q311287" start="8734" end="8747" title="Lucius Accius" label="Lucius Accius"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="8869" end="8886" title="Stoicism" label="Stoic philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="8887" end="8893" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450364" start="8903" end="8926" title="Senecan tragedy" label="Seneca&amp;#x27;s tragedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q777435" start="9034" end="9041" title="Phaedra (Seneca)" label="Phaedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="9075" end="9084" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q375786" start="9097" end="9107" title="Hippolytus (play)" label="Hippolytus"/>
<link wikidata="Q541923" start="9157" end="9163" title="Extant literature" label="extant"/>
<link wikidata="Q646990" start="9251" end="9258" title="Octavia (play)" label="Octavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184528" start="9768" end="9779" title="Soliloquy" label="soliloquies"/>
<link wikidata="Q20035824" start="9889" end="9896" title="Revenge tragedy" label="revenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q441066" start="9977" end="9999" title="Julius Caesar Scaliger" label="Julius Caesar Scaliger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247727" start="10248" end="10264" title="Medieval theatre" label="Medieval theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q240911" start="10282" end="10294" title="mystery play" label="mystery play"/>
<link wikidata="Q929047" start="10297" end="10310" title="morality play" label="morality play"/>
<link wikidata="Q193979" start="10313" end="10318" title="farce" label="farce"/>
<link wikidata="Q240911" start="10324" end="10336" title="miracle play" label="miracle play"/>
<link wikidata="Q617" start="10483" end="10488" title="Padua" label="Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091362" start="10490" end="10512" title="Lovato Lovati" label="Lovato de&amp;#x27; Lovati"/>
<link wikidata="Q737321" start="10536" end="10553" title="Albertino Mussato" label="Albertino Mussato"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496542" start="10600" end="10611" title="Latin verse" label="Latin verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q787178" start="10678" end="10700" title="Ezzelino III da Romano" label="Ezzelino III da Romano"/>
<link wikidata="Q785349" start="10743" end="10764" title="Cangrande della Scala" label="Cangrande della Scala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028" start="10768" end="10774" title="Verona" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11029" end="11043" title="Antonio Loschi" label="Antonio Loschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537" start="11047" end="11054" title="Vicenza" label="Vicenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="11103" end="11111" title="Venice" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765384" start="11112" end="11127" title="Gregorio Correr" label="Gregorio Correr"/>
<link wikidata="Q436738" start="11180" end="11201" title="Gian Giorgio Trissino" label="Gian Giorgio Trissino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036511" start="11273" end="11283" title="vernacular" label="vernacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039" start="11331" end="11335" title="Livy" label="Livy"/>
<link wikidata="Q241210" start="11354" end="11364" title="Sophonisba" label="Sophonisba"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="11370" end="11382" title="Carthage" label="Carthaginian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248954" start="11598" end="11627" title="Giovanni di Bernardo Rucellai" label="Giovanni di Bernardo Rucellai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115611" start="11750" end="11756" title="Hecuba (play)" label="Hecuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="11766" end="11775" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q523227" start="11813" end="11832" title="Iphigenia in Tauris" label="Iphigenia in Tauris"/>
<link wikidata="Q937691" start="11932" end="11947" title="hendecasyllable" label="hendecasyllable"/>
<link wikidata="Q610870" start="12054" end="12070" title="António Ferreira (poet)" label="António Ferreira"/>
<link wikidata="Q234022" start="12211" end="12225" title="Inês de Castro" label="Inês de Castro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12648" end="12664" title="Antonio Cammelli" label="Antonio Cammelli"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12719" end="12740" title="Galeotto del Carretto" label="Galeotto del Carretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="12826" end="12835" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="12837" end="12843" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="12849" end="12858" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q43353" start="12895" end="12907" title="Aristophanes" label="Aristophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q172048" start="12909" end="12916" title="Terence" label="Terence"/>
<link wikidata="Q47160" start="12921" end="12928" title="Plautus" label="Plautus"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="12984" end="12993" title="Humanism" label="humanists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="13546" end="13552" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197" start="13573" end="13579" title="Horace" label="Horace"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="13584" end="13593" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q441066" start="13628" end="13650" title="Julius Caesar Scaliger" label="Julius Caesar Scaliger"/>
<link wikidata="Q936665" start="13655" end="13675" title="Lodovico Castelvetro" label="Lodovico Castelvetro"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="13735" end="13743" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229963" start="13745" end="13754" title="Lives of the Twelve Caesars" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="13893" end="13902" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="13907" end="13916" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q530936" start="14042" end="14060" title="Spanish Golden Age" label="Spanish Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q170800" start="14073" end="14099" title="Pedro Calderón de la Barca" label="Pedro Calderón de la Barca"/>
<link wikidata="Q295598" start="14101" end="14116" title="Tirso de Molina" label="Tirso de Molina"/>
<link wikidata="Q165257" start="14121" end="14133" title="Lope de Vega" label="Lope de Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q215972" start="14687" end="14698" title="protagonist" label="protagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417744" start="14757" end="14769" title="Revenge play" label="Revenge play"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="14848" end="14867" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q912595" start="14876" end="14887" title="Elizabethan era" label="Elizabethan"/>
<link wikidata="Q606830" start="14950" end="14970" title="Antony and Cleopatra" label="Antony and Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q463126" start="14985" end="14995" title="Coriolanus" label="Coriolanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="15010" end="15016" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q215750" start="15031" end="15044" title="Julius Caesar (play)" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q181598" start="15059" end="15068" title="King Lear" label="King Lear"/>
<link wikidata="Q130283" start="15083" end="15090" title="Macbeth" label="Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q26833" start="15105" end="15112" title="Othello" label="Othello"/>
<link wikidata="Q83186" start="15127" end="15143" title="Romeo and Juliet" label="Romeo and Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q284641" start="15158" end="15173" title="Timon of Athens" label="Timon of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q272169" start="15188" end="15204" title="Titus Andronicus" label="Titus Andronicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q183304" start="15219" end="15239" title="Troilus and Cressida" label="Troilus and Cressida"/>
<link wikidata="Q28975" start="15278" end="15297" title="Christopher Marlowe" label="Christopher Marlowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q50919" start="15359" end="15397" title="The Tragical History of Doctor Faustus" label="The Tragical History of Doctor Faustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214597" start="15412" end="15433" title="Tamburlaine (play)" label="Tamburlaine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q225904" start="15441" end="15453" title="John Webster" label="John Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408612" start="15515" end="15535" title="The Duchess of Malfi" label="The Duchess of Malfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117565" start="15550" end="15565" title="The White Devil" label="The White Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="15747" end="15756" title="classical antiquity" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="15761" end="15773" title="Neoclassicism" label="Neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478141" start="15826" end="15838" title="Aristocracy (class)" label="aristocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="15920" end="15933" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="15943" end="15952" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q80596" start="17165" end="17178" title="Arthur Miller" label="Arthur Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q93157" start="17180" end="17199" title="Eugene O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Eugene O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q36661" start="17204" end="17216" title="Henrik Ibsen" label="Henrik Ibsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15416" start="17406" end="17425" title="Television show" label="television programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q571" start="17427" end="17432" title="books" label="books"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="17434" end="17439" title="films" label="films"/>
<link wikidata="Q25379" start="17441" end="17457" title="Play (theatre)" label="theatrical plays"/>
<link wikidata="Q12029" start="17608" end="17617" title="addiction" label="addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="17619" end="17629" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624998" start="17637" end="17653" title="structural abuse" label="structural abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q167191" start="17655" end="17666" title="child abuse" label="child abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="17668" end="17673" title="crime" label="crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="17675" end="17692" title="domestic violence" label="domestic violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q204244" start="17694" end="17709" title="shunning" label="social shunning"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="17711" end="17721" title="Major depressive disorder" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625343" start="17786" end="17804" title="Arden of Faversham" label="Arden of Faversham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549497" start="17826" end="17854" title="A Woman Killed with Kindness" label="A Woman Killed with Kindness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383498" start="17876" end="17895" title="A Yorkshire Tragedy" label="A Yorkshire Tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775295" start="17917" end="17938" title="The Witch of Edmonton" label="The Witch of Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q205519" start="18086" end="18097" title="Jacopo Peri" label="Jacopo Peri"/>
<link wikidata="Q748501" start="18127" end="18135" title="Euridice (Peri)" label="Euridice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192" start="18468" end="18473" title="Jean-Baptiste Lully" label="Lully"/>
<link wikidata="Q130759" start="18491" end="18496" title="Christoph Willibald Gluck" label="Gluck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="18751" end="18765" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q858403" start="18790" end="18805" title="Gesamtkunstwerk" label="Gesamtkunstwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="18978" end="18987" title="Nietzsche" label="Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053359" start="19002" end="19022" title="The Birth of Tragedy" label="The Birth of Tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q747" start="19167" end="19183" title="Pierre Corneille" label="Pierre Corneille"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="20097" end="20106" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q156296" start="20117" end="20126" title="catharsis" label="catharsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q714015" start="20593" end="20631" title="François Hédelin, abbé d&amp;#x27;Aubignac" label="François Hédelin, abbé d&amp;#x27;Aubignac"/>
<link wikidata="Q742" start="20723" end="20734" title="Jean Racine" label="Jean Racine"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="20777" end="20786" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="20788" end="20797" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="20802" end="20808" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q633885" start="21100" end="21106" title="pathos" label="pathos"/>
<link wikidata="Q969098" start="21133" end="21139" title="Phèdre" label="Phèdre"/>
<link wikidata="Q793366" start="21530" end="21538" title="Bérénice" label="Bérénice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052625" start="21706" end="21735" title="French Renaissance literature" label="French Renaissance literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137971" start="21740" end="21777" title="French literature of the 17th century" label="French literature of the 17th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q463302" start="21883" end="21897" title="Joanna Baillie" label="Joanna Baillie"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="23031" end="23044" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="23070" end="23085" title="Bourgeoisie" label="bourgeois class"/>
<link wikidata="Q832532" start="23233" end="23245" title="George Lillo" label="George Lillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34628" start="23366" end="23390" title="Gotthold Ephraim Lessing" label="Gotthold Ephraim Lessing"/>
<link wikidata="Q971480" start="23572" end="23592" title="modernist literature" label="modernist literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q80596" start="23791" end="23804" title="Arthur Miller" label="Arthur Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q721372" start="23994" end="24007" title="Howard Barker" label="Howard Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q453288" start="24291" end="24305" title="George Steiner" label="George Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q645906" start="25335" end="25356" title="Froth on the Daydream" label="Froth on the Daydream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140295" start="25370" end="25378" title="The Road" label="The Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q658375" start="25392" end="25414" title="The Fault in Our Stars" label="The Fault in Our Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437183" start="25428" end="25436" title="Fat City (novel)" label="Fat City"/>
<link wikidata="Q14250549" start="25450" end="25461" title="Rabbit Hole (play)" label="Rabbit Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428183" start="25475" end="25494" title="Requiem for a Dream (novel)" label="Requiem for a Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541914" start="25508" end="25532" title="The Handmaid&amp;#x27;s Tale" label="The Handmaid&amp;#x27;s Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="26906" end="26915" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q264714" start="26934" end="26953" title="Poetics (Aristotle)" label="&amp;quot;Poetics&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970348" start="27057" end="27064" title="luck" label="fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q623928" start="27072" end="27082" title="Peripeteia" label="Peripeteia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101072" start="27108" end="27118" title="definition" label="definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q249769" start="27184" end="27193" title="The Eumenides" label="Eumenides"/>
<link wikidata="Q148643" start="27258" end="27269" title="Oedipus Rex" label="Oedipus Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724817" start="27311" end="27315" title="pity" label="pity"/>
<link wikidata="Q44619" start="27320" end="27324" title="fear" label="fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q156296" start="27369" end="27378" title="catharsis" label="catharsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q44619" start="27674" end="27678" title="fear" label="fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724817" start="27683" end="27687" title="pity" label="pity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511686" start="27808" end="27816" title="hamartia" label="hamartia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073741" start="27862" end="27876" title="character flaw" label="character flaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q108429" start="28004" end="28010" title="archery" label="archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44475" start="28014" end="28019" title="spear" label="spear"/>
<link wikidata="Q216774" start="28393" end="28397" title="destiny" label="fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q171558" start="28516" end="28528" title="Accident" label="misadventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q483998" start="28622" end="28633" title="anagnorisis" label="anagnorisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="28961" end="28974" title="ancient Greek" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q263307" start="29100" end="29112" title="Aristotelianism" label="Aristotelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318295" start="29125" end="29130" title="narrative" label="story"/>
<link wikidata="Q623928" start="29662" end="29670" title="Peripety" label="Peripety"/>
<link wikidata="Q483998" start="29675" end="29684" title="Discovery (fiction)" label="Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q178641" start="29901" end="29907" title="Peleus" label="Peleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q257768" start="29978" end="29987" title="Graeae" label="Phorcides"/>
<link wikidata="Q83160" start="29992" end="30002" title="Prometheus" label="Prometheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="30016" end="30028" title="G.W.F. Hegel" label="G.W.F. Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="30097" end="30109" title="epistemology" label="epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818917" start="30238" end="30250" title="A.C. Bradley" label="A.C. Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30350" end="30366" title="tragic collision" label="tragic collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969230" start="30435" end="30446" title="tragic hero" label="tragic hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q877510" start="30654" end="30681" title="The Phenomenology of Spirit" label="The Phenomenology of Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q170292" start="31808" end="31818" title="Classicism" label="Classicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q908705" start="31821" end="31841" title="Tragédies en musique" label="Tragédies en musique"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055934" start="31844" end="31855" title="She-tragedy" label="She-tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q20035824" start="31858" end="31873" title="Revenge tragedy" label="Revenge tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831837" start="31977" end="31993" title="Alberto Toscano" label="Toscano, Alberto"/>
<link wikidata="Q113549103" start="32010" end="32052" title="Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Literature" label="Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Literature"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="57994" wikidata="Q188238" url="?curid=57994" title="Epiphyte">
<text>An epiphyte is a plant or plant-like organism that grows on the surface of another plant and derives its moisture and nutrients from the air, rain, water (in marine environments) or from debris accumulating around it. The plants on which epiphytes grow are called phorophytes. Epiphytes take part in nutrient cycles and add to both the diversity and biomass of the ecosystem in which they occur, like any other organism. In some cases, a rainforest tree&#x27;s epiphytes may total &quot;several tonnes&quot; (several long tons). They are an important source of food for many species. Typically, the older parts of a plant will have more epiphytes growing on them. Epiphytes differ from parasites in that they grow on other plants for physical support and do not necessarily affect the host negatively. An organism that grows on another organism that is not a plant may be called an epibiont. Epiphytes are usually found in the temperate zone (e.g., many mosses, liverworts, lichens, and algae) or in the tropics (e.g., many ferns, cacti, orchids, and bromeliads). Epiphyte species make good houseplants due to their minimal water and soil requirements. Epiphytes provide a rich and diverse habitat for other organisms including animals, fungi, bacteria, and myxomycetes.

Epiphyte is one of the subdivisions of the Raunkiær system.
The term &quot;epiphytic&quot; derives . Epiphytic plants are sometimes called &quot;air plants&quot; because they do not root in soil. However, that term is inaccurate, as there are many aquatic species of algae that are epiphytes on other aquatic plants (seaweeds or aquatic angiosperms).

==Terrestrial epiphytes==
The best-known epiphytic plants include mosses, orchids, and bromeliads such as Spanish moss (of the genus &quot;Tillandsia&quot;), but epiphytes may be found in every major group of the plant kingdom. Eighty-nine percent of (or about 24,000) terrestrial epiphyte species are flowering plants. The second largest group are the leptosporangiate ferns, with about 2,800 species (10% of epiphytes). About one-third of all fern species are epiphytes. The third largest group is clubmosses, with 190 species, followed by a handful of species in each of the spikemosses, other ferns, Gnetales, and cycads.

The first important monograph on epiphytic plant ecology was written by A. F. W. Schimper (, 1888). Assemblages of large epiphytes occur most abundantly in moist tropical forests, but mosses and lichens occur as epiphytes in almost all biomes. In Europe there are no dedicated epiphytic plants using roots, but rich assemblages of mosses and lichens grow on trees in damp areas (mainly the western coastal fringe), and the common polypody fern grows epiphytically along branches. Rarely, grass, small bushes or small trees may grow in suspended soils up trees (typically in a rot-hole).

=== Holo-epiphyte or hemi-epiphyte ===
Epiphytes however, can generally be categorized into holo-epiphytes or hemi-epiphytes. A holo-epiphyte is a plant that spends its whole life cycle without contact with the ground and a hemi-epiphyte is a plant that spends only half of its life without the ground before the roots can reach or make contact with the ground. Orchids are a common example of holo-epiphytes and Strangler Figs are an example of hemi-epiphytes.

=== Plant nutrient relations ===
Epiphytes are not connected to the soil, and consequently must get nutrients from other sources, such as fog, dew, rain and mist, or from nutrients being released from the ground rooted plants by decomposition or leaching, and dinitrogen fixation. Epiphytic plants attached to their hosts high in the canopy have an advantage over herbs restricted to the ground where there is less light and herbivores may be more active. Epiphytic plants are also important to certain animals that may live in their water reservoirs, such as some types of frogs and arthropods.

Epiphytes can have a significant effect on the microenvironment of their host, and of ecosystems where they are abundant, as they hold water in the canopy and decrease water input to the soil. Some non-vascular epiphytes such as lichens and mosses are well known for their ability to take up water rapidly. Epiphytes create a significantly cooler and more moist environment in the host plant canopy, potentially greatly reducing water loss by the host through transpiration.

=== Plant metabolism ===
CAM metabolism, a water-preserving metabolism present among various plant taxa, is particularly relevant to epiphytic communities. For example, it is estimated that among epiphytic orchids, as many as 50% are likely to use it. Other relevant epiphytic families which display such metabolism are Bromeliacee (e.g. in genera &quot;Aechmea&quot; and &quot;Tillandsia&quot;), Cactaceae (e.g. in &quot;Rhipsalis&quot; and &quot;Epiphyllum&quot;) and Apocynaceae (e.g. in &quot;Hoya&quot; and &quot;Dischidia&quot;).

==Marine epiphytes==
The ecology of epiphytes in marine environments differs from those in terrestrial ecosystems. Epiphytes in marine systems are species of algae, bacteria, fungi, sponges, bryozoans, ascidians, protozoa, crustaceans, molluscs and any other sessile organism that grows on the surface of a plant, typically seagrasses or algae. Settlement of epiphytic species is influenced by a number of factors including light, temperature, currents, nutrients, and trophic interactions. Algae are the most common group of epiphytes in marine systems. Photosynthetic epiphytes account for a large amount of the photosynthesis in systems in which they occur. This is typically between 20 and 60% of the total primary production of the ecosystem. They are a general group of organisms and are highly diverse, providing food for a great number of fauna. Snail and nudibranch species are two common grazers of epiphytes. Epiphyte species composition and the amount of epiphytes can be indicative of changes in the environment. Recent increases in epiphyte abundance have been linked to excessive nitrogen put into the environment from farm runoff and storm water. High abundance of epiphytes are considered detrimental to the plants that they grow on often causing damage or death, particularly in seagrasses. This is because too many epiphytes can block access to sunlight or nutrients. Epiphytes in marine systems are known to grow quickly with very fast generation times.

==See also==
* Lithophyte – a plant that grows on rocks
* &quot;Tillandsia&quot; – a genus of the Bromeliaceae
* &quot;Epiphyllum&quot; – a genus of epiphytic cacti
* Parasitic plant
* Epilith, an organism that grows in a rock
* Foliicolous, lichens or bryophytes that grow on leaves of vascular plants
* Epiphytic bacteria
* Epiphytic fungus
* Canopy soils

==References==
==External links==
* Epiphytes on a Scot&#x27;s Pine in Gorbie Glen, Scotland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188238" start="3" end="11" title="Epiphyte" label="epiphyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="17" end="22" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q111915062" start="264" end="275" title="Phorophyte" label="phorophytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070482" start="300" end="314" title="nutrient cycle" label="nutrient cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q186517" start="686" end="695" title="Parasitism" label="parasites"/>
<link wikidata="Q640114" start="882" end="890" title="epibiont" label="epibiont"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="927" end="941" title="temperate zone" label="temperate zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q25347" start="954" end="958" title="moss" label="moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q189808" start="962" end="972" title="Marchantiophyta" label="liverworts"/>
<link wikidata="Q43142" start="974" end="980" title="lichen" label="lichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="987" end="991" title="alga" label="alga"/>
<link wikidata="Q80005" start="1024" end="1028" title="fern" label="fern"/>
<link wikidata="Q14560" start="1031" end="1036" title="Cactus" label="cacti"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="1038" end="1044" title="orchid" label="orchid"/>
<link wikidata="Q156529" start="1051" end="1060" title="bromeliad" label="bromeliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q203834" start="1091" end="1101" title="houseplant" label="houseplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q378789" start="1258" end="1269" title="Mycetozoa" label="myxomycetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q753033" start="1315" end="1330" title="Raunkiær plant life-form" label="Raunkiær system"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="1539" end="1544" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="1609" end="1620" title="angiosperms" label="angiosperms"/>
<link wikidata="Q25347" start="1690" end="1694" title="moss" label="moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="1698" end="1704" title="orchid" label="orchid"/>
<link wikidata="Q156529" start="1711" end="1720" title="bromeliad" label="bromeliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q311524" start="1730" end="1742" title="Spanish moss" label="Spanish moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q157270" start="1763" end="1773" title="Tillandsia" label="Tillandsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="1926" end="1941" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395756" start="1977" end="1998" title="leptosporangiate fern" label="leptosporangiate fern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149748" start="2124" end="2132" title="clubmoss" label="clubmoss"/>
<link wikidata="Q379743" start="2202" end="2211" title="spikemoss" label="spikemoss"/>
<link wikidata="Q309147" start="2228" end="2236" title="Gnetophyta" label="Gnetales"/>
<link wikidata="Q157114" start="2242" end="2247" title="cycad" label="cycad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387972" start="2294" end="2307" title="plant ecology" label="plant ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q63760" start="2323" end="2340" title="Andreas Franz Wilhelm Schimper" label="A. F. W. Schimper"/>
<link wikidata="Q199403" start="2413" end="2429" title="Tropical rainforest" label="tropical forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135685" start="2681" end="2694" title="Polypodium" label="polypody fern"/>
<link wikidata="Q100920496" start="2786" end="2801" title="Canopy soils" label="suspended soils"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="3201" end="3208" title="Orchidaceae" label="Orchids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500609" start="3252" end="3266" title="Strangler fig" label="Strangler Figs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134228" start="3636" end="3642" title="Canopy (forest)" label="canopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q53636" start="3876" end="3880" title="frog" label="frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="3886" end="3895" title="arthropod" label="arthropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q858313" start="4400" end="4414" title="Crassulacean acid metabolism" label="CAM metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138178" start="4468" end="4478" title="Plant taxonomy" label="plant taxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q156529" start="4695" end="4706" title="Bromeliaceae" label="Bromeliacee"/>
<link wikidata="Q131754" start="4729" end="4736" title="Aechmea" label="Aechmea"/>
<link wikidata="Q14560" start="4772" end="4781" title="Cactus" label="Cactaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132296" start="4797" end="4806" title="Rhipsalis" label="Rhipsalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q310964" start="4823" end="4833" title="Epiphyllum" label="Epiphyllum"/>
<link wikidata="Q173756" start="4845" end="4856" title="Apocynaceae" label="Apocynaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q157749" start="4872" end="4876" title="Hoya (plant)" label="Hoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q146278" start="4893" end="4902" title="Dischidia" label="Dischidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q646660" start="5236" end="5244" title="seagrass" label="seagrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738459" start="5841" end="5860" title="species composition" label="species composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321691" start="6402" end="6412" title="Lithophyte" label="Lithophyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q157270" start="6451" end="6461" title="Tillandsia" label="Tillandsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q156529" start="6485" end="6497" title="Bromeliaceae" label="Bromeliaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q310964" start="6506" end="6516" title="Epiphyllum" label="Epiphyllum"/>
<link wikidata="Q14560" start="6546" end="6551" title="Cactus" label="cacti"/>
<link wikidata="Q127498" start="6554" end="6569" title="Parasitic plant" label="Parasitic plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321691" start="6572" end="6579" title="Epilith" label="Epilith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464375" start="6616" end="6627" title="Foliicolous" label="Foliicolous"/>
<link wikidata="Q24975407" start="6692" end="6710" title="Epiphytic bacteria" label="Epiphytic bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754417" start="6713" end="6729" title="Epiphytic fungus" label="Epiphytic fungus"/>
<link wikidata="Q100920496" start="6732" end="6744" title="Canopy soils" label="Canopy soils"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="57996" wikidata="Q210420" url="?curid=57996" title="Corticosteroid">
<text>Corticosteroids are a class of steroid hormones that are produced in the adrenal cortex of vertebrates, as well as the synthetic analogues of these hormones. Two main classes of corticosteroids, glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids, are involved in a wide range of physiological processes, including stress response, immune response, and regulation of inflammation, carbohydrate metabolism, protein catabolism, blood electrolyte levels, and behavior.

Some common naturally occurring steroid hormones are cortisol (), corticosterone (), cortisone () and aldosterone () (cortisone and aldosterone are isomers). The main corticosteroids produced by the adrenal cortex are cortisol and aldosterone.

The etymology of the &quot;&quot; part of the name refers to the adrenal cortex, which makes these steroid hormones. Thus a corticosteroid is a &quot;cortex steroid&quot;.

==Classes==


* Glucocorticoids such as cortisol affect carbohydrate, fat, and protein metabolism, and have anti-inflammatory, immunosuppressive, anti-proliferative, and vasoconstrictive effects. Anti-inflammatory effects are mediated by blocking the action of inflammatory mediators (transrepression) and inducing anti-inflammatory mediators (transactivation). Immunosuppressive effects are mediated by suppressing delayed hypersensitivity reactions by direct action on T-lymphocytes. Anti-proliferative effects are mediated by inhibition of DNA synthesis and epidermal cell turnover. Vasoconstrictive effects are mediated by inhibiting the action of inflammatory mediators such as histamine.
* Mineralocorticoids such as aldosterone are primarily involved in the regulation of electrolyte and water balance by modulating ion transport in the epithelial cells of the renal tubules of the kidney.

==Medical uses==
Synthetic pharmaceutical drugs with corticosteroid-like effects are used in a variety of conditions, ranging from hematological neoplasms to brain tumors or skin diseases. Dexamethasone and its derivatives are almost pure glucocorticoids, while prednisone and its derivatives have some mineralocorticoid action in addition to the glucocorticoid effect. Fludrocortisone (Florinef) is a synthetic mineralocorticoid. Hydrocortisone (cortisol) is typically used for replacement therapy, &quot;e.g.&quot; for adrenal insufficiency and congenital adrenal hyperplasia.

Medical conditions treated with systemic corticosteroids:
* Allergy and respirology medicine
** Asthma (severe exacerbations)
** Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
** Allergic rhinitis
** Atopic dermatitis
** Hives
** Angioedema
** Anaphylaxis
** Food allergies
** Drug allergies
** Nasal polyps
** Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
** Sarcoidosis
** Eosinophilic pneumonia
** Some other types of pneumonia (in addition to the traditional antibiotic treatment protocols)
** Interstitial lung disease
* Dermatology
** Pemphigus vulgaris
** Contact dermatitis
* Endocrinology (usually at physiologic doses)
** Addison&#x27;s disease
** Adrenal insufficiency
** Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
* Gastroenterology
** Ulcerative colitis
** Crohn&#x27;s disease
** Autoimmune hepatitis
* Hematology
** Lymphoma
** Leukemia
** Hemolytic anemia
** Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
** Multiple Myeloma
* Rheumatology/Immunology
** Rheumatoid arthritis
** Systemic lupus erythematosus
** Polymyalgia rheumatica
** Polymyositis
** Dermatomyositis
** Polyarteritis
** Vasculitis
* Ophthalmology
** Uveitis
** Optic neuritis
** Keratoconjunctivitis
* Other conditions
** Multiple sclerosis relapses
** Organ transplantation
** Nephrotic syndrome
** Chronic hepatitis (flare ups)
** Cerebral edema
** IgG4-related disease
** Prostate cancer
** Tendinosis
** Lichen planus
Topical formulations are also available for the skin, eyes (uveitis), lungs (asthma), nose (rhinitis), and bowels. Corticosteroids are also used supportively to prevent nausea, often in combination with 5-HT3 antagonists (e.g., ondansetron).

Typical undesired effects of glucocorticoids present quite uniformly as drug-induced Cushing&#x27;s syndrome. Typical mineralocorticoid side-effects are hypertension (abnormally high blood pressure), steroid induced diabetes mellitus, psychosis, poor sleep, hypokalemia (low potassium levels in the blood), hypernatremia (high sodium levels in the blood) without causing peripheral edema, metabolic alkalosis and connective tissue weakness. Wound healing or ulcer formation may be inhibited by the immunosuppressive effects.

A variety of steroid medications, from anti-allergy nasal sprays (Nasonex, Flonase) to topical skin creams, to eye drops (Tobradex), to prednisone have been implicated in the development of central serous retinopathy (CSR).

Corticosteroids have been widely used in treating people with traumatic brain injury. A systematic review identified 20 randomised controlled trials and included 12,303 participants, then compared patients who received corticosteroids with patients who received no treatment. The authors recommended people with traumatic head injury should not be routinely treated with corticosteroids.

==Pharmacology==
Corticosteroids act as agonists of the glucocorticoid receptor and/or the mineralocorticoid receptor.

In addition to their corticosteroid activity, some corticosteroids may have some progestogenic activity and may produce sex-related side effects.

==Pharmacogenetics==

===Asthma===
Patients&#x27; response to inhaled corticosteroids has some basis in genetic variations. Two genes of interest are CHRH1 (corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor 1) and TBX21 (transcription factor T-bet). Both genes display some degree of polymorphic variation in humans, which may explain how some patients respond better to inhaled corticosteroid therapy than others. However, not all asthma patients respond to corticosteroids and large sub groups of asthma patients are corticosteroid resistant.

A study funded by the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute of children and teens with mild persistent asthma found that using the control inhaler as needed worked the same as daily use in improving asthma control, number of asthma flares, how well the lungs work, and quality of life. Children and teens using the inhaler as needed used about one-fourth the amount of corticosteroid medicine as children and teens using it daily.

==Adverse effects==
Use of corticosteroids has numerous side-effects, some of which may be severe:
* Severe amoebic colitis: Fulminant amoebic colitis is associated with high case fatality and can occur in patients infected with the parasite &quot;Entamoeba histolytica&quot; after exposure to corticosteroid medications.
* Neuropsychiatric: steroid psychosis, and anxiety, depression. Therapeutic doses may cause a feeling of artificial well-being (&quot;steroid euphoria&quot;). The neuropsychiatric effects are partly mediated by sensitization of the body to the actions of adrenaline. Therapeutically, the bulk of corticosteroid dose is given in the morning to mimic the body&#x27;s diurnal rhythm; if given at night, the feeling of being energized will interfere with sleep. An extensive review is provided by Flores and Gumina.
* Cardiovascular: Corticosteroids can cause sodium retention through a direct action on the kidney, in a manner analogous to the mineralocorticoid aldosterone. This can result in fluid retention and hypertension.
* Metabolic: Corticosteroids cause a movement of body fat to the face and torso, resulting in &quot;moon face&quot;, &quot;buffalo hump&quot;, and &quot;pot belly&quot; or &quot;beer belly&quot;, and cause movement of body fat away from the limbs. This has been termed corticosteroid-induced lipodystrophy. Due to the diversion of amino-acids to glucose, they are considered anti-anabolic, and long term therapy can cause muscle wasting (muscle atrophy). Besides muscle atrophy, steroid myopathy includes muscle pains (myalgias), muscle weakness (typically of the proximal muscles), serum creatine kinase normal, EMG myopathic, and some have type II (fast-twitch/glycolytic) fibre atrophy.
* Endocrine: By increasing the production of glucose from amino-acid breakdown and opposing the action of insulin, corticosteroids can cause hyperglycemia, insulin resistance and diabetes mellitus.
* Skeletal: Steroid-induced osteoporosis may be a side-effect of long-term corticosteroid use. Use of inhaled corticosteroids among children with asthma may result in decreased height.
* Gastro-intestinal: While cases of colitis have been reported, corticosteroids are often prescribed when the colitis, although due to suppression of the immune response to pathogens, should be considered only after ruling out infection or microbe/fungal overgrowth in the gastrointestinal tract. While the evidence for corticosteroids causing peptic ulceration is relatively poor except for high doses taken for over a month, the majority of doctors still believe this is the case, and would consider protective prophylactic measures.
* Eyes: chronic use may predispose to cataract and glaucoma. Clinical and experimental evidence indicates that corticosteroids can cause permanent eye damage by inducing central serous retinopathy (CSR, also known as central serous chorioretinopathy, CSC). This should be borne in mind when treating patients with optic neuritis. There is experimental and clinical evidence that, at least in optic neuritis speed of treatment initiation is important.
* Vulnerability to infection: By suppressing immune reactions (which is one of the main reasons for their use in allergies), steroids may cause infections to flare up, notably candidiasis.
* Pregnancy: Corticosteroids have a low but significant teratogenic effect, causing a few birth defects per 1,000 pregnant women treated. Corticosteroids are therefore contraindicated in pregnancy.
* Habituation: Topical steroid addiction (TSA) or red burning skin has been reported in long-term users of topical steroids (users who applied topical steroids to their skin over a period of weeks, months, or years). TSA is characterised by uncontrollable, spreading dermatitis and worsening skin inflammation which requires a stronger topical steroid to get the same result as the first prescription. When topical steroid medication is lost, the skin experiences redness, burning, itching, hot skin, swelling, and/or oozing for a length of time. This is also called &#x27;red skin syndrome&#x27; or &#x27;topical steroid withdrawal&#x27; (TSW). After the withdrawal period is over the atopic dermatitis can cease or is less severe than it was before.
* In children the short term use of steroids by mouth increases the risk of vomiting, behavioral changes, and sleeping problems.
* Dysphonia: Inhaled corticosteroids are used for treatment of asthma as a standard treatment. This can cause local adverse effects like vocal cord dysfunction.

==Biosynthesis==
The corticosteroids are synthesized from cholesterol within the adrenal cortex. Most steroidogenic reactions are catalysed by enzymes of the cytochrome P450 family. They are located within the mitochondria and require adrenodoxin as a cofactor (except 21-hydroxylase and 17α-hydroxylase).

Aldosterone and corticosterone share the first part of their biosynthetic pathway. The last part is mediated either by the aldosterone synthase (for aldosterone) or by the 11β-hydroxylase (for corticosterone). These enzymes are nearly identical (they share 11β-hydroxylation and 18-hydroxylation functions), but aldosterone synthase is also able to perform an 18-oxidation. Moreover, aldosterone synthase is found within the zona glomerulosa at the outer edge of the adrenal cortex; 11β-hydroxylase is found in the zona fasciculata and zona glomerulosa.

==Classification==

===By chemical structure===
In general, corticosteroids are grouped into four classes, based on chemical structure. Allergic reactions to one member of a class typically indicate an intolerance of all members of the class. This is known as the &quot;Coopman classification&quot;.

The highlighted steroids are often used in the screening of allergies to topical steroids.

====Group A – Hydrocortisone type====
Hydrocortisone, hydrocortisone acetate, cortisone acetate, tixocortol pivalate, prednisolone, methylprednisolone, and prednisone.

====Group B – Acetonides (and related substances)====
Amcinonide, budesonide, desonide, fluocinolone acetonide, fluocinonide, halcinonide, triamcinolone acetonide, and Deflazacort (O-isopropylidene derivative)

====Group C – Betamethasone type====
Beclometasone, betamethasone, dexamethasone, fluocortolone, halometasone, and mometasone.

====Group D – Esters====

=====Group D1 – Halogenated (less labile)=====
Alclometasone dipropionate, betamethasone dipropionate, betamethasone valerate, clobetasol propionate, clobetasone butyrate, fluprednidene acetate, and mometasone furoate.

=====Group D2 – Labile prodrug esters=====
Ciclesonide, cortisone acetate, hydrocortisone aceponate, hydrocortisone acetate, hydrocortisone buteprate, hydrocortisone butyrate, hydrocortisone valerate, prednicarbate, and tixocortol pivalate.

===By route of administration===

====Topical steroids====
For use topically on the skin, eye, and mucous membranes.

Topical corticosteroids are divided in potency classes I to IV in most countries (A to D in Japan). Seven categories are used in the United States to determine the level of potency of any given topical corticosteroid.

====Inhaled steroids====
For nasal mucosa, sinuses, bronchi, and lungs.

This group includes:
* Flunisolide
* Fluticasone furoate
* Fluticasone propionate
* Triamcinolone acetonide
* Beclomethasone dipropionate
* Budesonide
* Mometasone furoate
* Ciclesonide

There also exist certain combination preparations such as Advair Diskus in the United States, containing fluticasone propionate and salmeterol (a long-acting bronchodilator), and Symbicort, containing budesonide and formoterol fumarate dihydrate (another long-acting bronchodilator). They are both approved for use in children over 12 years old.

====Oral forms====
Such as prednisone, prednisolone, methylprednisolone, or dexamethasone.

====Systemic forms====
Available in injectables for intravenous and parenteral routes.

==History==
Tadeusz Reichstein, Edward Calvin Kendall, and Philip Showalter Hench were awarded the Nobel Prize for Physiology and Medicine in 1950 for their work on hormones of the adrenal cortex, which culminated in the isolation of cortisone.

Initially hailed as a miracle cure and liberally prescribed during the 1950s, steroid treatment brought about adverse events of such a magnitude that the next major category of anti-inflammatory drugs, the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), was so named in order to demarcate from the opprobrium.

Lewis Sarett of Merck &amp; Co. was the first to synthesize cortisone, using a 36-step process that started with deoxycholic acid, which was extracted from ox bile. The low efficiency of converting deoxycholic acid into cortisone led to a cost of US$200 per gram in 1947. Russell Marker, at Syntex, discovered a much cheaper and more convenient starting material, diosgenin from wild Mexican yams. His conversion of diosgenin into progesterone by a four-step process now known as Marker degradation was an important step in mass production of all steroidal hormones, including cortisone and chemicals used in hormonal contraception.

In 1952, D.H. Peterson and H.C. Murray of Upjohn developed a process that used &quot;Rhizopus&quot; mold to oxidize progesterone into a compound that was readily converted to cortisone. The ability to cheaply synthesize large quantities of cortisone from the diosgenin in yams resulted in a rapid drop in price to US$6 per gram, falling to $0.46 per gram by 1980. Percy Julian&#x27;s research also aided progress in the field. The exact nature of cortisone&#x27;s anti-inflammatory action remained a mystery for years after, however, until the leukocyte adhesion cascade and the role of phospholipase A2 in the production of prostaglandins and leukotrienes was fully understood in the early 1980s.

Corticosteroids were voted Allergen of the Year in 2005 by the American Contact Dermatitis Society.

== See also ==
* List of corticosteroids
* List of corticosteroid cyclic ketals
* List of corticosteroid esters
* List of steroid abbreviations

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q210420" start="0" end="15" title="Corticosteroid" label="Corticosteroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q422137" start="31" end="46" title="steroid hormone" label="steroid hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q19065" start="73" end="87" title="adrenal cortex" label="adrenal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="91" end="102" title="vertebrates" label="vertebrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q422549" start="195" end="209" title="glucocorticoid" label="glucocorticoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q422519" start="215" end="232" title="mineralocorticoid" label="mineralocorticoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="267" end="280" title="physiology" label="physiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q123414" start="302" end="317" title="stress (medicine)" label="stress response"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="319" end="334" title="immune system" label="immune response"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="354" end="366" title="inflammation" label="inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="368" end="380" title="carbohydrate" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="381" end="391" title="metabolism" label="metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="393" end="400" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q21130714" start="401" end="411" title="catabolism" label="catabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q162908" start="419" end="430" title="electrolyte" label="electrolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q190875" start="507" end="515" title="cortisol" label="cortisol"/>
<link wikidata="Q422543" start="520" end="534" title="corticosterone" label="corticosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q423185" start="539" end="548" title="cortisone" label="cortisone"/>
<link wikidata="Q184564" start="556" end="567" title="aldosterone" label="aldosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q184564" start="586" end="597" title="aldosterone" label="aldosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q127950" start="602" end="609" title="isomers" label="isomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19065" start="764" end="778" title="adrenal cortex" label="adrenal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q422549" start="888" end="902" title="Glucocorticoid" label="Glucocorticoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q190875" start="912" end="920" title="cortisol" label="cortisol"/>
<link wikidata="Q581996" start="980" end="997" title="anti-inflammatory" label="anti-inflammatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455316" start="999" end="1016" title="Immunosuppression" label="immunosuppressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="1018" end="1036" title="Chemotherapy" label="anti-proliferative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067506" start="1042" end="1058" title="Vasoconstriction" label="vasoconstrictive"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="1133" end="1155" title="Inflammation" label="inflammatory mediators"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835354" start="1157" end="1172" title="transrepression" label="transrepression"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817769" start="1216" end="1231" title="transactivation" label="transactivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860879" start="1288" end="1322" title="Type IV hypersensitivity" label="delayed hypersensitivity reactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q193529" start="1343" end="1356" title="T cell" label="T-lymphocytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205774" start="1415" end="1428" title="DNA synthesis" label="DNA synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q212743" start="1433" end="1447" title="Epidermis" label="epidermal cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067506" start="1458" end="1474" title="Vasoconstriction" label="Vasoconstrictive"/>
<link wikidata="Q61233" start="1555" end="1564" title="histamine" label="histamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q422519" start="1568" end="1585" title="Mineralocorticoid" label="Mineralocorticoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184564" start="1595" end="1606" title="aldosterone" label="aldosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q909456" start="1651" end="1662" title="Water-electrolyte balance" label="electrolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q911011" start="1695" end="1708" title="Ion transporter" label="ion transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q41301" start="1716" end="1732" title="Epithelium" label="epithelial cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q58184" start="1740" end="1753" title="Nephron" label="renal tubules"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="1761" end="1767" title="kidney" label="kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="1797" end="1816" title="pharmaceutical drug" label="pharmaceutical drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509220" start="1901" end="1924" title="Hematological cancer" label="hematological neoplasms"/>
<link wikidata="Q233309" start="1928" end="1939" title="brain tumor" label="brain tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q949302" start="1944" end="1956" title="skin disease" label="skin disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q422252" start="1959" end="1972" title="Dexamethasone" label="Dexamethasone"/>
<link wikidata="Q424972" start="2032" end="2042" title="prednisone" label="prednisone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697578" start="2140" end="2155" title="Fludrocortisone" label="Fludrocortisone"/>
<link wikidata="Q26981430" start="2201" end="2215" title="Hydrocortisone" label="Hydrocortisone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507454" start="2291" end="2312" title="adrenal insufficiency" label="adrenal insufficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q366868" start="2317" end="2347" title="congenital adrenal hyperplasia" label="congenital adrenal hyperplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42982" start="2410" end="2417" title="Allergy" label="Allergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q203337" start="2422" end="2433" title="Pulmonology" label="respirology"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="2446" end="2452" title="Asthma" label="Asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q199804" start="2479" end="2516" title="Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease" label="Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q272436" start="2527" end="2544" title="Allergic rhinitis" label="Allergic rhinitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q268667" start="2548" end="2565" title="Atopic dermatitis" label="Atopic dermatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q187440" start="2569" end="2574" title="Hives" label="Hives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129007" start="2578" end="2588" title="Angioedema" label="Angioedema"/>
<link wikidata="Q168800" start="2592" end="2603" title="Anaphylaxis" label="Anaphylaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q769815" start="2607" end="2621" title="Food allergy" label="Food allergies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068896" start="2625" end="2639" title="Drug allergy" label="Drug allergies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055111" start="2643" end="2654" title="Nasal polyp" label="Nasal polyp"/>
<link wikidata="Q35890" start="2659" end="2687" title="Hypersensitivity pneumonitis" label="Hypersensitivity pneumonitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193894" start="2691" end="2702" title="Sarcoidosis" label="Sarcoidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q32540" start="2706" end="2728" title="Eosinophilic pneumonia" label="Eosinophilic pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="2752" end="2761" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="2794" end="2804" title="antibiotic" label="antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153419" start="2829" end="2854" title="Interstitial lung disease" label="Interstitial lung disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q171171" start="2857" end="2868" title="Dermatology" label="Dermatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3899001" start="2872" end="2890" title="Pemphigus vulgaris" label="Pemphigus vulgaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q783903" start="2894" end="2912" title="Contact dermatitis" label="Contact dermatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q162606" start="2915" end="2928" title="Endocrinology" label="Endocrinology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8282" start="2963" end="2985" title="Addison&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Addison&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507454" start="2989" end="3010" title="Adrenal insufficiency" label="Adrenal insufficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q366868" start="3014" end="3044" title="Congenital adrenal hyperplasia" label="Congenital adrenal hyperplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q120569" start="3047" end="3063" title="Gastroenterology" label="Gastroenterology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477" start="3067" end="3085" title="Ulcerative colitis" label="Ulcerative colitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472" start="3089" end="3109" title="Crohn&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Crohn&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q786844" start="3113" end="3133" title="Autoimmune hepatitis" label="Autoimmune hepatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q103824" start="3136" end="3146" title="Hematology" label="Hematology"/>
<link wikidata="Q208414" start="3150" end="3158" title="Lymphoma" label="Lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q29496" start="3162" end="3170" title="Leukemia" label="Leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145668" start="3174" end="3190" title="Hemolytic anemia" label="Hemolytic anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q638729" start="3194" end="3229" title="Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura" label="Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura"/>
<link wikidata="Q467635" start="3233" end="3249" title="Multiple Myeloma" label="Multiple Myeloma"/>
<link wikidata="Q327657" start="3252" end="3264" title="Rheumatology" label="Rheumatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q101929" start="3265" end="3275" title="Immunology" label="Immunology"/>
<link wikidata="Q187255" start="3279" end="3299" title="Rheumatoid arthritis" label="Rheumatoid arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485" start="3303" end="3331" title="Systemic lupus erythematosus" label="Systemic lupus erythematosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752891" start="3335" end="3357" title="Polymyalgia rheumatica" label="Polymyalgia rheumatica"/>
<link wikidata="Q980926" start="3361" end="3373" title="Polymyositis" label="Polymyositis"/>
<link wikidata="Q681160" start="3377" end="3392" title="Dermatomyositis" label="Dermatomyositis"/>
<link wikidata="Q745162" start="3396" end="3409" title="Polyarteritis" label="Polyarteritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q644318" start="3413" end="3423" title="Vasculitis" label="Vasculitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q161437" start="3426" end="3439" title="Ophthalmology" label="Ophthalmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q280027" start="3443" end="3450" title="Uveitis" label="Uveitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q972514" start="3454" end="3468" title="Optic neuritis" label="Optic neuritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623006" start="3472" end="3492" title="Keratoconjunctivitis" label="Keratoconjunctivitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="3515" end="3533" title="Multiple sclerosis" label="Multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q105196" start="3546" end="3567" title="Organ transplantation" label="Organ transplantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q504790" start="3571" end="3589" title="Nephrotic syndrome" label="Nephrotic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3593" end="3610" title="Hepatitis#Chronic hepatitis" label="Chronic hepatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="3612" end="3621" title="Flareup" label="flare ups"/>
<link wikidata="Q979168" start="3626" end="3640" title="Cerebral edema" label="Cerebral edema"/>
<link wikidata="Q11039483" start="3644" end="3664" title="IgG4-related disease" label="IgG4-related disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q181257" start="3668" end="3683" title="Prostate cancer" label="Prostate cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682583" start="3687" end="3697" title="Tendinosis" label="Tendinosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q848371" start="3701" end="3714" title="Lichen planus" label="Lichen planus"/>
<link wikidata="Q949302" start="3763" end="3767" title="skin disease" label="skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q280027" start="3775" end="3782" title="uveitis" label="uveitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="3792" end="3798" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q114085" start="3807" end="3815" title="rhinitis" label="rhinitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q917447" start="3822" end="3828" title="inflammatory bowel disease" label="bowels"/>
<link wikidata="Q410011" start="3943" end="3954" title="ondansetron" label="ondansetron"/>
<link wikidata="Q45959" start="3966" end="3983" title="adverse drug reaction" label="undesired effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q219102" start="4043" end="4066" title="Cushing&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Cushing&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="4111" end="4123" title="arterial hypertension" label="hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q794086" start="4216" end="4227" title="hypokalemia" label="hypokalemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132653" start="4265" end="4278" title="hypernatremia" label="hypernatremia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168709" start="4329" end="4345" title="peripheral edema" label="peripheral edema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428362" start="4347" end="4366" title="metabolic alkalosis" label="metabolic alkalosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044248" start="4550" end="4557" title="Nasonex" label="Nasonex"/>
<link wikidata="Q8564098" start="4559" end="4566" title="Flonase" label="Flonase"/>
<link wikidata="Q6147773" start="4606" end="4614" title="Tobradex" label="Tobradex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431217" start="4674" end="4700" title="central serous retinopathy" label="central serous retinopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995526" start="4771" end="4793" title="traumatic brain injury" label="traumatic brain injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504425" start="4797" end="4814" title="systematic review" label="systematic review"/>
<link wikidata="Q389934" start="5138" end="5145" title="agonist" label="agonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q14877410" start="5154" end="5177" title="glucocorticoid receptor" label="glucocorticoid receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454531" start="5189" end="5215" title="mineralocorticoid receptor" label="mineralocorticoid receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q50383885" start="5299" end="5310" title="progestogen (medication)" label="progestogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173298" start="5522" end="5564" title="corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor 1" label="corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor 1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5577" end="5603" title="transcription factor T-bet" label="transcription factor T-bet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453464" start="6449" end="6464" title="amoebic colitis" label="amoebic colitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508364" start="6466" end="6475" title="Fulminant" label="Fulminant"/>
<link wikidata="Q131027" start="6589" end="6610" title="Entamoeba histolytica" label="Entamoeba histolytica"/>
<link wikidata="Q309438" start="6683" end="6700" title="steroid psychosis" label="steroid psychosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q154430" start="6706" end="6713" title="anxiety (mood)" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="6715" end="6725" title="depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q184564" start="7322" end="7333" title="aldosterone" label="aldosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="7374" end="7386" title="hypertension" label="hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q458373" start="7488" end="7497" title="moon face" label="moon face"/>
<link wikidata="Q60789104" start="7657" end="7693" title="corticosteroid-induced lipodystrophy" label="corticosteroid-induced lipodystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q271993" start="8219" end="8232" title="hyperglycemia" label="hyperglycemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053470" start="8234" end="8252" title="insulin resistance" label="insulin resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="8257" end="8274" title="diabetes mellitus" label="diabetes mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611600" start="8288" end="8316" title="Steroid-induced osteoporosis" label="Steroid-induced osteoporosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453464" start="8497" end="8504" title="colitis" label="colitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q172941" start="8805" end="8817" title="peptic ulcer" label="peptic ulcer"/>
<link wikidata="Q127724" start="9035" end="9043" title="cataract" label="cataract"/>
<link wikidata="Q159701" start="9048" end="9056" title="glaucoma" label="glaucoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q972514" start="9311" end="9325" title="optic neuritis" label="optic neuritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q972514" start="9389" end="9403" title="optic neuritis" label="optic neuritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q273510" start="9624" end="9635" title="candidiasis" label="candidiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q631521" start="9693" end="9704" title="teratogenic" label="teratogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848900" start="9805" end="9820" title="contraindicated" label="contraindicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q25323840" start="9885" end="9901" title="red burning skin" label="red burning skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43656" start="10936" end="10947" title="cholesterol" label="cholesterol"/>
<link wikidata="Q19065" start="10959" end="10973" title="adrenal cortex" label="adrenal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="11021" end="11027" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q407693" start="11036" end="11051" title="cytochrome P450" label="cytochrome P450"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="11088" end="11100" title="mitochondria" label="mitochondria"/>
<link wikidata="Q9141217" start="11113" end="11124" title="adrenodoxin" label="adrenodoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q21110736" start="11147" end="11161" title="21-hydroxylase" label="21-hydroxylase"/>
<link wikidata="Q408305" start="11166" end="11181" title="17α-hydroxylase" label="17α-hydroxylase"/>
<link wikidata="Q184564" start="11185" end="11196" title="Aldosterone" label="Aldosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q422543" start="11201" end="11215" title="corticosterone" label="corticosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q14904983" start="11308" end="11328" title="aldosterone synthase" label="aldosterone synthase"/>
<link wikidata="Q184564" start="11334" end="11345" title="aldosterone" label="aldosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q904925" start="11357" end="11372" title="11β-hydroxylase" label="11β-hydroxylase"/>
<link wikidata="Q422543" start="11378" end="11392" title="corticosterone" label="corticosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551060" start="11610" end="11626" title="zona glomerulosa" label="zona glomerulosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q19065" start="11652" end="11666" title="adrenal cortex" label="adrenal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301573" start="11700" end="11716" title="zona fasciculata" label="zona fasciculata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551060" start="11721" end="11737" title="zona glomerulosa" label="zona glomerulosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q26981430" start="12171" end="12185" title="Hydrocortisone" label="Hydrocortisone"/>
<link wikidata="Q27102474" start="12187" end="12209" title="hydrocortisone acetate" label="hydrocortisone acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q39045244" start="12211" end="12228" title="cortisone acetate" label="cortisone acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810487" start="12230" end="12249" title="tixocortol pivalate" label="tixocortol pivalate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426176" start="12251" end="12263" title="prednisolone" label="prednisolone"/>
<link wikidata="Q417222" start="12265" end="12283" title="methylprednisolone" label="methylprednisolone"/>
<link wikidata="Q424972" start="12289" end="12299" title="prednisone" label="prednisone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742041" start="12356" end="12366" title="Amcinonide" label="Amcinonide"/>
<link wikidata="Q422212" start="12368" end="12378" title="budesonide" label="budesonide"/>
<link wikidata="Q904011" start="12380" end="12388" title="desonide" label="desonide"/>
<link wikidata="Q924467" start="12390" end="12412" title="fluocinolone acetonide" label="fluocinolone acetonide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462791" start="12414" end="12426" title="fluocinonide" label="fluocinonide"/>
<link wikidata="Q425991" start="12428" end="12439" title="halcinonide" label="halcinonide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211240" start="12441" end="12464" title="triamcinolone acetonide" label="triamcinolone acetonide"/>
<link wikidata="Q779118" start="12470" end="12481" title="Deflazacort" label="Deflazacort"/>
<link wikidata="Q421475" start="12550" end="12563" title="Beclometasone" label="Beclometasone"/>
<link wikidata="Q416132" start="12565" end="12578" title="betamethasone" label="betamethasone"/>
<link wikidata="Q422252" start="12580" end="12593" title="dexamethasone" label="dexamethasone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462793" start="12595" end="12608" title="fluocortolone" label="fluocortolone"/>
<link wikidata="Q10910139" start="12610" end="12622" title="halometasone" label="halometasone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044248" start="12628" end="12638" title="mometasone" label="mometasone"/>
<link wikidata="Q27114198" start="12714" end="12740" title="Alclometasone dipropionate" label="Alclometasone dipropionate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897349" start="12742" end="12768" title="betamethasone dipropionate" label="betamethasone dipropionate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445931" start="12770" end="12792" title="betamethasone valerate" label="betamethasone valerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q421637" start="12794" end="12815" title="clobetasol propionate" label="clobetasol propionate"/>
<link wikidata="Q27271005" start="12817" end="12837" title="clobetasone butyrate" label="clobetasone butyrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462886" start="12839" end="12860" title="fluprednidene acetate" label="fluprednidene acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044248" start="12866" end="12884" title="mometasone furoate" label="mometasone furoate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119448" start="12930" end="12941" title="Ciclesonide" label="Ciclesonide"/>
<link wikidata="Q39045244" start="12943" end="12960" title="cortisone acetate" label="cortisone acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q15409432" start="12962" end="12986" title="hydrocortisone aceponate" label="hydrocortisone aceponate"/>
<link wikidata="Q27102474" start="12988" end="13010" title="hydrocortisone acetate" label="hydrocortisone acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5954736" start="13012" end="13036" title="hydrocortisone buteprate" label="hydrocortisone buteprate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5954738" start="13038" end="13061" title="hydrocortisone butyrate" label="hydrocortisone butyrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q27122241" start="13063" end="13086" title="hydrocortisone valerate" label="hydrocortisone valerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376623" start="13088" end="13101" title="prednicarbate" label="prednicarbate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810487" start="13107" end="13126" title="tixocortol pivalate" label="tixocortol pivalate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219805" start="13228" end="13243" title="mucous membrane" label="mucous membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746835" start="13562" end="13573" title="Flunisolide" label="Flunisolide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166700" start="13576" end="13595" title="Fluticasone furoate" label="Fluticasone furoate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8564098" start="13598" end="13620" title="Fluticasone propionate" label="Fluticasone propionate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211240" start="13623" end="13646" title="Triamcinolone acetonide" label="Triamcinolone acetonide"/>
<link wikidata="Q421475" start="13649" end="13676" title="Beclomethasone dipropionate" label="Beclomethasone dipropionate"/>
<link wikidata="Q422212" start="13679" end="13689" title="Budesonide" label="Budesonide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044248" start="13692" end="13710" title="Mometasone furoate" label="Mometasone furoate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119448" start="13713" end="13724" title="Ciclesonide" label="Ciclesonide"/>
<link wikidata="Q581334" start="13784" end="13797" title="Advair Diskus" label="Advair Diskus"/>
<link wikidata="Q581334" start="13831" end="13868" title="Fluticasone/salmeterol" label="fluticasone propionate and salmeterol"/>
<link wikidata="Q863389" start="13905" end="13914" title="Symbicort" label="Symbicort"/>
<link wikidata="Q863389" start="13927" end="13971" title="budesonide/formoterol" label="budesonide and formoterol fumarate dihydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q417222" start="14126" end="14144" title="methylprednisolone" label="methylprednisolone"/>
<link wikidata="Q422252" start="14149" end="14162" title="dexamethasone" label="dexamethasone"/>
<link wikidata="Q115490" start="14265" end="14283" title="Tadeusz Reichstein" label="Tadeusz Reichstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q110101" start="14285" end="14306" title="Edward Calvin Kendall" label="Edward Calvin Kendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q235651" start="14312" end="14334" title="Philip Showalter Hench" label="Philip Showalter Hench"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="14352" end="14363" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="14368" end="14378" title="Physiology" label="Physiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="14383" end="14391" title="Medicine" label="Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q423185" start="14487" end="14496" title="cortisone" label="cortisone"/>
<link wikidata="Q170774" start="14521" end="14528" title="miracle" label="miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11516357" start="14609" end="14623" title="adverse events" label="adverse events"/>
<link wikidata="Q188724" start="14705" end="14740" title="nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug" label="nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q3831389" start="14809" end="14821" title="Lewis Sarett" label="Lewis Sarett"/>
<link wikidata="Q247489" start="14825" end="14840" title="Merck &amp;amp; Co." label="Merck &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q473194" start="14965" end="14967" title="ox" label="ox"/>
<link wikidata="Q65979" start="14968" end="14972" title="bile" label="bile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381482" start="15081" end="15095" title="Russell Marker" label="Russell Marker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646372" start="15100" end="15106" title="Syntex" label="Syntex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107734" start="15173" end="15182" title="diosgenin" label="diosgenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279587" start="15193" end="15204" title="Mexican yam" label="Mexican yam"/>
<link wikidata="Q26963" start="15240" end="15252" title="progesterone" label="progesterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770635" start="15289" end="15307" title="Marker degradation" label="Marker degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292449" start="15418" end="15440" title="hormonal contraception" label="hormonal contraception"/>
<link wikidata="Q16266700" start="15485" end="15491" title="Upjohn" label="Upjohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q134258" start="15528" end="15536" title="Rhizopus" label="Rhizopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q705852" start="15807" end="15826" title="Percy Lavon Julian" label="Percy Julian&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479893" start="15987" end="16013" title="leukocyte adhesion cascade" label="leukocyte adhesion cascade"/>
<link wikidata="Q24768001" start="16030" end="16046" title="phospholipase A2" label="phospholipase A2"/>
<link wikidata="Q209717" start="16068" end="16081" title="prostaglandin" label="prostaglandin"/>
<link wikidata="Q424190" start="16087" end="16098" title="leukotriene" label="leukotriene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732114" start="16169" end="16189" title="Allergen of the Year" label="Allergen of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q28076839" start="16260" end="16283" title="List of corticosteroids" label="List of corticosteroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q33125983" start="16286" end="16322" title="List of corticosteroid cyclic ketals" label="List of corticosteroid cyclic ketals"/>
<link wikidata="Q28209825" start="16325" end="16354" title="List of corticosteroid esters" label="List of corticosteroid esters"/>
<link wikidata="Q17083255" start="16357" end="16386" title="List of steroid abbreviations" label="List of steroid abbreviations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="57997" wikidata="Q185690" url="?curid=57997" title="Adrenocorticotropic hormone">
<text>Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH; also adrenocorticotropin, corticotropin) is a polypeptide tropic hormone produced by and secreted by the anterior pituitary gland. It is also used as a medication and diagnostic agent. ACTH is an important component of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and is often produced in response to biological stress (along with its precursor corticotropin-releasing hormone from the hypothalamus). Its principal effects are increased production and release of cortisol and androgens by the zona fasiculata and zona reticularis, respectively. ACTH is also related to the circadian rhythm in many organisms.

Deficiency of ACTH is an indicator of secondary adrenal insufficiency (suppressed production of ACTH due to an impairment of the pituitary gland or hypothalamus, cf. hypopituitarism) or tertiary adrenal insufficiency (disease of the hypothalamus, with a decrease in the release of corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH)). Conversely, chronically elevated ACTH levels occur in primary adrenal insufficiency (e.g. Addison&#x27;s disease) when adrenal gland production of cortisol is chronically deficient. In Cushing&#x27;s disease, a pituitary tumor leads to excessive production of ACTH, which stimulates the adrenal cortex to produce high levels of cortisol.

== Production and regulation ==
POMC, ACTH and β-lipotropin are secreted from corticotropic cells in the anterior lobe (or adenohypophysis) of the pituitary gland in response to the hormone corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) released by the hypothalamus. The pre-pro-opiomelanocortin (Pre-POMC) is the precursor of POMC, its cleavage forms POMC. ACTH, on the other hand, is produced from the cleavage of POMC. The removal of the signal peptide during translation produces the 241-amino acid polypeptide POMC, which undergoes a series of post-translational modifications such as phosphorylation and glycosylation before it is proteolytically cleaved by endopeptidases to yield various polypeptide fragments with varying physiological activity. These fragments include:
In order to regulate the secretion of ACTH, many substances secreted within this axis exhibit slow/intermediate and fast feedback-loop activity. Glucocorticoids secreted from the adrenal cortex work to inhibit CRH secretion by the hypothalamus, which in turn decreases anterior pituitary secretion of ACTH. Glucocorticoids may also inhibit the rates of POMC gene transcription and peptide synthesis. The latter is an example of a slow feedback loop, which works on the order of hours to days, whereas the former works on the order of minutes.

The half-life of ACTH in human blood is reported to be between ten and 30 minutes.

== Structure ==
ACTH consists of 39 amino acids, the first 13 of which (counting from the N-terminus) may be cleaved to form α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (α-MSH) (this common structure is responsible for excessively tanned skin in Addison&#x27;s disease). After a short period of time, ACTH is cleaved into α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (α-MSH) and CLIP, a peptide with unknown activity in humans.

In human body, total weight ACTH is 4,540 atomic mass units (Da).

== Function ==
ACTH stimulates secretion of glucocorticoid steroid hormones from adrenal cortex cells, especially in the zona fasciculata of the adrenal glands. ACTH acts by binding to cell surface ACTH receptors, which are located primarily on adrenocortical cells of the adrenal cortex. The ACTH receptor is a seven-membrane-spanning G protein-coupled receptor. Upon ligand binding, the receptor undergoes conformation changes that stimulate the enzyme adenylyl cyclase, which leads to an increase in intracellular cAMP and subsequent activation of protein kinase A.

ACTH influences steroid hormone secretion by both rapid short-term mechanisms that take place within minutes and slower long-term actions. The rapid actions of ACTH include stimulation of cholesterol delivery to the mitochondria where the P450scc enzyme is located. P450scc catalyzes the first step of steroidogenesis that is cleavage of the side-chain of cholesterol. 
ACTH also stimulates lipoprotein uptake into cortical cells. This increases the bioavailability of cholesterol in the cells of the adrenal cortex.

The long term actions of ACTH include stimulation of the transcription of the genes coding for steroidogenic enzymes, especially P450scc, steroid 11β-hydroxylase, and their associated electron transfer proteins. This effect is observed over several hours.

In addition to steroidogenic enzymes, ACTH also enhances transcription of mitochondrial genes that encode for subunits of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation systems. These actions are probably necessary to supply the enhanced energy needs of adrenocortical cells stimulated by ACTH.

==ACTH receptors outside the adrenal gland==
As indicated above, ACTH is a cleavage product of the pro-hormone, proopiomelanocortin (POMC), which also produces other hormones including α-MSH that stimulates the production of melanin. A family of related receptors mediates the actions of these hormones, the MCR, or melanocortin receptor family. These are mainly not associated with the pituitary-adrenal axis. MC2R is the ACTH receptor. 

While it has a crucial function in regulating the adrenal glands, it is also expressed elsewhere in the body, specifically in the osteoblast, which is responsible for making new bone, a continual and highly regulated process in the bodies of air-breathing vertebrates. The functional expression of MC2R on the osteoblast was discovered by Isales et alia in 2005. Since that time, it has been demonstrated that the response of bone forming cells to ACTH includes production of VEGF, as it does in the adrenal. This response might be important in maintaining osteoblast survival under some conditions. If this is physiologically important, it probably functions in conditions with short-period or intermittent ACTH signaling, since with continual exposure of osteoblasts to ACTH, the effect was lost in a few hours.

== History ==
While working on her dissertation, Evelyn M. Anderson co-discovered ACTH with James Bertram Collip and David Landsborough Thomson and, in a paper published in 1933, explained its function in the body.

An active synthetic form of ACTH, consisting of the first 23 amino acids of native ACTH, was first made by Klaus Hofmann at the University of Pittsburgh.

== Associated conditions ==
* Diseases of the pituitary, the gland that produces, among others, the hormone ACTH
* Hypopituitarism, the hyposecretion of ACTH in the pituitary, leading to secondary adrenal insufficiency (a form of hypocorticism)
* Addison&#x27;s disease, the primary adrenal insufficiency (another form of hypocorticism)
* Cushing&#x27;s syndrome, hypercorticism, one of the causes is hypersecretion of ACTH
* Small cell carcinoma, a common cause of ACTH secreted ectopically
* Congenital adrenal hyperplasia, diseases in the production of cortisol
* Nelson&#x27;s syndrome, the rapid enlargement of the ACTH producing pituitary after the removal of both adrenal glands
* Adrenoleukodystrophy, can be accompanied by adrenal insufficiency
* West syndrome (&quot;infantile spasms&quot;), a disease where ACTH is used as a therapy
* Postorgasmic illness syndrome (POIS), through production of tyrosine hydroxylase and dopamine β-hydroxylase, which two enzymes comprise the biochemical mechanism by which norepinephrine and epinephrine are produced.
*Critical illness-related corticosteroid insufficiency
* DAVID syndrome, a genetic disorder that is characterized by adrenocorticotropic hormone deficiency combined with common variable immunodeficiency and hypogammaglobulinemia.

== See also ==

* Semax, a synthetic analogue fragment of adrenocorticotropic hormone

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q185690" start="0" end="27" title="Adrenocorticotropic hormone" label="Adrenocorticotropic hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q185690" start="29" end="33" title="Adrenocorticotropic hormone" label="ACTH"/>
<link wikidata="Q185690" start="40" end="59" title="Adrenocorticotropic hormone" label="adrenocorticotropin"/>
<link wikidata="Q185690" start="61" end="74" title="Adrenocorticotropic hormone" label="corticotropin"/>
<link wikidata="Q172847" start="81" end="92" title="polypeptide" label="polypeptide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916173" start="93" end="107" title="tropic hormone" label="tropic hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q356002" start="140" end="164" title="anterior pituitary gland" label="anterior pituitary gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q560542" start="187" end="218" title="Adrenocorticotropic hormone (medication)" label="medication and diagnostic agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369123" start="258" end="293" title="hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis" label="hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q386664" start="375" end="406" title="corticotropin-releasing hormone" label="corticotropin-releasing hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q164386" start="416" end="428" title="hypothalamus" label="hypothalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q190875" start="493" end="501" title="cortisol" label="cortisol"/>
<link wikidata="Q208353" start="603" end="619" title="circadian rhythm" label="circadian rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507454" start="688" end="709" title="adrenal insufficiency" label="adrenal insufficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q156871" start="769" end="784" title="pituitary gland" label="pituitary gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q164386" start="788" end="800" title="hypothalamus" label="hypothalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q922411" start="806" end="821" title="hypopituitarism" label="hypopituitarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q386664" start="921" end="958" title="corticotropin releasing hormone" label="corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8282" start="1051" end="1073" title="Addison&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Addison&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q190875" start="1108" end="1116" title="cortisol" label="cortisol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947304" start="1146" end="1168" title="Cushing&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Cushing&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q19065" start="1248" end="1262" title="adrenal cortex" label="adrenal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q418896" start="1332" end="1336" title="POMC" label="POMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173293" start="1378" end="1396" title="corticotropic cell" label="corticotropic cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q356002" start="1405" end="1418" title="anterior pituitary" label="anterior lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q356002" start="1423" end="1438" title="adenohypophysis" label="adenohypophysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q156871" start="1447" end="1462" title="pituitary gland" label="pituitary gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q386664" start="1490" end="1521" title="corticotropin-releasing hormone" label="corticotropin-releasing hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q164386" start="1544" end="1556" title="hypothalamus" label="hypothalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q418896" start="1588" end="1596" title="Pre-proopiomelanocortin" label="Pre-POMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q172847" start="1739" end="1746" title="peptide" label="peptide"/>
<link wikidata="Q185917" start="1754" end="1765" title="Translation (biology)" label="translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q172847" start="1794" end="1805" title="polypeptide" label="polypeptide"/>
<link wikidata="Q898362" start="1840" end="1872" title="post-translational modifications" label="post-translational modifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q242736" start="1881" end="1896" title="phosphorylation" label="phosphorylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q898365" start="1901" end="1914" title="glycosylation" label="glycosylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q417262" start="1955" end="1969" title="endopeptidases" label="endopeptidases"/>
<link wikidata="Q422549" start="2216" end="2231" title="Glucocorticoids" label="Glucocorticoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q177900" start="2434" end="2447" title="Transcription (genetics)" label="transcription"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="2619" end="2628" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="2735" end="2745" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4063639" start="2824" end="2856" title="α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone" label="α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641068" start="2907" end="2930" title="hyperpigmentation" label="excessively tanned skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q423981" start="3012" end="3042" title="melanocyte-stimulating hormone" label="melanocyte-stimulating hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q483261" start="3147" end="3163" title="atomic mass unit" label="atomic mass unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q422549" start="3216" end="3247" title="Glucocorticoid" label="glucocorticoid steroid hormones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301573" start="3293" end="3309" title="zona fasciculata" label="zona fasciculata"/>
<link wikidata="Q410784" start="3370" end="3383" title="ACTH receptor" label="ACTH receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q19065" start="3445" end="3459" title="adrenal cortex" label="adrenal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q38173" start="3508" end="3534" title="G protein-coupled receptor" label="G protein-coupled receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q356257" start="3627" end="3643" title="adenylyl cyclase" label="adenylyl cyclase"/>
<link wikidata="Q210041" start="3689" end="3693" title="Cyclic adenosine monophosphate" label="cAMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q281417" start="3723" end="3739" title="protein kinase A" label="protein kinase A"/>
<link wikidata="Q412483" start="3981" end="3988" title="P450scc" label="P450scc"/>
<link wikidata="Q28350" start="4133" end="4144" title="lipoprotein" label="lipoprotein"/>
<link wikidata="Q461809" start="4192" end="4207" title="bioavailability" label="bioavailability"/>
<link wikidata="Q43656" start="4211" end="4222" title="cholesterol" label="cholesterol"/>
<link wikidata="Q418896" start="4918" end="4937" title="proopiomelanocortin" label="proopiomelanocortin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4063639" start="4991" end="4996" title="α-MSH" label="α-MSH"/>
<link wikidata="Q187526" start="5031" end="5038" title="melanin" label="melanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q24784850" start="5122" end="5143" title="melanocortin receptor" label="melanocortin receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q156871" start="5193" end="5202" title="pituitary" label="pituitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q712294" start="5203" end="5210" title="adrenal" label="adrenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q410784" start="5229" end="5242" title="ACTH receptor" label="ACTH receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q917177" start="5376" end="5386" title="osteoblast" label="osteoblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q29725" start="5722" end="5726" title="VEGF" label="VEGF"/>
<link wikidata="Q21027786" start="6110" end="6128" title="Evelyn M. Anderson" label="Evelyn M. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q59631" start="6153" end="6173" title="James Collip" label="James Bertram Collip"/>
<link wikidata="Q37999469" start="6178" end="6204" title="David Landsborough Thomson" label="David Landsborough Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q235034" start="6405" end="6429" title="University of Pittsburgh" label="University of Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199538" start="6462" end="6487" title="Pituitary disease" label="Diseases of the pituitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q922411" start="6547" end="6562" title="Hypopituitarism" label="Hypopituitarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507454" start="6629" end="6650" title="adrenal insufficiency" label="adrenal insufficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q8282" start="6679" end="6701" title="Addison&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Addison&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q219102" start="6771" end="6794" title="Cushing&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Cushing&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q738170" start="6858" end="6878" title="Small cell carcinoma" label="Small cell carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q366868" start="6926" end="6956" title="Congenital adrenal hyperplasia" label="Congenital adrenal hyperplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165266" start="6999" end="7021" title="Nelson&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Nelson&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q366964" start="7120" end="7140" title="Adrenoleukodystrophy" label="Adrenoleukodystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041258" start="7188" end="7201" title="West syndrome" label="West syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626291" start="7278" end="7307" title="Postorgasmic illness syndrome" label="Postorgasmic illness syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q420766" start="7338" end="7358" title="tyrosine hydroxylase" label="tyrosine hydroxylase"/>
<link wikidata="Q415762" start="7363" end="7385" title="dopamine β-hydroxylase" label="dopamine β-hydroxylase"/>
<link wikidata="Q186242" start="7449" end="7463" title="norepinephrine" label="norepinephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q132621" start="7468" end="7479" title="epinephrine" label="epinephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186731" start="7495" end="7548" title="Critical illness-related corticosteroid insufficiency" label="Critical illness-related corticosteroid insufficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q105952622" start="7551" end="7565" title="DAVID syndrome" label="DAVID syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4415058" start="7743" end="7748" title="Semax" label="Semax"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="7752" end="7761" title="Synthetic compound" label="synthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q485014" start="7762" end="7770" title="Structural analog" label="analogue"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="57998" wikidata="Q151018" url="?curid=57998" title="Battle of the Bulge">
<text>The Battle of the Bulge, also known as the Ardennes Offensive, was the last major German offensive campaign on the Western Front during the Second World War, taking place from 16 December 1944 to 25 January 1945. It was launched through the densely forested Ardennes region between Belgium and Luxembourg. The offensive was intended to stop Allied use of the Belgian port of Antwerp and to split the Allied lines, allowing the Germans to encircle and destroy each of the four Allied armies and force the western Allies to negotiate a peace treaty in the Axis powers&#x27; favor.

The Germans achieved a total surprise attack on the morning of 16 December 1944, due to a combination of Allied overconfidence based on the favorable defensive terrain and faulty intelligence about Wehrmacht intentions, poor aerial reconnaissance due to bad weather, and a preoccupation with Allied offensive plans elsewhere. American forces were using this region primarily as a rest area for the U.S. First Army, and the lines were thinly held by fatigued troops and inexperienced replacement units. The Germans also took advantage of heavily overcast weather conditions that grounded the Allies&#x27; superior air forces for an extended period. American resistance on the northern shoulder of the offensive, around Elsenborn Ridge, and in the south, around Bastogne, blocked German access to key roads to the northwest and west which they had counted on for success. This congestion and terrain that favored the defenders, threw the German advance behind schedule and allowed the Allies to reinforce the thinly placed troops. The farthest west the offensive reached was the village of Foy-Notre-Dame, south east of Dinant, being stopped by the U.S. 2nd Armored Division on 24 December 1944. Improved weather conditions from around 24 December permitted air attacks on German forces and supply lines. On 26 December the lead element of Patton&#x27;s U.S. Third Army reached Bastogne from the south ending the siege. Although the offensive was effectively broken by 27 December, when the trapped units of 2nd Panzer Division made two break-out attempts with only partial success, the battle continued for another month before the front line was effectively restored to its position prior to the attack.

The Germans committed over 410,000 men, just over 1,400 tanks and armored fighting vehicles, 2,600 artillery pieces, and over 1,000 combat aircraft. Between 63,000 and 104,000 of these men were killed, missing, wounded in action, or captured. The battle severely depleted Germany&#x27;s armored forces, which remained largely unreplaced throughout the remainder of the war. German Luftwaffe personnel, and later also Luftwaffe aircraft (in the concluding stages of the engagement) also sustained heavy losses. In the wake of the defeat, many experienced German units were effectively out of men and equipment, and the survivors retreated to the Siegfried Line.

Allied forces eventually came to more than 700,000 men; from these there were from 77,000 to more than 83,000 casualties, including at least 8,600 killed. The &quot;Bulge&quot; was the largest and bloodiest single battle fought by the United States in World War II and the third-deadliest campaign in American history. It was one of the most important battles of the war, as it marked the last major offensive attempted by the Axis powers on the Western front. After this defeat, Nazi forces could only retreat for the remainder of the war.

==Background==
After the breakout from Normandy at the end of July 1944 and the Allied landings in southern France on 15 August 1944, the Allies advanced towards Germany more quickly than anticipated. The speed of the advance of the Allies caused several military logistics issues:
* Troops were fatigued by weeks of continuous combat and rapid movement
* Supply lines were stretched extremely thin
* Supplies were dangerously depleted.

By December 1944, General Dwight D. Eisenhower (the Supreme Allied Commander on the Western Front) and his staff decided to hold the Ardennes region primarily as a rest area for the U.S. First Army, with limited Allied operational objectives in the area.

The Allies defended the Ardennes line very thinly, due to the favorable defensive terrain (a densely wooded highland with deep river valleys and a rather thin road network) and because they had intelligence that the Wehrmacht was using the area across the German border as a rest-and-refit area for its own troops.

===Allied supply issues===
The Allies faced major supply issues, due to the rate of their advance coupled with the initial lack of deep-water ports. Over-the-beach supply operations using the Normandy landing areas, and direct landing ships on the beaches, were unable to meet operational needs. The only deep-water port the Allies had captured was Cherbourg on the northern shore of the Cotentin peninsula and west of the original invasion beaches, but the Germans had thoroughly wrecked and mined the harbor before it could be taken. It took many months to rebuild its cargo-handling capability. The Allies captured the port of Antwerp intact in the first days of September, but it was not operational until 28 November. The estuary of the Schelde river that controlled access to the port had to be cleared of both German troops and naval mines. These limitations led to differences between General Eisenhower and Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery, commander of the Anglo-Canadian 21st Army Group, over whether Montgomery or Lieutenant General Omar Bradley, commanding the U.S. 12th Army Group, in the south would get priority access to supplies. German forces remained in control of several major ports on the English Channel coast into the autumn, while Dunkirk remained under siege until the end of the war in May 1945.

The Allies&#x27; efforts to destroy the French railway system prior to D-Day were successful. This destruction hampered the German response to the invasion, but it proved equally hampering to the Allies, as it took time to repair the rail network&#x27;s tracks and bridges. A trucking system nicknamed the Red Ball Express brought supplies to front-line troops, but used up five times as much fuel to reach the front line near the Belgian border. By early October, the Allies had suspended major offensives to improve their supply lines and supply availability at the front.

Montgomery and Bradley both pressed for priority delivery of supplies to their respective armies so they could continue their individual lines of advance and maintain pressure on the Germans, while Eisenhower preferred a broad-front strategy. He gave some priority to Montgomery&#x27;s northern forces. This had the short-term goal of opening the urgently needed port of Antwerp and the long-term goal of capturing the Ruhr area, the biggest industrial area of Germany. With the Allies stalled, German (&#x27;Field Marshal&#x27;) Gerd von Rundstedt was able to reorganize the disrupted German armies into a coherent defensive force.

Field Marshal Montgomery&#x27;s Operation Market Garden had achieved only some of its objectives, while its territorial gains left the Allied supply situation stretched further than before. In October, the First Canadian Army fought the Battle of the Scheldt, opening the port of Antwerp to shipping. As a result, by the end of October, the supply situation had eased somewhat.

===German plans===
Despite a lull along the front after the Scheldt battles, the German situation remained dire. While operations continued in the autumn, notably the Lorraine Campaign, the Battle of Aachen and fighting in the Hürtgen Forest, the strategic situation in the west had changed little. The Allies were slowly pushing towards Germany, but no decisive breakthrough was achieved. There were 96 Allied divisions at or near the front, with an estimated ten more divisions on the way from the United Kingdom. Additional Allied airborne units remained in England. The Germans could field a total of 55 understrength divisions.

Adolf Hitler first outlined his planned counter-offensive to his generals on 16 September 1944. The goal was to pierce the thinly held lines of the U.S. First Army between Monschau and Wasserbillig with Walter Model&#x27;s Army Group B by the end of the first day, get the armor through the Ardennes by the end of the second day, reach the Meuse between Liège and Dinant by the third day, and seize Antwerp and the western bank of the Scheldt estuary by the fourth day.

Hitler initially promised his generals a total of 18 infantry and 12 armored or mechanized divisions &quot;for planning purposes.&quot; The plan was to pull 13 infantry divisions, two parachute divisions and six armored divisions from the strategic reserve.

On the Eastern Front, the Soviets&#x27; Operation Bagration during the summer had destroyed much of Germany&#x27;s Army Group Center (). By November, it was clear that Soviet forces were preparing for a winter offensive.

Meanwhile, the Allied air offensive of early 1944 had effectively grounded the Luftwaffe, leaving the German Army with little battlefield intelligence and no way to interdict Allied supplies. The converse was equally damaging; daytime movement of German forces was rapidly noticed, and interdiction of supplies combined with the bombing of the Romanian oil fields starved Germany of oil and gasoline. This fuel shortage intensified after the Soviets overran those fields in the course of their August 1944 Jassy-Kishinev Offensive.

One of the few advantages held by the German forces in November 1944 was that they were no longer defending all of Western Europe. Their front lines in the west had been considerably shortened by the Allied offensive and were much closer to the German heartland. This drastically reduced their supply problems despite Allied control of the air. Additionally, their extensive telephone and telegraph network meant that radios were no longer necessary for communications, which lessened the effectiveness of Allied Ultra intercepts. Nevertheless, some 40–50 messages per day were decrypted by Ultra. They recorded the quadrupling of German fighter forces, and a term used in an intercepted Luftwaffe message (, literally, &#x27;Fighter Deployment&#x27;) implied preparation for an offensive operation. Ultra also picked up communiqués regarding extensive rail and road movements in the region, as well as orders that movements should be made on time.

===Drafting the offensive===
Hitler felt that his mobile reserves allowed him to mount one major offensive. Although he realized nothing significant could be accomplished in the Eastern Front, he still believed an offensive against the Western Allies, whom he considered militarily inferior to the Red Army, would have some chances of success. Hitler believed he could split the Allied forces and compel the Americans and British to settle for a separate peace, independent of the Soviet Union. Success in the west would give the Germans time to design and produce more advanced weapons (such as jet aircraft, new U-boat designs and super-heavy tanks) and permit the concentration of forces in the east. After the war ended, this assessment was generally viewed as unrealistic, given Allied air superiority throughout Europe and their ability to continually disrupt German offensive operations.

Hitler&#x27;s plan called for a Blitzkrieg attack through the weakly defended Ardennes, mirroring the successful German offensive there during the Battle of France in 1940, and aimed at splitting the armies along the U.S.-British lines and capturing Antwerp. The plan banked on unfavorable weather, including heavy fog and low-lying clouds, which would minimize the Allied air advantage. Hitler originally set the offensive for late November, before the anticipated start of the Russian winter offensive. The disputes between Montgomery and Bradley were well known, and Hitler hoped he could exploit this disunity. If the attack were to succeed in capturing Antwerp, four complete armies would be trapped without supplies behind German lines.

Several senior German military officers, including Model and von Rundstedt, expressed concern as to whether the goals of the offensive could be realized. Model and von Rundstedt both believed aiming for Antwerp was too ambitious, given Germany&#x27;s scarce resources in late 1944. At the same time, they felt that maintaining a purely defensive posture (as had been the case since Normandy) would only delay defeat, not avert it. They thus developed alternative, less ambitious plans that did not aim to cross the Meuse River (in German and Dutch: Maas); Model&#x27;s being (&#x27;Operation Autumn Mist&#x27;) and von Rundstedt&#x27;s (&#x27;Plan Martin&#x27;). The two field marshals combined their plans to present a joint &quot;small solution&quot; to Hitler. When they offered their alternative plans, Hitler would not listen. Rundstedt later testified that while he recognized the merit of Hitler&#x27;s operational plan, he saw from the very first that &quot;all, absolutely all conditions for the possible success of such an offensive were lacking.&quot;

Model, commander of German Army Group B (), and von Rundstedt, overall commander of the German Army Command in the West (), were put in charge of carrying out the operation.

The positions of the Allied armies stretched from southern France all the way north to the Netherlands. German planning for the counteroffensive rested on the premise that a successful strike against thinly manned stretches of the line would halt Allied advances on the entire Western Front.

===Operation names===
The Wehrmacht&#x27;s code name for the offensive was (&#x27;Operation Watch on the Rhine&#x27;), after the German patriotic hymn , a name that deceptively implied the Germans would be adopting a defensive posture along the Western Front. The Germans also referred to it as (&#x27;Ardennes Offensive&#x27;) and Rundstedt-Offensive, both names being generally used nowadays in modern Germany. The French (and Belgian) name for the operation is , &#x27;Battle of the Ardennes&#x27;. The battle was militarily defined by the Allies as the Ardennes Counteroffensive, which included the German drive and the American effort to contain and later defeat it. The phrase &#x27;Battle of the Bulge&#x27; was coined by contemporary press to describe the way the Allied front line bulged inward on wartime news maps.

While the Ardennes Counteroffensive is the correct term in Allied military language, the official Ardennes-Alsace campaign reached beyond the Ardennes battle region, and the most popular description in English speaking countries remains simply &#x27;Battle of the Bulge&#x27;.

===Planning===



The OKW decided by mid-September, at Hitler&#x27;s insistence, that the offensive would be mounted in the Ardennes, as was done in 1940. In 1940 German forces had passed through the Ardennes in three days before engaging the enemy, but the 1944 plan called for battle in the forest itself. The main forces were to advance westward to the Meuse River, then turn northwest for Antwerp and Brussels. The close terrain of the Ardennes would make rapid movement difficult, though open ground beyond the Meuse offered the prospect of a successful dash to the coast.

Four armies were selected for the operation. Adolf Hitler personally selected for the counter-offensive on the northern shoulder of the western front the best troops available and officers he trusted. The lead role in the attack was given to the 6th Panzer Army, commanded by SS Sepp Dietrich. It included the most experienced formation of the Waffen-SS: the 1st SS Panzer Division Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler. It also contained the 12th SS Panzer Division Hitlerjugend. They were given priority for supply and equipment and assigned the shortest route to the primary objective of the offensive, Antwerp, starting from the northernmost point on the intended battlefront, nearest the important road network hub of Monschau.

The Fifth Panzer Army under General Hasso von Manteuffel was assigned to the middle sector with the objective of capturing Brussels. The Seventh Army, under General Erich Brandenberger, was assigned to the southernmost sector, near the Luxembourgish city of Echternach, with the task of protecting the flank. This Army was made up of only four infantry divisions, with no large-scale armored formations to use as a spearhead unit. As a result, they made little progress throughout the battle.

In an indirect, secondary role, the Fifteenth Army, under General Gustav-Adolf von Zangen, recently brought back up to strength and re-equipped after heavy fighting during Operation Market Garden, was located just north of the Ardennes battlefield and tasked with holding U.S. forces in place, with the possibility of launching its own attack given favorable conditions.

For the offensive to be successful, four criteria were deemed critical: the attack had to be a complete surprise; the weather conditions had to be poor to neutralize Allied air superiority and the damage it could inflict on the German offensive and its supply lines; the progress had to be rapid—the Meuse River, halfway to Antwerp, had to be reached by day 4; and Allied fuel supplies would have to be captured intact along the way because the combined Wehrmacht forces were short on fuel. The General Staff estimated they only had enough fuel to cover one third to one half of the ground to Antwerp in heavy combat conditions.

The plan originally called for just under 45 divisions, including a dozen panzer and divisions forming the armored spearhead and various infantry units to form a defensive line as the battle unfolded. By this time the German Army suffered from an acute manpower shortage, and the force had been reduced to around 30 divisions. Although it retained most of its armor, there were not enough infantry units because of the defensive needs in the East. These 30 newly rebuilt divisions used some of the last reserves of the German Army. Among them were (&#x27;People&#x27;s Grenadier&#x27;) units formed from a mix of battle-hardened veterans and recruits formerly regarded as too young, too old or too frail to fight. Training time, equipment and supplies were inadequate during the preparations. German fuel supplies were precarious—those materials and supplies that could not be directly transported by rail had to be horse-drawn to conserve fuel, and the mechanized and panzer divisions would depend heavily on captured fuel. As a result, the start of the offensive was delayed from 27 November until 16 December.

Before the offensive the Allies were virtually blind to German troop movement. During the liberation of France, the extensive network of the French Resistance had provided valuable intelligence about German dispositions. Once they reached the German border, this source dried up. In France, orders had been relayed within the German army using radio messages enciphered by the Enigma machine, and these could be picked up and decrypted by Allied code-breakers headquartered at Bletchley Park, to give the intelligence known as Ultra. In Germany such orders were typically transmitted using telephone and teleprinter, and a special radio silence order was imposed on all matters concerning the upcoming offensive. The major crackdown in the Wehrmacht after the 20 July plot to assassinate Hitler resulted in much tighter security and fewer leaks. The foggy autumn weather also prevented Allied reconnaissance aircraft from correctly assessing the ground situation. German units assembling in the area were even issued charcoal instead of wood for cooking fires to cut down on smoke and reduce chances of Allied observers deducing a troop buildup was underway.

For these reasons Allied High Command considered the Ardennes a quiet sector, relying on assessments from their intelligence services that the Germans were unable to launch any major offensive operations this late in the war. What little intelligence they had led the Allies to believe precisely what the Germans wanted them to believe-–that preparations were being carried out only for defensive, not offensive, operations. The Allies relied too much on Ultra, not human reconnaissance. In fact, because of the Germans&#x27; efforts, the Allies were led to believe that a new defensive army was being formed around Düsseldorf in the northern Rhineland, possibly to defend against British attack. This was done by increasing the number of flak (, i.e., anti-aircraft cannons) in the area and the artificial multiplication of radio transmissions in the area. All of this meant that the attack, when it came, completely surprised the Allied forces. Remarkably, the U.S. Third Army intelligence chief, Colonel Oscar Koch, the U.S. First Army intelligence chief and the SHAEF intelligence officer Brigadier General Kenneth Strong all correctly predicted the German offensive capability and intention to strike the U.S. VIII Corps area. These predictions were largely dismissed by the U.S. 12th Army Group. Strong had informed Bedell Smith in December of his suspicions. Bedell Smith sent Strong to warn Lieutenant General Omar Bradley, the commander of the 12th Army Group, of the danger. Bradley&#x27;s response was succinct: &quot;Let them come.&quot; Historian Patrick K. O&#x27;Donnell writes that on 8 December 1944 U.S. Rangers at great cost took Hill 400 during the Battle of the Hürtgen Forest. The next day GIs who relieved the Rangers reported a considerable movement of German troops inside the Ardennes in the enemy&#x27;s rear, but that no one in the chain of command connected the dots.

Because the Ardennes was considered a quiet sector, considerations of economy of force led it to be used as a training ground for new units and a rest area for units that had seen hard fighting. The U.S. units deployed in the Ardennes thus were a mixture of inexperienced troops (such as the 99th and 106th &quot;Golden Lions&quot; Divisions), and battle-hardened troops sent to that sector to recuperate (the 28th Infantry Division).

Two major special operations were planned for the offensive. By October it was decided that Otto Skorzeny, the German SS-commando who had rescued the former Italian dictator Benito Mussolini, was to lead a task force of English-speaking German soldiers in Operation Greif. These soldiers were to be dressed in American and British uniforms and wear dog tags taken from corpses and prisoners of war. Their job was to go behind American lines and change signposts, misdirect traffic, generally cause disruption and seize bridges across the Meuse River. By late November another ambitious special operation was added: Col. Friedrich August von der Heydte was to lead a (paratrooper combat group) in Operation Stösser, a night-time paratroop drop behind the Allied lines aimed at capturing a vital road junction near Malmedy.

German intelligence had set 20 December as the expected date for the start of the upcoming Soviet offensive, aimed at crushing what was left of German resistance on the Eastern Front and thereby opening the way to Berlin. It was hoped that Soviet leader Stalin would delay the start of the operation once the German assault in the Ardennes had begun and wait for the outcome before continuing.

After the 20 July 1944 attempt to assassinate Hitler, and the close advance of the Red Army which would seize the site on 27 January 1945, Hitler and his staff had been forced to abandon the headquarters in East Prussia, in which they had coordinated much of the fighting on the Eastern Front. After a brief visit to Berlin, Hitler traveled on his (&#x27;Special Train of the Führer&#x27;) to Giessen on 11 December, taking up residence in the Adlerhorst (eyrie) command complex, co-located with OB West&#x27;s base at Kransberg Castle. Believing in omens and the successes of his early war campaigns that had been planned at Kransberg, Hitler had chosen the site from which he had overseen the successful 1940 campaign against France and the Low Countries.

Von Rundstedt set up his operational headquarters near Limburg, close enough for the generals and Panzer Corps commanders who were to lead the attack to visit Adlerhorst on 11 December, traveling there in an SS-operated bus convoy. With the castle acting as overflow accommodation, the main party was settled into the Adlerhorst&#x27;s Haus 2 command bunker, including Gen. Alfred Jodl, Gen. Wilhelm Keitel, Gen. Blumentritt, von Manteuffel and Dietrich.

In a personal conversation on 13 December between Walter Model and Friedrich von der Heydte, who was put in charge of Operation Stösser, von der Heydte gave Operation Stösser less than a 10% chance of succeeding. Model told him it was necessary to make the attempt: &quot;It must be done because this offensive is the last chance to conclude the war favorably.&quot;

==Initial German assault==
On 16 December 1944 at 05:30, the Germans began the assault with a massive, 90-minute artillery barrage using 1,600 artillery pieces across a front on the Allied troops facing the 6th Panzer Army. The Americans&#x27; initial impression was that this was the anticipated, localized counterattack resulting from the Allies&#x27; recent attack in the Wahlerscheid sector to the north, where the 2nd Division had knocked a sizable dent in the Siegfried Line. Heavy snowstorms engulfed parts of the Ardennes area. While having the effect of keeping the Allied aircraft grounded, the weather also proved troublesome for the Germans because poor road conditions hampered their advance. Poor traffic control led to massive traffic jams and fuel shortages in forward units. Nearly 10 hours into the assault, one of the German V-2 rockets destroyed the &quot;Cine Rex&quot; cinema in Antwerp, killing 567 people, the highest death toll from a single rocket attack during the war.

In the center, von Manteuffel&#x27;s Fifth Panzer Army attacked towards Bastogne and St. Vith, both road junctions of great strategic importance. In the south, Brandenberger&#x27;s Seventh Army pushed towards Luxembourg in its efforts to secure the flank from Allied attacks.

===Units involved in initial assault===
&quot;Forces deployed North to South&quot;

Northern Sector: Monschau to Krewinkel


 U.S. Forces
* 102nd Cavalry Group, Mechanized
* 9th Infantry Regiment / 2nd Infantry Division
* 395th Infantry Regiment / 99th Infantry Division
* 23rd Infantry Regiment / 2nd Infantry Division
* 38th Infantry Regiment / 2nd Infantry Division
* 393rd Infantry Regiment / 99th Infantry Division
* Combat Command B / 9th Armored Division
* 394th Infantry Regiment / 99th Infantry Division
* 14th Cavalry Group, Mechanized

 German Forces
* Sixth Panzer Army (Dietrich)
** LXVII Corps (Hitzfeld)
*** 326th Volksgrenadier Division
** I SS Panzer Corps (Prieß)
*** 277th Volksgrenadier Division
*** 12th SS Panzer Division
*** 12th Volksgrenadier Division
*** 1st SS Panzer Division (Including &quot;Kampfgruppe Peiper&quot;)
*** 3rd Fallschirmjäger Division
*** 150th Panzer Brigade (Skorzeny)

Central Sector: Roth to Gemünd


 U.S. Forces
* Surrounded and captured on the Schnee Eifel:
** 422nd Infantry Regiment / 106th Infantry Division
** 423rd Infantry Regiment / 106th Infantry Division
* 392nd Engineer General Service Regiment
* 424th Infantry Regiment / 106th Infantry Division
* 112th Infantry Regiment / 28th Infantry Division
* Combat Command R / 9th Armored Division
* 110th Infantry Regiment / 28th Infantry Division

 German Forces
* Fifth Panzer Army (von Manteuffel)
** LXVI Corps (Lucht)
*** 18th Volksgrenadier Division
*** 62nd Volksgrenadier Division
** LVIII Panzer Corps (Kruger)
*** 116th Panzer Division
*** 560th Volksgrenadier Division
** XLVII Panzer Corps (Lüttwitz)
*** 2nd Panzer Division
*** 26th Volksgrenadier Division
*** &quot;Panzer Lehr&quot; Division

Southern Sector: Hochscheid to Mompach


 U.S. Forces
* 109th Infantry Regiment / 28th Infantry Division
* Combat Command A / 9th Armored Division
* 12th Infantry Regiment / 4th Infantry Division
* 8th Infantry Regiment / 4th Infantry Division

 German Forces
* Seventh Army (Brandenberger)
** LXXXV Corps (Kniess)
*** 5th Fallschirmjäger Division
*** 352nd Volksgrenadier Division
** LXXX Corps (Beyer)
*** 276th Volksgrenadier Division
*** 212th Volksgrenadier Division

==Attack on the northern shoulder==

While the Siege of Bastogne is often credited as the central point where the German offensive was stopped, the battle for Elsenborn Ridge was actually the decisive component of the Battle of the Bulge. Untested troops of the 99th Infantry Division prevented the best equipped armored units of the German army from advancing and forced them to reroute their troops to unfavorable alternative routes that considerably slowed their advance.

===Best German divisions assigned===
The attack on Monschau, Höfen, Krinkelt-Rocherath, and then Elsenborn Ridge was led by the units personally selected by Adolf Hitler. The 6th Panzer Army was given priority for supply and equipment and was assigned the shortest route to the ultimate objective of the offensive, Antwerp. The 6th Panzer Army included the elite of the Waffen-SS, including four Panzer divisions and five infantry divisions in three corps. SS-&quot;Obersturmbannführer&quot; Joachim Peiper led Peiper, consisting of 4,800 men and 600 vehicles, which was charged with leading the main effort. Its newest and most powerful tank, the Tiger II heavy tank, consumed 2 US gallons of fuel per mile (470 litres per 100 km), and the Germans only had enough fuel for an estimated of travel, not nearly enough to reach Antwerp.

===German forces held up===
The attacks by the Sixth Panzer Army&#x27;s infantry units in the north fared badly because of unexpectedly fierce resistance by the U.S. 2nd and 99th Infantry Divisions. Peiper, at the head of Sepp Dietrich&#x27;s Sixth Panzer Army, had been designated to take the Losheim-Losheimergraben road, a key route through the Losheim Gap, but it was closed by two collapsed overpasses that German engineers failed to repair during the first day. Peiper&#x27;s forces were rerouted through Lanzerath.

To preserve the quantity of armor available, the infantry of the 9th Regiment, 3rd &quot;Fallschirmjaeger&quot; Division, had been ordered to clear the village first. A single 18-man Intelligence and Reconnaissance Platoon from the 99th Infantry Division along with four Forward Air Controllers held up the battalion of about 500 German paratroopers until sunset, about 16:00, causing 92 casualties among the Germans.

This created a bottleneck in the German advance. Peiper did not begin its advance until nearly 16:00, more than 16 hours behind schedule and didn&#x27;t reach Bockholtz Station until the early morning of 17 December. Their intention was to control the twin villages of Rocherath-Krinkelt which would clear a path to the high ground of Elsenborn Ridge. Occupation of this dominating terrain would allow control of the roads to the south and west and ensure supply to Peiper&#x27;s armored task force.

===Malmedy massacres===

At 4:30 a.m. on 17 December 1944, the 1st SS Panzer Division was approximately 16 hours behind schedule when the convoys departed the village of Lanzerath enroute west to the town of Honsfeld. After capturing Honsfeld, Peiper detoured from his assigned route to seize a small fuel depot in Büllingen, where the infantry summarily executed dozens of U.S. POWs. Afterwards, Peiper advanced to the west, towards the River Meuse and captured Ligneuville, bypassing the towns of Mödersheid, Schoppen, Ondenval, and Thirimont. The terrain and poor quality of the roads made the advance of difficult; at the exit to the village of Thirimont, the armored spearhead was unable to travel the road directly to Ligneuville, and Peiper deviated from the planned route, and rather than turn to the left, the armored spearhead turned to the right, and advanced towards the crossroads of Baugnez, which is equidistant from the city of Malmedy and Ligneuville and Waimes.

At 12:30 p.m. on 17 December, Peiper was near the hamlet of Baugnez, on the height halfway between the town of Malmedy and Ligneuville, when they encountered elements of the 285th Field Artillery Observation Battalion, U.S. 7th Armored Division. After a brief battle the lightly armed Americans surrendered. They were disarmed and, with some other Americans captured earlier (approximately 150 men), sent to stand in a field near the crossroads under light guard. About fifteen minutes after Peiper&#x27;s advance guard passed through, the main body under the command of SS- Werner Pötschke arrived. The SS troopers suddenly opened fire on the prisoners. As soon as the firing began, the prisoners panicked. Most were shot where they stood, though some managed to flee. Accounts of the killing vary, but at least 84 of the POWs were murdered. A few survived, and news of the killings of prisoners of war spread through Allied lines. Following the end of the war, soldiers and officers of Peiper, including Peiper and SS general Dietrich, were tried for the incident at the Malmedy massacre trial.

===Kampfgruppe Peiper deflected southeast===
Driving to the south-east of Elsenborn, Peiper entered Honsfeld, where they encountered one of the 99th Division&#x27;s rest centers, clogged with confused American troops. They quickly captured portions of the 3rd Battalion of the 394th Infantry Regiment. They destroyed a number of American armored units and vehicles, and took several dozen prisoners who were subsequently murdered. Peiper also captured of fuel for his vehicles.

Peiper advanced north-west towards Büllingen, keeping to the plan to move west, unaware that if he had turned north he had an opportunity to flank and trap the entire 2nd and 99th Divisions. Instead, intent on driving west, Peiper turned south to detour around Hünningen, choosing a route designated Rollbahn D as he had been given latitude to choose the best route west.

To the north, the 277th Volksgrenadier Division attempted to break through the defending line of the U.S. 99th and the 2nd Infantry Divisions. The 12th SS Panzer Division, reinforced by additional infantry ( and ) divisions, took the key road junction at Losheimergraben just north of Lanzerath and attacked the twin villages of Rocherath and Krinkelt.

===Wereth 11===

Another, smaller, massacre was committed in Wereth, Belgium, approximately northeast of Saint-Vith on 17 December 1944. Eleven black American soldiers were tortured after surrendering and then shot by men of the 1st SS Panzer Division belonging to Knittel. Some of the injuries sustained before death included bayonet wounds to the head, broken legs, and their fingers cut off. The perpetrators were never punished for this crime. In 2001, a group of people began working on a tribute to the eleven black American soldiers to remember their sacrifices.

===Germans advance west===
By the evening the spearhead had pushed north to engage the U.S. 99th Infantry Division and &quot;Kampfgruppe&quot; Peiper arrived in front of Stavelot. Peiper&#x27;s forces were already behind his timetable because of the stiff American resistance and because when the Americans fell back, their engineers blew up bridges and emptied fuel dumps. Peiper&#x27;s unit was delayed and his vehicles denied critically needed fuel. They took 36 hours to advance from the Eifel region to Stavelot, while the same advance required nine hours in 1940.

&quot;Kampfgruppe&quot; Peiper attacked Stavelot on 18 December but was unable to capture the town before the Americans evacuated a large fuel depot. Three tanks attempted to take the bridge, but the lead vehicle was disabled by a mine. Following this, 60 grenadiers advanced forward but were stopped by concentrated American defensive fire. After a fierce tank battle the next day, the Germans finally entered the town when U.S. engineers failed to blow the bridge.

Capitalizing on his success and not wanting to lose more time, Peiper rushed an advance group toward the vital bridge at Trois-Ponts, leaving the bulk of his strength in Stavelot. When they reached it at 11:30 on 18 December, retreating U.S. engineers blew it up. Peiper detoured north towards the villages of La Gleize and Cheneux. At Cheneux, the advance guard was attacked by American fighter-bombers, destroying two tanks and five halftracks, blocking the narrow road. The group began moving again at dusk at 16:00 and was able to return to its original route at around 18:00. Of the two bridges remaining between &quot;Kampfgruppe&quot; Peiper and the Meuse, the bridge over the Lienne was blown by the Americans as the Germans approached. Peiper turned north and halted his forces in the woods between La Gleize and Stoumont. He learned that Stoumont was strongly held and that the Americans were bringing up strong reinforcements from Spa.

To Peiper&#x27;s south, the advance of &quot;Kampfgruppe&quot; Hansen had stalled. SS-&quot;Oberführer&quot; Mohnke ordered &quot;Schnellgruppe&quot; Knittel, which had been designated to follow Hansen, to instead move forward to support Peiper. SS-&quot;Sturmbannführer&quot; Knittel crossed the bridge at Stavelot around 19:00 against American forces trying to retake the town. Knittel pressed forward towards La Gleize, and shortly afterward the Americans recaptured Stavelot. Peiper and Knittel both faced the prospect of being cut off.

===German advance halted===
At dawn on 19 December, Peiper surprised the American defenders of Stoumont by sending infantry from the 2nd SS Regiment in an attack and a company of Fallschirmjäger to infiltrate their lines. He followed this with a Panzer attack, gaining the eastern edge of the town. An American tank battalion arrived but, after a two-hour tank battle, Peiper finally captured Stoumont at 10:30. Knittel joined up with Peiper and reported the Americans had recaptured Stavelot to their east. Peiper ordered Knittel to retake Stavelot. Assessing his own situation, he determined that his &quot;Kampfgruppe&quot; did not have sufficient fuel to cross the bridge west of Stoumont and continue his advance. He maintained his lines west of Stoumont for a while, until the evening of 19 December when he withdrew them to the village edge. On the same evening the U.S. 82nd Airborne Division under Maj. Gen. James Gavin arrived and deployed at La Gleize and along Peiper&#x27;s planned route of advance.

German efforts to reinforce Peiper were unsuccessful. &quot;Kampfgruppe&quot; Hansen was still struggling against bad road conditions and stiff American resistance on the southern route. &quot;Schnellgruppe&quot; Knittel was forced to disengage from the heights around Stavelot. &quot;Kampfgruppe&quot; Sandig, which had been ordered to take Stavelot, launched another attack without success. Sixth Panzer Army commander Sepp Dietrich ordered Hermann Priess, commanding officer of the I SS Panzer Corps, to increase its efforts to back Peiper&#x27;s battle group, but Priess was unable to break through.

Small units of the U.S. 2nd Battalion, 119th Infantry Regiment, 30th Infantry Division, attacked the dispersed units of &quot;Kampfgruppe&quot; Peiper on the morning of 21 December. They failed and were forced to withdraw, and a number were captured, including battalion commander Maj. Hal D. McCown. Peiper learned that his reinforcements had been directed to gather in La Gleize to his east, and he withdrew, leaving wounded Americans and Germans in the . As he withdrew from Cheneux, American paratroopers from the 82nd Airborne Division engaged the Germans in fierce house-to-house fighting. The Americans shelled &quot;Kampfgruppe&quot; Peiper on 22 December, and although the Germans had run out of food and had virtually no fuel, they continued to fight. A Luftwaffe resupply mission went badly when SS-&quot;Brigadeführer&quot; Wilhelm Mohnke insisted the grid coordinates supplied by Peiper were wrong, parachuting supplies into American hands in Stoumont.

In La Gleize, Peiper set up defenses waiting for German relief. When the relief force was unable to penetrate the Allied lines, he decided to break through the Allied lines and return to the German lines on 23 December. The men of the &quot;Kampfgruppe&quot; were forced to abandon their vehicles and heavy equipment, although most of the 800 remaining troops were able to escape.

===Outcome===
The U.S. 99th Infantry Division, outnumbered five to one, inflicted casualties in the ratio of 18 to one. The division lost about 20% of its effective strength, including 465 killed and 2,524 evacuated due to wounds, injuries, fatigue, or trench foot. German losses were much higher. In the northern sector opposite the 99th, this included more than 4,000 deaths and the destruction of 60 tanks and big guns. Historian John S. D. Eisenhower wrote, &quot;... the action of the 2nd and 99th Divisions on the northern shoulder could be considered the most decisive of the Ardennes campaign.&quot;

The stiff American defense prevented the Germans from reaching the vast array of supplies near the Belgian cities of Liège and Spa and the road network west of the Elsenborn Ridge leading to the Meuse River. After more than 10 days of intense battle, they pushed the Americans out of the villages, but were unable to dislodge them from the ridge, where elements of the V Corps of the First U.S. Army prevented the German forces from reaching the road network to their west.

===Operation Stösser===

Operation Stösser was a paratroop drop into the American rear in the High Fens (; ; ) area. The objective was the &quot;Baraque Michel&quot; crossroads. It was led by Oberst Friedrich August Freiherr von der Heydte, considered by Germans to be a hero of the Battle of Crete.

It was the German paratroopers&#x27; only nighttime drop during World War II. Heydte was given only eight days to prepare prior to the assault. He was not allowed to use his own regiment because their movement might alert the Allies to the impending counterattack. Instead, he was provided with a &quot;Kampfgruppe&quot; of 800 men. The II Parachute Corps was tasked with contributing 100 men from each of its regiments. In loyalty to their commander, 150 men from Heydte&#x27;s own unit, the 6th Parachute Regiment, went against orders and joined him. They had little time to establish any unit cohesion or train together.

The parachute drop was a complete failure. Heydte ended up with a total of around 300 troops. Too small and too weak to counter the Allies, they abandoned plans to take the crossroads and instead converted the mission to reconnaissance. With only enough ammunition for a single fight, they withdrew towards Germany and attacked the rear of the American lines. Only about 100 of his weary men finally reached the German rear.

===Chenogne massacre===

Following the Malmedy massacre, on New Year&#x27;s Day 1945, having previously received orders to take no prisoners, American soldiers executed approximately sixty German prisoners of war near the Belgian village of Chenogne (8 km from Bastogne).

==Attack in the center==

The Germans fared better in the center (the Schnee Eifel sector) as the Fifth Panzer Army attacked positions held by the U.S. 28th and 106th Infantry Divisions. The Germans lacked the overwhelming strength that had been deployed in the north, but still possessed a marked numerical and material superiority over the very thinly spread 28th and 106th divisions. They succeeded in surrounding two largely intact regiments (422nd and 423rd) of the 106th Division in a pincer movement and forced their surrender, a tribute to the way Manteuffel&#x27;s new tactics had been applied. The official U.S. Army history states: &quot;At least seven thousand [men] were lost here and the figure probably is closer to eight or nine thousand. The amount lost in arms and equipment, of course, was very substantial. The Schnee Eifel battle, therefore, represents the most serious reverse suffered by American arms during the operations of 1944–45 in the European theater.&quot;

===Battle for St. Vith===

In the center, the town of St. Vith, a vital road junction, presented the main challenge for both von Manteuffel&#x27;s and Dietrich&#x27;s forces. The defenders, led by the 7th Armored Division, included the remaining regiment of the 106th U.S. Infantry Division, with elements of the 9th Armored Division and 28th U.S. Infantry Division. These units, which operated under the command of Generals Robert W. Hasbrouck (7th Armored) and Alan W. Jones (106th Infantry), successfully resisted the German attacks, significantly slowing the German advance. At Montgomery&#x27;s orders, St. Vith was evacuated on 21 December; U.S. troops fell back to entrenched positions in the area, presenting an imposing obstacle to a successful German advance. By 23 December, as the Germans shattered their flanks, the defenders&#x27; position became untenable and U.S. troops were ordered to retreat west of the Salm River. Since the German plan called for the capture of St. Vith by 18:00 on 17 December, the prolonged action in and around it dealt a major setback to their timetable.

===Meuse River bridges===
To protect the river crossings on the Meuse at Givet, Dinant and Namur, Montgomery ordered those few units available to hold the bridges on 19 December. This led to a hastily assembled force including rear-echelon troops, military police and Army Air Force personnel. The British 29th Armoured Brigade of British 11th Armoured Division, which had turned in its tanks for re-equipping, was told to take back their tanks and head to the area. British XXX Corps was significantly reinforced for this effort. Units of the corps which fought in the Ardennes were the 51st (Highland) and 53rd (Welsh) Infantry Divisions, the British 6th Airborne Division, the 29th and 33rd Armoured Brigades, and the 34th Tank Brigade.

Unlike the German forces on the northern and southern shoulders who were experiencing great difficulties, the German advance in the center gained considerable ground. The Fifth Panzer Army was spearheaded by the 2nd Panzer Division while the Panzer Lehr Division (Elite Armored Demonstration Division) came up from the south, leaving Bastogne to other units. The Ourthe River was passed at Ourtheville on 21 December. Lack of fuel held up the advance for one day, but on 23 December the offensive was resumed towards the two small towns of Hargimont and Marche-en-Famenne. Hargimont was captured the same day, but Marche-en-Famenne was strongly defended by the American 84th Division. Gen. von Lüttwitz, commander of the XXXXVII Panzer-Korps, ordered the division to turn westwards towards Dinant and the Meuse, leaving only a blocking force at Marche-en-Famenne. Although advancing only in a narrow corridor, 2nd Panzer Division was still making rapid headway, leading to jubilation in Berlin. Headquarters now freed up the 9th Panzer Division for Fifth Panzer Army, which was deployed at Marche.

On 22/23 December German forces reached the woods of Foy-Notre-Dame, only a few kilometers ahead of Dinant. The narrow corridor caused considerable difficulties, as constant flanking attacks threatened the division. On 24 December, German forces made their furthest penetration west. The Panzer Lehr Division took the town of Celles, while a bit farther north, parts of 2nd Panzer Division were in sight of the Meuse near Dinant at Foy-Notre-Dame. A hastily assembled British blocking force on the east side of the river prevented the German Battlegroup Böhm from approaching the Dinant bridge. The 29th Armoured Brigade ambushed the Germans knocking out three Panthers and a number of vehicles in and around Foy-Notre-Dame. By late Christmas Eve the advance in this sector was stopped, as Allied forces threatened the narrow corridor held by the 2nd Panzer Division.

===Operation Greif and Operation Währung===

For Operation Greif (&quot;Griffin&quot;), Otto Skorzeny successfully infiltrated a small part of his battalion of English-speaking Germans disguised in American uniforms behind the Allied lines. Although they failed to take the vital bridges over the Meuse, their presence caused confusion out of all proportion to their military activities, and rumors spread quickly. Even General George Patton was alarmed and, on 17 December, described the situation to General Dwight Eisenhower as &quot;Krauts ... speaking perfect English ... raising hell, cutting wires, turning road signs around, spooking whole divisions, and shoving a bulge into our defenses.&quot;

Checkpoints were set up all over the Allied rear, greatly slowing the movement of soldiers and equipment. American MPs at these checkpoints grilled troops on things that every American was expected to know, like the identity of Mickey Mouse&#x27;s girlfriend, baseball scores, or the capital of a particular U.S. state—though many could not remember or did not know. General Omar Bradley was briefly detained when he correctly identified Springfield as the capital of Illinois because the American MP who questioned him mistakenly believed the capital was Chicago.

The tightened security nonetheless made things very hard for the German infiltrators, and a number of them were captured. Even during interrogation, they continued their goal of spreading disinformation; when asked about their mission, some of them claimed they had been told to go to Paris to either kill or capture General Dwight Eisenhower. Security around the general was greatly increased, and Eisenhower was confined to his headquarters. Because Skorzeny&#x27;s men were captured in American uniforms, they were executed as spies. This was the standard practice of every army at the time, as many belligerents considered it necessary to protect their territory against the grave dangers of enemy spying. Skorzeny said that he was told by German legal experts that as long he did not order his men to fight in combat while wearing American uniforms, such a tactic was a legitimate ruse of war. Skorzeny and his men were fully aware of their likely fate, and most wore their German uniforms underneath their American ones in case of capture. Skorzeny was tried by an American military tribunal in 1947 at the Dachau Trials for allegedly violating the laws of war stemming from his leadership of Operation Greif but was acquitted. He later moved to Spain and South America.

==Attack in the south==
Further south on Manteuffel&#x27;s front, the main thrust was delivered by all attacking divisions crossing the River Our, then increasing the pressure on the key road centers of St. Vith and Bastogne. The more experienced U.S. 28th Infantry Division put up a much more dogged defense than the inexperienced soldiers of the 106th Infantry Division. The 112th Infantry Regiment (the most northerly of the 28th Division&#x27;s regiments), holding a continuous front east of the Our, kept German troops from seizing and using the Our River bridges around Ouren for two days, before withdrawing progressively westwards.

The 109th and 110th Regiments of the 28th Division fared worse, as they were spread so thinly that their positions were easily bypassed. Both offered stubborn resistance in the face of superior forces and threw the German schedule off by several days. The 110th&#x27;s situation was by far the worst, as it was responsible for an front while its 2nd Battalion was withheld as the divisional reserve. Panzer columns took the outlying villages and widely separated strong points in bitter fighting, and advanced to points near Bastogne within four days. The struggle for the villages and American strong points, plus transport confusion on the German side, slowed the attack sufficiently to allow the 101st Airborne Division (reinforced by elements from the 9th and 10th Armored Divisions) to reach Bastogne by truck on the morning of 19 December. The fierce defense of Bastogne, in which American paratroopers particularly distinguished themselves, made it impossible for the Germans to take the town with its important road junctions. The panzer columns swung past on either side, cutting off Bastogne on 20 December but failing to secure the vital crossroads.

Twenty years after the battle, General McAuliffe praised the men of the 10th Armored &quot;Tiger&quot; Division saying, &quot;It&#x27;s always seemed regrettable to me, that Combat Command B of the 10th Armored Division didn&#x27;t get the credit it deserved in the battle of Bastogne. All of the newspaper and radio talk was about the paratroopers. Actually, the 10th Armored Division was in there December 18th, a day before we were, and had some very hard fighting before we ever got into it, and I sincerely believe that we would never have been able to get into Bastogne if it had not been for the defensive fighting of the three elements of the 10th Armored Division who were first into Bastogne and protected the town from invasion by the Germans.&quot;

In the extreme south, Brandenberger&#x27;s three infantry divisions were checked by divisions of the U.S. VIII Corps after an advance of ; that front was then firmly held. Only the 5th Parachute Division of Brandenberger&#x27;s command was able to thrust forward on the inner flank to partially fulfill its assigned role. Eisenhower and his principal commanders realized by 17 December that the fighting in the Ardennes was a major offensive and not a local counterattack, and they ordered vast reinforcements to the area. Within a week 250,000 troops had been sent. General Gavin of the 82nd Airborne Division arrived on the scene first and ordered the 101st to hold Bastogne while the 82nd would take the more difficult task of facing the SS Panzer Divisions; it was also thrown into the battle north of the bulge, near Elsenborn Ridge.

===Siege of Bastogne===

Senior Allied commanders met in a bunker in Verdun on 19 December. By this time, the town of Bastogne and its network of 11 hard-topped roads leading through the widely forested mountainous terrain with deep river valleys and boggy mud of the Ardennes region was under severe threat. Bastogne had previously been the site of the VIII Corps headquarters. Two separate westbound German columns that were to have bypassed the town to the south and north, the 2nd Panzer Division and Panzer-Lehr-Division of XLVII Panzer Corps, as well as the Corps&#x27; infantry (26th Volksgrenadier Division), coming due west had been engaged and much slowed and frustrated in outlying battles at defensive positions up to from the town proper, but these defensive positions were gradually being forced back onto and into the hasty defenses built within the municipality. Moreover, the sole corridor that was open (to the southeast) was threatened and it had been sporadically closed as the front shifted, and there was expectation that it would be completely closed sooner than later, given the strong likelihood that the town would soon be surrounded.

Gen. Eisenhower, realizing that the Allies could destroy German forces much more easily when they were out in the open and on the offensive than if they were on the defensive, told his generals, &quot;The present situation is to be regarded as one of opportunity for us and not of disaster. There will be only cheerful faces at this table.&quot; Patton, realizing what Eisenhower implied, responded, &quot;Hell, let&#x27;s have the guts to let the bastards go all the way to Paris. Then, we&#x27;ll really cut &#x27;em off and chew &#x27;em up.&quot; Eisenhower, after saying he was not that optimistic, asked Patton how long it would take to turn his Third Army, located in northeastern France, north to counterattack. To the disbelief of the other generals present, Patton replied that he could attack with two divisions within 48 hours. Unknown to the other officers present, before he left, Patton had ordered his staff to prepare three contingency plans for a northward turn in at least corps strength. By the time Eisenhower asked him how long it would take, the movement was already underway. On 20 December, Eisenhower removed the First and Ninth U.S. Armies from Gen. Bradley&#x27;s 12th Army Group and placed them under Montgomery&#x27;s 21st Army Group.

By 21 December the Germans had surrounded Bastogne, which was defended by the 101st Airborne Division, the all African American 969th Artillery Battalion, and Combat Command B of the 10th Armored Division. Conditions inside the perimeter were tough—most of the medical supplies and medical personnel had been captured. Food was scarce, and by 22 December artillery ammunition was restricted to 10 rounds per gun per day. The weather cleared the next day and supplies (primarily ammunition) were dropped over four of the next five days.

Despite determined German attacks, the perimeter held. The German commander, Lüttwitz, requested Bastogne&#x27;s surrender. When Brig. Gen. Anthony McAuliffe, acting commander of the 101st, was told of the German demand to surrender, in frustration he responded, &quot;Nuts!&quot; After turning to other pressing issues, his staff reminded him that they should reply to the German demand. One officer, Lt. Col. Harry Kinnard, noted that McAuliffe&#x27;s initial reply would be &quot;tough to beat.&quot; Thus McAuliffe wrote on the paper, which was typed up and delivered to the Germans, the line he made famous and a morale booster to his troops: &quot;NUTS!&quot; That reply had to be explained, both to the Germans and to non-American Allies.

Both 2nd Panzer and Panzer-Lehr division moved forward from Bastogne after 21 December, leaving only Panzer-Lehr division&#x27;s 901st Regiment to assist the 26th Volksgrenadier-Division in attempting to capture the crossroads. The 26th VG received one Regiment from the 15th Panzergrenadier Division on Christmas Eve for its main assault the next day. Because it lacked sufficient troops and those of the 26th VG Division were near exhaustion, the XLVII Panzerkorps concentrated its assault on several individual locations on the west side of the perimeter in sequence rather than launching one simultaneous attack on all sides. The assault, despite initial success by its tanks in penetrating the American line, was defeated and all the tanks destroyed. On the following day of 26 December the spearhead of Gen. Patton&#x27;s 4th Armored Division, supplemented by the 26th (Yankee) Infantry Division, broke through and opened a corridor to Bastogne.

==Allied counterstrikes==
On 23 December the weather conditions started improving, allowing the Allied air forces to attack. They launched devastating bombing raids on the German supply points in their rear, and P-47 Thunderbolts started attacking the German troops on the roads. Allied air forces also helped the defenders of Bastogne, dropping much-needed supplies—medicine, food, blankets, and ammunition. A team of volunteer surgeons flew in by military glider and began operating in a tool room.

By 24 December the German advance was effectively stalled short of the Meuse. Units of the British XXX Corps were holding the bridges at Dinant, Givet, and Namur and U.S. units were about to take over. The Germans had outrun their supply lines, and shortages of fuel and ammunition were becoming critical. Up to this point the German losses had been light, notably in armor, with the exception of Peiper&#x27;s losses. On the evening of 24 December, Manteuffel recommended to Hitler&#x27;s Military Adjutant a halt to all offensive operations and a withdrawal back to the (literally &#x27;Western Rampart&#x27;). Hitler rejected this.

Disagreement and confusion at the Allied command prevented a strong response, throwing away the opportunity for a decisive action. In the center, on Christmas Eve, the 2nd Armored Division attempted to attack and cut off the spearheads of the 2nd Panzer Division at the Meuse, while the units from the 4th Cavalry Group kept the 9th Panzer Division at Marche busy. As a result, parts of the 2nd Panzer Division were cut off. The Panzer-Lehr division tried to relieve them, but was only partially successful, as the perimeter held. For the next two days the perimeter was strengthened. On 26 and 27 December the trapped units of 2nd Panzer Division made two break-out attempts, again only with partial success, as major quantities of equipment fell into Allied hands. Further Allied pressure out of Marche finally led the German command to the conclusion that no further offensive action towards the Meuse was possible.

In the south, Patton&#x27;s Third Army was battling to relieve Bastogne. At 16:50 on 26 December, the lead element, Company D, 37th Tank Battalion of the 4th Armored Division, reached Bastogne, ending the siege.

==German supporting efforts across the Western Front==

On 1 January, in an attempt to keep the offensive going, the Germans launched two new operations. At 09:15, the Luftwaffe launched (Operation Baseplate), a major campaign against Allied airfields in the Low Countries. Hundreds of planes attacked Allied airfields, destroying or severely damaging some 465 aircraft. The Luftwaffe lost 277 planes, 62 to Allied fighters and 172 mostly because of an unexpectedly high number of Allied flak guns, set up to protect against German V-1 flying bomb/missile attacks and using proximity fused shells, but also by friendly fire from the German flak guns that were uninformed of the pending large-scale German air operation. The Germans suffered heavy losses at an airfield named Y-29, losing 40 of their own planes while damaging only four American planes. While the Allies recovered from their losses within days, the operation left the Luftwaffe ineffective for the remainder of the war.

On the same day, German Army Group G () and Army Group Upper Rhine () launched a major offensive against the thinly-stretched, line of the Seventh U.S. Army. This offensive, known as (Operation North Wind), and separate from the Ardennes Offensive, was the last major German offensive of the war on the Western Front. The weakened Seventh Army had, at Eisenhower&#x27;s orders, sent troops, equipment, and supplies north to reinforce the American armies in the Ardennes, and the offensive left it in dire straits.

By 15 January, Seventh Army&#x27;s VI Corps was fighting on three sides in Alsace. With casualties mounting, and running short on replacements, tanks, ammunition, and supplies, Seventh Army was forced to withdraw to defensive positions on the south bank of the Moder River on 21 January. The German offensive drew to a close on 25 January. In the bitter, desperate fighting of Operation Nordwind, VI Corps, which had borne the brunt of the fighting, suffered a total of 14,716 casualties. The total for Seventh Army for January was 11,609. Total casualties included at least 9,000 wounded. First, Third, and Seventh Armies suffered a total of 17,000 hospitalized from the cold.

==Allied counter-offensive==


While the German offensive toward the Meuse had ground to a halt by the end of December, they still controlled a dangerous salient in the Allied line. Patton&#x27;s Third Army in the south, centered around Bastogne, would attack north, Montgomery&#x27;s forces in the north would strike south, and the two forces planned to meet at Houffalize to reduce the bulge, and push east back toward the offensive start line.

The temperature during that January was extremely low, which required weapons to be maintained and truck engines run every half-hour to prevent their oil from congealing. The offensive went forward regardless.

Eisenhower wanted Montgomery to go on the counter offensive on 1 January, with the aim of meeting up with Patton&#x27;s advancing Third Army and cutting off German troops at the tip of the salient, trapping them in a pocket. Montgomery, refusing to risk underprepared infantry in a snowstorm for a strategically unimportant area, did not launch the attack until 3 January. In addition, a series of renewed German attempts to re-encircle and seize Bastogne using units moved to the southern shoulder of the salient from the north, put Patton in a desperate fight for the initiative, with the German maintaining offensive operations in sectors north and east of Bastogne until 7 January, and resulting in heavier fighting than during the 21–26 December siege of Bastogne itself; in addition, Patton&#x27;s Third Army would have to clear out the &quot;Harlange Pocket&quot; east of Bastogne on the Belgian-Luxembourg border. One of these fierce actions around Bastogne occurred on 2 January, the Tiger IIs of German Heavy Tank Battalion 506 supported an attack by the 12th SS Hitlerjugend division against U.S. positions of the 6th Armored Division near Wardin and knocked out 15 Sherman tanks.

At the start of the offensive, the First and Third U.S. Armies were separated by about . American progress in the south was also restricted to about a kilometer or a little over half a mile per day.

On 7/8 January 1945, Hitler agreed to gradually withdraw forces from the tip of the Ardennes salient to east of Houffalize to avoid being cut off, but the Germans continued to resist in the salient and were only gradually pushed back otherwise. Considerable fighting went on for another 3 weeks, with Third Army and First Army linking up on 16 January with the capture of Houffalize. Sixth Panzer Army left the Ardennes and ceded its sector to the Fifth Panzer Army on 22 January, while St. Vith was recaptured by the Americans on 23 January, and the last German units participating in the offensive did not return to their start line until February.

Winston Churchill, addressing the House of Commons following the Battle of the Bulge said, &quot;This is undoubtedly the greatest American battle of the war and will, I believe, be regarded as an ever-famous American victory.&quot;

==Force comparisons by date==


==Strategy and leadership==

===Hitler&#x27;s chosen few===
The plan and timing for the Ardennes attack sprang from the mind of Adolf Hitler. He believed a critical fault line existed between the British and American military commands, and that a heavy blow on the Western Front would shatter this alliance. Planning for the &quot;Watch on the Rhine&quot; offensive emphasized secrecy and the commitment of overwhelming force. Due to the use of landline communications within Germany, motorized runners carrying orders, and draconian threats from Hitler, the timing and mass of the attack was not detected by Ultra codebreakers and achieved complete surprise.

After officers of the regular German Army attempted to assassinate him, Hitler had increasingly trusted only the Nazi Party SS and its armed branch, the Waffen-SS. He entrusted them with carrying out his decisive counterattack. But following the Allied Normandy invasion, the SS armored units had suffered significant leadership casualties. This included SS- (Brigadier general) Kurt Meyer, commander of the 12th SS Panzer (Armor) Division, captured by Belgian partisans on 6 September 1944. Thus Hitler gave responsibility for the key right flank of the assault to the best SS troops and a few units under the command of &quot;Sepp&quot; (Joseph) Dietrich, a fanatical political disciple of Hitler, and a loyal follower from the early days of the rise of National Socialism in Germany. The leadership composition of the Sixth Panzer Army had a distinctly political nature.

Despite their loyalty, none of the German field commanders entrusted with planning and executing the offensive believed it was possible to capture Antwerp. Even Dietrich believed the Ardennes was a poor area for armored warfare and that the inexperienced and badly equipped soldiers would clog the roads the tanks needed for their rapid advance. In fact, their horse-drawn artillery and rocket units became a significant obstacle to the armored units. Other than making futile objections to Hitler in private, Dietrich generally stayed out of planning the offensive. Model and Manteuffel, technical experts from the eastern front, told Hitler that a limited offensive with the goal of surrounding and crushing the American 1st Army would be the best goal their offensive could hope to achieve. Their ideas shared the same fate as Dietrich&#x27;s objections.

The German staff planning and organization of the attack was well done. Most of the units committed to the offensive reached their jump off points undetected. They were for the most part well organized and supplied for the attack, although they were counting on capturing American gasoline dumps to fuel their vehicles. As the battle ensued, on the northern shoulder of the offensive, Dietrich stopped the armored assault on the twin villages after two days and changed the axis of their advance southward through the hamlet of Domäne Bütgenbach. The headlong drive on Elsenborn Ridge lacked needed support from German units that had already bypassed the ridge. Dietrich&#x27;s decision unknowingly played into American hands, as Robertson had already decided to abandon the villages.

===Allied high-command controversy===

One of the fault lines between the British and American high commands was Eisenhower&#x27;s commitment to a broad front advance. This view was opposed by the British Chief of the Imperial General Staff, Field Marshal Alan Brooke, as well as Field Marshal Montgomery, who promoted a rapid advance on a narrow front under his command, with the other allied armies in reserve.

Eisenhower based his decision on various military and political realities. The Allied occupation zones in Germany had been agreed upon in February 1944, and a faster Allied advance in the autumn of 1944 would not have altered this. The Soviet Union would have also benefited from a rapid German collapse, and its participation in the war against Japan was greatly desired. There were reservations about whether the Allied logistical system possessed the required flexibility to support the narrow-front strategy, the reality of terrain and logistics argued strongly against it, and the consequences if the narrow front advance had failed would have been very severe.

Montgomery&#x27;s Chief of Staff, Major-General Francis de Guingand, stated in his post-war account that he had opposed Montgomery&#x27;s narrow front strategy on political and administrative grounds.

===Montgomery&#x27;s actions===
Montgomery differed from the U.S. command in how to respond to the German attack and his public statements to that effect caused tension in the American high command. Major-General Freddie de Guingand, Chief of Staff of Montgomery&#x27;s 21st Army Group, rose to the occasion, and personally smoothed over the disagreements on 30 December.

As the Ardennes crisis developed, the U.S. First Army (Hodges) and U.S. Ninth Army (Simpson) on the northern shoulder of the German penetration lost communications with adjacent armies, as well as with Bradley&#x27;s headquarters in Luxembourg City to the south of the &quot;bulge&quot;. Consequently, at 10:30 a.m. on 20 December, Eisenhower transferred the command of the U.S. First and Ninth Armies temporarily from Bradley to Montgomery. Command of the U.S. First Army reverted to the U.S. 12th Army Group on 17 January 1945, and command of the U.S. Ninth Army reverted to the U.S. 12th Army Group on 4 April 1945.

Montgomery wrote about the situation he found on 20 December:

Due to the news blackout imposed on the 16th, the change of leadership to Montgomery did not become public information until SHAEF announced that the change in command had &quot;absolutely nothing to do with failure on the part of the three American generals&quot;. The announcement resulted in headlines in British newspapers and &quot;Stars and Stripes&quot;, which for the first time mentioned British contributions to the fighting.

Montgomery requested permission from Churchill to give a press conference to explain the situation. Though some of his staff were concerned at how the press conference would affect Montgomery&#x27;s image, it was cleared by CIGS Alan Brooke, who was possibly the only person from whom Montgomery would accept advice.

On the same day as Hitler&#x27;s withdrawal order of 7 January, Montgomery held his press conference at Zonhoven. Montgomery started with giving credit to the &quot;courage and good fighting quality&quot; of the American troops, characterizing a typical American as a &quot;very brave fighting man who has that tenacity in battle which makes a great soldier&quot;, and went on to talk about the necessity of Allied teamwork, and praised Eisenhower, stating, &quot;Teamwork wins battles and battle victories win wars. On our team, the captain is General Ike.&quot;

Then Montgomery described the course of the battle for a half-hour. Coming to the end of his speech he said he had &quot;employed the whole available power of the British Group of Armies; this power was brought into play very gradually ... Finally it was put into battle with a bang ... you thus have the picture of British troops fighting on both sides of the Americans who have suffered a hard blow.&quot; He stated that he (i.e., the German) was &quot;headed off ... seen off ... and ... written off ... The battle has been the most interesting, I think possibly one of the most interesting and tricky battles I have ever handled.&quot;

Despite his positive remarks about American soldiers, the overall impression given by Montgomery, at least in the ears of the American military leadership, was that he had taken the lion&#x27;s share of credit for the success of the campaign and had been responsible for rescuing the besieged Americans.

His comments were interpreted as self-promoting, particularly his claim that when the situation &quot;began to deteriorate,&quot; Eisenhower had placed him in command in the north. Patton and Eisenhower both felt this was a misrepresentation of the relative share of the fighting played by the British and Americans in the Ardennes (for every British soldier there were thirty to forty Americans in the fight), and that it belittled the part played by Bradley, Patton and other American commanders. In the context of Patton&#x27;s and Montgomery&#x27;s well-known antipathy, Montgomery&#x27;s failure to mention the contribution of any American general besides Eisenhower was seen as insulting. Indeed, Bradley and his American commanders were already starting their counterattack by the time Montgomery was given command of 1st and 9th U.S. Armies.

Focusing exclusively on his own generalship, Montgomery continued to say he thought the counteroffensive had gone very well but did not explain the reason for his delayed attack on 3 January. He later attributed this to needing more time for preparation on the northern front. According to Churchill, the attack from the south under Patton was steady but slow and involved heavy losses, and Montgomery was trying to avoid this situation. Morelock states that Monty was preoccupied with being allowed to lead a &quot;single thrust offensive&quot; to Berlin as the overall commander of Allied ground forces, and that he accordingly treated the Ardennes counteroffensive &quot;as a sideshow, to be finished with the least possible effort and expenditure of resources.&quot;

Many American officers had already grown to dislike Montgomery, who was seen by them as an overly cautious commander, arrogant, and all too willing to say uncharitable things about the Americans. However, on 18 January 1945 Churchill stated to Parliament &quot;the United States troops have done almost all the fighting&quot;. He ended with &quot;Care must be taken in telling our proud tale not to claim for the British Army an undue share of what is undoubtedly the greatest American battle of the war and will, I believe, be regarded as an ever famous American victory.&quot;

Montgomery subsequently recognized his error and later wrote: &quot;Not only was it probably a mistake to have held this conference at all in the sensitive state of feeling at the time, but what I said was skillfully distorted by the enemy.&quot; BBC correspondent Chester Wilmot explained that &quot;my dispatch to the BBC about it was intercepted by the German wireless, re-written to give it an anti-American bias, and then broadcast by Arnhem Radio, which was then in Goebbels&#x27; hands. Monitored at Bradley&#x27;s HQ, this broadcast was mistaken for a BBC transmission and it was this twisted text that started the uproar.&quot;

Montgomery later said, &quot;Distorted or not, I think now that I should never have held that press conference. So great were the feelings against me on the part of the American generals that whatever I said was bound to be wrong. I should therefore have said nothing.&quot; Eisenhower commented in his own memoirs: &quot;I doubt if Montgomery ever came to realize how resentful some American commanders were. They believed he had belittled them—and they were not slow to voice reciprocal scorn and contempt.&quot;

Bradley and Patton both threatened to resign unless Montgomery&#x27;s command was changed. Eisenhower, encouraged by his British deputy Arthur Tedder, had decided to sack Montgomery. Intervention by Montgomery&#x27;s and Eisenhower&#x27;s Chiefs of Staff, Guingand, and Walter Smith, moved Eisenhower to reconsider and allowed Montgomery to apologize.

After the war Manteuffel, who commanded the 5th Panzer Army in the Ardennes, was imprisoned awaiting trial for war crimes. During this period he was interviewed by B. H. Liddell Hart, a British author who has since been accused of putting words in the mouths of German generals, and attempting to &quot;rewrite the historical record&quot;. After conducting several interviews via an interpreter, Liddell Hart in a subsequent book attributed to Manteuffel the following statement about Montgomery&#x27;s contribution to the battle in the Ardennes:

However, American historian Stephen Ambrose, writing in 1997, maintained that &quot;Putting Monty in command of the northern flank had no effect on the battle&quot;. Ambrose wrote that: &quot;Far from directing the victory, Montgomery had gotten in everyone&#x27;s way, and had botched the counter-attack.&quot; Bradley blamed Montgomery&#x27;s &quot;stagnating conservatism&quot; for his failure to counterattack when ordered to do so by Eisenhower. In contrast, historian Professor John Buckley, writing in 2013, noted how Montgomery &quot;must take considerable credit&quot; for stabilising the position, due to his &quot;efficient and disciplined system of controlling or gripping subordinates&quot;.

==Casualties==
===Allied===

The Battle of the Bulge was the bloodiest battle for U.S. forces during World War II. A preliminary Army report restricted to the First and Third U.S. Armies listed 75,482 casualties (8,407 killed, 46,170 wounded and 20,905 missing); British XXX Corps losses to 17 January 1945 were recorded as 1,408 (200 killed, 969 wounded, and 239 missing.) T.N. Dupuy, David Bongard, and Richard Anderson list battle casualties for XXX Corps combat units as 1,462, including 222 killed, 977 wounded, and 263 missing to 16 January 1945 inclusive. Casualties among American divisions (excluding attached elements, corps and army-level combat support, and rear-area personnel) totaled 62,439 from 16 December 1944 to 16 January 1945, inclusive: 6,238 killed, 32,712 wounded, and 23,399 missing. Historian Charles B. MacDonald lists 81,000 American casualties, 41,315 during the defensive phase and 39,672 during the drive to flatten the &quot;Bulge&quot; through 28 January.

An official report by the United States Department of the Army lists 105,102 casualties for the entire &quot;Ardennes-Alsace&quot; campaign, including 19,246 killed, 62,489 wounded, and 26,612 captured or missing; this number incorporates losses not just for the Battle of the Bulge but also all losses suffered during the period by units with the &quot;Ardennes-Alsace&quot; battle credit (the entirety of U.S. First, Third and Seventh Armies), which includes losses suffered during the German offensive in Alsace, Operation Nordwind as well as forces engaged in the Saar and Lorraine campaigns, and the Battle of Hürtgen Forest during that time period. For the period of December 1944 – January 1945 on the entire western front, Forrest Pogue gives a total of 28,178 U.S. military personnel captured, including shot down airmen.

===German===

The German High Command estimated that they lost between 81,834 and 98,024 men on the Western Front between 16 December 1944 and 25 January 1945; the accepted figure was 81,834, of which 12,652 were killed, 38,600 were wounded, and 30,582 were missing. Allied estimates on German casualties range from 81,000 to 103,900. Some authors have estimated German casualties as high as 125,000:
* T.N. Dupuy&#x27;s estimates based on fragmentary German records and oral testimony suggests casualties among divisions and brigades alone (excluding attached elements, corps and army-level combat support, and rear-area personnel) totaled 74,459 from 16 December 1944 to 16 January 1945, inclusive: 11,048 killed, 34,168 wounded, and 29,243 missing.
* German historian Hermann Jung lists 67,675 casualties from 16 December 1944 to late January 1945 for the three German armies that participated in the offensive.
* The German casualty reports for the involved armies count 63,222 losses from 10 December 1944 to 31 January 1945.
* The United States Army Center of Military History&#x27;s official numbers are 75,000 American casualties and 100,000 German casualties.

Christer Bergström lists between 527 and 554 losses to all causes among German tanks, tank destroyers, and assault guns during the campaign, of which 324 were lost in combat. Of the German write-offs, 16–20 were Tigers, 191–194 Panthers, 141–158 Panzer IVs, and 179–182 were tank destroyers and assault guns. Hermann Jung gave figures for 600 German tanks across the entire western front from 16 December 1944, to 1 February 1945. Other sources place German losses in the range of 600–800: Magna E. Bauer&#x27;s review of OKW records suggests 324 losses in December (77 Panzer IVs, 132 Panthers, 13 Tigers, and 102 assault guns) and even more in January. American losses over the same period were similarly heavy, totaling from 733 tanks and tank destroyers (exclusive of other types and losses suffered by British XXX Corps) to 800 in tanks alone.

==Result==
Although the Germans managed to begin their offensive with complete surprise and enjoyed some initial successes, they were not able to seize the initiative on the Western Front. While the German command did not reach its goals, the Ardennes operation inflicted heavy losses and set back the Allied invasion of Germany by several weeks. The High Command of the Allied forces had planned to resume the offensive by early January 1945, after the wet season rains and severe frosts, but those plans had to be postponed until 29 January 1945 in connection with the unexpected changes in the front.

The Allies pressed their advantage following the battle. By the beginning of February 1945, the lines were roughly where they had been in December 1944. In early February, the Allies launched an attack all along the Western front: in the north under Montgomery, they fought Operation Veritable (also known as the Battle of the Reichswald); east of Aachen they fought the second phase of the Battle of Hürtgen Forest; in the center, under Hodges; and in the south, under Patton.

The German losses in the battle were especially critical: their last reserves were now gone, the Luftwaffe had been shattered, and remaining forces throughout the West were being pushed back to defend the Siegfried Line.

In response to the early success of the offensive, on 6 January Churchill contacted Stalin to request that the Soviets put pressure on the Germans on the Eastern Front. On 12 January, the Soviets began the massive Vistula–Oder Offensive, originally planned for 20 January. It had been brought forward from 20 January to 12 January because meteorological reports warned of a thaw later in the month, and the tanks needed hard ground for the offensive (and the advance of the Red Army was assisted by two Panzer Armies (5th and 6th) being redeployed for the Ardennes attack).

Churchill was elated at Stalin&#x27;s offer of help, thanking Stalin for the thrilling news.

During World War II, most U.S. black soldiers still served only in maintenance or service positions, or in segregated units. Because of troop shortages during the Battle of the Bulge, Eisenhower decided to integrate the service for the first time. This was an important step toward a desegregated United States military. More than 2,000 black soldiers had volunteered to go to the front. A total of 708 black Americans were killed in combat during World War II.

The Germans officially referred to the offensive by the codename &#x27;Operation Watch on the Rhine&#x27;, while the Allies designated it the Ardennes Counteroffensive. The phrase &quot;Battle of the Bulge&quot; was coined by contemporary press to describe the bulge in German front lines on wartime news maps, and it became the most widely used name for the battle. The offensive was planned by the German forces with utmost secrecy, with minimal radio traffic and movements of troops and equipment under cover of darkness. Intercepted German communications indicating a substantial German offensive preparation were not acted upon by the Allies.

==Media attention==
The battle around Bastogne received a great deal of media attention because in early December 1944 it was a rest and recreation area for many war correspondents. The rapid advance by the German forces who surrounded the town, the spectacular resupply operations via parachute and glider, along with the fast action of General Patton&#x27;s Third U.S. Army, all were featured in newspaper articles and on radio and captured the public&#x27;s imagination; there were no correspondents in the area of Saint-Vith, Elsenborn, or Monschau-Höfen.

==Bletchley Park post-mortem==

===Missed indicators===
At Bletchley Park, F. L. Lucas and Peter Calvocoressi of Hut 3 were tasked by General Nye (as part of the enquiry set up by the Chiefs of Staff) with writing a report on the lessons to be learned from the handling of pre-battle Ultra. The report concluded that &quot;the costly reverse might have been avoided if Ultra had been more carefully considered&quot;. &quot;Ultra intelligence was plentiful and informative&quot; though &quot;not wholly free from ambiguity&quot;, &quot;but it was misread and misused&quot;. Lucas and Calvocoressi noted that &quot;intelligence staffs had been too apt to assume that Ultra would tell them everything&quot;. Among the signs misread were the formation of the new 6th Panzer Army in the build-up area (west bank of the Rhine about Cologne); the new &#x27;Star&#x27; (signals control-network) noted by the &#x27;Fusion Room&#x27; traffic-analysts, linking &quot;all the armoured divisions [assembling in the build-up area], including some transferred from the Russian front&quot;; the daily aerial reconnaissance of the lightly defended target area by new Arado Ar 234 jets &quot;as a matter of greatest urgency&quot;; the marked increase in railway traffic in the build-up area; the movement of 1,000 trucks from the Italian front to the build-up area; disproportionate anxiety about tiny hitches in troop movements, suggesting a tight timetable; the quadrupling of Luftwaffe fighter forces in the West; and decrypts of Japanese diplomatic signals from Berlin to Tokyo, mentioning &quot;the coming offensive&quot;.

===SHAEF failures===
For its part, Hut 3 had grown &quot;shy of going beyond its job of amending and explaining German messages. Drawing broad conclusions was for the intelligence staff at SHAEF, who had information from all sources,&quot; including aerial reconnaissance. Lucas and Calvocoressi added that &quot;it would be interesting to know how much reconnaissance was flown over the Eiffel sector on the U.S. First Army Front&quot;. E. J. N. Rose, head Air Adviser in Hut 3, read the paper at the time and described it in 1998 as &quot;an extremely good report&quot; that &quot;showed the failure of intelligence at SHAEF and at the Air Ministry&quot;. Lucas and Calvocoressi &quot;expected heads to roll at Eisenhower&#x27;s HQ, but they did no more than wobble&quot;.

Five copies of a report by the Chief of the Secret Intelligence Service&quot;Indications of the German Offensive of December 1944, derived from ULTRA material, submitted to DMI&quot;were issued on 28 December 1944. Copy No. 2 is held by the UK National Archives as file HW 13/45. It sets out the various indications of an impending offensive that were received, then offers conclusions about the wisdom conferred by hindsight; the dangers of becoming wedded to a fixed view of the enemy&#x27;s likely intentions; over-reliance on &quot;Source&quot; (i.e. ULTRA); and improvements in German security. It also stresses the role played by poor Allied security: &quot;The Germans have this time prevented us from knowing enough about them; but we have not prevented them knowing far too much about us&quot;.

==Battle credit==
After the war ended, the U.S. Army issued battle credit in the form of the Ardennes-Alsace campaign citation to units and individuals that took part in operations in northwest Europe. The citation covered troops in the Ardennes sector where the main battle took place, as well as units further south in the Alsace sector, including those in the northern Alsace who filled in the vacuum created by the U.S. Third Army racing north, engaged in the concurrent Operation Nordwind diversion in central and southern Alsace launched to weaken Allied response in the Ardennes, and provided reinforcements to units fighting in the Ardennes.

==See also==
* Battle of Garfagnana
* German occupation of Luxembourg during World War II
* Liberation of France
* Operation Spring Awakening

==References==
===Notes===
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
===Further reading===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==

* Battle of the Bulge – Official webpage of the United States Army.
* The Battle of the Bulge: Battlebook U.S. Army Europe
* Battle of the Bulge Museums – a list of Battle of the Bulge museums near the previous battlefield.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q151018" start="4" end="23" title="Battle of the Bulge" label="Battle of the Bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q151018" start="43" end="61" title="Battle of the Bulge" label="Ardennes Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001676" start="89" end="98" title="Offensive (military)" label="offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q831663" start="99" end="107" title="Military campaign" label="campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q216184" start="115" end="128" title="Western Front (World War II)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="140" end="156" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q151985" start="258" end="266" title="Ardennes" label="Ardennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="282" end="289" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="294" end="304" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q662529" start="367" end="382" title="port of Antwerp" label="port of Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569578" start="438" end="446" title="Encirclement" label="encircle"/>
<link wikidata="Q625298" start="534" end="546" title="peace treaty" label="peace treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="554" end="565" title="Axis powers" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306321" start="805" end="826" title="aerial reconnaissance" label="aerial reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535104" start="1298" end="1313" title="Battle of Elsenborn Ridge" label="Elsenborn Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q34021" start="1340" end="1348" title="Bastogne" label="Bastogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q108247" start="1698" end="1704" title="Dinant" label="Dinant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633981" start="1727" end="1752" title="2nd Armored Division (United States)" label="U.S. 2nd Armored Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q658035" start="1869" end="1880" title="supply line" label="supply line"/>
<link wikidata="Q130368" start="2351" end="2376" title="armored fighting vehicles" label="armored fighting vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q210392" start="2479" end="2485" title="Killed in action" label="killed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344557" start="2487" end="2494" title="Missing in action" label="missing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603108" start="2496" end="2513" title="wounded in action" label="wounded in action"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="2518" end="2526" title="Prisoner of war" label="captured"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="2666" end="2675" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q835881" start="2729" end="2764" title="Operation Bodenplatte" label="concluding stages of the engagement"/>
<link wikidata="Q154504" start="2930" end="2944" title="Siegfried Line" label="Siegfried Line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3220" end="3264" title="List of battles with most United States military fatalities#Campaigns" label="third-deadliest campaign in American history"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="3427" end="3438" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q700674" start="3514" end="3536" title="Operation Cobra" label="breakout from Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="3569" end="3575" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q221111" start="3576" end="3603" title="Operation Dragoon" label="landings in southern France"/>
<link wikidata="Q163059" start="3744" end="3762" title="military logistics" label="military logistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608441" start="3945" end="3952" title="General (United States)" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="3953" end="3973" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q647033" start="3979" end="4003" title="Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force" label="Supreme Allied Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q216184" start="4011" end="4024" title="Western Front (World War II)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q151985" start="4060" end="4068" title="Ardennes" label="Ardennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q163646" start="4109" end="4124" title="U.S. First Army" label="U.S. First Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="4399" end="4408" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q11229656" start="4719" end="4739" title="Landing Ship, Tank" label="direct landing ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q160199" start="4848" end="4857" title="Cherbourg-Octeville" label="Cherbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q463529" start="4887" end="4905" title="Cotentin Peninsula" label="Cotentin peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q662529" start="5121" end="5136" title="port of Antwerp" label="port of Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q37620" start="5241" end="5248" title="Schelde" label="Schelde"/>
<link wikidata="Q189929" start="5334" end="5344" title="naval mine" label="naval mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703373" start="5415" end="5428" title="Field marshal (United Kingdom)" label="Field Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q152025" start="5429" end="5447" title="Bernard Montgomery" label="Bernard Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q214026" start="5481" end="5496" title="21st Army Group" label="21st Army Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046665" start="5525" end="5543" title="Lieutenant general (United States)" label="Lieutenant General"/>
<link wikidata="Q207955" start="5544" end="5556" title="Omar Bradley" label="Omar Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703383" start="5573" end="5593" title="Twelfth United States Army Group" label="U.S. 12th Army Group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5661" end="5680" title="Channel Ports#World War II" label="remained in control"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="5711" end="5726" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485883" start="5756" end="5784" title="Siege of Dunkirk (1944–45)" label="Dunkirk remained under siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834891" start="5852" end="5885" title="Transport Plan" label="destroy the French railway system"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="5895" end="5900" title="D-Day" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067470" start="6130" end="6146" title="Red Ball Express" label="Red Ball Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q151993" start="6819" end="6828" title="Ruhr" label="Ruhr area"/>
<link wikidata="Q70527" start="6930" end="6948" title="Gerd von Rundstedt" label="Gerd von Rundstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q189930" start="7066" end="7089" title="Operation Market Garden" label="Operation Market Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703916" start="7240" end="7259" title="First Canadian Army" label="First Canadian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q697022" start="7271" end="7292" title="Battle of the Scheldt" label="Battle of the Scheldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935372" start="7580" end="7597" title="Lorraine Campaign" label="Lorraine Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q327052" start="7603" end="7619" title="Battle of Aachen" label="Battle of Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q162287" start="7624" end="7654" title="Battle of Hürtgen Forest" label="fighting in the Hürtgen Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q885019" start="7728" end="7758" title="Operation Queen" label="slowly pushing towards Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="8047" end="8059" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q70536" start="8250" end="8262" title="Walter Model" label="Walter Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q157572" start="8270" end="8282" title="Army Group B" label="Army Group B"/>
<link wikidata="Q41986" start="8387" end="8392" title="Meuse" label="Meuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992" start="8401" end="8406" title="Liège" label="Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="8784" end="8797" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q151052" start="8817" end="8836" title="Operation Bagration" label="Operation Bagration"/>
<link wikidata="Q158260" start="8892" end="8909" title="Army Group Center" label="Army Group Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="9078" end="9087" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065534" start="9343" end="9362" title="Petrochemical industry in Romania" label="Romanian oil fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q311765" start="9505" end="9529" title="Second Jassy–Kishinev Offensive" label="Jassy-Kishinev Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q825712" start="10045" end="10050" title="Ultra (cryptography)" label="Ultra"/>
<link wikidata="Q206592" start="11078" end="11090" title="jet aircraft" label="jet aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q428661" start="11096" end="11102" title="U-boat" label="U-boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205451" start="11115" end="11131" title="super-heavy tank" label="super-heavy tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q56506" start="11410" end="11420" title="Blitzkrieg" label="Blitzkrieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="11525" end="11541" title="Battle of France" label="Battle of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q159065" start="11857" end="11881" title="Vistula–Oder offensive" label="Russian winter offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q41986" start="12637" end="12648" title="Meuse River" label="Meuse River"/>
<link wikidata="Q655075" start="13281" end="13305" title="OB West" label="Army Command in the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="15164" end="15172" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q246340" start="15584" end="15599" title="6th Panzer Army" label="6th Panzer Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q57175" start="15617" end="15630" title="Sepp Dietrich" label="Sepp Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q153626" start="15682" end="15691" title="Waffen-SS" label="Waffen-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q156970" start="15697" end="15749" title="1st SS Panzer Division Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler" label="1st SS Panzer Division Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q158277" start="15773" end="15809" title="12th SS Panzer Division Hitlerjugend" label="12th SS Panzer Division Hitlerjugend"/>
<link wikidata="Q200783" start="16053" end="16061" title="Monschau" label="Monschau"/>
<link wikidata="Q240048" start="16068" end="16085" title="5th Panzer Army" label="Fifth Panzer Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q57211" start="16100" end="16120" title="Hasso von Manteuffel" label="Hasso von Manteuffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q671885" start="16201" end="16213" title="7th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="Seventh Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q60898" start="16229" end="16248" title="Erich Brandenberger" label="Erich Brandenberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q204317" start="16322" end="16332" title="Echternach" label="Echternach"/>
<link wikidata="Q191052" start="16594" end="16608" title="15th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="Fifteenth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q61403" start="16624" end="16647" title="Gustav-Adolf von Zangen" label="Gustav-Adolf von Zangen"/>
<link wikidata="Q898788" start="17103" end="17118" title="air superiority" label="air superiority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779157" start="17634" end="17640" title="panzer division" label="panzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068457" start="17667" end="17684" title="armored spearhead" label="armored spearhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q697829" start="18764" end="18784" title="liberation of France" label="liberation of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q157146" start="18815" end="18832" title="French Resistance" label="French Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q150758" start="19051" end="19065" title="Enigma machine" label="Enigma machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q155921" start="19151" end="19165" title="Bletchley Park" label="Bletchley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q66196" start="19278" end="19289" title="teleprinter" label="teleprinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q374165" start="19305" end="19318" title="radio silence" label="radio silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q105570" start="19434" end="19446" title="20 July plot" label="20 July plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718" start="20450" end="20460" title="Düsseldorf" label="Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="20573" end="20577" title="flak" label="flak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7106081" start="20841" end="20851" title="Oscar Koch" label="Oscar Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390725" start="20945" end="20959" title="Kenneth Strong" label="Kenneth Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q333365" start="21156" end="21168" title="Walter Bedell Smith" label="Bedell Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333815" start="21802" end="21818" title="economy of force" label="economy of force"/>
<link wikidata="Q277245" start="22024" end="22028" title="99th Infantry Division (United States)" label="99th"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662633" start="22033" end="22073" title="106th Infantry Division (United States)" label="106th &amp;quot;Golden Lions&amp;quot; Divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640018" start="22142" end="22164" title="28th Infantry Division (United States)" label="28th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060062" start="22178" end="22196" title="special operations" label="special operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q89383" start="22260" end="22273" title="Otto Skorzeny" label="Otto Skorzeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q698778" start="22302" end="22313" title="Gran Sasso raid" label="had rescued"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="22342" end="22358" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q167002" start="22424" end="22439" title="Operation Greif" label="Operation Greif"/>
<link wikidata="Q590167" start="22517" end="22525" title="dog tag (identifier)" label="dog tags"/>
<link wikidata="Q64440" start="22788" end="22819" title="Friedrich August von der Heydte" label="Friedrich August von der Heydte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533594" start="22864" end="22881" title="Operation Stösser" label="Operation Stösser"/>
<link wikidata="Q159838" start="22981" end="22988" title="Malmedy" label="Malmedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q159065" start="23073" end="23098" title="Vistula–Oder Offensive" label="upcoming Soviet offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="23245" end="23251" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q105570" start="23396" end="23438" title="20 July Plot" label="20 July 1944 attempt to assassinate Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q103801" start="23593" end="23605" title="East Prussia" label="East Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874" start="23779" end="23786" title="Giessen" label="Giessen"/>
<link wikidata="Q571510" start="23830" end="23840" title="Adlerhorst" label="Adlerhorst"/>
<link wikidata="Q16026" start="24200" end="24207" title="Limburg an der Lahn" label="Limburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q57123" start="24519" end="24530" title="Alfred Jodl" label="Alfred Jodl"/>
<link wikidata="Q76361" start="24537" end="24551" title="Wilhelm Keitel" label="Wilhelm Keitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q57793" start="24558" end="24569" title="Günther Blumentritt" label="Blumentritt"/>
<link wikidata="Q64440" start="24668" end="24692" title="Friedrich August Freiherr von der Heydte" label="Friedrich von der Heydte"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25323" end="25363" title="Battle of Elsenborn Ridge#Battle of Heartbreak Crossroads" label="recent attack in the Wahlerscheid sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q174640" start="25813" end="25823" title="V-2 rocket" label="V-2 rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q15210656" start="25825" end="25859" title="Cinema Rex bombing" label="destroyed the &amp;quot;Cine Rex&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="25870" end="25877" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q34021" start="26039" end="26047" title="Bastogne" label="Bastogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q152748" start="26052" end="26060" title="St. Vith" label="St. Vith"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="26176" end="26186" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970459" start="26384" end="26403" title="102nd Cavalry Regiment" label="102nd Cavalry Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646583" start="26418" end="26439" title="9th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="9th Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q210607" start="26442" end="26463" title="2nd Infantry Division (United States)" label="2nd Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057570" start="26466" end="26489" title="395th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="395th Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q277245" start="26492" end="26514" title="99th Infantry Division (United States)" label="99th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631646" start="26517" end="26539" title="23rd Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="23rd Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q210607" start="26542" end="26563" title="2nd Infantry Division (United States)" label="2nd Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636019" start="26566" end="26588" title="38th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="38th Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q210607" start="26591" end="26612" title="2nd Infantry Division (United States)" label="2nd Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q277245" start="26641" end="26663" title="99th Infantry Division (United States)" label="99th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q275886" start="26685" end="26705" title="9th Armored Division (United States)" label="9th Armored Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q277245" start="26734" end="26756" title="99th Infantry Division (United States)" label="99th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4550002" start="26759" end="26777" title="14th Cavalry Regiment (United States)" label="14th Cavalry Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q246340" start="26808" end="26825" title="6th Panzer Army" label="Sixth Panzer Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q225484" start="26867" end="26896" title="326th Infantry Division (Wehrmacht)" label="326th Volksgrenadier Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q700270" start="26900" end="26917" title="I SS Panzer Corps" label="I SS Panzer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q797691" start="26930" end="26959" title="277th Infantry Division (Wehrmacht)" label="277th Volksgrenadier Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q158277" start="26964" end="26987" title="12th SS Panzer Division Hitlerjugend" label="12th SS Panzer Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q171780" start="26992" end="27020" title="12th Infantry Division (Wehrmacht)" label="12th Volksgrenadier Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q156970" start="27025" end="27047" title="1st SS Panzer Division Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler" label="1st SS Panzer Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662875" start="27095" end="27123" title="3rd Parachute Division (Germany)" label="3rd Fallschirmjäger Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q246335" start="27128" end="27148" title="Panzer Brigade 150" label="150th Panzer Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q896245" start="27240" end="27252" title="Schnee Eifel" label="Schnee Eifel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662633" start="27283" end="27306" title="106th Infantry Division (United States)" label="106th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662633" start="27336" end="27359" title="106th Infantry Division (United States)" label="106th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662633" start="27430" end="27453" title="106th Infantry Division (United States)" label="106th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547386" start="27456" end="27479" title="112th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="112th Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640018" start="27482" end="27504" title="28th Infantry Division (United States)" label="28th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q275886" start="27526" end="27546" title="9th Armored Division (United States)" label="9th Armored Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640018" start="27575" end="27597" title="28th Infantry Division (United States)" label="28th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q240048" start="27616" end="27633" title="5th Panzer Army" label="Fifth Panzer Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029286" start="27677" end="27705" title="18th Volksgrenadier Division (Wehrmacht)" label="18th Volksgrenadier Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641905" start="27710" end="27738" title="62nd Volksgrenadier Division (Wehrmacht)" label="62nd Volksgrenadier Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q170787" start="27774" end="27795" title="116th Panzer Division (Wehrmacht)" label="116th Panzer Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817514" start="27800" end="27829" title="560th Volksgrenadier Division (Wehrmacht)" label="560th Volksgrenadier Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q210387" start="27867" end="27886" title="2nd Panzer Division (Wehrmacht)" label="2nd Panzer Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q218785" start="27891" end="27919" title="26th Volksgrenadier Division (Wehrmacht)" label="26th Volksgrenadier Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q233763" start="27924" end="27956" title="Panzer Lehr Division" label="&amp;quot;Panzer Lehr&amp;quot; Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640018" start="28040" end="28062" title="28th Infantry Division (United States)" label="28th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q275886" start="28084" end="28104" title="9th Armored Division (United States)" label="9th Armored Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548846" start="28107" end="28129" title="12th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="12th Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q231293" start="28132" end="28153" title="4th Infantry Division (United States)" label="4th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645383" start="28156" end="28177" title="8th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="8th Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q231293" start="28180" end="28201" title="4th Infantry Division (United States)" label="4th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q671885" start="28220" end="28232" title="7th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="Seventh Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q209957" start="28277" end="28305" title="5th Parachute Division (Germany)" label="5th Fallschirmjäger Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q390997" start="28310" end="28339" title="352nd Volksgrenadier Division (Germany)" label="352nd Volksgrenadier Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632529" start="28366" end="28395" title="276th Volksgrenadier Division (Wehrmacht)" label="276th Volksgrenadier Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q213529" start="28400" end="28429" title="212th Volksgrenadier Division (Wehrmacht)" label="212th Volksgrenadier Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q708181" start="28478" end="28495" title="Siege of Bastogne" label="Siege of Bastogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535104" start="28590" end="28605" title="Battle of Elsenborn Ridge" label="Elsenborn Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q152737" start="28975" end="28993" title="Büllingen" label="Krinkelt-Rocherath"/>
<link wikidata="Q161102" start="29373" end="29392" title="Obersturmbannführer" label="Obersturmbannführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q57199" start="29399" end="29413" title="Joachim Peiper" label="Joachim Peiper"/>
<link wikidata="Q151950" start="29555" end="29563" title="Tiger II" label="Tiger II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636277" start="30090" end="30101" title="Losheim Gap" label="Losheim Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871535" start="30253" end="30262" title="Battle of Lanzerath Ridge" label="Lanzerath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662875" start="30344" end="30385" title="3rd Parachute Division (Germany)" label="3rd &amp;quot;Fallschirmjaeger&amp;quot; Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q5974529" start="30448" end="30487" title="ISTAR" label="Intelligence and Reconnaissance Platoon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30497" end="30519" title="99th Infantry Division (United States)#Most decorated platoon of World War II" label="99th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333496" start="30843" end="30860" title="Hosingen" label="Bockholtz Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q152737" start="30953" end="30971" title="Büllingen" label="Rocherath-Krinkelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535104" start="31019" end="31034" title="Battle of Elsenborn Ridge" label="Elsenborn Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156457" start="32082" end="32089" title="Baugnez" label="Baugnez"/>
<link wikidata="Q159961" start="32157" end="32163" title="Waimes" label="Waimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q22115553" start="32340" end="32383" title="285th Field Artillery Observation Battalion" label="285th Field Artillery Observation Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009736" start="32385" end="32410" title="7th Armored Division (United States)" label="U.S. 7th Armored Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q107630174" start="32741" end="32756" title="Werner Pötschke" label="Werner Pötschke"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="32989" end="32993" title="Prisoner of War" label="POWs"/>
<link wikidata="Q896206" start="33239" end="33261" title="Malmedy massacre trial" label="Malmedy massacre trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057569" start="33541" end="33564" title="394th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="394th Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q797691" start="34134" end="34163" title="277th Volksgrenadier Division (Wehrmacht)" label="277th Volksgrenadier Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q210607" start="34235" end="34257" title="2nd Infantry Division (United States)" label="2nd Infantry Divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q159868" start="34531" end="34537" title="Wereth" label="Wereth"/>
<link wikidata="Q152748" start="34575" end="34585" title="Saint-Vith" label="Saint-Vith"/>
<link wikidata="Q156970" start="34699" end="34721" title="1st SS Panzer Division" label="1st SS Panzer Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q5621167" start="34735" end="34742" title="Gustav Knittel" label="Knittel"/>
<link wikidata="Q468920" start="35211" end="35219" title="Stavelot" label="Stavelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q152356" start="35533" end="35538" title="Eifel" label="Eifel"/>
<link wikidata="Q711183" start="36201" end="36212" title="Trois-Ponts" label="Trois-Ponts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341092" start="36390" end="36399" title="La Gleize" label="La Gleize"/>
<link wikidata="Q711046" start="36902" end="36910" title="Stoumont" label="Stoumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q39865" start="37022" end="37025" title="Spa, Belgium" label="Spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q60723" start="37137" end="37143" title="Wilhelm Mohnke" label="Mohnke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358" start="38448" end="38470" title="82nd Airborne Division" label="82nd Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q355040" start="38487" end="38498" title="James M. Gavin" label="James Gavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q66693" start="39027" end="39041" title="Hermann Priess" label="Hermann Priess"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547719" start="39228" end="39251" title="119th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="119th Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q96743099" start="39475" end="39488" title="Hal D. McCown" label="Hal D. McCown"/>
<link wikidata="Q538633" start="40971" end="40992" title="John S. D. Eisenhower" label="John S. D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063057" start="41516" end="41523" title="V Corps (United States)" label="V Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q163646" start="41531" end="41546" title="First U.S. Army" label="First U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q599193" start="41716" end="41725" title="High Fens" label="High Fens"/>
<link wikidata="Q321168" start="41767" end="41781" title="Baraque Michel" label="Baraque Michel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756713" start="41814" end="41820" title="Oberst" label="Oberst"/>
<link wikidata="Q153316" start="41905" end="41920" title="Battle of Crete" label="Battle of Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655289" start="42260" end="42278" title="2nd Parachute Corps (Germany)" label="II Parachute Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q151989" start="42416" end="42438" title="6th Parachute Division (Germany)" label="6th Parachute Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887111" start="42514" end="42527" title="unit cohesion" label="unit cohesion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5091523" start="43215" end="43223" title="Chenogne" label="Chenogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q146889" start="43738" end="43753" title="pincer movement" label="pincer movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q275886" start="44550" end="44570" title="9th Armored Division (United States)" label="9th Armored Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q74078599" start="44700" end="44713" title="Alan W. Jones" label="Alan W. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q552315" start="45160" end="45170" title="Salm River" label="Salm River"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="45603" end="45617" title="United States Army Air Force" label="Army Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632917" start="45633" end="45662" title="29th Armoured Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="British 29th Armoured Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280081" start="45666" end="45696" title="11th Armoured Division (United Kingdom)" label="British 11th Armoured Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487699" start="45802" end="45819" title="XXX Corps (United Kingdom)" label="British XXX Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438997" start="45923" end="45938" title="51st (Highland) Division" label="51st (Highland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345596" start="45943" end="45964" title="53rd (Welsh) Infantry Division" label="53rd (Welsh) Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q245557" start="45980" end="46009" title="6th Airborne Division (United Kingdom)" label="British 6th Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816219" start="46024" end="46046" title="33rd Armoured Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="33rd Armoured Brigades"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057551" start="46056" end="46073" title="34th Armoured Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="34th Tank Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q160698" start="46439" end="46451" title="Ourthe River" label="Ourthe River"/>
<link wikidata="Q269908" start="46630" end="46647" title="Marche-en-Famenne" label="Marche-en-Famenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818506" start="46746" end="46759" title="84th Division (United States)" label="84th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q64291" start="46766" end="46778" title="Heinrich Freiherr von Lüttwitz" label="von Lüttwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580063" start="46797" end="46817" title="XLVII Panzer Corps (Germany)" label="XXXXVII Panzer-Korps"/>
<link wikidata="Q275718" start="47101" end="47120" title="9th Panzer Division" label="9th Panzer Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373653" start="47501" end="47507" title="Celles, Houyet" label="Celles"/>
<link wikidata="Q130223" start="48116" end="48123" title="Griffin" label="Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q617638" start="48855" end="48867" title="Military Police Corps (United States)" label="American MPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11934" start="48977" end="48989" title="Mickey Mouse" label="Mickey Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q28515" start="49187" end="49198" title="Springfield, Illinois" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="49217" end="49225" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="49305" end="49312" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q189656" start="49503" end="49517" title="disinformation" label="disinformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q673063" start="50201" end="50212" title="ruse of war" label="ruse of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q28737" start="50395" end="50412" title="military tribunal" label="military tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q565682" start="50428" end="50441" title="Dachau Trials" label="Dachau Trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833880" start="50470" end="50481" title="laws of war" label="laws of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q318762" start="50729" end="50738" title="River Our" label="River Our"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547386" start="50970" end="50993" title="112th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="112th Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968687" start="51169" end="51174" title="Ouren" label="Ouren"/>
<link wikidata="Q165256" start="51933" end="51956" title="101st Airborne Division" label="101st Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009717" start="51998" end="52020" title="10th Armored Division (United States)" label="10th Armored Divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923739" start="53259" end="53274" title="U.S. VIII Corps" label="U.S. VIII Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q209957" start="53339" end="53361" title="5th Parachute Division (Germany)" label="5th Parachute Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q154748" start="54067" end="54073" title="Verdun-sur-Meuse" label="Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923739" start="54352" end="54362" title="VIII Corps (United States)" label="VIII Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q210387" start="54479" end="54498" title="2nd Panzer Division" label="2nd Panzer Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q233763" start="54503" end="54523" title="Panzer-Lehr-Division" label="Panzer-Lehr-Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q218785" start="54584" end="54612" title="26th Infantry Division (Wehrmacht)" label="26th Volksgrenadier Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703383" start="56352" end="56367" title="12th Army Group" label="12th Army Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q214026" start="56408" end="56423" title="British 21st Army Group" label="21st Army Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646084" start="56554" end="56579" title="969th Artillery Battalion (United States)" label="969th Artillery Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q573609" start="57103" end="57120" title="Anthony McAuliffe" label="Anthony McAuliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138194" start="57374" end="57387" title="Harry Kinnard" label="Harry Kinnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q13600072" start="57981" end="58010" title="15th Panzergrenadier Division" label="15th Panzergrenadier Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q207089" start="58875" end="58891" title="P-47 Thunderbolt" label="P-47 Thunderbolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q601924" start="59112" end="59127" title="military glider" label="military glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633981" start="59969" end="59989" title="2nd Armored Division (United States)" label="2nd Armored Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639231" start="60103" end="60120" title="4th Cavalry Regiment (United States)" label="4th Cavalry Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635874" start="60837" end="60867" title="U.S. 37th Armor Regiment" label="Company D, 37th Tank Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639180" start="60875" end="60895" title="U.S. 4th Armored Division" label="4th Armored Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="61193" end="61206" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q153348" start="61466" end="61481" title="V-1 flying bomb" label="V-1 flying bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q333133" start="61508" end="61522" title="proximity fuse" label="proximity fuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303061" start="61544" end="61557" title="friendly fire" label="friendly fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075444" start="61709" end="61713" title="Zutendaal Air Base" label="Y-29"/>
<link wikidata="Q316999" start="61945" end="61957" title="Army Group G" label="Army Group G"/>
<link wikidata="Q694368" start="61965" end="61987" title="Army Group Oberrhein (Germany)" label="Army Group Upper Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q327044" start="62105" end="62125" title="Operation Nordwind" label="Operation North Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961214" start="62471" end="62479" title="VI Corps (United States)" label="VI Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142" start="62511" end="62517" title="Alsace" label="Alsace"/>
<link wikidata="Q650274" start="63478" end="63488" title="Houffalize" label="Houffalize"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="65819" end="65836" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q57220" start="67124" end="67134" title="Kurt Meyer" label="Kurt Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="67501" end="67519" title="National Socialism" label="National Socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q335889" start="69521" end="69532" title="Alan Brooke" label="Alan Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415901" start="69758" end="69781" title="Allied-occupied Germany" label="Allied occupation zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3661735" start="70762" end="70781" title="Freddie de Guingand" label="Freddie de Guingand"/>
<link wikidata="Q44400" start="70977" end="70983" title="Courtney Hodges" label="Hodges"/>
<link wikidata="Q924898" start="71006" end="71013" title="William Hood Simpson" label="Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568142" start="72266" end="72270" title="Chief of the Imperial General Staff" label="CIGS"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="76321" end="76324" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093771" start="76339" end="76353" title="Chester Wilmot" label="Chester Wilmot"/>
<link wikidata="Q41749" start="76546" end="76554" title="Goebbels" label="Goebbels"/>
<link wikidata="Q334980" start="77364" end="77377" title="Arthur Tedder" label="Arthur Tedder"/>
<link wikidata="Q112119463" start="77467" end="77482" title="Chief of Staff" label="Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q299431" start="77745" end="77763" title="B. H. Liddell Hart" label="B. H. Liddell Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q443953" start="78157" end="78172" title="Stephen E. Ambrose" label="Stephen Ambrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328562" start="79851" end="79887" title="United States Department of the Army" label="United States Department of the Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935372" start="80402" end="80419" title="Lorraine campaign" label="Lorraine campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889463" start="81694" end="81739" title="United States Army Center of Military History" label="United States Army Center of Military History"/>
<link wikidata="Q708235" start="83556" end="83575" title="Operation Veritable" label="Operation Veritable"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="83649" end="83697" title="Battle of Hürtgen Forest#Second phase" label="the second phase of the Battle of Hürtgen Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q154504" start="83966" end="83980" title="Siegfried Line" label="Siegfried Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030752" start="85376" end="85381" title="Salient (military)" label="bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q164236" start="85926" end="85943" title="war correspondent" label="war correspondent"/>
<link wikidata="Q714298" start="86282" end="86292" title="Battle of St. Vith" label="Saint-Vith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423943" start="86400" end="86411" title="F. L. Lucas" label="F. L. Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364666" start="86416" end="86434" title="Peter Calvocoressi" label="Peter Calvocoressi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845786" start="86438" end="86443" title="Hut 3" label="Hut 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q4312366" start="86459" end="86470" title="Archibald Nye" label="General Nye"/>
<link wikidata="Q157335" start="87475" end="87487" title="Arado Ar 234" label="Arado Ar 234"/>
<link wikidata="Q184560" start="88756" end="88783" title="Secret Intelligence Service" label="Secret Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q392703" start="88953" end="88973" title="The National Archives (United Kingdom)" label="UK National Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="89560" end="89569" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884025" start="90183" end="90203" title="Battle of Garfagnana" label="Battle of Garfagnana"/>
<link wikidata="Q708193" start="90206" end="90257" title="German occupation of Luxembourg during World War II" label="German occupation of Luxembourg during World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q697829" start="90260" end="90280" title="Liberation of France" label="Liberation of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q155995" start="90283" end="90309" title="Operation Spring Awakening" label="Operation Spring Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q181197" start="90707" end="90723" title="United States Army Europe" label="U.S. Army Europe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58001" wikidata="Q7696763" url="?curid=58001" title="Teleportation (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Teleportation]] is the fictional or imagined process by which matter is instantaneously transferred from one place to another.

Teleportation may also refer to:

*Quantum teleportation, a method of transmitting quantum data
*Teleportation (virtualization), a method of moving a running virtual machine between two physical computers

==See also==
*Teleport (disambiguation)
*Teleporter (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7696763" start="0" end="17" title="Teleportation (disambiguation)" label="[[Teleportation]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696763" start="130" end="143" title="Teleportation (disambiguation)" label="Teleportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135332" start="165" end="186" title="Quantum teleportation" label="Quantum teleportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142584" start="227" end="257" title="Teleportation (virtualization)" label="Teleportation (virtualization)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696760" start="350" end="375" title="Teleport (disambiguation)" label="Teleport (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q123425641" start="377" end="404" title="Teleporter (disambiguation)" label="Teleporter (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="58003" wikidata="Q144682" url="?curid=58003" title="Gentiana">
<text>Gentiana () is a genus of flowering plants belonging to the gentian family (Gentianaceae), the tribe Gentianeae, and the monophyletic subtribe Gentianinae. With over 300 species, it is considered a large genus. Gentians are notable for their mostly large trumpet-shaped flowers, which are often of an intense blue hue.

The genus name is a tribute to Gentius, an Illyrian king who may have discovered tonic properties in gentians.

==Habitat==

This is a cosmopolitan genus, occurring in alpine habitats in temperate regions of Asia, Europe and the Americas. Some species also occur in northwestern Africa, eastern Australia, and New Zealand. They are annual, biennial, and perennial plants. Some are evergreen, others are not.

Many gentians are difficult to grow outside their wild habitat, but several species are available in cultivation. Gentians are fully hardy and can grow in full sun or partial shade. They grow in well-drained, neutral-to-acid soils rich in humus. They are popular in rock gardens.

==Uses==
Many beverages are made with gentian root. &quot;Gentiana lutea&quot; is used to produce &quot;gentian&quot;, a distilled beverage produced in the Alps and in the Auvergne. Some species are harvested for the manufacture of apéritifs, liqueurs, and tonics.

Gentian root is a common beverage flavouring for bitters. The soft drink Moxie contains gentian root. The French apéritif Suze is made with gentian. Americano apéritifs contain gentian root for bitter flavoring. It is an ingredient in the Italian liqueur Aperol. It is also used as the main flavor in the German after-dinner digestif called Underberg, and the main ingredient in Angostura bitters and Peychaud&#x27;s Bitters.

The principal bitter component of gentian root is gentiopicrin (also called gentiopicroside), a glycoside. A 2007 paper by a Japanese group identified 23 compounds in fresh gentian root. Gentiopicrin was absent from the fresh root, so it possibly developed during drying and storage of the root.

Gentian has had limited use in perfumery, most notably as a glycerine soap (Crabtree &amp; Evelyn) and a perfume (Corday&#x27;s Possession, 1937).

===Pharmacological uses===
Great yellow gentian (&quot;Gentiana lutea&quot;) is used in herbal medicine for digestive problems, fever, hypertension, muscle spasms, parasitic worms, wounds, cancer, sinusitis, and malaria, although studies have shown minimal efficacy beyond that of a placebo with regard to the treatment of anxiety and ADHD in children. Gentian has been shown to manage dyspepsia by eliciting cephalic responses that increase vascular resistance and reduce the workload of the heart during digestion.

&quot;Gentiana punctata&quot; leaves and roots have been used in traditional Austrian medicine internally and externally as liqueur or tea for disorders of the gastrointestinal tract, skin, locomotor system, liver, and bile, and for pediatric problems, fever, flu, rheumatism, and gout.

&quot;Gentiana purpurea&quot;, &quot;Gentiana punctata&quot;, and &quot;Gentiana pannonica&quot; are used to produce gentian schnapps, traditionally used as a digestive aid. In Ayurvedic medicine the endangered Indian gentian &quot;Gentiana kurroo&quot; has been used as a medical herb, but has been replaced with the Himalayan plant &quot;Picrorhiza kurroa,&quot; or &quot;Picrorhiza scrophulariiflora&quot; from traditional Chinese medicine.

===Symbolism===
The gentian flower was used as the emblem of the Minamoto clan, one of the four great clans that dominated Japanese politics during the Heian period and went on to establish the first Shogunate in the aftermath of the Genpei War. It is the official flower (called ) of the German-speaking community of Belgium.

==Species==

===General===
Gentians have oppositely arranged leaves, sometimes in a basal rosette. The trumpet-shaped flowers are usually deep blue or azure but can be white, cream, yellow, or red. Many species are polymorphic concerning flower color, bearing flowers of different colors. Blue-flowered species predominate in the Northern Hemisphere, with red-flowered species dominant in the Andes, where bird pollination is probably more often favored by natural selection. White-flowered species are scattered throughout the range of the genus but dominate in New Zealand. Most flowers are pentamerous, with five lobes in the corolla and five sepals. A few species have four to seven flower parts. The corolla has folds called plicae between the lobes. The style is short or absent. The ovary is mostly sessile and has nectary glands.

===List of accepted species===

The following species are recognised in the genus &quot;Gentiana&quot;:

*&quot;Gentiana acaulis&quot; – stemless gentian
*&quot;Gentiana affinis&quot; – pleated gentian
*&quot;Gentiana alba&quot; – pleated gentian
*&quot;Gentiana albescens&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana albicalyx&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana algida&quot; – whitish gentian
*&quot;Gentiana alii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana alpina&quot; – alpine gentian
*&quot;Gentiana alsinoides&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana altigena&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana altorum&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana × ambigua&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana amplicrater&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana andrewsii&quot; – closed bottle gentian
*&quot;Gentiana angustifolia&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana anisostemon&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana aperta&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana apiata&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana aquatica&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana arenicola&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana arethusae&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana argentea&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana arisanensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana aristata&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana arunii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana asclepiadea&quot; – willow gentian
*&quot;Gentiana asterocalyx&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana atlantica&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana atuntsiensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana austromontana&quot; – Appalachian gentian
*&quot;Gentiana autumnalis&quot; – pinebarren gentian
*&quot;Gentiana baeuerlenii&quot; - N.S.W
*&quot;Gentiana bambuseti&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana bavarica&quot; – Bavarian gentian
*&quot;Gentiana beamanii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana bella&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana bicentenaria&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana bicuspidata&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana × billingtonii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana boissieri&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana bokorensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana bolavenensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana borneensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana boryi&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana brachyphylla&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana bredboensis&quot; - N.S.W
*&quot;Gentiana brentae&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana bryoides&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana burseri&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana cachemirica&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana caelestis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana caeruleogrisea&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana caliculata&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana calycosa&quot; – Rainier pleated gentian
*&quot;Gentiana capitata&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana carinata&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana carinicostata&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana catesbaei&quot; – Elliott&#x27;s gentian
*&quot;Gentiana cephalantha&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana cephalodes&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana × charpentieri&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana chinensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana choanantha&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana chungtienensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana clarkei&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana clausa&quot; – bottled gentian
*&quot;Gentiana clusii&quot; – trumpet gentian
*&quot;Gentiana confertifolia&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana coronata&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana crassa&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana crassicaulis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana crassula&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana crassuloides&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana cristata&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana cruciata&quot; – cross gentian
*&quot;Gentiana cruttwellii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana cuneibarba&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana × curtisii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana dahurica&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana davidi&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana decemfida&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana decora&quot; – showy gentian
*&quot;Gentiana decumbens&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana delavayi&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana deltoidea&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana dendrologi&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana densiflora&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana depressa&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana × digenea&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana divaricata&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana diversifolia&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana douglasiana&quot; – swamp gentian
*&quot;Gentiana dschungarica&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana dshimilensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana duclouxii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana durangensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana ecaudata&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana elmeriana&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana elwesii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana emodi&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana ettingshausenii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana exigua&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana faucipilosa&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana fieldiana&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana filistyla&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana flavomaculata&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana flexicaulis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana formosa&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana forrestii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana franchetiana&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana fremontii&quot; – moss gentian
*&quot;Gentiana frigida&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana froelichii&quot; – Karawanken gentian
*&quot;Gentiana futtereri&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana × gaudiniana&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana gayi&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana gelida&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana georgei&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana gilvostriata&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana glauca&quot; – pale gentian
*&quot;Gentiana grandiflora&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana × grandilacustris&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana grata&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana × grisebachiana&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana grumii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana gyirongensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana handeliana&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana haraldi-smithii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana harrowiana&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana haynaldii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana heleonastes&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana helophila&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana hesseliana&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana hexaphylla&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana himalayensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana hirsuta&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana hohoxiliensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana hooperi&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana hsinganica&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana hugelii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana huxleyi&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana × hybrida&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana intricata&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana jamesii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana jarmilae&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana jingdongensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana jouyana&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana kaohsiungensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana kauffmanniana&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana khammouanensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana kirilowii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana kurroo&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana kurumbae&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana lacerulata&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana laciniata&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana × laengstii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana laevigata&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana lagodechiana&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana langbianensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana laotica&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana lateriflora&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana latidens&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana lawrencei&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana laxiflora&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana leroyana&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana leucomelaena&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana lhassica&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana liangshanensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana licentii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana ligustica&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana linearis&quot; – narrowleaf gentian
*&quot;Gentiana lineolata&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana linoides&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana loerzingii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana longicollis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana loureiroi&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana lowryi&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana lutea&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana lycopodioides&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana macgregoryi&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana macrophylla&quot; – bigleaf gentian
*&quot;Gentiana maeulchanensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana mairei&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana makinoi&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana manshurica&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana × marcailhouana&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana × marceli-jouseaui&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana × media&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana meiantha&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana melandriifolia&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana membranulifera&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana micans&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana micantiformis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana micrantha&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana microdonta&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana microphyta&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana mirandae&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana moniliformis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana muscicola&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana myrioclada&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana namlaensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana nanobella&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana nerterifolia&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana newberryi&quot; – Newberry&#x27;s gentian
*&quot;Gentiana nipponica&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana nivalis&quot; – snow gentian
*&quot;Gentiana nubigena&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana nudicaulis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana nyalamensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana obconica&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana occidentalis&quot; - Pyrenean trumpoet gentian
*&quot;Gentiana officinalis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana olgae&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana oligophylla&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana olivieri&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana oreocharis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana oreodoxa&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana ornata&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana ovatiloba&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana pachyphylla&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana × pallidocyanea&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana pannonica&quot; – brown gentian
*&quot;Gentiana panthaica&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana papillosa&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana paradoxa&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana parryae&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana parryi&quot; – Parry&#x27;s gentian
*&quot;Gentiana parvula&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana pedata&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana pedicellata&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana perpusilla&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana phyllocalyx&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana piasezkii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana picta&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana platypetala&quot; – broadpetal gentian
*&quot;Gentiana plurisetosa&quot; – bristly gentian
*&quot;Gentiana pneumonanthe&quot; – marsh gentian
*&quot;Gentiana praeclara&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana praticola&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana prattii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana pringlei&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana producta&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana prolata&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana prostrata&quot; – pygmy gentian
*&quot;Gentiana pseudosquarrosa&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana puberulenta&quot; – downy gentian
*&quot;Gentiana pubigera&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana pulvinarum&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana pumila&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana pumilio&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana punctata&quot; – spotted gentian
*&quot;Gentiana purpurea&quot; – purple gentian
*&quot;Gentiana pyrenaica&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana qiujiangensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana quadrifaria&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana querceticola&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana radiata&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana radicans&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana ranae&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana recurvata&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana riparia&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana robusta&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana rostanii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana rubicunda&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana rubricaulis&quot; – closed gentian
*&quot;Gentiana sagarmathae&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana saginifolia&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana saginoides&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana saltuum&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana saponaria&quot; – harvestbells gentian
*&quot;Gentiana sasidharanii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana satsunanensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana scabra&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana scabrida&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana sceptrum&quot; – king&#x27;s scepter gentian
*&quot;Gentiana scytophylla&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana sedifolia&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana septemfida&quot; – crested gentian
*&quot;Gentiana setigera&quot; – Mendocino gentian
*&quot;Gentiana shaanxiensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana sierrae&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana sikkimensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana sikokiana&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana simulatrix&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana sino-ornata&quot; – showy Chinese gentian
*&quot;Gentiana siphonantha&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana sirensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana spathacea&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana spathulifolia&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana spathulisepala&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana springateana&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana squarrosa&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana stellata&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana stellulata&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana stipitata&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana stragulata&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana straminea&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana suborbisepala&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana subpolytrichoides&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana subuliformis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana sumatrana&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana susamyrensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana susanneae&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana sutchuenensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana szechenyii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana taiwanialbiflora&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana taiwanica&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana takushii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana taliensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana tarokoensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana tatsienensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana terglouensis&quot; – Triglav gentian
*&quot;Gentiana ternifolia&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana tetraphylla&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana tetrasepala&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana tetrasticha&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana thunbergii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana tibetica&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana timida&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana tongolensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana tonkinensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana tornezyana&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana trichotoma&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana tricolor&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana triflora&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana tubiflora&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana ulmeri&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana uniflora&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana urnula&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana utriculosa&quot; – bladder gentian
*&quot;Gentiana vandellioides&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana vandewateri&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana veitchiorum&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana venusta&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana verna&quot; – spring gentian
*&quot;Gentiana vernayi&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana viatrix&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana villosa&quot; – striped gentian
*&quot;Gentiana vodopjanovae&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana waltonii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana walujewii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana wangchukii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana wardii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana wasenensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana wilsonii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana winchuanensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana wingecarribiensis&quot; - N.S.W.
*&quot;Gentiana woodii&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana xanthonannos&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana yakushimensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana yokusai&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana yunnanensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana zekuensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana zhenxiongensis&quot; 
*&quot;Gentiana zollingeri&quot; 
===Formerly placed here===
*&quot;Gentianopsis crinita&quot; (fringed gentian), as &quot;Gentiana crinita&quot;

==Cultivation==

Several gentian species may be found in cultivation, and are valued for the unusual intensity of their blue flowers. They have a reputation for being difficult to grow. All require similar conditions – moist, rich, free-draining soil with an acid to neutral pH. They include:

*&quot;G. acaulis&quot;
*&quot;G. asclepiadea&quot;
*&quot;G. paradoxa&quot;
*&quot;G. septemfida&quot;
*&quot;G. sino-ornata&quot;
In addition, the following cultivars, of mixed or uncertain parentage, have gained the Royal Horticultural Society&#x27;s Award of Garden Merit: 
* &#x27;Blue Silk&#x27; 
*&#x27;Shot Silk&#x27; 
*&#x27;Strathmore&#x27;
==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="17" end="22" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="26" end="41" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="68" end="74" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q157216" start="76" end="88" title="Gentianaceae" label="Gentianaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="121" end="133" title="Monophyly" label="monophyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="170" end="177" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q372948" start="314" end="317" title="hue" label="hue"/>
<link wikidata="Q380555" start="351" end="358" title="Gentius" label="Gentius"/>
<link wikidata="Q146715" start="363" end="371" title="Illyrians" label="Illyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q237315" start="401" end="417" title="tonic water" label="tonic properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q215402" start="455" end="473" title="cosmopolitan distribution" label="cosmopolitan genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q859654" start="488" end="494" title="Alpine climate" label="alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="507" end="516" title="temperateness" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q172645" start="968" end="973" title="humus" label="humus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141231" start="995" end="1006" title="rock garden" label="rock garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q158572" start="1068" end="1082" title="Gentiana lutea" label="Gentiana lutea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254524" start="1108" end="1127" title="Gentian (spirit)" label="&amp;quot;gentian&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q56139" start="1131" end="1149" title="distilled beverage" label="distilled beverage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="1166" end="1170" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152" start="1182" end="1190" title="Auvergne" label="Auvergne"/>
<link wikidata="Q96755250" start="1242" end="1251" title="Apéritif and digestif" label="apéritifs"/>
<link wikidata="Q178780" start="1253" end="1260" title="liqueur" label="liqueur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441998" start="1267" end="1273" title="Herbal tonic" label="tonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q753069" start="1325" end="1332" title="bitters" label="bitters"/>
<link wikidata="Q147538" start="1338" end="1348" title="soft drink" label="soft drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078987" start="1349" end="1354" title="Moxie" label="Moxie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425215" start="1398" end="1402" title="Suze (drink)" label="Suze"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272342" start="1425" end="1444" title="Quinquina" label="Americano apéritifs"/>
<link wikidata="Q618238" start="1531" end="1537" title="Aperol" label="Aperol"/>
<link wikidata="Q612150" start="1617" end="1626" title="Underberg" label="Underberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q542594" start="1655" end="1672" title="Angostura bitters" label="Angostura bitters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081822" start="1677" end="1700" title="Peychaud&amp;#x27;s Bitters" label="Peychaud&amp;#x27;s Bitters"/>
<link wikidata="Q192639" start="1799" end="1808" title="glycoside" label="glycoside"/>
<link wikidata="Q158572" start="2175" end="2195" title="Great yellow gentian" label="Great yellow gentian"/>
<link wikidata="Q861699" start="2236" end="2251" title="herbal medicine" label="herbal medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="2283" end="2295" title="hypertension" label="hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q574360" start="2297" end="2309" title="muscle spasm" label="muscle spasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129936" start="2312" end="2326" title="parasitic worm" label="parasitic worm"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="2360" end="2367" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q269829" start="2431" end="2438" title="placebo" label="placebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q653971" start="2534" end="2543" title="dyspepsia" label="dyspepsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309668" start="2557" end="2565" title="Cephalic phase" label="cephalic"/>
<link wikidata="Q456026" start="2590" end="2609" title="vascular resistance" label="vascular resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q162579" start="2960" end="2977" title="Gentiana purpurea" label="Gentiana purpurea"/>
<link wikidata="Q164729" start="2991" end="3008" title="Gentiana punctata" label="Gentiana punctata"/>
<link wikidata="Q160745" start="3026" end="3044" title="Gentiana pannonica" label="Gentiana pannonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254524" start="3071" end="3087" title="gentian schnapps" label="gentian schnapps"/>
<link wikidata="Q132325" start="3131" end="3149" title="Ayurvedic medicine" label="Ayurvedic medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q13112649" start="3186" end="3201" title="Gentiana kurroo" label="Gentiana kurroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562125" start="3294" end="3311" title="Picrorhiza kurroa" label="Picrorhiza kurroa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15346400" start="3328" end="3356" title="Picrorhiza scrophulariiflora" label="Picrorhiza scrophulariiflora"/>
<link wikidata="Q200253" start="3368" end="3396" title="traditional Chinese medicine" label="traditional Chinese medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q599881" start="3464" end="3477" title="Minamoto clan" label="Minamoto clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193292" start="3551" end="3563" title="Heian period" label="Heian period"/>
<link wikidata="Q736839" start="3593" end="3608" title="Kamakura shogunate" label="first Shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q737542" start="3633" end="3643" title="Genpei War" label="Genpei War"/>
<link wikidata="Q90027" start="3688" end="3724" title="German-speaking community of Belgium" label="German-speaking community of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="3845" end="3851" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q373058" start="3878" end="3883" title="Azure (color)" label="azure"/>
<link wikidata="Q485680" start="3942" end="3953" title="polymorphism (biology)" label="polymorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="4120" end="4125" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424557" start="4133" end="4149" title="Ornithophily" label="bird pollination"/>
<link wikidata="Q107412" start="4356" end="4363" title="Corolla (flower)" label="corolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q107216" start="4373" end="4378" title="sepal" label="sepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q588964" start="4487" end="4492" title="gynoecium" label="style"/>
<link wikidata="Q163785" start="4678" end="4694" title="Gentiana acaulis" label="Gentiana acaulis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4727" end="4743" title="Gentiana affinis" label="Gentiana affinis"/>
<link wikidata="Q961885" start="4775" end="4788" title="Gentiana alba" label="Gentiana alba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4820" end="4838" title="Gentiana albescens" label="Gentiana albescens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4853" end="4871" title="Gentiana albicalyx" label="Gentiana albicalyx"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4886" end="4901" title="Gentiana algida" label="Gentiana algida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4933" end="4946" title="Gentiana alii" label="Gentiana alii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650772" start="4961" end="4976" title="Gentiana alpina" label="Gentiana alpina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5007" end="5026" title="Gentiana alsinoides" label="Gentiana alsinoides"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5041" end="5058" title="Gentiana altigena" label="Gentiana altigena"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5073" end="5089" title="Gentiana altorum" label="Gentiana altorum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5104" end="5122" title="Gentiana × ambigua" label="Gentiana × ambigua"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5137" end="5157" title="Gentiana amplicrater" label="Gentiana amplicrater"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533615" start="5172" end="5190" title="Gentiana andrewsii" label="Gentiana andrewsii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5228" end="5249" title="Gentiana angustifolia" label="Gentiana angustifolia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5264" end="5284" title="Gentiana anisostemon" label="Gentiana anisostemon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5299" end="5314" title="Gentiana aperta" label="Gentiana aperta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5329" end="5344" title="Gentiana apiata" label="Gentiana apiata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5359" end="5376" title="Gentiana aquatica" label="Gentiana aquatica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5391" end="5409" title="Gentiana arenicola" label="Gentiana arenicola"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5424" end="5442" title="Gentiana arethusae" label="Gentiana arethusae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5457" end="5474" title="Gentiana argentea" label="Gentiana argentea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5489" end="5509" title="Gentiana arisanensis" label="Gentiana arisanensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5524" end="5541" title="Gentiana aristata" label="Gentiana aristata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5556" end="5571" title="Gentiana arunii" label="Gentiana arunii"/>
<link wikidata="Q162853" start="5586" end="5606" title="Gentiana asclepiadea" label="Gentiana asclepiadea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5637" end="5657" title="Gentiana asterocalyx" label="Gentiana asterocalyx"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5672" end="5690" title="Gentiana atlantica" label="Gentiana atlantica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5705" end="5726" title="Gentiana atuntsiensis" label="Gentiana atuntsiensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533614" start="5741" end="5763" title="Gentiana austromontana" label="Gentiana austromontana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533616" start="5799" end="5818" title="Gentiana autumnalis" label="Gentiana autumnalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15557531" start="5853" end="5873" title="Gentiana baeuerlenii" label="Gentiana baeuerlenii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5895" end="5913" title="Gentiana bambuseti" label="Gentiana bambuseti"/>
<link wikidata="Q160788" start="5928" end="5945" title="Gentiana bavarica" label="Gentiana bavarica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5978" end="5995" title="Gentiana beamanii" label="Gentiana beamanii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6010" end="6024" title="Gentiana bella" label="Gentiana bella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6039" end="6060" title="Gentiana bicentenaria" label="Gentiana bicentenaria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6075" end="6095" title="Gentiana bicuspidata" label="Gentiana bicuspidata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6110" end="6133" title="Gentiana × billingtonii" label="Gentiana × billingtonii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6148" end="6166" title="Gentiana boissieri" label="Gentiana boissieri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6181" end="6200" title="Gentiana bokorensis" label="Gentiana bokorensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6215" end="6236" title="Gentiana bolavenensis" label="Gentiana bolavenensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6251" end="6270" title="Gentiana borneensis" label="Gentiana borneensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6285" end="6299" title="Gentiana boryi" label="Gentiana boryi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6314" end="6335" title="Gentiana brachyphylla" label="Gentiana brachyphylla"/>
<link wikidata="Q27828479" start="6350" end="6370" title="Gentiana bredboensis" label="Gentiana bredboensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6392" end="6408" title="Gentiana brentae" label="Gentiana brentae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6423" end="6440" title="Gentiana bryoides" label="Gentiana bryoides"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6455" end="6471" title="Gentiana burseri" label="Gentiana burseri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6486" end="6506" title="Gentiana cachemirica" label="Gentiana cachemirica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6521" end="6539" title="Gentiana caelestis" label="Gentiana caelestis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6554" end="6577" title="Gentiana caeruleogrisea" label="Gentiana caeruleogrisea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6592" end="6611" title="Gentiana caliculata" label="Gentiana caliculata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007193" start="6626" end="6643" title="Gentiana calycosa" label="Gentiana calycosa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6683" end="6700" title="Gentiana capitata" label="Gentiana capitata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6715" end="6732" title="Gentiana carinata" label="Gentiana carinata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6747" end="6769" title="Gentiana carinicostata" label="Gentiana carinicostata"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533617" start="6784" end="6802" title="Gentiana catesbaei" label="Gentiana catesbaei"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6841" end="6861" title="Gentiana cephalantha" label="Gentiana cephalantha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6876" end="6895" title="Gentiana cephalodes" label="Gentiana cephalodes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6910" end="6933" title="Gentiana × charpentieri" label="Gentiana × charpentieri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6948" end="6966" title="Gentiana chinensis" label="Gentiana chinensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6981" end="7000" title="Gentiana choanantha" label="Gentiana choanantha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7015" end="7038" title="Gentiana chungtienensis" label="Gentiana chungtienensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7053" end="7069" title="Gentiana clarkei" label="Gentiana clarkei"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533620" start="7084" end="7099" title="Gentiana clausa" label="Gentiana clausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q159969" start="7131" end="7146" title="Gentiana clusii" label="Gentiana clusii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7178" end="7200" title="Gentiana confertifolia" label="Gentiana confertifolia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7215" end="7232" title="Gentiana coronata" label="Gentiana coronata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7247" end="7262" title="Gentiana crassa" label="Gentiana crassa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7277" end="7298" title="Gentiana crassicaulis" label="Gentiana crassicaulis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7313" end="7330" title="Gentiana crassula" label="Gentiana crassula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7345" end="7366" title="Gentiana crassuloides" label="Gentiana crassuloides"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7381" end="7398" title="Gentiana cristata" label="Gentiana cristata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377367" start="7413" end="7430" title="Gentiana cruciata" label="Gentiana cruciata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7460" end="7480" title="Gentiana cruttwellii" label="Gentiana cruttwellii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7495" end="7514" title="Gentiana cuneibarba" label="Gentiana cuneibarba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7529" end="7548" title="Gentiana × curtisii" label="Gentiana × curtisii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7563" end="7580" title="Gentiana dahurica" label="Gentiana dahurica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7595" end="7610" title="Gentiana davidi" label="Gentiana davidi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7625" end="7643" title="Gentiana decemfida" label="Gentiana decemfida"/>
<link wikidata="Q15557848" start="7658" end="7673" title="Gentiana decora" label="Gentiana decora"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7703" end="7721" title="Gentiana decumbens" label="Gentiana decumbens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7736" end="7753" title="Gentiana delavayi" label="Gentiana delavayi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7768" end="7786" title="Gentiana deltoidea" label="Gentiana deltoidea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7801" end="7820" title="Gentiana dendrologi" label="Gentiana dendrologi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7835" end="7854" title="Gentiana densiflora" label="Gentiana densiflora"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7869" end="7886" title="Gentiana depressa" label="Gentiana depressa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7901" end="7919" title="Gentiana × digenea" label="Gentiana × digenea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7934" end="7953" title="Gentiana divaricata" label="Gentiana divaricata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7968" end="7989" title="Gentiana diversifolia" label="Gentiana diversifolia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8004" end="8024" title="Gentiana douglasiana" label="Gentiana douglasiana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8054" end="8075" title="Gentiana dschungarica" label="Gentiana dschungarica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8090" end="8111" title="Gentiana dshimilensis" label="Gentiana dshimilensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8126" end="8144" title="Gentiana duclouxii" label="Gentiana duclouxii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8159" end="8179" title="Gentiana durangensis" label="Gentiana durangensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8194" end="8211" title="Gentiana ecaudata" label="Gentiana ecaudata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8226" end="8244" title="Gentiana elmeriana" label="Gentiana elmeriana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8259" end="8275" title="Gentiana elwesii" label="Gentiana elwesii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8290" end="8304" title="Gentiana emodi" label="Gentiana emodi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8319" end="8343" title="Gentiana ettingshausenii" label="Gentiana ettingshausenii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8358" end="8373" title="Gentiana exigua" label="Gentiana exigua"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8388" end="8408" title="Gentiana faucipilosa" label="Gentiana faucipilosa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8423" end="8441" title="Gentiana fieldiana" label="Gentiana fieldiana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8456" end="8474" title="Gentiana filistyla" label="Gentiana filistyla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8489" end="8511" title="Gentiana flavomaculata" label="Gentiana flavomaculata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8526" end="8546" title="Gentiana flexicaulis" label="Gentiana flexicaulis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8561" end="8577" title="Gentiana formosa" label="Gentiana formosa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8592" end="8610" title="Gentiana forrestii" label="Gentiana forrestii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8625" end="8646" title="Gentiana franchetiana" label="Gentiana franchetiana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8661" end="8679" title="Gentiana fremontii" label="Gentiana fremontii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674576" start="8708" end="8724" title="Gentiana frigida" label="Gentiana frigida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729031" start="8739" end="8758" title="Gentiana froelichii" label="Gentiana froelichii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8793" end="8811" title="Gentiana futtereri" label="Gentiana futtereri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8826" end="8847" title="Gentiana × gaudiniana" label="Gentiana × gaudiniana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8862" end="8875" title="Gentiana gayi" label="Gentiana gayi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8890" end="8905" title="Gentiana gelida" label="Gentiana gelida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8920" end="8936" title="Gentiana georgei" label="Gentiana georgei"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8951" end="8972" title="Gentiana gilvostriata" label="Gentiana gilvostriata"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533618" start="8987" end="9002" title="Gentiana glauca" label="Gentiana glauca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9031" end="9051" title="Gentiana grandiflora" label="Gentiana grandiflora"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9066" end="9092" title="Gentiana × grandilacustris" label="Gentiana × grandilacustris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9107" end="9121" title="Gentiana grata" label="Gentiana grata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9136" end="9160" title="Gentiana × grisebachiana" label="Gentiana × grisebachiana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9175" end="9190" title="Gentiana grumii" label="Gentiana grumii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9205" end="9226" title="Gentiana gyirongensis" label="Gentiana gyirongensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9241" end="9260" title="Gentiana handeliana" label="Gentiana handeliana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9275" end="9299" title="Gentiana haraldi-smithii" label="Gentiana haraldi-smithii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9314" end="9333" title="Gentiana harrowiana" label="Gentiana harrowiana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9348" end="9366" title="Gentiana haynaldii" label="Gentiana haynaldii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9381" end="9401" title="Gentiana heleonastes" label="Gentiana heleonastes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9416" end="9434" title="Gentiana helophila" label="Gentiana helophila"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9449" end="9468" title="Gentiana hesseliana" label="Gentiana hesseliana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9483" end="9502" title="Gentiana hexaphylla" label="Gentiana hexaphylla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9517" end="9538" title="Gentiana himalayensis" label="Gentiana himalayensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9553" end="9569" title="Gentiana hirsuta" label="Gentiana hirsuta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9584" end="9606" title="Gentiana hohoxiliensis" label="Gentiana hohoxiliensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9621" end="9637" title="Gentiana hooperi" label="Gentiana hooperi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9652" end="9671" title="Gentiana hsinganica" label="Gentiana hsinganica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9686" end="9702" title="Gentiana hugelii" label="Gentiana hugelii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9717" end="9733" title="Gentiana huxleyi" label="Gentiana huxleyi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9748" end="9766" title="Gentiana × hybrida" label="Gentiana × hybrida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9781" end="9799" title="Gentiana intricata" label="Gentiana intricata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9814" end="9830" title="Gentiana jamesii" label="Gentiana jamesii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9845" end="9862" title="Gentiana jarmilae" label="Gentiana jarmilae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9877" end="9899" title="Gentiana jingdongensis" label="Gentiana jingdongensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9914" end="9930" title="Gentiana jouyana" label="Gentiana jouyana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9945" end="9968" title="Gentiana kaohsiungensis" label="Gentiana kaohsiungensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9983" end="10005" title="Gentiana kauffmanniana" label="Gentiana kauffmanniana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10020" end="10043" title="Gentiana khammouanensis" label="Gentiana khammouanensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10058" end="10076" title="Gentiana kirilowii" label="Gentiana kirilowii"/>
<link wikidata="Q13112649" start="10091" end="10106" title="Gentiana kurroo" label="Gentiana kurroo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10121" end="10138" title="Gentiana kurumbae" label="Gentiana kurumbae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10153" end="10172" title="Gentiana lacerulata" label="Gentiana lacerulata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10187" end="10205" title="Gentiana laciniata" label="Gentiana laciniata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10220" end="10240" title="Gentiana × laengstii" label="Gentiana × laengstii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10255" end="10273" title="Gentiana laevigata" label="Gentiana laevigata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10288" end="10309" title="Gentiana lagodechiana" label="Gentiana lagodechiana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10324" end="10346" title="Gentiana langbianensis" label="Gentiana langbianensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10361" end="10377" title="Gentiana laotica" label="Gentiana laotica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10392" end="10412" title="Gentiana lateriflora" label="Gentiana lateriflora"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10427" end="10444" title="Gentiana latidens" label="Gentiana latidens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10459" end="10477" title="Gentiana lawrencei" label="Gentiana lawrencei"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10492" end="10510" title="Gentiana laxiflora" label="Gentiana laxiflora"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10525" end="10542" title="Gentiana leroyana" label="Gentiana leroyana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10557" end="10578" title="Gentiana leucomelaena" label="Gentiana leucomelaena"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10593" end="10610" title="Gentiana lhassica" label="Gentiana lhassica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10625" end="10648" title="Gentiana liangshanensis" label="Gentiana liangshanensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10663" end="10680" title="Gentiana licentii" label="Gentiana licentii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10695" end="10713" title="Gentiana ligustica" label="Gentiana ligustica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533619" start="10728" end="10745" title="Gentiana linearis" label="Gentiana linearis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10780" end="10798" title="Gentiana lineolata" label="Gentiana lineolata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10813" end="10830" title="Gentiana linoides" label="Gentiana linoides"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10845" end="10864" title="Gentiana loerzingii" label="Gentiana loerzingii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10879" end="10899" title="Gentiana longicollis" label="Gentiana longicollis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5556699" start="10914" end="10932" title="Gentiana loureiroi" label="Gentiana loureiroi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10947" end="10962" title="Gentiana lowryi" label="Gentiana lowryi"/>
<link wikidata="Q158572" start="10977" end="10991" title="Gentiana lutea" label="Gentiana lutea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11006" end="11028" title="Gentiana lycopodioides" label="Gentiana lycopodioides"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11043" end="11063" title="Gentiana macgregoryi" label="Gentiana macgregoryi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040115" start="11078" end="11098" title="Gentiana macrophylla" label="Gentiana macrophylla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11130" end="11153" title="Gentiana maeulchanensis" label="Gentiana maeulchanensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11168" end="11183" title="Gentiana mairei" label="Gentiana mairei"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11198" end="11214" title="Gentiana makinoi" label="Gentiana makinoi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11229" end="11248" title="Gentiana manshurica" label="Gentiana manshurica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11263" end="11287" title="Gentiana × marcailhouana" label="Gentiana × marcailhouana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11302" end="11329" title="Gentiana × marceli-jouseaui" label="Gentiana × marceli-jouseaui"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11344" end="11360" title="Gentiana × media" label="Gentiana × media"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11375" end="11392" title="Gentiana meiantha" label="Gentiana meiantha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11407" end="11430" title="Gentiana melandriifolia" label="Gentiana melandriifolia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11445" end="11468" title="Gentiana membranulifera" label="Gentiana membranulifera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11483" end="11498" title="Gentiana micans" label="Gentiana micans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11513" end="11535" title="Gentiana micantiformis" label="Gentiana micantiformis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11550" end="11568" title="Gentiana micrantha" label="Gentiana micrantha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11583" end="11602" title="Gentiana microdonta" label="Gentiana microdonta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11617" end="11636" title="Gentiana microphyta" label="Gentiana microphyta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11651" end="11668" title="Gentiana mirandae" label="Gentiana mirandae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11683" end="11704" title="Gentiana moniliformis" label="Gentiana moniliformis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11719" end="11737" title="Gentiana muscicola" label="Gentiana muscicola"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11752" end="11771" title="Gentiana myrioclada" label="Gentiana myrioclada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11786" end="11805" title="Gentiana namlaensis" label="Gentiana namlaensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11820" end="11838" title="Gentiana nanobella" label="Gentiana nanobella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11853" end="11874" title="Gentiana nerterifolia" label="Gentiana nerterifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533623" start="11889" end="11907" title="Gentiana newberryi" label="Gentiana newberryi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11947" end="11965" title="Gentiana nipponica" label="Gentiana nipponica"/>
<link wikidata="Q161661" start="11980" end="11996" title="Gentiana nivalis" label="Gentiana nivalis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12025" end="12042" title="Gentiana nubigena" label="Gentiana nubigena"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12057" end="12076" title="Gentiana nudicaulis" label="Gentiana nudicaulis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12091" end="12111" title="Gentiana nyalamensis" label="Gentiana nyalamensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12126" end="12143" title="Gentiana obconica" label="Gentiana obconica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100846" start="12158" end="12179" title="Gentiana occidentalis" label="Gentiana occidentalis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12221" end="12241" title="Gentiana officinalis" label="Gentiana officinalis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12256" end="12270" title="Gentiana olgae" label="Gentiana olgae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12285" end="12305" title="Gentiana oligophylla" label="Gentiana oligophylla"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533621" start="12320" end="12337" title="Gentiana olivieri" label="Gentiana olivieri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12352" end="12371" title="Gentiana oreocharis" label="Gentiana oreocharis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12386" end="12403" title="Gentiana oreodoxa" label="Gentiana oreodoxa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12418" end="12433" title="Gentiana ornata" label="Gentiana ornata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12448" end="12466" title="Gentiana ovatiloba" label="Gentiana ovatiloba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12481" end="12501" title="Gentiana pachyphylla" label="Gentiana pachyphylla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12516" end="12540" title="Gentiana × pallidocyanea" label="Gentiana × pallidocyanea"/>
<link wikidata="Q160745" start="12555" end="12573" title="Gentiana pannonica" label="Gentiana pannonica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12603" end="12621" title="Gentiana panthaica" label="Gentiana panthaica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12636" end="12654" title="Gentiana papillosa" label="Gentiana papillosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100853" start="12669" end="12686" title="Gentiana paradoxa" label="Gentiana paradoxa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12701" end="12717" title="Gentiana parryae" label="Gentiana parryae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533624" start="12732" end="12747" title="Gentiana parryi" label="Gentiana parryi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12784" end="12800" title="Gentiana parvula" label="Gentiana parvula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12815" end="12830" title="Gentiana pedata" label="Gentiana pedata"/>
<link wikidata="Q15227374" start="12845" end="12865" title="Gentiana pedicellata" label="Gentiana pedicellata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12880" end="12899" title="Gentiana perpusilla" label="Gentiana perpusilla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12914" end="12934" title="Gentiana phyllocalyx" label="Gentiana phyllocalyx"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12949" end="12967" title="Gentiana piasezkii" label="Gentiana piasezkii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12982" end="12996" title="Gentiana picta" label="Gentiana picta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13011" end="13031" title="Gentiana platypetala" label="Gentiana platypetala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533622" start="13066" end="13086" title="Gentiana plurisetosa" label="Gentiana plurisetosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q161548" start="13118" end="13139" title="Gentiana pneumonanthe" label="Gentiana pneumonanthe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13169" end="13187" title="Gentiana praeclara" label="Gentiana praeclara"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13202" end="13220" title="Gentiana praticola" label="Gentiana praticola"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13235" end="13251" title="Gentiana prattii" label="Gentiana prattii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13266" end="13283" title="Gentiana pringlei" label="Gentiana pringlei"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13298" end="13315" title="Gentiana producta" label="Gentiana producta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13330" end="13346" title="Gentiana prolata" label="Gentiana prolata"/>
<link wikidata="Q955695" start="13361" end="13379" title="Gentiana prostrata" label="Gentiana prostrata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13409" end="13433" title="Gentiana pseudosquarrosa" label="Gentiana pseudosquarrosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15560544" start="13448" end="13468" title="Gentiana puberulenta" label="Gentiana puberulenta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13498" end="13515" title="Gentiana pubigera" label="Gentiana pubigera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13530" end="13549" title="Gentiana pulvinarum" label="Gentiana pulvinarum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13564" end="13579" title="Gentiana pumila" label="Gentiana pumila"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13594" end="13610" title="Gentiana pumilio" label="Gentiana pumilio"/>
<link wikidata="Q164729" start="13625" end="13642" title="Gentiana punctata" label="Gentiana punctata"/>
<link wikidata="Q162579" start="13674" end="13691" title="Gentiana purpurea" label="Gentiana purpurea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13722" end="13740" title="Gentiana pyrenaica" label="Gentiana pyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13755" end="13777" title="Gentiana qiujiangensis" label="Gentiana qiujiangensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13792" end="13812" title="Gentiana quadrifaria" label="Gentiana quadrifaria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13827" end="13848" title="Gentiana querceticola" label="Gentiana querceticola"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13863" end="13879" title="Gentiana radiata" label="Gentiana radiata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13894" end="13911" title="Gentiana radicans" label="Gentiana radicans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13926" end="13940" title="Gentiana ranae" label="Gentiana ranae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13955" end="13973" title="Gentiana recurvata" label="Gentiana recurvata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13988" end="14004" title="Gentiana riparia" label="Gentiana riparia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14019" end="14035" title="Gentiana robusta" label="Gentiana robusta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14050" end="14067" title="Gentiana rostanii" label="Gentiana rostanii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14082" end="14100" title="Gentiana rubicunda" label="Gentiana rubicunda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14115" end="14135" title="Gentiana rubricaulis" label="Gentiana rubricaulis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14166" end="14186" title="Gentiana sagarmathae" label="Gentiana sagarmathae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14201" end="14221" title="Gentiana saginifolia" label="Gentiana saginifolia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14236" end="14255" title="Gentiana saginoides" label="Gentiana saginoides"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14270" end="14286" title="Gentiana saltuum" label="Gentiana saltuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533625" start="14301" end="14319" title="Gentiana saponaria" label="Gentiana saponaria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14356" end="14377" title="Gentiana sasidharanii" label="Gentiana sasidharanii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14392" end="14414" title="Gentiana satsunanensis" label="Gentiana satsunanensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q926053" start="14429" end="14444" title="Gentiana scabra" label="Gentiana scabra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14459" end="14476" title="Gentiana scabrida" label="Gentiana scabrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533628" start="14491" end="14508" title="Gentiana sceptrum" label="Gentiana sceptrum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14552" end="14572" title="Gentiana scytophylla" label="Gentiana scytophylla"/>
<link wikidata="Q15548052" start="14587" end="14605" title="Gentiana sedifolia" label="Gentiana sedifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533626" start="14620" end="14639" title="Gentiana septemfida" label="Gentiana septemfida"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533629" start="14671" end="14688" title="Gentiana setigera" label="Gentiana setigera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14722" end="14743" title="Gentiana shaanxiensis" label="Gentiana shaanxiensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14758" end="14774" title="Gentiana sierrae" label="Gentiana sierrae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14789" end="14809" title="Gentiana sikkimensis" label="Gentiana sikkimensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14824" end="14842" title="Gentiana sikokiana" label="Gentiana sikokiana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14857" end="14876" title="Gentiana simulatrix" label="Gentiana simulatrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q847154" start="14891" end="14911" title="Gentiana sino-ornata" label="Gentiana sino-ornata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14949" end="14969" title="Gentiana siphonantha" label="Gentiana siphonantha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14984" end="15001" title="Gentiana sirensis" label="Gentiana sirensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15016" end="15034" title="Gentiana spathacea" label="Gentiana spathacea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15049" end="15071" title="Gentiana spathulifolia" label="Gentiana spathulifolia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15086" end="15109" title="Gentiana spathulisepala" label="Gentiana spathulisepala"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15124" end="15145" title="Gentiana springateana" label="Gentiana springateana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15160" end="15178" title="Gentiana squarrosa" label="Gentiana squarrosa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15193" end="15210" title="Gentiana stellata" label="Gentiana stellata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15225" end="15244" title="Gentiana stellulata" label="Gentiana stellulata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15259" end="15277" title="Gentiana stipitata" label="Gentiana stipitata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15292" end="15311" title="Gentiana stragulata" label="Gentiana stragulata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15326" end="15344" title="Gentiana straminea" label="Gentiana straminea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15359" end="15381" title="Gentiana suborbisepala" label="Gentiana suborbisepala"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15396" end="15422" title="Gentiana subpolytrichoides" label="Gentiana subpolytrichoides"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15437" end="15458" title="Gentiana subuliformis" label="Gentiana subuliformis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15473" end="15491" title="Gentiana sumatrana" label="Gentiana sumatrana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15506" end="15527" title="Gentiana susamyrensis" label="Gentiana susamyrensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15542" end="15560" title="Gentiana susanneae" label="Gentiana susanneae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15575" end="15597" title="Gentiana sutchuenensis" label="Gentiana sutchuenensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15612" end="15631" title="Gentiana szechenyii" label="Gentiana szechenyii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15646" end="15671" title="Gentiana taiwanialbiflora" label="Gentiana taiwanialbiflora"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15686" end="15704" title="Gentiana taiwanica" label="Gentiana taiwanica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15719" end="15736" title="Gentiana takushii" label="Gentiana takushii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15751" end="15769" title="Gentiana taliensis" label="Gentiana taliensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15784" end="15804" title="Gentiana tarokoensis" label="Gentiana tarokoensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15819" end="15840" title="Gentiana tatsienensis" label="Gentiana tatsienensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15855" end="15876" title="Gentiana terglouensis" label="Gentiana terglouensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15908" end="15927" title="Gentiana ternifolia" label="Gentiana ternifolia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15942" end="15962" title="Gentiana tetraphylla" label="Gentiana tetraphylla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15977" end="15997" title="Gentiana tetrasepala" label="Gentiana tetrasepala"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16012" end="16032" title="Gentiana tetrasticha" label="Gentiana tetrasticha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16047" end="16066" title="Gentiana thunbergii" label="Gentiana thunbergii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16081" end="16098" title="Gentiana tibetica" label="Gentiana tibetica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16113" end="16128" title="Gentiana timida" label="Gentiana timida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16143" end="16163" title="Gentiana tongolensis" label="Gentiana tongolensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16178" end="16198" title="Gentiana tonkinensis" label="Gentiana tonkinensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16213" end="16232" title="Gentiana tornezyana" label="Gentiana tornezyana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16247" end="16266" title="Gentiana trichotoma" label="Gentiana trichotoma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16281" end="16298" title="Gentiana tricolor" label="Gentiana tricolor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533631" start="16313" end="16330" title="Gentiana triflora" label="Gentiana triflora"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16345" end="16363" title="Gentiana tubiflora" label="Gentiana tubiflora"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16378" end="16393" title="Gentiana ulmeri" label="Gentiana ulmeri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16408" end="16425" title="Gentiana uniflora" label="Gentiana uniflora"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16440" end="16455" title="Gentiana urnula" label="Gentiana urnula"/>
<link wikidata="Q160358" start="16470" end="16489" title="Gentiana utriculosa" label="Gentiana utriculosa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16521" end="16543" title="Gentiana vandellioides" label="Gentiana vandellioides"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16558" end="16578" title="Gentiana vandewateri" label="Gentiana vandewateri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16593" end="16613" title="Gentiana veitchiorum" label="Gentiana veitchiorum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16628" end="16644" title="Gentiana venusta" label="Gentiana venusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q159389" start="16659" end="16673" title="Gentiana verna" label="Gentiana verna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16704" end="16720" title="Gentiana vernayi" label="Gentiana vernayi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16735" end="16751" title="Gentiana viatrix" label="Gentiana viatrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533630" start="16766" end="16782" title="Gentiana villosa" label="Gentiana villosa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16814" end="16835" title="Gentiana vodopjanovae" label="Gentiana vodopjanovae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16850" end="16867" title="Gentiana waltonii" label="Gentiana waltonii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16882" end="16900" title="Gentiana walujewii" label="Gentiana walujewii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16915" end="16934" title="Gentiana wangchukii" label="Gentiana wangchukii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16949" end="16964" title="Gentiana wardii" label="Gentiana wardii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16979" end="16998" title="Gentiana wasenensis" label="Gentiana wasenensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17013" end="17030" title="Gentiana wilsonii" label="Gentiana wilsonii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17045" end="17067" title="Gentiana winchuanensis" label="Gentiana winchuanensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15562227" start="17082" end="17108" title="Gentiana wingecarribiensis" label="Gentiana wingecarribiensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17131" end="17146" title="Gentiana woodii" label="Gentiana woodii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17161" end="17182" title="Gentiana xanthonannos" label="Gentiana xanthonannos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17197" end="17219" title="Gentiana yakushimensis" label="Gentiana yakushimensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17234" end="17250" title="Gentiana yokusai" label="Gentiana yokusai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17265" end="17285" title="Gentiana yunnanensis" label="Gentiana yunnanensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17300" end="17318" title="Gentiana zekuensis" label="Gentiana zekuensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17333" end="17356" title="Gentiana zhenxiongensis" label="Gentiana zhenxiongensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17371" end="17390" title="Gentiana zollingeri" label="Gentiana zollingeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022946" start="17432" end="17452" title="Gentianopsis crinita" label="Gentianopsis crinita"/>
<link wikidata="Q163785" start="17806" end="17828" title="Gentiana acaulis" label="&amp;quot;G. acaulis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q162853" start="17830" end="17856" title="Gentiana asclepiadea" label="&amp;quot;G. asclepiadea&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100853" start="17858" end="17881" title="Gentiana paradoxa" label="&amp;quot;G. paradoxa&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533626" start="17883" end="17908" title="Gentiana septemfida" label="&amp;quot;G. septemfida&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q847154" start="17910" end="17936" title="Gentiana sino-ornata" label="&amp;quot;G. sino-ornata&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="17964" end="17972" title="cultivar" label="cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032739" start="18024" end="18051" title="Royal Horticultural Society" label="Royal Horticultural Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501416" start="18059" end="18080" title="Award of Garden Merit" label="Award of Garden Merit"/>
</links>
</doc>
