<doc id="64485" wikidata="Q170603" url="?curid=64485" title="New Spain">
<text>New Spain, officially the Viceroyalty of New Spain ( ; Nahuatl: &quot;Yankwik Kaxtillan Birreiyotl&quot;), originally the Kingdom of New Spain, was an integral territorial entity of the Spanish Empire, established by Habsburg Spain. It was one of several domains established during the Spanish conquest of the Americas, and had its capital in Mexico City. Its jurisdiction comprised a large area of the southern and western portions of North America, mainly what became Mexico and the Southwestern United States, but also California, Florida and Louisiana; Central America as Mexico, the Caribbean like Hispaniola and Martinica, and northern parts of South America, even Colombia; several Pacific archipelagos, including the Philippines and Guam. Additional Asian colonies included &quot;Spanish Formosa&quot;, on the island of Taiwan.

After the 1521 Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire, conqueror Hernán Cortés named the territory New Spain, and established the new capital, Mexico City, on the site of Tenochtitlan, the capital of the Aztec Empire. Central Mexico became the base of expeditions of exploration and conquest, expanding the territory claimed by the Spanish Empire. With the political and economic importance of the conquest, the crown asserted direct control over the densely populated realm. The crown established New Spain as a viceroyalty in 1535, appointing as viceroy Antonio de Mendoza, an aristocrat loyal to the monarch rather than the conqueror Cortés. New Spain was the first of the viceroyalties that Spain created, the second being Peru in 1542, following the Spanish conquest of the Inca Empire. Both New Spain and Peru had dense indigenous populations at conquest as a source of labor and material wealth in the form of vast silver deposits, discovered and exploited beginning in the mid-1500s.

New Spain developed strong regional divisions based on local climate, topography, distance from the capital and the Gulf Coast port of Veracruz, size and complexity of indigenous populations, and the presence or absence of mineral resources. Central and southern Mexico had dense indigenous populations, each with complex social, political, and economic organization, but no large-scale deposits of silver to draw Spanish settlers. By contrast, the northern area of Mexico was arid and mountainous, a region of nomadic and semi-nomadic indigenous populations, which do not easily support human settlement. In the 1540s, the discovery of silver in Zacatecas attracted Spanish mining entrepreneurs and workers, to exploit the mines, as well as crown officials to ensure the crown received its share of revenue. Silver mining became integral not only to the development of New Spain, but also to the enrichment of the Spanish crown, which marked a transformation in the global economy. New Spain&#x27;s port of Acapulco became the New World terminus of the transpacific trade with the Philippines via the Manila galleon. New Spain became a vital link between Spain&#x27;s New World empire and its East Indies empire.

From the beginning of the 19th century, the kingdom fell into crisis, aggravated by the 1808 Napoleonic invasion of Iberia and the forced abdication of the Bourbon monarch, Charles IV. This resulted in a political crisis in New Spain and much of the Spanish Empire in 1808, which ended with the government of Viceroy José de Iturrigaray. Conspiracies of American-born Spaniards sought to take power, leading to the Mexican War of Independence, 1810–1821. At its conclusion in 1821, the viceroyalty was dissolved and the Mexican Empire was established. Former royalist military officer turned insurgent for independence Agustín de Iturbide would be crowned as emperor.

== The Crown and the Viceroyalty of New Spain ==
The Kingdom of New Spain was established on 18 August 1521, following the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire, as a New World kingdom ruled by the Crown of Castile. The initial funds for exploration came from Queen Isabella. Although New Spain was a dependency of Castile, it (Mexico) was a kingdom and not a colony, subject to the presiding monarch on the Iberian Peninsula.

The monarch had sweeping power in the overseas territories, with not just sovereignty over the realm but also property rights. All power over the state came from the monarch. The crown had sweeping powers over the Catholic Church in its overseas territories, and via the Patronato real, a grant by the papacy to the crown to oversee the Church in all aspects save doctrine. The Viceroyalty of New Spain was created by royal decree on October 12, 1535, in the Kingdom of New Spain with a viceroy appointed as the king&#x27;s &quot;deputy&quot; or substitute. This was the first New World viceroyalty and one of only two that the Spanish Empire administered in the continent until the 18th-century Bourbon Reforms.

===Territorial extent of the overseas Spanish Empire===

At its greatest extent, the Spanish crown claimed on the mainland of the Americas much of North America south of Canada, that is: all of modern Mexico and Central America except Panama; most of the United States west of the Mississippi River, plus the Floridas. The Spanish West Indies, settled prior to the conquest of the Aztec Empire, also came under New Spain&#x27;s jurisdiction: Cuba, Hispaniola, Puerto Rico, Jamaica, the Cayman Islands, Trinidad, Martinica and the Bay Islands. New Spain also claimed jurisdiction over the overseas territories of the Spanish East Indies in Asia and Oceania: the Philippine Islands, the Mariana Islands, the Caroline Islands, parts of Taiwan, and parts of the Moluccas. Although asserting sovereignty over this vast realm, it did not effectively control large swaths. Other European powers, including England, France, and the Netherlands established colonies in territories Spain claimed.

Much of what was called in the United States the &quot;Spanish borderlands&quot;, is territory that attracted few Spanish settlers, with less dense indigenous populations and apparently lacking in mineral wealth. Huge deposits of gold in California were discovered immediately after it was incorporated into the U.S. following the Mexican–American War (1846–1848). The northern region of New Spain in the colonial era was considered marginal to Spanish interests compared to the most densely populated and lucrative areas of central Mexico. To shore up its claims in North America in the eighteenth century as other powers encroached on its claims, the crown sent expeditions to the Pacific Northwest, which explored and claimed the coast of British Columbia and Alaska.

Religious missions and fortified presidios were established to shore up Spanish control on the ground. On the mainland, the administrative units included Las Californias, that is, the Baja California peninsula, still part of Mexico and divided into Baja California and Baja California Sur; Alta California (modern Arizona, California, Nevada, Utah, western Colorado, and southern Wyoming); (from the 1760s) Louisiana (including the western Mississippi River basin and the Missouri River basin); Nueva Extremadura (the modern states of Coahuila and Texas); and Santa Fe de Nuevo México (parts of Texas and New Mexico).

=== Government ===


====Viceroyalty====
The Viceroyalty was administered by a viceroy residing in Mexico City and appointed by the Spanish monarch, who had administrative oversight of all of these regions, although most matters were handled by the local governmental bodies, which ruled the various regions of the viceroyalty. First among these were the &quot;audiencias&quot;, which were primarily superior tribunals, but which also had administrative and legislative functions. Each of these was responsible to the Viceroy of New Spain in administrative matters (though not in judicial ones), but they also answered directly to the Council of the Indies.

====Captaincies general and governorates====
The Captaincy Generals were the second-level administrative divisions and these were relatively autonomous from the viceroyalty. The viceroy was captain-general of those provinces that remained directly under his command. Santo Domingo (1535); Philippines (1565); Puerto Rico (1580); Cuba (1608); Guatemala (1609); Yucatán (1617); Commandancy General of the Provincias Internas (1776) (analogous to a dependent captaincy general). Two governorates, third-level administrative divisions, were established, the Governorate of Spanish Florida (Spanish: &quot;La Florida&quot;) and the Governorate of Spanish Louisiana (Spanish: &quot;Luisiana&quot;).

====High courts====
The high courts, or &quot;audiencias&quot;, were established in major areas of Spanish settlement. In New Spain the high court was established in 1527, prior to the establishment of the viceroyalty. The First Audiencia was headed by Hernán Cortés&#x27;s rival Nuño de Guzmán, who used the court to deprive Cortés of power and property. The crown dissolved the First Audiencia and established the Second Audiencia.
The audiencias of New Spain were Santo Domingo (1511, effective 1526, predated the Viceroyalty); Mexico (1527, predated the Viceroyalty); Panama (1st one, 1538–1543); Guatemala (1543); Guadalajara (1548); Manila (1583). 

Audiencia districts further incorporated the older, smaller divisions known as governorates (&quot;gobernaciones&quot;, roughly equivalent to provinces), which had been originally established by conquistador-governors known as &quot;adelantados&quot;. Provinces which were under military threat were grouped into captaincies general, such as the Captaincies General of the Philippines (established 1574) and Guatemala (established in 1609), which were joint military and political commands with a certain level of autonomy. The viceroy was captain-general of those provinces that remained directly under his command.
====Local-level administration====
At the local level there were over two hundred districts, in both indigenous and Spanish areas, which were headed by either a &quot;corregidor&quot; (also known as an &quot;alcalde mayor&quot;) or a &quot;cabildo&quot; (town council), both of which had judicial and administrative powers. In the late 18th century the Bourbon dynasty began phasing out the &quot;corregidores&quot; and introduced intendants, whose broad fiscal powers cut into the authority of the viceroys, governors and &quot;cabildos&quot;. Despite their late creation, these intendancies so affected the formation of regional identity that they became the basis for the nations of Central America and the first Mexican states after independence.

====Intendancies of the 1780s====
As part of the sweeping eighteenth-century administrative and economic changes known as the Bourbon Reforms, the Spanish crown created new administrative units called intendancies, to strengthen central control over the viceroyalty. Some measures aimed to break the power of local elites in order to improve the economy of the empire. Reforms included the improvement of public participation in communal affairs, distribution of undeveloped lands to the indigenous and Spaniards, ending the corrupt practices of local crown officials, encouraging trade and mining, and establishing a system of territorial division similar to the model created by the government of France, already adopted in Spain.

The establishment of intendancies was strongly resisted by the viceroyalties and general captaincies similar to the opposition in the Iberian Peninsula when the reform was adopted. Royal audiencias and ecclesiastical hierarchs opposed the reform for its intervention in economic issues, for its centralist politics, and the forced ceding of many of their functions to the intendants. In New Spain, these units generally corresponded to the regions or provinces that had developed earlier in the center, South, and North.

Many of the intendancy boundaries became Mexican state boundaries after independence. The intendancies were created between 1764 and 1789, with the greatest number in the mainland in 1786: 1764 La Habana (later subdivided); 1766 Nueva Orleans; 1784 Puerto Rico; 1786 México, Veracruz, Puebla de Los Ángeles, Guadalajara, Guanajuato, Zacatecas, San Luis Potosí, Sonora, Durango, Oaxaca, Guatemala, San Salvador, Comayagua, León, Santiago de Cuba, Puerto Príncipe; 1789 Mérida.

==History of New Spain==

The history of mainland New Spain spans three hundred years from the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire (1519–1521) to the collapse of Spanish rule in the Mexican War of Independence (1810–1821).

Beginning with the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire in 1521 by Hernán Cortés, Spanish rule was established, leading to the creation of governing bodies like the Council of the Indies and the Audiencia to maintain control. It involved the forced conversion of indigenous populations to Catholicism and the blending of Spanish and indigenous cultures.

During the 16th and 17th centuries, Spanish settlers founded major cities such as Mexico City, Puebla, and Guadalajara, turning New Spain into a vital part of the Spanish Empire. The discovery of silver in Zacatecas and Guanajuato significantly boosted the economy, leading to conflicts like the Chichimeca War. Missions and presidios were established in northern frontiers, aiding in the expansion and control of territories that later became part of the southwestern United States. The 18th century saw the implementation of the Bourbon Reforms, which aimed to modernize and strengthen the colonial administration and economy. These reforms included the creation of intendancies, increased military presence, and the centralization of royal authority. The expulsion of the Jesuits and the establishment of economic societies, were part of the efforts to enhance efficiency and revenue for the crown.

The decline of New Spain culminated in the early 19th century with the Mexican War of Independence. Following Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla&#x27;s 1810 Cry of Dolores, the insurgent army waged an eleven-year war against Spanish rule. The eventual alliance between royalist military officer Agustín de Iturbide and insurgent leader Vicente Guerrero led to the successful campaign for independence. In 1821, New Spain officially became the independent nation of Mexico, ending three centuries of Spanish colonial rule.

==Economy==

During the era of the conquest, in order to pay off the debts incurred by the conquistadors and their companies, the new Spanish governors awarded their men grants of native tribute and labor, known as encomiendas. In New Spain these grants were modeled after the tribute and corvee labor that the Mexica rulers had demanded from native communities. This system came to signify the oppression and exploitation of natives, although its originators may not have set out with such intent. In short order the upper echelons of patrons and priests in the society lived off the work of the lower classes. Due to some horrifying instances of abuse against the indigenous peoples, Bishop Bartolomé de las Casas suggested bringing black slaves to replace them. Fray Bartolomé later repented when he saw the even worse treatment given to the black slaves.

In colonial Mexico, Encomenderos de Negros were specialized middlemen during the first half of the seventeenth century. While encomendero (alternatively, &quot;encomenderos de indios)&quot; generally refers to men granted the labor and tribute of a particular indigenous group in the immediate post-conquest era, encomenderos de negros were Portuguese slave dealers who were permitted to operate in Mexico for the slave trade.

In Peru, the other discovery that perpetuated the system of forced labor, the mit&#x27;a, was the enormously rich single silver mine discovered at Potosí, but in New Spain, labor recruitment differed significantly. With the exception of silver mines worked in the Aztec period at Taxco, southwest of Tenochtitlan, the Mexico&#x27;s mining region was outside the area of dense indigenous settlement. Labor for the mines in the north of Mexico had a workforce of black slave labor and indigenous wage labor, not draft labor. Indigenous who were drawn to the mining areas were from different regions of the center of Mexico, with a few from the north itself. With such diversity they did not have a common ethnic identity or language and rapidly assimilated to Hispanic culture. Although mining was difficult and dangerous, the wages were good, which is what drew the indigenous labor.

The Viceroyalty of New Spain was the principal source of income for Spain in the eighteenth century, with the revival of mining under the Bourbon Reforms. Important mining centers like Zacatecas, Guanajuato, San Luis Potosí and Hidalgo had been established in the sixteenth century and suffered decline for a variety of reasons in the seventeenth century, but silver mining in Mexico out-performed all other Spanish overseas territories in revenues for the royal coffers.

The fast red dye cochineal was an important export in areas such as central Mexico and Oaxaca in terms of revenues to the crown and stimulation of the internal market of New Spain. &quot;Cacao&quot; and indigo were also important exports for the New Spain, but was used through rather the vice royalties rather than contact with European countries due to piracy, and smuggling. The indigo industry in particular also helped to temporarily unite communities throughout the Kingdom of Guatemala due to the smuggling.

There were two major ports in New Spain, Veracruz the viceroyalty&#x27;s principal port on the Atlantic, and Acapulco on the Pacific, terminus of the Manila galleon. In the Philippines Manila near the South China Sea was the main port. The ports were fundamental for overseas trade, stretching a trade route from Asia, through the Manila galleon to the Spanish mainland.

These were ships that made voyages from the Philippines to Mexico, whose goods were then transported overland from Acapulco to Veracruz and later reshipped from Veracruz to Cádiz in Spain. So then, the ships that set sail from Veracruz were generally loaded with merchandise from the East Indies originating from the commercial centers of the Philippines, plus the precious metals and natural resources of Mexico, Central America, and the Caribbean. During the 16th century, Spain held the equivalent of US$1.5 trillion (1990 terms) in gold and silver received from New Spain.

However, these resources did not translate into development for the Metropolis (mother country) due to Spanish Roman Catholic Monarchy&#x27;s frequent preoccupation with European wars (enormous amounts of this wealth were spent hiring mercenaries to fight the Protestant Reformation), as well as the incessant decrease in overseas transportation caused by assaults from companies of British buccaneers, Dutch corsairs and pirates of various origin. These companies were initially financed by, at first, by the Amsterdam stock market, the first in history and whose origin is owed precisely to the need for funds to finance pirate expeditions, as later by the London market. The above is what some authors call the &quot;historical process of the transfer of wealth from the south to the north&quot;.

==Regions of mainland New Spain==
In the colonial period, basic patterns of regional development emerged and strengthened. European settlement and institutional life was built in the Mesoamerican heartland of the Aztec Empire in Central Mexico. The South (Oaxaca, Michoacán, Yucatán, and Central America) was a region of dense indigenous settlement of Mesoamerica, but without exploitable resources of interest to Europeans, the area attracted few Europeans, while the indigenous presence remained strong. 

The North was outside the area of complex indigenous populations, inhabited primarily by nomadic and hostile northern indigenous groups. With the discovery of silver in the north, the Spanish sought to conquer or pacify those peoples in order to exploit the mines and develop enterprises to supply them. Nonetheless, much of northern New Spain had sparse indigenous population and attracted few Europeans. The Spanish crown and later the Republic of Mexico did not effectively exert sovereignty over the region, leaving it vulnerable to the expansionism of the United States in the nineteenth century.

Regional characteristics of colonial Mexico have been the focus of considerable study. For those based in the vice-regal capital of Mexico City, everywhere else were the &quot;provinces&quot;. Even in the modern era, &quot;Mexico&quot; for many refers solely to Mexico City, with the pejorative view that anywhere outside the capital is a hopeless backwater. &quot;Fuera de México, todo es Cuauhtitlán&quot; [&quot;outside of Mexico City, it&#x27;s all Podunk&quot;], that is, poor, marginal, and backward, in short, the periphery. 

The picture is far more complex, however; while the capital is enormously important as the center of institutional, economic, and social power, the provinces played a significant role in colonial Mexico. Regions (provinces) developed and thrived to the extent that they became sites of economic production and tied into networks of trade. &quot;Spanish society in the Indies was import-export oriented at the very base and in every aspect,&quot; and the development of many regional economies was typically centered on support of that export sector.

===Central region===
====Mexico City, capital of the viceroyalty====
Mexico City was the center of the Central region, and the hub of New Spain. The development of Mexico City itself was vitally important to the development of New Spain as a whole. It was the seat of the Viceroyalty of New Spain, the Archdiocese of the Catholic Church, the Holy Office of the Inquisition, the merchants&#x27; guild (&quot;consulado&quot;), and home of the most elite families in the Kingdom of New Spain. Mexico City was the single most populous city, not just in New Spain, but for many years the entire Western Hemisphere, with a high concentration of mixed-race castas.

====Veracruz to Mexico City====
Significant regional development grew along the main transportation route from the capital east to the port of Veracruz. Alexander von Humboldt called this area, &quot;Mesa de Anahuac&quot;, which can be defined as the adjacent valleys of Puebla, Mexico, and Toluca, enclosed by high mountains, along with their connections to the Gulf Coast port of Veracruz and the Pacific port of Acapulco, where over half the population of New Spain lived. These valleys were linked trunk lines, or main routes, facilitating the movement of vital goods and people to get to key areas. 

Even in the relatively richly endowed region of Mexico, the difficulty of transit of people and goods in the absence of rivers and level terrain remained a major challenge to the economy of New Spain. This challenge persisted during the post-independence years until the late nineteenth-century construction of railroads. In the colonial era and up until the railroads were built in key areas in post-independence in the late nineteenth century, mule trains were the main mode of transporting goods. Pack mules were used because unpaved roads, mountainous terrain, and seasonal flooding could not generally accommodate carts.

In the late eighteenth century, the crown devoted some resources to study and remedy the poor roads. The &quot;Camino Real&quot; (royal road) between the port of Veracruz and the capital had some short sections paved and bridges constructed. The construction was done despite protests from some indigenous settlements when the infrastructure improvements, which sometimes included rerouting the road through communal lands. The Spanish crown finally decided that road improvement was in the interests of the state for military purposes, as well as for fostering commerce, agriculture, and industry, but the lack of state involvement in the development of physical infrastructure was to have lasting effects, constraining development until the late nineteenth century. Despite the road improvements, transit was still difficult, particularly for heavy military equipment.

Although the crown had ambitious plans for both the Toluca and Veracruz portions of the king&#x27;s highway, improvements were limited to a localized network. Even where infrastructure was improved, transit on the Veracruz-Puebla main road had other obstacles, with wolves attacking mule trains, killing animals, and rendering some sacks of foodstuffs unsellable because they were smeared with blood. The north-south Acapulco route remained a mule track through mountainous terrain.

====Veracruz, port city and province====
Veracruz was the first Spanish settlement founded in what became New Spain, and it endured as the only viable Gulf Coast port, the gateway for Spain to New Spain. The difficult topography around the port affected local development and New Spain as a whole. Going from the port to the central plateau entailed a daunting 2000 meter climb from the narrow tropical coastal plain in just over a hundred kilometers. The narrow, slippery road in the mountain mists was treacherous for mule trains, and in some cases mules were hoisted by ropes. Many tumbled with their cargo to their deaths. 

Given the transport constraints, only high-value, low-bulk goods continued to be shipped in the transatlantic trade, which stimulated local production of foodstuffs, rough textiles, and other products for a mass market. Although New Spain produced considerable sugar and wheat, these were consumed exclusively in the colony even though there was demand elsewhere. Philadelphia, not New Spain, supplied Cuba with wheat.

The Caribbean port of Veracruz was small, with its hot, pestilential climate not a draw for permanent settlers: its population never topped 10,000. Many Spanish merchants preferred living in the pleasant highland town of Jalapa (1,500 m). For a brief period (1722–76) the town of Jalapa became even more important than Veracruz, after it was granted the right to hold the royal trade fair for New Spain, serving as the entre for goods from Asia via Manila galleon through the port of Acapulco and European goods via the flota (convoy) from the Spanish port of Cádiz. 

Spaniards also settled in the temperate area of Orizaba, east of the Citlaltepetl volcano. Orizaba varied considerably in elevation from to (the summit of the Citlaltepetl volcano), but &quot;most of the inhabited part is temperate&quot;. Some Spaniards lived in semitropical Córdoba, which was founded as a villa in 1618, to serve as a Spanish base against runaway slave (cimarrón) predations on mule trains traveling the route from the port to the capital. Some cimarrón settlements sought autonomy, such as one led by Gaspar Yanga, with whom the crown concluded a treaty leading to the recognition of a largely black town, San Lorenzo de los Negros de Cerralvo, later called the municipality of Yanga.

European diseases immediately affected the multiethnic Indian populations in the Veracruz area and for that reason Spaniards imported black slaves as either an alternative to indigenous labor or its complete replacement in the event of a repetition of the Caribbean die-off. A few Spaniards acquired prime agricultural lands left vacant by the indigenous demographic disaster. Portions of the province could support sugar cultivation and as early as the 1530s sugar production was underway. New Spain&#x27;s first viceroy, Don Antonio de Mendoza established an hacienda on lands taken from Orizaba.

Indians resisted cultivating sugarcane themselves, preferring to tend their subsistence crops. As in the Caribbean, black slave labor became crucial to the development of sugar estates. During the period 1580–1640 when Spain and Portugal were ruled by the same monarch and Portuguese slave traders had access to Spanish markets, African slaves were imported in large numbers to New Spain and many of them remained in the region of Veracruz. But even when that connection was broken and prices rose, black slaves remained an important component of Córdoba&#x27;s labor sector even after 1700. Rural estates in Córdoba depended on African slave labor, who were 20% of the population there, a far greater proportion than any other area of New Spain, and greater than even nearby Jalapa.

In 1765 the crown created a monopoly on tobacco, which directly affected agriculture and manufacturing in the Veracruz region. Tobacco was a valuable, high-demand product. Men, women, and even children smoked, something commented on by foreign travelers and depicted in eighteenth-century casta paintings. The crown calculated that tobacco could produce a steady stream of tax revenues by supplying the huge Mexican demand, so the crown limited zones of tobacco cultivation. It also established a small number of factories of finished products, and licensed distribution outlets (&quot;estanquillos&quot;). The crown also set up warehouses to store up to a year&#x27;s worth of supplies, including paper for cigarettes, for the factories. With the establishment of the monopoly, crown revenues increased and there is evidence that despite high prices and expanding rates of poverty, tobacco consumption rose while at the same time, general consumption fell.

In 1787 during the Bourbon Reforms Veracruz became an intendancy, a new administrative unit.

====Valley of Puebla====
Founded in 1531 as a Spanish settlement, Puebla de los Angeles quickly rose to the status of Mexico&#x27;s second-most important city. Its location on the main route between the viceregal capital and the port of Veracruz, in a fertile basin with a dense indigenous population, largely not held in encomienda, made Puebla a destination for later arriving Spaniards. If there had been significant mineral wealth in Puebla, it could have been even more prominent a center for New Spain, but its first century established its importance. In 1786 it became the capital of an intendancy of the same name.

It became the seat of the richest diocese in New Spain in its first century, with the seat of the first diocese, formerly in Tlaxcala, moved there in 1543. Bishop Juan de Palafox asserted that the income from the diocese of Puebla was twice that of the archbishopic of Mexico, due to the tithe income derived from agriculture. In its first hundred years, Puebla was prosperous from wheat farming and other agriculture, as the ample tithe income indicates, plus manufacturing woolen cloth for the domestic market. Merchants, manufacturers, and artisans were important to the city&#x27;s economic fortunes, but its early prosperity was followed by stagnation and decline in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.

The foundation of the town of Puebla was a pragmatic social experiment to settle Spanish immigrants without encomiendas to pursue farming and industry. Puebla was privileged in a number of ways, starting with its status as a Spanish settlement not founded on existing indigenous city-state, but with a significant indigenous population. It was located in a fertile basin on a temperate plateau in the nexus of the key trade triangle of Veracruz–Mexico City–Antequera (Oaxaca). Although there were no encomiendas in Puebla itself, encomenderos with nearby labor grants settled in Puebla. And despite its foundation as a Spanish city, sixteenth-century Puebla had Indians resident in the central core.

Administratively Puebla was far enough from Mexico City (approximately ) so as not to be under its direct influence. Puebla&#x27;s Spanish town council (cabildo) had considerable autonomy and was not dominated by encomenderos. The administrative structure of Puebla &quot;may be seen as a subtle expression of royal absolutism, the granting of extensive privileges to a town of commoners, amounting almost to republican self-government, in order to curtail the potential authority of encomenderos and the religious orders, as well as to counterbalance the power of the viceregal capital.&quot;
During the &quot;golden century&quot; from its founding in 1531 until the early 1600s, Puebla&#x27;s agricultural sector flourished, with small-scale Spanish farmers plowing the land for the first time, planting wheat and vaulting Puebla to importance as New Spain&#x27;s breadbasket, a role assumed by the Bajío (including Querétaro) in the seventeenth century, and Guadalajara in the eighteenth. Puebla&#x27;s wheat production was the initial source of its prosperity, but it emerged as a manufacturing and commercial center, &quot;serving as the inland port of Mexico&#x27;s Atlantic trade&quot;. Economically, the city was exempted from the &quot;alcabala&quot; (sales tax) and &quot;almojarifazgo&quot; (import/export duties) for its first century (1531–1630), which helped promote commerce.

Puebla built significant textile production in workshops (obrajes) supplying New Spain and markets as far away as Guatemala and Peru. Transatlantic ties between a particular Spanish town, Brihuega, and Puebla demonstrated the close connection between the two settlements. The growth in Puebla&#x27;s manufacturing sector did not simply coincide with immigration from Brihuega but was crucial to &quot;shaping and driving Puebla&#x27;s economic development&quot;. 

Brihuega immigrants came to Mexico with expertise in textile production, and the transplanted briocenses provided capital to create large-scale obrajes. Although obrajes in Brihuega were small-scale enterprises, quite a number of them in Puebla employed up to 100 workers. Supplies of wool, water for fulling mills, and labor (free indigenous, incarcerated Indians, black slaves) were available. Although much of Puebla&#x27;s textile output was rough cloth, it also produced higher quality dyed cloth with cochineal from Oaxaca and indigo from Guatemala. But by the eighteenth century, Querétaro had displaced Puebla as the mainstay of woolen textile production.

In 1787, Puebla became an intendancy as part of the new administrative structuring of the Bourbon Reforms.

====Valley of Mexico====
Mexico City dominated the Valley of Mexico, but the valley continued to have dense indigenous populations challenged by growing, increasingly dense Spanish settlement. The Valley of Mexico had many former Indian city-states that became Indian towns in the colonial era. These towns continued to be ruled by indigenous elites under the Spanish crown, with an indigenous governor and a town councils. The Indian towns close to the capital were the most desirable ones for encomenderos to hold and for the friars to evangelize.

The capital was provisioned by the indigenous towns, and its labor was available for enterprises that ultimately created a colonial economy. The gradual drying up of the central lake system created more dry land for farming, but the sixteenth-century population declines allowed Spaniards to expand their acquisition of land. One region that retained strong Indian land holding was the southern fresh water area, with important suppliers of fresh produce to the capital. The area was characterized by intensely cultivated chinampas, human-made extensions of cultivable land into the lake system. These chinampa towns retained a strong indigenous character, and Indians continued to hold the majority of that land, despite its closeness to the Spanish capital. A key example is Xochimilco.

Texcoco in the pre-conquest period was one of the three members of the Aztec Triple Alliance and the cultural center of the empire. It fell on hard times in the colonial period as an economic backwater. Spaniards with any ambition or connections would be lured by the closeness of Mexico City, so that the Spanish presence was minimal and marginal.

Tlaxcala, the major ally of the Spanish against the Aztecs of Tenochtitlan, also became something of a backwater, but like Puebla it did not come under the control of Spanish encomenderos. No elite Spaniards settled there, but like many other Indian towns in the Valley of Mexico, it had an assortment of small-scale merchants, artisans, farmers and ranchers, and textile workshops (obrajes).

===North===
Since portions of northern New Spain became part of the United States&#x27; Southwest region, there has been considerable scholarship on the Spanish borderlands in the north. The motor of the Spanish colonial economy was the extraction of silver. In Bolivia, it was from the single rich mountain of Potosí; but in New Spain, there were two major mining sites, one in Zacatecas, the other in Guanajuato.

The region farther north of the main mining zones attracted few Spanish settlers. Where there were settled indigenous populations, such as in the present-day state of New Mexico and in coastal regions of Baja and Alta California, indigenous culture retained considerable integrity.

====Bajío, Mexico&#x27;s breadbasket====
The Bajío, a rich, fertile lowland just north of central Mexico, was nonetheless a frontier region between the densely populated plateaus and valleys of Mexico&#x27;s center and south and the harsh northern desert controlled by nomadic Chichimeca. Devoid of settled indigenous populations in the early sixteenth century, the Bajío did not initially attract Spaniards, who were much more interested in exploiting labor and collecting tribute whenever possible. The region did not have indigenous populations that practiced subsistence agriculture. The Bajío developed in the colonial period as a region of commercial agriculture.

The discovery of mining deposits in Zacatecas and Guanajuato in the mid-sixteenth century and later in San Luis Potosí stimulated the Bajío&#x27;s development to supply the mines with food and livestock. A network of Spanish towns was established in this region of commercial agriculture, with Querétaro also becoming a center of textile production. Although there were no dense indigenous populations or network of settlements, Indians migrated to the Bajío to work as resident employees on the region&#x27;s haciendas and ranchos or rented land (terrasguerros). From diverse cultural backgrounds and with no sustaining indigenous communities, these indios were quickly hispanized, but largely remained at the bottom of the economic hierarchy. Although Indians migrated willingly to the region, they did so in such small numbers that labor shortages prompted Spanish hacendados to provide incentives to attract workers, especially in the initial boom period of the early seventeenth century. Land owners lent workers money, which could be seen as a perpetual indebtedness, but it can be seen not as coercing Indians to stay but a way estate owners sweetened their terms of employment, beyond their basic wage labor. For example, in 1775 the Spanish administrator of a San Luis Potosí estate &quot;had to scour both Mexico City and the northern towns to find enough blue French linen to satisfy the resident employees&quot;. Other types of goods they received on credit were textiles, hats, shoes, candles, meat, beans, and a guaranteed ration of maize. However, where labor was more abundant or market conditions depressed, estate owners paid lower wages. The more sparsely populated northern Bajío tended to pay higher wages than the southern Bajío, which was increasingly integrated in the economy of central Mexico. The credit-based employment system often privileged those holding higher ranked positions on the estate (supervisors, craftsmen, other specialists) who were mostly white, and the estates did not demand repayment.

In the late colonial period, renting complemented estate employment for many non-Indians in more central areas of the Bajío with access to markets. As with hacendados, renters produced for the commercial market. While these Bajío renters could prosper in good times and achieved a level of independence, drought and other disasters made their choice more risky than beneficial.

Many renters retained ties to the estates, diversifying their household&#x27;s sources of income and level of economic security. In San Luis Potosí, rentals were fewer and estate employment the norm. After a number of years of drought and bad harvests in the first decade of the nineteenth century Hidalgo&#x27;s 1810 grito appealed more in the Bajío than in San Luis Potosí. In the Bajío estate owners were evicting tenants in favor of renters better able to pay more for land, there was a disruption of previous patterns of mutual benefit between estate owners and renters.

===Spanish borderlands===
Areas of northern Mexico were incorporated into the United States in the mid-nineteenth century, following Texas independence and the Mexican–American War (1846–48) and generally known as the &quot;Spanish Borderlands&quot;. Scholars in the United States have extensively studied this northern region, which became the states of Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, and California. During the period of Spanish rule, this area was sparsely populated even by indigenous peoples.

The Presidios (forts), pueblos (civilian towns) and the misiones (missions) were the three major agencies employed by the Spanish crown to extend its borders and consolidate its colonial holdings in these territories.

====Missions and the northern frontier====
The town of Albuquerque (modern Albuquerque, New Mexico) was founded in 1706. Other Mexican towns in the region included Paso del Norte (modern Ciudad Juárez), founded in 1667; Santiago de la Monclova in 1689; Panzacola, Tejas in 1681; and San Francisco de Cuéllar (modern city of Chihuahua) in 1709. From 1687, Father Eusebio Francisco Kino, with funding from the Marqués de Villapuente, founded over twenty missions in the Sonoran Desert (in modern Sonora and Arizona). 

From 1697, Jesuits established eighteen missions throughout the Baja California peninsula. Between 1687 and 1700 several missions were founded in Trinidad, but only four survived as Amerindian villages throughout the 18th century. In 1691, explorers and missionaries visited the interior of Texas and came upon a river and Amerindian settlement on 13 June, the feast day of St. Anthony, and named the location and river San Antonio in his honor.

====New Mexico====

During the term of viceroy Don Luis de Velasco, marqués de Salinas the crown ended the long-running Chichimeca War by making peace with the semi-nomadic Chichimeca indigenous tribes of northern México in 1591. This allowed expansion into the &#x27;Province of New Mexico&#x27; or &quot;Provincia de Nuevo México&quot;. In 1595, Don Juan de Oñate, son of one of the key figures in the silver remining region of Zacatecas, received official permission from the viceroy to explore and conquer New Mexico. As was the pattern of such expeditions, the leader assumed the greatest risk but would reap the largest rewards, so that Oñate would become &quot;capitán general&quot; of New Mexico and had the authority to distribute rewards to those in the expedition. 

Oñate pioneered &#x27;The Royal Road of the Interior Land&#x27; or &quot;El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro&quot; between Mexico City and the Tewa village of Ohkay Owingeh, or San Juan Pueblo. He also founded the Spanish settlement of San Gabriel de Yungue-Ouinge on the Rio Grande near the Native American Pueblo, located just north of the modern city of Española, New Mexico. Oñate eventually learned that New Mexico, while it had a settled indigenous population, had little arable land, no silver mines, and possessed few other resources to exploit that would merit large scale colonization. He resigned as governor in 1607 and left New Mexico, having lost much of his personal wealth on the enterprise.

In 1610, Pedro de Peralta, a later governor of the Province of New Mexico, established the settlement of Santa Fe near the southern end of the Sangre de Cristo mountain range. Missions were established to convert the indigenous peoples and manage the agricultural industry. The territory&#x27;s indigenous population resented their forced conversion to Catholicism and suppression of their religion, and the imposition of encomienda system of forced labor. The unrest led to the Pueblo Revolt in 1680, expelling the Spanish, who retreated to Paso del Norte, modern-day Ciudad Juárez.

After the return of the Spanish in 1692, the final resolution included a marked reduction of Spanish efforts to eradicate native culture and religion, the issuing of substantial communal land grants to each Pueblo, and a public defender of their rights and for their legal cases in Spanish courts. In 1776 the New Mexico came under the new Provincias Internas jurisdiction. In the late 18th century the Spanish land grant encouraged the settlement by individuals of large land parcels outside Mission and Pueblo boundaries, many of which became ranchos.

====California====
In 1602, Sebastián Vizcaíno, the first Spanish presence in the &#x27;New California&#x27; (&quot;Nueva California&quot;) region of the frontier Las Californias province since Cabrillo in 1542, sailed as far north up the Pacific Coast as present-day Oregon, and named California coastal features from San Diego to as far north as the Bay of Monterrey.

Not until the eighteenth century was California of much interest to the Spanish crown, since it had no known rich mineral deposits or indigenous populations sufficiently organized to render tribute and do labor for Spaniards. The discovery of huge deposits of gold in the Sierra Nevada foothills did not come until after the U.S. had added California following the Mexican–American War (1846–48).

By the middle of the 1700s, the Catholic order of Jesuits had established a number of missions on the &quot;Baja&quot; (lower) California peninsula. Then, in 1767, King Charles III ordered all Jesuits expelled from all Spanish possessions, including New Spain. New Spain&#x27;s Visitador General José de Gálvez replaced them with the Dominican Order in Baja California, and the Franciscans were chosen to establish new northern missions in &quot;Alta&quot; (upper) California.

In 1768, Gálvez received the order to &quot;Occupy and fortify San Diego and Monterey for God and the King of Spain&quot;. The Spanish colonies there, having far fewer known natural resources and less cultural development than Mexico or Peru, were to combine establishing posts to defend the territory with a perceived responsibility to convert the indigenous people to Catholicism.

The method used to &quot;occupy and fortify&quot; was the established Spanish colonial system: missions (&quot;misiones&quot;, between 1769 and 1833 twenty-one missions were established) aimed at converting the Native Californians to Catholicism, forts (&quot;presidios&quot;, four total) to protect the missionaries, and secular municipalities (&quot;pueblos&quot;, three total). Due to the region&#x27;s great distance from supplies and support in México, the system had to be largely self-sufficient. As a result, the colonial population of California remained small, widely scattered and near the coast.

In 1776, the north-western frontier areas came under the administration of the new &#x27;Commandancy General of the Internal Provinces of the North&#x27; &quot;(Provincias Internas)&quot;, designed to streamline administration and invigorate growth. The crown created two new provincial governments from the former Las Californias in 1804; the southern peninsula became Baja California, and the ill-defined northern mainland frontier area became Alta California.

Once missions and protective presidios were established in an area, large land grants encouraged settlement and establishment of California ranchos. The Spanish system of land grants was not very successful; however, because the grants were merely royal concessions—not actual land ownership. Under later Mexican rule, land grants conveyed ownership, and were more successful at promoting settlement.

Rancho activities centered on cattle-raising; many grantees emulated the Dons of Spain, with cattle, horses and sheep the source of wealth. The work was usually done by Native Americans, sometimes displaced and/or relocated from their villages. Native-born descendants of the resident Spanish-heritage rancho grantees, soldiers, servants, merchants, craftsmen and others became the Californios. Many of the less-affluent men took native wives, and many daughters married later English, French and American settlers.

After the Mexican War of Independence (1821) and subsequent secularization (&quot;disestablishment&quot;) of the missions (1834), Mexican land grant transactions increased the spread of the rancho system. The land grants and ranchos established mapping and land-ownership patterns that are still recognizable in present-day California and New Mexico.

===South===
====Yucatán====

The Yucatán Peninsula can be considered a cul-de-sac, and it has unique features, but it also has strong similarities to other areas in the South. The Yucatán Peninsula extends into the Gulf of Mexico and was connected to Caribbean trade routes and Mexico City, far more than some other southern regions, such as Oaxaca. The main Spanish settlements included the inland city of Mérida, where Spanish civil and religious officials had their headquarters and where the many Spaniards in the province lived. The &quot;villa&quot; of Campeche was the peninsula&#x27;s port, the key gateway for the whole region. A merchant group developed and expanded dramatically as trade flourished during the seventeenth century. Although that period was once characterized as New Spain&#x27;s &quot;century of depression&quot;, for Yucatán this was certainly not the case, with sustained growth from the early seventeenth century to the end of the colonial period.

With dense indigenous Maya populations, Yucatán&#x27;s encomienda system was established early and persisted far longer than in central Mexico, since fewer Spaniards migrated to the region than in the center. Although Yucatán was a more peripheral area to the colony, since it lacked rich mining areas and no agricultural or other export product, it did have a complex of Spanish settlement, with a whole range of social types in the main settlements of Mérida and the villas of Campeche and Valladolid. There was an important sector of mixed-race &quot;castas&quot;, some of whom were fully at home in both the indigenous and Hispanic worlds. Blacks were an important component of Yucatecan society. The largest population in the province was indigenous Maya, who lived in their communities, but which were in contact with the Hispanic sphere via labor demands and commerce.

In Yucatán, Spanish rule was largely indirect, allowing these communities considerable political and cultural autonomy. The Maya community, the &quot;cah&quot;, was the means by which indigenous cultural integrity was maintained. In the economic sphere, unlike many other regions and ethnic groups in Mesoamerica, the Yucatec Maya did not have a pre-conquest network of regular markets to exchange different types of food and craft goods. Perhaps because the peninsula was uniform in its ecosystem local niche production did not develop. Production of cotton textiles, largely by Maya women, helped pay households&#x27; tribute obligations, but basic crops were the basis of the economy. The cah retained considerable land under the control of religious brotherhoods or confraternities (&quot;cofradías&quot;), the device by which Maya communities avoided colonial officials, the clergy, or even indigenous rulers (&quot;gobernadores&quot;) from diverting of community revenues in their &quot;cajas de comunidad&quot; (literally community-owned chests that had locks and keys). &quot;Cofradías&quot; were traditionally lay pious organizations and burial societies, but in Yucatán they became significant holders of land, a source of revenue for pious purposes kept under cah control. &quot;[I]n Yucatán the &quot;cofradía&quot; in its modified form was the community.&quot; Local Spanish clergy had no reason to object to the arrangement since much of the revenue went for payment for masses or other spiritual matters controlled by the priest.

A limiting factor in Yucatán&#x27;s economy was the poor quality of the limestone soil, which could only support crops for two to three years with land cleared through slash-and-burn agriculture. Access to water was also a limiting factor on agriculture, with the limestone escarpment giving way in water filled sinkholes (locally called &quot;cenotes&quot;), but rivers and streams were generally absent on the peninsula. Individuals had rights to land so long as they cleared and tilled them and when the soil was exhausted, they repeated the process. In general, the Indians lived in a dispersed pattern, which Spanish &quot;congregación&quot; or forced resettlement attempted to alter. Collective labor cultivated the confraternities&#x27; lands, which included raising the traditional maize, beans, and cotton. But confraternities also later pursued cattle ranching, as well as mule and horse breeding, depending on the local situation. There is evidence that &quot;cofradías&quot; in southern Campeche were involved in inter-regional trade in cacao as well as cattle ranching. Although generally the revenues from crops and animals were devoted to expenses in the spiritual sphere, &quot;cofradías&quot;&#x27; cattle were used for direct aid to community members during droughts, stabilizing the community&#x27;s food supply.

In the seventeenth century, patterns shifted in Yucatán and Tabasco, as the English took territory the Spanish claimed but did not control, especially what became British Honduras (now Belize) and in Laguna de Términos (Isla del Carmen) where they cut logwood. In 1716–17 viceroy of New Spain organized a sufficient ships to expel the foreigners, where the crown subsequently built a fortress at Isla del Carmen. But the British held onto their territory in the eastern portion of the peninsula into the twentieth century. In the nineteenth century, the enclave supplied guns to the rebellious Maya in the Caste War of Yucatan.

====Valley of Oaxaca====

Since Oaxaca was lacking in mineral deposits and it had an abundant sedentary indigenous population, it developed without European or mixed-race population and large-scale Spanish haciendas, so the indigenous communities retained their land, indigenous languages, and distinct ethnic identities. Antequera (Oaxaca City) was a Spanish settlement founded in 1529, but the rest of Oaxaca consisted of indigenous towns. Despite its remoteness from Mexico City, &quot;throughout the colonial era, Oaxaca was one of Mexico&#x27;s most prosperous provinces&quot;. In the eighteenth century, the value of crown offices (alcalde mayor or corregidor) were the highest for two Oaxaca jurisdictions, with Jicayan and Villa Alta each worth 7,500 pesos, Cuicatlan-Papalotipac, 4,500; Teposcolula and Chichicapa, each 4,200 pesos.q

The most important commodity for Oaxaca was cochineal red dye. Cochineal&#x27;s commodity chain is interesting, with indigenous peasants in the remote areas of Oaxaca ultimately linked to Amsterdam and London commodity exchanges and the European production of luxury cloth. The most extensive study of Oaxaca&#x27;s eighteenth-century economy deals with the nexus between the local crown officials (alcaldes mayores), merchant investors (&quot;aviadores&quot;), the repartimiento (forced labor), and indigenous products, particularly cochineal. The rich, color-fast red dye produced from insects, was harvested from nopal cacti. Cochineal was a high-value, low-volume product that became the second-most valuable Mexican export after silver. Although it could be produced elsewhere in central and southern Mexico, its main region of production was Oaxaca. For the indigenous in Oaxaca, cochineal was the only one &quot;with which the [tributaries] maintain themselves and pay their debts&quot; but it also had other advantages. Producing cochineal was time-consuming labor, but it was not particularly difficult and could be done by the elderly, women, and children. It was also important to households and communities because it initially did not require the indigenous to displace their existing crops or migrate elsewhere.

Although the repartimiento has historically been seen as an imposition on the indigenous, forcing them into economic relations they would rather have avoided and maintained by force, recent work on eighteenth-century Oaxaca analyzes the nexus of crown officials (the alcaldes mayores) and Spanish merchants, and indigenous via the repartimiento. cash loaned by local crown officials (the alcalde mayor and his teniente), usually to individual Indians but sometimes to communities, in exchange for a fixed amount of a good (cochineal or cotton mantles) at a later date. Indigenous elites were an integral part of the repartimiento, often being recipients of large extensions of credit. As authority figures in their community, they were in a good position to collect on the debt, the most risky part of the business from the Spanish point of view.

====Tehuantepec====
The Isthmus of Tehuantepec region of Oaxaca was strategically important for its short transit between the Gulf Coast and the Pacific, facilitating both overland and sea trade. The province of Tehuantepec was the Pacific side of the isthmus and the headwaters of the Coatzacoalcos River. Hernán Cortés acquired holdings for his entailed estate including Huatulco, once the main Pacific Coast port before Acapulco replaced it in 1563.

Gold mining was an early draw for Spaniards, who directed indigenous labor to its extraction, but did not continue beyond the mid-sixteenth century. Over the long run, ranching and commerce were the most important economic activities, with the settlement of Tehuantepec becoming the hub. The region&#x27;s history can be divided into three distinct periods, an initial period of engagement with Spanish colonial rule to 1563, during which there was a working relationship with the Zapotec ruling line and the establishment of Cortés&#x27;s economic enterprises. This early period came to a close with the death of the last native king in 1562 and the escheatment of Cortés&#x27;s Tehuantepec encomiendas to the crown in 1563. The second period of approximately a century (1563–1660) saw the decline of the indigenous entailed estate (&quot;cacicazgo&quot;) and indigenous political power and development of the colonial economy and imposition of Spanish political and religious structures. The final period is the maturation of these structures (1660–1750). The 1660 rebellion can be a dividing line between the two later periods.

The Villa of Tehuantepec, the largest settlement on the isthmus, was an important prehispanic Zapotec trade and religious center, which was not under the jurisdiction of the Aztecs. The early colonial history of Tehuantepec and the larger province was dominated by Cortés and the Marquesado, but the crown realized the importance of the area and concluded an agreement in 1563 with the second Marqués by which the crown took control of the Tehuantepec encomienda. The Marquesado continued to have major private holdings in the province. The Villa of Tehuantepec became a center of Spanish and mixed-race settlement, crown administration, and trade.

The Cortés haciendas in Tehuantepec were key components of the province&#x27;s economy, and they were directly linked to other Marquesado enterprises in greater Mexico in an integrated fashion. The Dominicans also had significant holdings in Tehuantepec, but there has been little research on these. However important the Marquesado and the Dominican enterprises were, there were also other economic players in the region, including individual Spaniards as well as existing indigenous communities. Ranching emerged as the dominant rural enterprise in most of Tehuantepec with a ranching boom in the period 1580–1640. Since Tehuantepec experienced significant indigenous population loss in the sixteenth century conforming to the general pattern, ranching made possible for Spaniards to thrive in Tehuantepec because ranching was not dependent on significant amounts of indigenous labor.

The most detailed economic records for the region are of the Marquesado&#x27;s ranching haciendas, which produced draft animals (horses, mules, burros, and oxen) and sheep and goats, for meat and wool. Cattle ranching for meat, tallow, and leather were also important. Tallow for candles used in churches and residences and leather used in a variety of ways (saddles, other tack, boots, furniture, machinery) were significant items in the larger colonial economy, finding markets well beyond Tehuantepec. Since the Marquesado operated as an integrated enterprise, draft animals were used in other holdings for transport, agriculture, and mining in Oaxaca, Morelos, Toluca, and Mexico City as well as sold. Raised in Tehuantepec, the animals were driven to other Marquesado holdings for use and distribution.

Although colonial population decline affected the indigenous in Tehuantepec, their communities remained important in the colonial era and remain distinctly Indian to the current era. There were differences in the three distinct linguistic and ethnic groups in colonial Tehuantepec, the Zapotec, the Zoque, and the Huave. The Zapotecs concluded an alliance with the Spaniards at contact, and they had already expanded their territory into Zoque and Huave regions.

Under Spanish rule, the Zapotecs not only survived, but flourished, unlike the other two. They continued to pursue agriculture, some of it irrigated, which was not disrupted by the growing ranching economy. Generally Zapotec elites protected their communities from Spanish incursions and community cohesion remained strong as shown in members&#x27; performance of regular community service for social ends. Zapotec elites engaged in the market economy early on, which undermined to an extent the bonds between commoners and elites who colluded with the Spanish. In contrast to the Zapotecs, the Zoque generally declined as a group during the ranching boom, with interloping animals eating their maize crops. Zoque response was to take up being vaqueros themselves. They had access to the trade to Guatemala. Of the three indigenous groups, the Huave were the most isolated from the Spanish ranching economy and labor demands. With little arable or grazing land, they exploited the lagoons of the Pacific coast, using shore and beach resources. They traded dried shrimp and fish, as well as purple dye from shells to Oaxaca, likely acquiring foodstuffs that they were unable to cultivate themselves.

Not well documented is the number of African slaves and their descendants, who were artisans in urban areas and did hard manual labor in rural areas. In a pattern recognizable elsewhere, coastal populations were mainly African, including an unknown number of cimarrón (runaway slave) settlements, while inland the indigenous communities were more prominent. On the Cortés haciendas, blacks and mulattoes were essential to the profitability of the enterprises.

In general, Tehuantepec was not a site of major historical events, but in 1660–61, there was a significant rebellion stemming from increased repartimiento Spanish demands.

====Central America====
With the growth of a sufficient Spanish population and the crown&#x27;s desire to better govern the area, it established the Captaincy General of Guatemala, which had primary jurisdiction over what became Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Costa Rica. The region was diverse, and outlying provinces were resentful for elites in capital of Antigua Guatemala, destroyed by an earthquake in 1773. There was a high court Audiencia in the Kingdom of Guatemala. Given the region&#x27;s distance from major centers of power in New Spain and Spain itself, local strongmen in the early were only nominally subject to royal authority. The indigenous population was very large in comparison to the Spanish, and there were relatively few Africans. Spaniards continued to employ forced labor in the region starting with the conquest era and exact tribute from the indigenous. Compared to the mining areas of New Spain&#x27;s North, this region was generally poor in mineral resources, although Honduras had a brief boom in gold mining, and in the colonial period had little potential to develop an export product, except for cacao and the blue dye indigo. 
Cacao had been cultivated in the prehispanic period. Orchards of cacao trees, which took a number of years to come to maturity and produce fruit. Cacao boomed in the late sixteenth century, and then was displaced by indigo as the most important export product. Indigo, like cacao, was native to the region, and the indigenous peoples gathered wild indigo, used for dying cloth and as a trade good. After the arrival of the Spanish, they domesticated indigo and created plantations for its cultivation in Yucatan, El Salvador, and Guatemala. The indigo industry thrived, since there was high demand in Europe for a high quality, color-fast blue dye. In the region, cultivation and processing was done by indigenous workers, but the owners of plantations, &quot;añileros&quot;, were Spanish. 

It was a dangerous work environment, with toxins in the indigo plants that sickened and sometimes killed workers. It was profitable, especially following the Bourbon Reforms, which allowed trade within the Spanish empire. In the late eighteenth century, indigo growers organized in a trade organization, the &quot;Consulado de Comercio&quot;. There were regions that were not subjugated to Spanish rule, such as the Petén and the Mosquito Coast, and the English took advantage of weak Spanish control to establish a commercial presence on the Gulf Coast, later seizing Belize. An American-born Spanish elite (&quot;criollos&quot;) accumulated land and built fortunes on wheat, sugar, and cattle, all of which were consumed within the region.

==Demographics==
===The role of epidemics===

Spanish settlers brought to the American continent smallpox, measles, typhoid fever, and other infectious diseases. Most of the Spanish settlers had developed an immunity to these diseases from childhood, but the indigenous peoples lacked the needed antibodies since these diseases were totally alien to the native population. There were at least three separate, major epidemics that devastated the population: smallpox (1520–1521), measles (1545–1548) and typhus (1576–1581). 

During the 16th century, the native population of Mexico fell from an estimated pre-Columbian population of 8 to 20 million to less than two million. Therefore, at the start of the 17th century, continental New Spain was a depopulated region with abandoned cities and maize fields. These diseases did not affect the Philippines in the same way because they were already present; Pre-Hispanic Filipinos had contact with other foreign nationalities prior to the arrival of the Spaniards.

===Population in early 1800s===

While different intendancies would conduct censuses to get insights into their inhabitants (namely occupation, number of persons per household, ethnicity etc.), it was not until 1793 that the results of the first national census would be published. That census is known as the &quot;Revillagigedo census&quot; because its creation was ordered by the Count of the same name. Most of the census&#x27; original datasets have reportedly been lost; thus most of what is known about it comes from essays and field investigations made by academics who had access to the census data and used it as reference for their works, such as Prussian geographer Alexander von Humboldt. Each author gives different estimates for the total population, ranging from 3,799,561 to 6,122,354 (more recent data suggest that the population of New Spain in 1810 was 5 to 5.5 million individuals) and not much variation in ethnic composition, with Europeans ranging from 18% to 23% of New Spain&#x27;s population, Mestizos ranging from 21% to 25%, Amerindians ranging from 51% to 61% and Africans being between 6,000 and 10,000. It is concluded then, that across nearly three centuries of colonization, the population growth trends of Europeans and Mestizos were steady, while the percentage of the indigenous population decreased at a rate of 13%–17% per century. The authors assert that rather than Europeans and Mestizos having higher birthrates, the reason for the indigenous population&#x27;s decrease lies with their higher mortality, due to living in remote locations rather than in cities and towns founded by the Spanish colonists, or being at war with them. It is also for these reasons that the number of indigenous Mexicans presents a greater variation between publications, with their numbers in a given location estimated rather than counted, leading to possible overestimations in some provinces and underestimations in others.
~

Regardless of the imprecision related to the counting of indigenous peoples living outside of the colonized areas, the effort that New Spain&#x27;s authorities put into considering them as subjects is worth mentioning, as censuses made by other colonial or post-colonial countries did not consider American Indians to be citizens/subjects. For example the censuses made by the Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata would only count the inhabitants of the colonized settlements. Another example would be the censuses made by the United States, that did not count Indigenous peoples living among the general population until 1860, and indigenous peoples as a whole until 1900.

Once New Spain achieved independence, the legal basis of the colonial caste system was abolished and mentions of a person&#x27;s caste in official documents was also abandoned, which led to the exclusion of racial classification from future censuses, and made it difficult to track demographic development of each ethnicity in the country. More than a century would pass before Mexico conducted a new census on which a person&#x27;s race was listed, in 1921, but even then, due to its huge inconsistencies with other official registers as well as its historic context, modern investigators have deemed it inaccurate. Almost a century after the 1921 census, Mexico&#x27;s government has begun to conduct ethno-racial surveys again, with results suggesting that the population growth trends for each major ethnic group haven&#x27;t changed significantly since the 1793 census.

==Culture, art, and architecture==

The capital of Viceroyalty of New Spain, Mexico City, was one of the principal centers of European cultural expansion in the Americas. Some of the most important early buildings in New Spain were churches and other religious architecture. Civil architecture included the viceregal palace, now the National Palace, and the Mexico City town council (&quot;cabildo&quot;), both located on the main square in the capital.

The first printing press in the New World was brought to Mexico in 1539, by printer Juan Pablos (Giovanni Paoli). The first book printed in Mexico was entitled &quot;La escala espiritual de San Juan Clímaco&quot;. In 1568, Bernal Díaz del Castillo finished &quot;La Historia Verdadera de la Conquista de la Nueva España&quot;. Figures such as Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz, Juan Ruiz de Alarcón, and don Carlos de Sigüenza y Góngora, stand out as some of the viceroyalty&#x27;s most notable contributors to Spanish literature. In 1693, Sigüenza y Góngora published &quot;El Mercurio Volante&quot;, the first newspaper in New Spain.

Architects Pedro Martínez Vázquez and Lorenzo Rodriguez produced some visually frenetic architecture known as churrigueresque in the capital, Ocotlan, Puebla and some remote silver-mining towns. Composers including Manuel de Zumaya, Juan Gutiérrez de Padilla, and Antonio de Salazar were active from the early 1500s through the Baroque period of music.

==See also==
*Criollo people
*Economic history of Mexico
*Filipino immigration to Mexico
*Governor-General of the Philippines
*Historiography of Colonial Spanish America
*History of democracy in Mexico
*History of Honduras
*Index of Mexico-related articles
*List of governors in the Viceroyalty of New Spain
*List of viceroys of New Spain
*Mexican settlement in the Philippines
*Spanish American Enlightenment
*History of Mexico
*History of Guatemala
*History of El Salvador
*List of viceroys of New Spain
*Louisiana (New Spain)
*Supply of Franciscan missions in New Mexico
*Mexican War of Independence
*Viceroyalty of Peru
*Spanish American wars of independence

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==

===General histories===
*
*
*
*Meyer, Michael C., William L. Sherman, and Susan M. Deeds. (2014) &quot;The Course of Mexican History&quot; Tenth edition, esp. chapters 6–15. New York: Oxford University Press. 
*Van Young, Eric. &quot;Stormy Passage: Mexico from Colony to Republic, 1750-1850&quot;. Lanham MD: Rowman and Littlefield 2022. .

===More specialized works===
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

===Historiography===

* Hanke, Lewis. &quot;Do the Americas Have a Common History? A Critique of the Bolton Theory&quot; (1964).
* Hurtado, Albert L. &quot;Bolton and Turner: The Borderlands and American Exceptionalism&quot;. &quot;Western Historical Quarterly&quot; 44#1 (2013): 4–20. online.
* Hurtado, Albert L. &quot;Herbert Eugene Bolton: Historian of the American Borderlands&quot; (University of California Press; 2012).
*Van Young, Eric. &quot;Two Decades of Anglophone Historical Writing on Colonial Mexico: Continuity and Change since 1980&quot;. Mexican Studies/Estudios Mexicanos. (2004) vol. 20, No. 2 (summer), 275–326. 

===Reference works===
*&quot;Encyclopedia of Mexico&quot;. 2 vols. (1997) Chicago.
*&quot;Encyclopedia of Latin American History and Culture&quot;. 5 vols. (1996) New York.
*
==External links==
*MEXICO&#x27;S COLONIAL ERA—PART I: The Settlement of New Spain at mexconnect.com
*Index to the DeWitt Colony Region under New Spain at Texas A&amp;M University
*1492 – Middle America at ibiblio.org &quot;the public&#x27;s library and digital archive&quot;
*&quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;: Hispanic Heritage in The Americas
*Map of the Border of the King&#x27;s Dominion in the Northern America is a map by José de Urrútia and Nicolas de la Fora.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="0" end="9" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="26" end="50" title="New Spain" label="Viceroyalty of New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q13300" start="55" end="62" title="Nahuatl" label="Nahuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="122" end="142" title="New Spain" label="Kingdom of New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="186" end="200" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q600093" start="217" end="231" title="Habsburg Spain" label="Habsburg Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047607" start="286" end="318" title="Spanish colonization of the Americas" label="Spanish conquest of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="522" end="532" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="534" end="541" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q748300" start="546" end="555" title="Louisiana (New Spain)" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="576" end="582" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="603" end="613" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054" start="618" end="627" title="Martinique" label="Martinica"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="671" end="679" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="725" end="736" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="741" end="745" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q74049" start="788" end="803" title="Spanish Formosa" label="Spanish Formosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="828" end="834" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q828435" start="852" end="888" title="Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire" label="Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326" start="900" end="913" title="Hernán Cortés" label="Hernán Cortés"/>
<link wikidata="Q13695" start="1006" end="1018" title="Tenochtitlan" label="Tenochtitlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608489" start="1039" end="1051" title="Aztec Empire" label="Aztec Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12356456" start="1348" end="1359" title="viceroyalty" label="viceroyalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q441300" start="1391" end="1409" title="Antonio de Mendoza" label="Antonio de Mendoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q211435" start="1562" end="1566" title="Viceroyalty of Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q636771" start="1590" end="1625" title="Spanish conquest of the Inca Empire" label="Spanish conquest of the Inca Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q173270" start="1963" end="1971" title="Veracruz (city)" label="Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="2465" end="2471" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q80269" start="2475" end="2484" title="Zacatecas" label="Zacatecas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808040" start="2771" end="2809" title="Global silver trade from the 16th to 19th centuries" label="a transformation in the global economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81398" start="2836" end="2844" title="Acapulco" label="Acapulco"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="2856" end="2865" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q683846" start="2930" end="2944" title="Manila galleon" label="Manila galleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q910648" start="3018" end="3040" title="Spanish East Indies" label="its East Indies empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="3136" end="3165" title="Peninsular War" label="Napoleonic invasion of Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183226" start="3216" end="3226" title="Charles IV of Spain" label="Charles IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q432371" start="3360" end="3379" title="José de Iturrigaray" label="José de Iturrigaray"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="3458" end="3485" title="Mexican War of Independence" label="Mexican War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q285658" start="3563" end="3577" title="First Mexican Empire" label="Mexican Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q133808" start="3662" end="3681" title="Agustín de Iturbide" label="Agustín de Iturbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q828435" start="3835" end="3871" title="Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire" label="Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q217196" start="3909" end="3925" title="Crown of Castile" label="Crown of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q45859" start="3971" end="3985" title="Isabella I of Castile" label="Queen Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="4119" end="4136" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554269" start="4410" end="4424" title="Patronato real" label="Patronato real"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="4626" end="4633" title="viceroy" label="viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734662" start="4835" end="4850" title="Bourbon Reforms" label="Bourbon Reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="5088" end="5094" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q555528" start="5158" end="5170" title="Spanish Florida" label="the Floridas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12213222" start="5176" end="5195" title="Spanish West Indies" label="Spanish West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="5301" end="5311" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q5785" start="5339" end="5353" title="Cayman Islands" label="Cayman Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q128323" start="5355" end="5363" title="Trinidad" label="Trinidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054" start="5365" end="5374" title="Martinique" label="Martinica"/>
<link wikidata="Q751725" start="5383" end="5394" title="Bay Islands (department)" label="Bay Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q910648" start="5469" end="5488" title="Spanish East Indies" label="Spanish East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q153732" start="5538" end="5553" title="Mariana Islands" label="Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q118350" start="5559" end="5575" title="Caroline Islands" label="Caroline Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q74049" start="5586" end="5592" title="Spanish Formosa" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827" start="5611" end="5619" title="Moluccas" label="Moluccas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="6172" end="6192" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238120" start="6505" end="6541" title="Spanish expeditions to the Pacific Northwest" label="expeditions to the Pacific Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q301467" start="6767" end="6782" title="Las Californias" label="Las Californias"/>
<link wikidata="Q58731" start="6862" end="6877" title="Baja California" label="Baja California"/>
<link wikidata="Q46508" start="6882" end="6901" title="Baja California Sur" label="Baja California Sur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422806" start="6903" end="6918" title="Alta California" label="Alta California"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="6927" end="6934" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="6936" end="6946" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="6948" end="6954" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="6956" end="6960" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="6970" end="6978" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="6993" end="7000" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q748300" start="7020" end="7029" title="Louisiana (New Spain)" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q677487" start="7108" end="7125" title="Nueva Extremadura" label="Nueva Extremadura"/>
<link wikidata="Q53079" start="7148" end="7156" title="Coahuila" label="Coahuila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="7161" end="7166" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q921283" start="7173" end="7197" title="Santa Fe de Nuevo México" label="Santa Fe de Nuevo México"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="7208" end="7213" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="7218" end="7228" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="7311" end="7318" title="viceroy" label="viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q889833" start="7364" end="7379" title="Spanish monarchy" label="Spanish monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695783" start="7593" end="7602" title="Audiencia Real" label="audiencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127285" start="7867" end="7888" title="Council of the Indies" label="Council of the Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323389" start="7940" end="7957" title="Captaincy General" label="Captaincy General"/>
<link wikidata="Q56061" start="7981" end="8004" title="administrative division" label="administrative division"/>
<link wikidata="Q484105" start="8032" end="8042" title="Autonomy" label="autonomous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919465" start="8158" end="8171" title="Captaincy General of Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721139" start="8180" end="8191" title="Captaincy General of the Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q541745" start="8200" end="8211" title="Captaincy General of Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039931" start="8220" end="8224" title="Captaincy General of Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077243" start="8233" end="8242" title="Captaincy General of Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556639" start="8251" end="8258" title="Captaincy General of Yucatán" label="Yucatán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622232" start="8267" end="8313" title="Provincias Internas" label="Commandancy General of the Provincias Internas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8371" end="8382" title="Governorate#Spanish Empire" label="governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q555528" start="8460" end="8475" title="Spanish Florida" label="Spanish Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q748300" start="8533" end="8550" title="Louisiana (New Spain)" label="Spanish Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326" start="8838" end="8851" title="Hernán Cortés" label="Hernán Cortés"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333486" start="8865" end="8879" title="Nuño de Guzmán" label="Nuño de Guzmán"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400549" start="9052" end="9065" title="Real Audiencia of Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747501" start="9116" end="9122" title="Real Audiencia of Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226748" start="9157" end="9163" title="Real Audiencia of Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4233720" start="9186" end="9195" title="Real Audiencia of Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q4233721" start="9204" end="9215" title="Real Audiencia of Guadalajara" label="Guadalajara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774484" start="9224" end="9230" title="Real Audiencia of Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798622" start="9320" end="9331" title="governorate" label="governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q34876" start="9383" end="9392" title="provinces" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q126236" start="9436" end="9448" title="conquistador" label="conquistador"/>
<link wikidata="Q354097" start="9474" end="9484" title="adelantado" label="adelantado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200068" start="9554" end="9573" title="Captaincy" label="captaincies general"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274587" start="10025" end="10035" title="Corregidor (position)" label="corregidor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024827" start="10098" end="10105" title="Cabildo (council)" label="cabildo"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="10211" end="10226" title="Bourbon dynasty" label="Bourbon dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491450" start="10289" end="10298" title="intendant" label="intendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q28912963" start="10574" end="10588" title="Mexican states" label="Mexican states"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="10595" end="10607" title="Mexican independence" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734662" start="10736" end="10751" title="Bourbon Reforms" label="Bourbon Reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491450" start="10811" end="10823" title="Intendant (government official)" label="intendancies"/>
<link wikidata="Q828435" start="12438" end="12474" title="Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire" label="Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="12526" end="12553" title="Mexican War of Independence" label="Mexican War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326" start="12635" end="12648" title="Hernán Cortés" label="Hernán Cortés"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127285" start="12733" end="12754" title="Council of the Indies" label="Council of the Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747501" start="12763" end="12772" title="Real Audiencia of Mexico" label="Audiencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79923" start="13018" end="13024" title="Puebla" label="Puebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q9022" start="13030" end="13041" title="Guadalajara" label="Guadalajara"/>
<link wikidata="Q80269" start="13129" end="13138" title="Zacatecas" label="Zacatecas"/>
<link wikidata="Q46475" start="13143" end="13153" title="Guanajuato" label="Guanajuato"/>
<link wikidata="Q936533" start="13219" end="13233" title="Chichimeca War" label="Chichimeca War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734662" start="13454" end="13469" title="Bourbon Reforms" label="Bourbon Reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491450" start="13591" end="13603" title="Intendant" label="intendancies"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="13698" end="13705" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q55636" start="13936" end="13961" title="Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla" label="Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145411" start="13974" end="13988" title="Cry of Dolores" label="Cry of Dolores"/>
<link wikidata="Q133808" start="14112" end="14131" title="Agustín de Iturbide" label="Agustín de Iturbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q315618" start="14153" end="14169" title="Vicente Guerrero" label="Vicente Guerrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q396287" start="14555" end="14566" title="encomiendas" label="encomiendas"/>
<link wikidata="Q466259" start="14629" end="14635" title="corvee" label="corvee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307681" start="14651" end="14657" title="Mexica" label="Mexica"/>
<link wikidata="Q207416" start="15033" end="15055" title="Bartolomé de las Casas" label="Bartolomé de las Casas"/>
<link wikidata="Q85759259" start="15220" end="15242" title="Encomenderos de Negros" label="Encomenderos de Negros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477994" start="15706" end="15716" title="mit&amp;#x27;a" label="mit&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q990095" start="15908" end="15913" title="Taxco" label="Taxco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734662" start="16650" end="16665" title="Bourbon Reforms" label="Bourbon Reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q80269" start="16697" end="16706" title="Zacatecas" label="Zacatecas"/>
<link wikidata="Q46475" start="16708" end="16718" title="Guanajuato" label="Guanajuato"/>
<link wikidata="Q78980" start="16720" end="16735" title="San Luis Potosí" label="San Luis Potosí"/>
<link wikidata="Q80903" start="16740" end="16747" title="Hidalgo (Mexico)" label="Hidalgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q189720" start="16998" end="17001" title="dye" label="dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q244274" start="17002" end="17011" title="cochineal" label="cochineal"/>
<link wikidata="Q195" start="17172" end="17177" title="Chocolate" label="Cacao"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967009" start="17188" end="17194" title="indigo" label="indigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077243" start="17457" end="17477" title="Kingdom of Guatemala" label="Kingdom of Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q60130" start="17542" end="17550" title="Veracruz" label="Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q81398" start="17610" end="17618" title="Acapulco" label="Acapulco"/>
<link wikidata="Q683846" start="17651" end="17665" title="Manila galleon" label="Manila galleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="17686" end="17692" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="17702" end="17717" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q15682" start="18046" end="18051" title="Cádiz" label="Cádiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="18216" end="18227" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q271449" start="18238" end="18252" title="precious metal" label="precious metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q200250" start="18519" end="18529" title="Metropolis" label="Metropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="18711" end="18733" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q850220" start="18842" end="18851" title="buccaneer" label="buccaneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q201559" start="18860" end="18868" title="Privateer" label="corsairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="18873" end="18880" title="Piracy" label="pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="18961" end="18970" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q475000" start="18971" end="18983" title="stock market" label="stock market"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="19435" end="19447" title="Mesoamerican" label="Mesoamerican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608489" start="19465" end="19477" title="Aztec Empire" label="Aztec Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881158" start="21597" end="21623" title="history of Mexico City" label="development of Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q43173" start="21809" end="21820" title="Inquisition" label="Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379243" start="22098" end="22104" title="castas" label="castas"/>
<link wikidata="Q173270" start="22242" end="22258" title="port of Veracruz" label="port of Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694" start="22260" end="22282" title="Alexander von Humboldt" label="Alexander von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q81398" start="22522" end="22530" title="Acapulco" label="Acapulco"/>
<link wikidata="Q683846" start="26194" end="26208" title="Manila galleon" label="Manila galleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15682" start="26305" end="26310" title="Cádiz" label="Cádiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q993904" start="26362" end="26369" title="Orizaba" label="Orizaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q238147" start="26383" end="26395" title="Citlaltepetl" label="Citlaltepetl"/>
<link wikidata="Q989492" start="26590" end="26597" title="Córdoba, Veracruz" label="Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q445485" start="26687" end="26695" title="cimarrónes" label="cimarrón"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081727" start="26835" end="26847" title="Gaspar Yanga" label="Gaspar Yanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q441300" start="27547" end="27565" title="Antonio de Mendoza" label="Antonio de Mendoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379243" start="28694" end="28699" title="casta" label="casta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734662" start="29383" end="29398" title="Bourbon Reforms" label="Bourbon Reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491450" start="29418" end="29428" title="intendancy" label="intendancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q125293" start="29524" end="29545" title="Puebla de los Angeles" label="Puebla de los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q396287" start="29780" end="29790" title="encomienda" label="encomienda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491450" start="30053" end="30063" title="intendancy" label="intendancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448974" start="30246" end="30261" title="Juan de Palafox" label="Juan de Palafox"/>
<link wikidata="Q523302" start="32400" end="32405" title="Bajío" label="Bajío"/>
<link wikidata="Q52615" start="33079" end="33087" title="Brihuega" label="Brihuega"/>
<link wikidata="Q244274" start="33863" end="33872" title="cochineal" label="cochineal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967009" start="33889" end="33895" title="indigo" label="indigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="33901" end="33910" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q79754" start="33943" end="33952" title="Querétaro" label="Querétaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491450" start="34047" end="34057" title="intendancy" label="intendancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734662" start="34111" end="34126" title="Bourbon Reforms" label="Bourbon Reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q643026" start="35457" end="35467" title="Xochimilco" label="Xochimilco"/>
<link wikidata="Q689987" start="35820" end="35828" title="Tlaxcala de Xicohténcatl" label="Tlaxcala"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="36302" end="36318" title="Southwest United States" label="Southwest region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="36465" end="36471" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="36476" end="36483" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055970" start="36525" end="36531" title="Cerro de Potosí" label="Potosí"/>
<link wikidata="Q80269" start="36593" end="36602" title="Zacatecas" label="Zacatecas"/>
<link wikidata="Q46475" start="36617" end="36627" title="Guanajuato" label="Guanajuato"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="36737" end="36759" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="indigenous populations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="36797" end="36807" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q178543" start="36834" end="36838" title="Baja California (region)" label="Baja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422806" start="36843" end="36858" title="Alta California" label="Alta California"/>
<link wikidata="Q523302" start="36958" end="36963" title="Bajío" label="Bajío"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323096" start="41074" end="41082" title="Presidio" label="Presidio"/>
<link wikidata="Q251749" start="41093" end="41099" title="pueblo" label="pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573426" start="41126" end="41134" title="List of Spanish missions" label="misiones"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="41344" end="41355" title="Albuquerque" label="Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="41377" end="41387" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q26590" start="41476" end="41489" title="Ciudad Juárez" label="Ciudad Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q990007" start="41524" end="41532" title="Monclova" label="Monclova"/>
<link wikidata="Q61302" start="41613" end="41622" title="Chihuahua, Chihuahua" label="Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q45185" start="41644" end="41673" title="Father Kino" label="Father Eusebio Francisco Kino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859282" start="41741" end="41749" title="Spanish missions in the Sonoran Desert" label="missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q189429" start="41757" end="41771" title="Sonoran Desert" label="Sonoran Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q46422" start="41783" end="41789" title="Sonora" label="Sonora"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41846" end="41895" title="Spanish missions in California#Missions in present-day Baja California (Mexico)" label="missions throughout the Baja California peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573425" start="41927" end="41960" title="Spanish missions in Trinidad" label="missions were founded in Trinidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q167477" start="42180" end="42191" title="Anthony of Padua" label="St. Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="42226" end="42237" title="San Antonio, Texas" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="42292" end="42299" title="viceroy" label="viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551930" start="42304" end="42339" title="Luis de Velasco, marqués de Salinas" label="Luis de Velasco, marqués de Salinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q936533" start="42373" end="42387" title="Chichimeca War" label="Chichimeca War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072137" start="42426" end="42436" title="Chichimeca" label="Chichimeca"/>
<link wikidata="Q921283" start="42559" end="42584" title="Santa Fe de Nuevo México" label="Provincia de Nuevo México"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040026" start="42605" end="42618" title="Juan de Oñate" label="Juan de Oñate"/>
<link wikidata="Q911953" start="43104" end="43136" title="El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro" label="El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974818" start="43171" end="43175" title="Tewa people" label="Tewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13437115" start="43187" end="43200" title="Ohkay Owingeh, New Mexico" label="Ohkay Owingeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414216" start="43264" end="43292" title="San Gabriel de Yungue-Ouinge" label="San Gabriel de Yungue-Ouinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="43300" end="43310" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="43320" end="43335" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018839" start="43385" end="43405" title="Española, New Mexico" label="Española, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160043" start="43746" end="43762" title="Pedro de Peralta" label="Pedro de Peralta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197469" start="43772" end="43810" title="Spanish governors of New Mexico" label="governor of the Province of New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="43842" end="43850" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328749" start="43880" end="43896" title="Sangre de Cristo Mountains" label="Sangre de Cristo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573426" start="43913" end="43921" title="List of Spanish missions" label="Missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q852431" start="44032" end="44053" title="Puebloan peoples" label="indigenous population"/>
<link wikidata="Q396287" start="44159" end="44169" title="encomienda" label="encomienda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547791" start="44216" end="44229" title="Pueblo Revolt" label="Pueblo Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q26590" start="44306" end="44319" title="Ciudad Juárez" label="Ciudad Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217027" start="44509" end="44519" title="land grant" label="land grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622232" start="44662" end="44681" title="Provincias Internas" label="Provincias Internas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573409" start="44725" end="44743" title="Spanish land grants in New Mexico" label="Spanish land grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q51647" start="44815" end="44822" title="Mission (Christian)" label="Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q141710" start="44905" end="44923" title="Sebastián Vizcaíno" label="Sebastián Vizcaíno"/>
<link wikidata="Q301467" start="45040" end="45055" title="Las Californias" label="Las Californias"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="45116" end="45129" title="West Coast of the United States" label="Pacific Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="45145" end="45151" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="45196" end="45205" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q584588" start="45225" end="45245" title="Monterey Bay" label="the Bay of Monterrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="45478" end="45512" title="California gold rush" label="discovery of huge deposits of gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="45613" end="45633" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="45696" end="45703" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q178543" start="45748" end="45793" title="Baja California peninsula" label="&amp;quot;Baja&amp;quot; (lower) California peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q36234" start="45810" end="45826" title="Charles III of Spain" label="King Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709724" start="45942" end="45956" title="José de Gálvez" label="José de Gálvez"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="45980" end="45995" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominican Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="46024" end="46035" title="Franciscans" label="Franciscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422806" start="46086" end="46121" title="Alta California" label="&amp;quot;Alta&amp;quot; (upper) California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824509" start="46603" end="46611" title="Spanish Missions of California" label="missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q744299" start="46719" end="46738" title="Indigenous peoples of California" label="Native Californians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323096" start="46755" end="46760" title="presidio" label="forts"/>
<link wikidata="Q265204" start="46838" end="46852" title="pueblo (disambiguation)" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622232" start="47278" end="47297" title="Provincias Internas" label="Provincias Internas"/>
<link wikidata="Q301467" start="47432" end="47447" title="Las Californias" label="Las Californias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679045" start="47655" end="47666" title="Spanish land grants in California" label="land grants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679045" start="47710" end="47728" title="Ranchos of California" label="California ranchos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138610" start="48056" end="48060" title="Don (honorific)" label="Dons"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="48152" end="48168" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285219" start="48365" end="48376" title="Californios" label="Californios"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="48510" end="48537" title="Mexican War of Independence" label="Mexican War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q85502" start="48560" end="48574" title="secularization" label="secularization"/>
<link wikidata="Q130978" start="48885" end="48902" title="Yucatán Peninsula" label="Yucatán Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q12731" start="48923" end="48933" title="cul-de-sac" label="cul-de-sac"/>
<link wikidata="Q165204" start="49259" end="49265" title="Mérida, Yucatán" label="Mérida"/>
<link wikidata="Q61301" start="49411" end="49419" title="Campeche City" label="Campeche"/>
<link wikidata="Q396287" start="49886" end="49896" title="encomienda" label="encomienda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024731" start="50323" end="50333" title="Valladolid, Yucatán" label="Valladolid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379243" start="50385" end="50391" title="castas" label="castas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921225" start="50475" end="50481" title="Afro-Mexicans" label="Blacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="51260" end="51266" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="52326" end="52335" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q622543" start="52422" end="52448" title="slash-and-burn agriculture" label="slash-and-burn agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174791" start="52528" end="52538" title="escarpment" label="escarpment"/>
<link wikidata="Q188734" start="52566" end="52574" title="sinkhole" label="sinkhole"/>
<link wikidata="Q41692" start="53137" end="53141" title="mule" label="mule"/>
<link wikidata="Q80914" start="53647" end="53654" title="Tabasco" label="Tabasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643555" start="53750" end="53766" title="British Honduras" label="British Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650280" start="53787" end="53805" title="Laguna de Términos" label="Laguna de Términos"/>
<link wikidata="Q991435" start="53807" end="53822" title="Isla del Carmen" label="Isla del Carmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q376320" start="53839" end="53846" title="logwood" label="logwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q772814" start="54193" end="54213" title="Caste War of Yucatan" label="Caste War of Yucatan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34110" start="54248" end="54254" title="Oaxaca" label="Oaxaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q131429" start="54549" end="54560" title="Oaxaca City" label="Oaxaca City"/>
<link wikidata="Q244274" start="55104" end="55113" title="cochineal" label="cochineal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55676" end="55687" title="nopal cacti" label="nopal cacti"/>
<link wikidata="Q629479" start="57270" end="57281" title="Tehuantepec" label="Tehuantepec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326" start="57542" end="57555" title="Hernán Cortés" label="Hernán Cortés"/>
<link wikidata="Q5395020" start="57582" end="57597" title="Marquesado del Valle de Oaxaca" label="entailed estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q96620931" start="57608" end="57616" title="Huatulco" label="Huatulco"/>
<link wikidata="Q81398" start="57658" end="57666" title="Acapulco" label="Acapulco"/>
<link wikidata="Q629479" start="58834" end="58845" title="Tehuantepec" label="Tehuantepec"/>
<link wikidata="Q147401" start="61454" end="61461" title="Zapotec peoples" label="Zapotec"/>
<link wikidata="Q509276" start="61467" end="61472" title="Zoque people" label="Zoque"/>
<link wikidata="Q611921" start="61482" end="61487" title="Huave people" label="Huave"/>
<link wikidata="Q445485" start="63091" end="63099" title="cimarrónes" label="cimarrón"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077243" start="63615" end="63645" title="Captaincy General of Guatemala" label="Captaincy General of Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="63695" end="63704" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="63706" end="63717" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q783" start="63719" end="63727" title="Honduras" label="Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="63729" end="63738" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="63744" end="63754" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q212773" start="63843" end="63860" title="Antigua Guatemala" label="Antigua Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695783" start="63921" end="63930" title="Audiencia Real" label="Audiencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="64616" end="64621" title="Cocoa bean" label="cacao"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967009" start="64639" end="64645" title="indigo" label="indigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734662" start="65598" end="65613" title="Bourbon Reforms" label="Bourbon Reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q466061" start="65856" end="65861" title="Petén Department" label="Petén"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165546" start="65870" end="65884" title="Mosquito Coast" label="Mosquito Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q242" start="66009" end="66015" title="Belize" label="Belize"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="66280" end="66288" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q79793" start="66290" end="66297" title="measles" label="measles"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="66299" end="66312" title="typhoid fever" label="typhoid fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="66479" end="66489" title="antibodies" label="antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="66976" end="66981" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694" start="67873" end="67895" title="Alexander von Humboldt" label="Alexander von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q210551" start="69524" end="69558" title="Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata" label="Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379243" start="69881" end="69902" title="castas" label="colonial caste system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915612" start="71155" end="71192" title="House of the First Print Shop in the Americas" label="first printing press in the New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q6300719" start="71235" end="71246" title="Juan Pablos" label="Juan Pablos"/>
<link wikidata="Q315795" start="71374" end="71398" title="Bernal Díaz del Castillo" label="Bernal Díaz del Castillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q183074" start="71494" end="71519" title="Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz" label="Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q356532" start="71521" end="71541" title="Juan Ruiz de Alarcón" label="Juan Ruiz de Alarcón"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734753" start="71551" end="71579" title="Carlos de Sigüenza y Góngora" label="Carlos de Sigüenza y Góngora"/>
<link wikidata="Q238499" start="71654" end="71672" title="Spanish literature" label="Spanish literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q954879" start="71890" end="71905" title="churrigueresque" label="churrigueresque"/>
<link wikidata="Q322033" start="71922" end="71929" title="Ocotlán, Tlaxcala" label="Ocotlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q125293" start="71931" end="71937" title="Puebla, Puebla" label="Puebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q329122" start="71995" end="72011" title="Manuel de Zumaya" label="Manuel de Zumaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349443" start="72013" end="72038" title="Juan Gutiérrez de Padilla" label="Juan Gutiérrez de Padilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777073" start="72044" end="72062" title="Antonio de Salazar (composer)" label="Antonio de Salazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8361" start="72108" end="72131" title="Baroque music" label="Baroque period of music"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242047" start="72148" end="72162" title="Criollo people" label="Criollo people"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333484" start="72164" end="72190" title="Economic history of Mexico" label="Economic history of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448620" start="72192" end="72222" title="Filipino immigration to Mexico" label="Filipino immigration to Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542521" start="72224" end="72259" title="Governor-General of the Philippines" label="Governor-General of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q27333702" start="72261" end="72303" title="Historiography of Colonial Spanish America" label="Historiography of Colonial Spanish America"/>
<link wikidata="Q85766770" start="72305" end="72335" title="History of democracy in Mexico" label="History of democracy in Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q687152" start="72337" end="72356" title="History of Honduras" label="History of Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048853" start="72358" end="72390" title="Index of Mexico-related articles" label="Index of Mexico-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773758" start="72392" end="72441" title="List of governors in the Viceroyalty of New Spain" label="List of governors in the Viceroyalty of New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q556876" start="72443" end="72472" title="List of viceroys of New Spain" label="List of viceroys of New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6826093" start="72474" end="72511" title="Mexican settlement in the Philippines" label="Mexican settlement in the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134404" start="72513" end="72543" title="Spanish American Enlightenment" label="Spanish American Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q212763" start="72545" end="72562" title="History of Mexico" label="History of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427210" start="72564" end="72584" title="History of Guatemala" label="History of Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q675398" start="72586" end="72608" title="History of El Salvador" label="History of El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q556876" start="72610" end="72639" title="List of viceroys of New Spain" label="List of viceroys of New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q748300" start="72641" end="72662" title="Louisiana (New Spain)" label="Louisiana (New Spain)"/>
<link wikidata="Q123914155" start="72664" end="72707" title="Supply of Franciscan missions in New Mexico" label="Supply of Franciscan missions in New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="72709" end="72736" title="Mexican War of Independence" label="Mexican War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q211435" start="72738" end="72757" title="Viceroyalty of Peru" label="Viceroyalty of Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123201" start="72759" end="72796" title="Spanish American wars of independence" label="Spanish American wars of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q24765565" start="73052" end="73067" title="Eric Van Young" label="Van Young, Eric"/>
<link wikidata="Q24765565" start="73682" end="73697" title="Eric Van Young" label="Van Young, Eric"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825992" start="73810" end="73844" title="Mexican Studies" label="Mexican Studies/Estudios Mexicanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q55074756" start="73918" end="73940" title="Encyclopedia of Mexico" label="Encyclopedia of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q55610861" start="73979" end="74029" title="Encyclopedia of Latin American History and Culture" label="Encyclopedia of Latin American History and Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243194" start="74495" end="74510" title="José de Urrútia" label="José de Urrútia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64486" wikidata="Q404000" url="?curid=64486" title="! (disambiguation)">
<text>[[exclamation mark|!]] is a punctuation mark, called an exclamation mark, exclamation point, ecphoneme, or bang.

! or exclamation point may also refer to:

== Mathematics and computers ==
*Factorial, a mathematical function
**Derangement, a related mathematical function
*Negation, in logic and some programming languages
*Uniqueness quantification, in mathematics and logic
*codice_1, a CONFIG.SYS directive in FreeDOS for unconditional execution of directives
*A dereference operator in BCPL

== Music ==
*&quot;!&quot; (The Dismemberment Plan album), released in 1995
*&quot;!&quot; (Donnie Vie album), released in 2016
*&quot;!&quot; (The Song Formerly Known As), a single on the 1997 album &quot;Unit&quot; by Regurgitator
*&quot;Exclamation Mark&quot; (album), a 2011 album by Jay Chou
*&quot;Exclamation Point&quot;, a 2010 LP by DA!
*&quot;!&quot; (Trippie Redd album), released in 2019
** &quot;!&quot; (Trippie Redd song), that album&#x27;s title track
*&quot;!&quot; (Cláudia Pascoal album), released in 2020

== Other ==
*ǃ, the IPA symbol for postalveolar click in speech
*An indicator of a good chess move in punctuation
*! (chess), a good move in chess annotation

== See also ==
*!! (disambiguation)
*!!! (disambiguation)
*Interrobang, the nonstandard mix of a question mark and an exclamation mark
*ḷ, not the exclamation mark, but a lower-case letter Ḷ used in Asturian</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q404000" start="0" end="22" title="! (disambiguation)" label="[[exclamation mark|!]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q404000" start="114" end="115" title="! (disambiguation)" label="!"/>
<link wikidata="Q404000" start="119" end="136" title="! (disambiguation)" label="exclamation point"/>
<link wikidata="Q120976" start="190" end="199" title="Factorial" label="Factorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207920" start="227" end="238" title="Derangement" label="Derangement"/>
<link wikidata="Q190558" start="273" end="281" title="Negation" label="Negation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502253" start="324" end="349" title="Uniqueness quantification" label="Uniqueness quantification"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="389" end="399" title="CONFIG.SYS#!" label="CONFIG.SYS"/>
<link wikidata="Q118155" start="466" end="486" title="dereference operator" label="dereference operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4540205" start="509" end="553" title="! (The Dismemberment Plan album)" label="&amp;quot;!&amp;quot; (The Dismemberment Plan album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714010" start="573" end="605" title="! (Donnie Vie album)" label="&amp;quot;!&amp;quot; (Donnie Vie album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85719441" start="625" end="667" title="! (The Song Formerly Known As)" label="&amp;quot;!&amp;quot; (The Song Formerly Known As)"/>
<link wikidata="Q873560" start="730" end="766" title="Exclamation Mark (album)" label="&amp;quot;Exclamation Mark&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204183" start="838" end="841" title="DA! (band)" label="DA!"/>
<link wikidata="Q66092288" start="843" end="877" title="! (Trippie Redd album)" label="&amp;quot;!&amp;quot; (Trippie Redd album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q66092288" start="899" end="932" title="! (Trippie Redd song)" label="&amp;quot;!&amp;quot; (Trippie Redd song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q98684635" start="965" end="1002" title="! (Cláudia Pascoal album)" label="&amp;quot;!&amp;quot; (Cláudia Pascoal album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q196190" start="1057" end="1075" title="alveolar click" label="postalveolar click"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1124" end="1135" title="Chess annotation symbols#! (Good move)" label="punctuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q641172" start="1137" end="1146" title="! (chess)" label="! (chess)"/>
<link wikidata="Q353153" start="1197" end="1216" title="!! (disambiguation)" label="!! (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q37961639" start="1218" end="1238" title="!!! (disambiguation)" label="!!! (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q427676" start="1240" end="1251" title="Interrobang" label="Interrobang"/>
<link wikidata="Q425441" start="1317" end="1318" title="ḷ" label="ḷ"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64487" wikidata="Q323767" url="?curid=64487" title="Tour Montparnasse">
<text>Tour Maine-Montparnasse (Maine-Montparnasse Tower), also commonly named Tour Montparnasse, is a office skyscraper in the Montparnasse area of Paris, France. Constructed from 1969 to 1973, it was the tallest skyscraper in France until 2011, when it was surpassed by the Tour First in the La Défense business district west of Paris&#x27;s city limits. It remains the tallest building in Paris proper and the third tallest in France, behind Tour First and Tour Hekla. , it is the 53rd-tallest building in Europe.

The tower was designed by architects Eugène Beaudouin, Urbain Cassan, and Louis Hoym de Marien and built by Campenon Bernard. On 21 September 2017, Nouvelle AOM won a competition to redesign the building&#x27;s façade.

==Description==
Built on top of the Montparnasse–Bienvenüe Paris Métro station, the building has 59 floors.

The 56th floor, from the ground, is home to Paris Montparnasse, an observation deck owned by Magnicity, a French company which also operates the Berlin TV Tower in Berlin and 360 CHICAGO at the former John Hancock Center in Chicago. Visitors to the observation deck can also visit the scenic rooftop terrace or make reservations for the 56th-floor restaurant called Ciel de Paris.

The view covers a radius of ; aircraft can be seen taking off from Orly Airport.

The guard rail, to which various antennae are attached, can be pneumatically lowered.

==History==
===The project===
In 1934, the old Montparnasse station located on the edges of the similarly named boulevard, opposite the Rue de Rennes, appeared ill-suited to traffic. The city of Paris planned to reorganize the district and build a new station. But the project, entrusted to Raoul Dautry (who would give his name to the square of the tower), met strong opposition and was cancelled.

In 1956, on the occasion of the adoption of the new master plan for the Paris traffic plan, the &quot;Société d&#x27;économie mixte pour l&#x27;Aménagement du secteur Maine Montparnasse&quot; (SEMMAM) was created, as well as the &quot;l&#x27;Agence pour l&#x27;Opération Maine Montparnasse&quot; (AOM). Their mission was to redevelop the neighbourhood, which required razing many streets, often dilapidated and unsanitary. The site then occupied up to .

In 1958, the first studies of the tower were well launched, but the project was strongly criticized because of the height of the building. A controversy ensued, led by the Minister of Public Works Edgard Pisani, who obtained the support of André Malraux, then Minister of Culture under General de Gaulle which led to slowdowns in the project.

However, the reconstruction of the Montparnasse station a few hundred metres south of the old one and the destruction of the Gare du Maine, which was included in the real estate project of the AOM, a joint agency which brought together the four architects: Urbain Cassan, Eugène Beaudouin and Louis de Hoÿm de Marien, was carried out from June 1966 to the spring of 1969 with the assistance of the architect Jean Saubot.

In 1968, André Malraux granted the building permit for the Tower to the AOM and work began that same year. The project was spearheaded by the American real estate developer Wylie Tuttle, who enlisted a consortium of 17 French insurance companies and seven banks in the $140 million multiple-building project, but later distanced himself from the project until his 2002 obituary revealed that the building was his original &quot;brainchild&quot;.

In 1969, the decision to build a shopping centre was finally made, and Georges Pompidou, then President of the Republic, wanted to provide the capital with modern infrastructure. Despite a major controversy, the construction of the tower was started.

For geographer Anne Clerval, this construction symbolizes the service economy of Paris in the 1970s resulting from deindustrialization policies which, from the 1960s, favoured &quot;bypassing by space the most working class strongholds at the time&quot;.

===Construction===

The Tour Montparnasse was built between 1969 and 1973 on the site of the old Montparnasse station. The first stone was laid in 1970 and the inauguration took place in 1973.

The foundations of the tower are made up of 56 reinforced concrete pillars sinking underground. For urban planning reasons, the tower had to be built just above a Metro line; and to avoid using the same support and weakening it, the Metro structures were protected by a reinforced concrete shield. Long horizontal beams were installed in order to free up the space needed in the basement to fit out the tracks for trains.

==Occupation==

The tower is mainly occupied by offices. Various companies and organizations have settled in the tower:

* The International Union of Architects, Axa and MMA insurers, the mining and metallurgy company Eramet, Al Jazeera
* Political parties have used campaign offices, such as François Mitterrand in 1974, the RPR in the late 1970s, Emmanuel Macron&#x27;s La République En Marche! in 2016, Benoît Hamon since 2018
*Previously Tour Maine-Montparnasse housed the executive management of Accor.

The 56th floor, with its terrace, bars and restaurant, has been used for private or public events. During the 1980s and 1990s, the live National Lottery was cast on TF1 from the 56th floor.

==Climbing the tower==
French urban climber Alain Robert scaled the building&#x27;s exterior glass and steel wall to the top twice, in 1995 and in 2015, both times using no equipment or safety devices. The feat was also undertaken by Polish climber Marcin Banot in 2020 and 2023.

==Criticism==

The tower&#x27;s simple architecture, large proportions and monolithic appearance have been often criticized by Parisians for being out of place in Paris&#x27;s landscape. As a result, two years after its completion the construction of buildings over seven storeys tall in the city centre was banned in Paris. This ban was lifted in 2015.

The design of the tower predates architectural trends of more modern skyscrapers today that are often designed to provide a window for every office. Only the offices around the perimeter of each floor of Tour Montparnasse have windows.

It is said as a joke among the Parisians, that the tower&#x27;s observation deck enjoys the most beautiful view in all of Paris because it is the only place from which the tower cannot be seen.

A 2008 poll of editors on Virtualtourist voted the building the second-ugliest building in the world, behind Boston City Hall in the United States.

==Asbestos contamination==
In 2005, studies showed that the tower contained asbestos material. When inhaled, for instance during repairs, asbestos is a carcinogen. Monitoring revealed that legal limits of fibres per litre were surpassed and, on at least one occasion, reached 20 times the legal limit. Due to health and legal concerns, some tenants abandoned their offices in the building.

Removal of the asbestos was originally expected to take three years. After a nearly three-year delay, removal began in 2009 alongside regular operation of the building. In 2012, it was reported the tower was 90% free of asbestos.

==See also==

* List of tallest buildings and structures in the Paris region

==References==
==External links==
* Photos of Tour Montparnasse
* Tour Montparnasse
* Pictures and info</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q323767" start="0" end="23" title="Tour Montparnasse" label="Tour Maine-Montparnasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q323767" start="25" end="49" title="Tour Montparnasse" label="Maine-Montparnasse Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q323767" start="72" end="89" title="Tour Montparnasse" label="Tour Montparnasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11303" start="103" end="113" title="skyscraper" label="skyscraper"/>
<link wikidata="Q211604" start="121" end="133" title="Montparnasse" label="Montparnasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="142" end="147" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056326" start="199" end="227" title="List of tallest buildings and structures in the Paris region" label="tallest skyscraper in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509747" start="269" end="279" title="Tour First" label="Tour First"/>
<link wikidata="Q987729" start="287" end="297" title="La Défense" label="La Défense"/>
<link wikidata="Q17640070" start="453" end="463" title="Tour Hekla" label="Tour Hekla"/>
<link wikidata="Q924418" start="477" end="508" title="List of tallest buildings in Europe" label="53rd-tallest building in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475312" start="619" end="635" title="Vinci SA" label="Campenon Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q764465" start="767" end="789" title="Montparnasse–Bienvenüe (Paris Métro)" label="Montparnasse–Bienvenüe"/>
<link wikidata="Q50716" start="790" end="801" title="Paris Métro" label="Paris Métro"/>
<link wikidata="Q151356" start="985" end="1000" title="Fernsehturm Berlin" label="Berlin TV Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q217727" start="1041" end="1060" title="John Hancock Center" label="John Hancock Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q223416" start="1289" end="1301" title="Orly Airport (Paris)" label="Orly Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q211500" start="1367" end="1380" title="pneumatically" label="pneumatically"/>
<link wikidata="Q631114" start="1434" end="1458" title="Gare Montparnasse" label="old Montparnasse station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251863" start="2418" end="2442" title="Minister of Public Works (France)" label="Minister of Public Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284283" start="2443" end="2456" title="Edgard Pisani" label="Edgard Pisani"/>
<link wikidata="Q151164" start="2486" end="2499" title="André Malraux" label="André Malraux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="2540" end="2549" title="de Gaulle" label="de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q96066858" start="3185" end="3197" title="Wylie Tuttle" label="Wylie Tuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185" start="3530" end="3546" title="Georges Pompidou" label="Georges Pompidou"/>
<link wikidata="Q112730899" start="3773" end="3788" title="service economy" label="service economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q185909" start="4711" end="4744" title="International Union of Architects" label="International Union of Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q160054" start="4746" end="4749" title="Axa" label="Axa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347990" start="4802" end="4808" title="Eramet" label="Eramet"/>
<link wikidata="Q13477" start="4810" end="4820" title="Al Jazeera Arabic" label="Al Jazeera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038" start="4877" end="4896" title="François Mitterrand" label="François Mitterrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052584" start="4910" end="4913" title="Rally for the Republic" label="RPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052772" start="4933" end="4948" title="Emmanuel Macron" label="Emmanuel Macron"/>
<link wikidata="Q23731823" start="4956" end="4980" title="La République En Marche!" label="La République En Marche!"/>
<link wikidata="Q818118" start="4990" end="5002" title="Benoît Hamon" label="Benoît Hamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q212599" start="5085" end="5090" title="Accor" label="Accor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450805" start="5229" end="5245" title="Française des Jeux (lottery)" label="National Lottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q214683" start="5258" end="5261" title="TF1" label="TF1"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="5307" end="5313" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q312489" start="5328" end="5340" title="Alain Robert" label="Alain Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527945" start="6378" end="6392" title="Virtualtourist" label="Virtualtourist"/>
<link wikidata="Q250773" start="6461" end="6477" title="Boston City Hall" label="Boston City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q104085" start="6577" end="6585" title="asbestos" label="asbestos"/>
<link wikidata="Q187661" start="6653" end="6663" title="carcinogen" label="carcinogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056326" start="7139" end="7199" title="List of tallest buildings and structures in the Paris region" label="List of tallest buildings and structures in the Paris region"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64488" wikidata="Q315633" url="?curid=64488" title="Carlos Salinas de Gortari">
<text>Carlos Salinas de Gortari (; born 3 April 1948) is a Mexican economist and former politician who served as the 60th president of Mexico from 1988 to 1994. Affiliated with the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI), earlier in his career he worked in the Secretariat of Programming and Budget, eventually becoming Secretary. He secured the party&#x27;s nomination for the 1988 general election and was elected amid widespread accusations of electoral fraud.

An economist, Salinas de Gortari was the first Mexican president since 1946 who was not a law graduate. His presidency was characterized by the entrenchment of the neoliberal, free trade economic policies initiated by his predecessor Miguel de la Madrid in observance of the Washington Consensus, mass privatizations of state-run companies and the reprivatization of the banks, Mexico&#x27;s entry into NAFTA, negotiations with the right-wing opposition party PAN to recognize their victories in state and local elections in exchange for supporting Salinas&#x27; policies, normalization of relations with the Catholic clergy, and the adoption of a new currency. From the beginning of his administration, Salinas de Gortari was criticized by the Mexican left, who considered him an illegitimate president whose neoliberal policies led to higher unemployment and were perceived as giving away the wealth of the nation to foreign ownership, whereas he was praised by the right wing and the international community, who considered him a leading figure of globalization and credited him with modernizing the country. Salinas was also backed by the United States government in his bid for Director-General of the newly created World Trade Organization (WTO).

After years of economic recovery during his presidency, a series of mismanagement and corruption scandals during his last year in office crumbled his public image domestically and internationally. These events included the Zapatista uprising and the assassinations of Luis Donaldo Colosio (Salinas&#x27;s hand-picked successor and PRI candidate for the 1994 presidential election) and José Francisco Ruiz Massieu (Salinas&#x27;s brother-in-law and PRI Secretary-General). This surge of political violence led to economic uncertainty. Facing pressures to devalue the peso, Salinas refused, opting for a strategy he believed would help his candidacy to be the inaugural president of the WTO. As a consequence, less than a month after Salinas left office, his successor Ernesto Zedillo was forced to devalue the peso and Mexico entered into one of the worst economic crises of its history. Shortly after, his brother Raúl Salinas de Gortari was arrested for ordering the assassination of Ruiz Massieu and was subsequently indicted on charges of drug trafficking. Salinas then left the country, returning in 1999.

Salinas is often referred to as the most unpopular former president of Mexico. A 2005 nationwide poll conducted by Parametría found that 73% of the respondents had a negative image of him, while only 9% stated that they had a positive image of the former president. He has been regarded as the most influential and controversial Mexican politician since the 1990s.

==Early life and education==
Carlos Salinas de Gortari was born on 3 April 1948 in Mexico City, the second son and one of five children of economist and government official Raúl Salinas Lozano and Margarita de Gortari Carvajal. Salinas&#x27;s father served as President Adolfo López Mateos&#x27;s minister of industry and commerce, but was passed over as the PRI&#x27;s presidential candidate in favor of Gustavo Díaz Ordaz (1964–70). When Carlos Salinas was chosen the PRI&#x27;s presidential candidate for the 1988 election, he told his father, &quot;It took us more than 20 years, but we made it.&quot;

A tragedy occurred early in Carlos Salinas&#x27;s life. On 18 December 1951, when he was three years old, he was playing with his older brother Raúl, then five, and an eight-year-old friend when they found a loaded rifle, and one of them shot and killed the Salinas family&#x27;s twelve-year-old maid, Manuela. It was never determined which of the three boys pulled the trigger, and the incident was declared an accident; it was given newspaper coverage in &quot;Excélsior&quot; and &quot;La Prensa&quot; at the time. A judge blamed the Salinas parents for leaving a loaded weapon accessible to their small children. The Salinas family did not know the last name of their 12-year-old maid Manuela—only that she came from San Pedro Azcapotzaltongo—and it is unknown whether her family ever claimed her body. They were also exonerated with the assistance of Gilberto Bolaños Cacho, maternal uncle of legendary Mexican comedian Chespirito, who is also nephew to Gustavo Díaz Ordaz, who became president of Mexico in 1964. He has not commented publicly on this tragic early childhood incident.

Salinas attended the National Autonomous University of Mexico as an undergraduate, studying economics. He was an undergraduate when the student movement in Mexico organized against the 1968 Summer Olympics, but there is no evidence of his participation. He was an active member of the PRI youth movement and a political club, the Revolutionary Policy and Professional Association, whose members continued to be his close friends when he was president. Salinas was a skilled dressage horseman, and was a member of the Mexico national team at the Pan-American Games in Cali, Colombia, in 1971.

Salinas was one of the Mexicans of his generation who studied at elite foreign universities. He earned a master&#x27;s degree in Public Administration from Harvard University in 1973 and went on to earn a PhD from Harvard Kennedy School in 1978. His doctoral dissertation was published as &quot;Political Participation, Public Investment and Support for the System: A Comparative Study of Rural Communities in Mexico&quot;.

==Personal life==
Salinas met his future first wife, Cecilia Yolanda Occelli González (born 1950), who was two years his junior, in 1958 when he was just ten years old whilst she was only eight. They began dating in 1965 when he was 17-years old and she was 15-years old. However, the relationship ended in 1968 when Salinas moved to the United States to study economics.

In 1970, Salinas and Occelli reconnected in Williamsburg, Virginia, in the United States. They were engaged soon after and married on 15 April 1972, in a ceremony in Mexico City. They moved to Boston, where Salinas was completing his master&#x27;s and doctorate at Harvard University. The couple discovered that Occelli was pregnant with their first child during Salinas&#x27; first semester at Harvard. Their oldest daughter, Cecilia Salinas Occelli, was born on 22 January 1974. Occelli and Salinas had two more children: Emiliano, who was born on 19 February 1976, and Juan Cristobal, who was born in 1978.

Cecilia Occelli González served as First Lady of Mexico from 1988 to 1994 during the Salinas presidency. Soon after leaving office, Salinas traveled to New York City to take a break from Mexican politics. He returned to Mexico from the United States in 1995, where he immediately asked his wife for a divorce. The couple divorced later in 1995.

Salinas married his second wife, Ana Paula Gerard Rivero, shortly after his divorce from Occelli. It is believed that Salinas originally met Gerard in 1983 at the Instituto Tecnológico Autónomo de México, where he was teaching at the time, though that story remains unconfirmed. Gerard later worked as a technical secretary for the Economic Cabinet of the Salinas administration. The couple had three children. Gerard gave birth to their eldest daughter, Ana Emilia Margarita, in January 1996. followed by a son, Patricio Gerónimo Gerardo who was born two years later in 1998, while their youngest son, Mateo, was born in 2006.

In early 2021, he obtained Spanish nationality through the procedure that grants it to descendants of Sephardic Jews.

==Early political career==
Salinas was tapped by President Miguel de la Madrid to serve as Minister of Planning and Budget in 1982, a position that De la Madrid himself had previously held. It was a key cabinet position since Mexico was in dire financial circumstances following the presidency of José López Portillo, who as a desperate measure had nationalized the banks in Mexico and expropriated dollar-denominated savings accounts. The country held no hard currency reserves, exhaustion of foreign credit, and soaring interest rates. the Ministries of Finance and Planning and Budget became the most powerful positions to deal with the economic crisis. In the cabinet, Salinas&#x27;s main rival was Jesús Silva Herzog, Minister of Finance. In the internecine politics that would decide who would succeed De la Madrid as president, Salinas sought to destroy the reputation of Silva Herzog. Another key figure in the cabinet was Manuel Bartlett, Minister of the Interior, with whom Salinas forged a non-compete alliance. Salinas also forged other alliances within the circles of power and did not directly compete with De la Madrid for public attention. Silva Herzog made missteps in his ministry, which Salinas capitalized on, forcing his resignation.

==Presidential election 1988==
According to historian Enrique Krauze, &quot;Not in their worst nightmares could the lords of the PRI have imagined what would happen to them on the sixth of July 1988. As they had done six years before, the electorate came out to vote, but not in support of the official candidate. They came to the voting booths to punish him.&quot; Salinas had become presidential candidate in a difficult time for the PRI which for the first time was faced by significant opposition from the left (National Democratic Front) and from the right (National Action Party, PAN). The candidate of the PAN was Manuel Clouthier.

Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas, son of President Lázaro Cárdenas, registered as an opposing candidate from a left-wing coalition called &quot;Frente Democrático Nacional&quot;. He rapidly became a popular figure, and became the first opposing candidate to fill the &quot;Zócalo&quot; with sympathizers and to seriously threaten the PRI, which had won all presidential elections since its inception in 1929. The Ministry of the Interior (Secretaría de Gobernación), through its Federal Electoral Commission, was the institution in charge of the electoral process, and installed a modern computing system to count the votes. On election day 6 July 1988, the system &quot;crashed&quot;, and when it was finally restored, Carlos Salinas was declared the official winner. Even though the elections are extremely controversial, and some maintain that Salinas won legally, the expression &quot;se cayó el sistema&quot; (&quot;the system crashed&quot;) became a colloquial euphemism for electoral fraud. As one observer put it, &quot;For the ordinary citizen, it was not the computer network but the Mexican political system that had crashed.&quot;

The process involved two suspicious shutdowns of the computer system used to keep track of the number of votes. Suspicions later grew as Congress voted (with support from the Revolutionary Institutional and National Action parties) to destroy without opening the electoral documentation. Other people believed that Salinas, in fact, won the ballot, albeit probably not with an absolute majority as the official figures suggested, although that is not required under Mexican election law.

Former president Miguel de la Madrid seemed to admit in a 2004 autobiography that the 1988 election had been rigged, and during a television interview in September 2005, de la Madrid appeared to acknowledge that the PRI lost the 1988 elections. However, what he actually observed in his autobiography was that &quot;Initial results from areas around the capital showed that Mr. Salinas was losing badly to the opposition leader Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas,&quot; which was undoubtedly true given the overwhelming support for Cárdenas in the capital region and may easily have led to a situation comparable to the familiar &quot;blue shift&quot; or &quot;red mirage&quot; phenomenon often seen in U.S. elections; and in the 2005 interview, his actual words were that &quot;the PRI lost the &#x27;88 elections, or at least lost a significant number of voters&quot;. Asked for comment on De la Madrid&#x27;s statements, Senator Manuel Bartlett, who was the president of the Federal Electoral Commission &quot;(Comisión Federal Electoral)&quot; during the De la Madrid administration, declared Salinas won the election albeit with the smallest margin of any PRI candidate before him. He attributed De la Madrid&#x27;s remarks to his old age (71 years old ) and the remarks being taken out of context by journalist Carlos Loret de Mola.

==Presidency 1988–1994==
===Cabinet===

Salinas assumed the presidency on 1 December 1988 at the Legislative Palace of San Lázaro. There he took oath before the Congress of the Union. As the declared winner of a highly contested election, he had the task of restoring his own legitimacy and that of his party when he took office. The election had shown that much of the public desired reform, but Salinas appointed PRI hard-liners (&quot;dinosaurs&quot;) to his cabinet, including Fernando Gutiérrez Barrios to the Ministry of the Interior; Manuel Bartlett to the Ministry of Education; and Carlos Hank González to Agriculture. The cabinet was cohesive in support of Salinas&#x27;s neoliberal policies. Many ministers were technocrats with graduate academic degrees, a profile similar to Salinas&#x27;s. Although there was opposition to many of Salinas&#x27;s policies, it came from outside the cabinet. Over the course of his presidency, he moved or replaced a number of cabinet ministers. A key replacement in January 1994 immediately after the Chiapas conflict was at the Ministry of the Interior (&quot;Gobernación&quot;), appointing Jorge Carpizo, who had been head of the government National Human Rights Commission and previously was rector of the National Autonomous University of Mexico. When the PRI candidate in the 1994 elections, Luis Donaldo Colosio was assassinated in March 1994, new restrictions barring cabinet ministers who had not resigned in the six months previous to the election date from being candidates for the presidency meant that Salinas had a small pool of eligible choices.

===Domestic issues===
In his inaugural address in December 1988, he outlined an ambitious and important goal of &quot;modernizing&quot; Mexico.&quot; He contended that &quot;The modernization of Mexico is essential if we are to meet the demands of the 85 million Mexicans of today... In brief, we need to modernize politics, the economy, and society. The modernization of Mexico is, moreover, an absolute imperative. This is the only way we will be able to affirm our sovereignty in a world undergoing profound transformation.&quot;

During his six-year term in office (&quot;sexenio&quot;) major changes were made to the Constitution of 1917 that affected political reform; church-state relations, ending many aspects of anticlericalism restricting the Catholic Church and other religious organizations; agrarian reform, ending redistribution of land under Article 27; and policy changes on &quot;indigenous peoples, human rights, economic activities of the state, [and] criminal due process.&quot;

====First steps====
Immediately upon his inauguration, he arrested prominent union leaders, many of whom were his opponents in the PRI, among other measures to demonstrate his determination to set his own course. His government privatized state-run companies, including Teléfonos de México, sold to PRI-insider Carlos Slim, as well as re-privatizing banks that President José López Portillo had nationalized at the end of his term. The funds from these sales of state assets helped pay off Mexico&#x27;s internal debt. However, there were also bailouts for banks and the Mexican toll roads that became scandals.

====Economic policy====
Salinas continued with the neoliberal economic policy of his predecessor Miguel de la Madrid and converted Mexico into a regulatory state. During his presidential term, he aggressively privatized hundreds of state-run companies, including telecommunications, steel, and mining. The banking system (that had been nationalized by José López Portillo) was privatized.

His National Development Plan (&quot;Plan Nacional de Desarrollo&quot;) published in 1989 had 4 objectives:
# Protecting sovereignty
# Democracy
# Economic recovery
# Improving the living standard.

By the end of his term, inflation had been reduced to 7% in 1994, the lowest figure in 22 years. Shortly after leaving office, due to the so-called December Mistake, inflation rose again to 51%.

During his term, the peso devalued from 2.65 MXP to 3.60 MXN per U.S. dollar by 30 November 1994, the last day of his term; thus the peso devalued far less than it had in the two previous terms. (The peso was later devalued from 4 per dollar to 7.2 in a single week due to the &quot;December Mistake.&quot;)

====Poverty alleviation====
Salinas established the National Solidarity Program (PRONASOL), a social welfare program, as a way to directly aid poor Mexicans, but also create a network of support for Salinas. It was his first official act as president. The program channeled public funds, which the administration said came largely from privatization of state-owned companies, into impoverished areas to improve roads, the electrical grid, schools, and clinics in order to raise levels of education and health and link remote areas, with lack of oversight in its spending. The program was similar to those in other countries to manage the disruption and political costs of macroeconomic adjustment. Salinas&#x27;s Harvard doctoral dissertation had examined the relationship between social programs and political support for the government. Given the Salinas&#x27;s questionable legitimacy as the winner of the 1988 election, PRONASOL was seen as a way for Salinas to deliver immediate benefits to the poor and avert their turning to other political parties or worse. It did not prioritize funding for Mexico&#x27;s poorest states, but rather to states with middle-income populations where elections were most contested and where the PRI had lost. Politically, the program sought to undermine the appeal of leftists, especially Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas. In Chiapas, PRONASOL channeled increased funds in 1993 and 1994, but it did not prevent the Zapatista uprising, which showed that the program had only a limited impact.

====Church–State relations====

The Catholic Church and the Mexican government has had a historically fraught relationship, with restrictions on the church&#x27;s role in national life. In the 1980s, the church saw electoral participation reform and fighting electoral fraud as an issue. Sometime during the presidential campaign, the PRI had indicated to the Church that a Salinas victory would be beneficial to the Church. It has been considered a quid pro quo agreement.
A delegation of the leadership of the episcopal hierarchy attended the inauguration of Salinas on 1 December 1988. After the 1988 election the Mexican bishops did not make public statements about the election results. Behind the scenes the apostolic delegate to Mexico, the Vatican&#x27;s representative, Mexican bishops, and government officials had a series of secret meetings that hammered out the outlines of a new Church-State relationship. In his inaugural address, Salinas de Gortari announced a program to &quot;modernize&quot; Mexico via structural transformation. &quot;The modern state is a state which ... maintains transparency and updates its relation with political parties, entrepreneurial groups, and the church.&quot; His declaration was more an articulation of the direction of change, but not list of specifics.

The implementation of reforms entailed amending the 1917 constitution, but before that overcoming opposition on the Left but also in the Catholic Church itself. After considerable debate, the Mexican legislature voted for fundamental revisions in Church-State policy.

====Electoral reform====
In the wake of the highly controversial 1988 election results, the government initiated a series of electoral reforms. A major change was the creation of the Federal Electoral Institute (IFE) in October 1990, taking elections out of the hands of the Ministry of the Interior to create an independent entity.

The 1994 elections were the first to have international observers, and were considered, at that time, the fairest elections in the century, although not free of controversy. For the first time, the PRI lost its two-thirds majority in Congress, which is necessary to conduct constitutional reforms.

====Human rights====
In 1990, the National Human Rights Commission (&quot;Comisión Nacional de los Derechos Humanos&quot;) was created. Initially a government agency, it became a separate entity,

====Education====
In 1992, Salinas and his Secretary of Education, Ernesto Zedillo introduced new compulsory history texts in Mexican schools, part of the Mexican Free-Textbook Program. Authored by Enrique Florescano and Héctor Aguilar Camín, the new textbooks set off a storm of controversy. Shifts in emphasis concerned the Porfiriato and the role of foreign investment, Emiliano Zapata, lauding him as a hero despite his having opposed every government in power; U.S.-Mexico relations, avoiding negative treatment of the history; and the Catholic Church in Mexico, treating it dispassionately. The government was compelled to withdraw them in January 1993. According to one assessment, &quot;While the 1992 textbook controversy disclosed new support for the regime from the right, it also revealed an erosion of support and discipline within officialdom.&quot;

===North American Free Trade Agreement===

The centerpiece of Salinas&#x27;s presidency was his successful negotiation with the U.S. and Canada to create the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), which came into effect on 1 January 1994. The agreement was a reversal of Mexico&#x27;s longstanding policies of economic nationalism and anti-Americanism and was intended to create a single market. Mexican proponents of NAFTA saw it in a way to secure markets for its exports and attract foreign investment, and create jobs, help the government to be able to service its foreign debt, and overall, promote economic recovery. In Mexico, the reversal was controversial, opposed by organized labor, many academics, and nongovernmental organizations.

===Drug trafficking and corruption===

An issue of importance both domestic and foreign policy is drug trafficking. In the 1980s and early 1990s, Mexico was a transit country for cocaine produced in Colombia and destined for consumers in the United States. President De la Madrid considered drug trafficking a national security issue and devoted government funding to it. Salinas expanded this funding, but neither president stemmed the growth of trafficking and its impact on Mexico. Drug trafficking is highly lucrative for those involved with it, and Mexico&#x27;s weak law enforcement and judicial system could not prevent the wide-scale involvement of Mexico&#x27;s poorly-paid police from being corrupted. The Mexican military to a lesser extent was corrupted, along with politicians, and some journalists. Such corruption undermined the possibility of rule of law and it prevented Mexicans from having trust in the state. A rising level of violence by drug traffickers against the state, witnesses, journalists, and bystanders. The Mexican government did capture and jail some high-level drug mafia leaders, including Miguel Ángel Félix Gallardo in 1989, whose arrest made visible the extent of law enforcement collusion.

===Foreign policy===
Salinas negotiated the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), with the United States and Canada. Salinas also renegotiated Mexico&#x27;s foreign debt. In 1990, Salinas had traveled to Europe to attract non-North American capital investment, but dissolution of the Soviet Union and the Soviet bloc opened them to foreign investment; Mexico was less attractive to them and Salinas turned to North America. Critics say that NAFTA has had mixed results for Mexico: while there has been huge increase in commerce and foreign investment, this has not been at all the case for employment and salaries.

In 1992, Mexico hosted the Chapultepec Peace Accords, a venue where the parties in the civil war in El Salvador signed an accord ending the long conflict.

Mexico reestablished diplomatic relations with the Vatican. Moreover, Mexico became member of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). The First Ibero-American Summit was held and the Chapultepec Peace Accords, a peace agreement for El Salvador, were signed.

Salinas in 1991 visited United States to help convince the Illinois Governor, James R. Thompson to pardon four Mexican citizens from a quadruple murder known as the Milwaukee Ave Massacre, that took place in 1981 in Chicago, Illinois. With the help of Carlos Salinas de Gortari the four men, Joaquin Varela, Rogelio Arroyo, Ignacio Varela, and Isauro Sanchez, had their sentences commuted, later pardoned by Governor Jim Edgar.

==1994 election year==
As the 1994 presidential election approached, Salinas had the crucial decision to designate the candidate for the PRI; that person had always gone on to win the presidential election. &quot;The shipwreck of the 1988 succession should have sufficed to teach Salinas to prevent another disaster from befalling the system he had inherited.&quot; At the time Salinas made the choice, popularity and credibility was high over the course of his presidency, but a series of events in the final year of his presidency changed that.

===Choosing the PRI nominee===

The &quot;unveiling&quot; of the PRI candidate for the presidency was on 28 November 1993, with Salinas choosing Luis Donaldo Colosio. Those considered for the position were Manuel Camacho and Colosio, with earlier contenders, such as Jesús Silva Herzog and Pedro Aspe being eliminated. Aspe, a graduate of MIT had a high international profile, but was considered unlikely to actually attract voters. The changed circumstances of the Mexican political system, as demonstrated by Salinas&#x27;s own election to the presidency, meant that being designated the PRI did not guarantee election. Aspe was not a charismatic prospect as a candidate who could energize and charm voters. With the potential that Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas was likely to run again for the presidency, the PRI needed to field someone who could garner votes.

===Zapatista rebellion===
The uprising in Chiapas on 1 January 1994 coincided with the date that the NAFTA came into effect. The Zapatista Army of National Liberation (&quot;Ejército Zapatista de Liberación Nacional&quot;, EZLN) issued their first declaration from the state of Chiapas in southern Mexico. Salinas&#x27;s immediate response was to find for a peaceful solution: offering pardon to deposed arms, ordering a cease fire, appointing a peace negotiator, and sending the Mexican Congress a General Amnesty Law. Salinas&#x27; presidential successor took a harder line when he was inaugurated. Salinas&#x27; more peaceful solution to the uprising was legal and politically pragmatic, likely saving many lives in Mexico. The Zapatista rebellion spread regionally, not nationwide, but the fact that it happened and that international attention was drawn to this poor region of Mexico just as NAFTA was implemented meant that Salinas&#x27; careful plans for a peaceful political transition with his legacy intact were obliterated. Salinas appointed Manuel Camacho, Minister of Foreign Affairs, as the government&#x27;s peace mediator. For Salinas, this had political benefits, since Camacho, having been passed over as the PRI presidential candidate, could have bolted from the party. With this important appointment, he was in the public limelight again.

===Assassination of Colosio and the new PRI candidate===

A spectacular political event in 1994 was the assassination of Salinas&#x27;s handpicked PRI presidential candidate Luis Donaldo Colosio in March 1994, upending the already complex electoral situation with elections scheduled for August of that year. The Zapatista uprising had ruined Salinas&#x27;s plans for a peaceful transition of Mexico in the elections. There is evidence that Salinas and Colosio began to disagree, not unusual after the electoral transfer, but this occurred prior to it. His campaign languished with lack of funding, and Colosio had problems getting media coverage, given the high-profile events in Chiapas. Salinas prevented Colosio from going to Chiapas, with the explanation that his presence there would complicate the situation. There was the impression that Salinas would reverse his decision for Colosio, substituting someone else, perhaps Manuel Camacho. Camacho was a politically savvy former Minister of Foreign Affairs, Head of Government of Mexico City, as well as Peace Commissioner in Chiapas. Salinas made a public statement on 17 January 1994, affirming his choice as candidate, but this was at the insistence of Colosio. Salinas extracted a pledge from Camacho that he had no designs on the presidency, which he renounced the day before Colosio&#x27;s assassination in Tijuana on 23 March 1994. After a few days of weighing his options, Salinas chose Colosio&#x27;s campaign manager, Ernesto Zedillo, former Minister of Education, as the new PRI candidate for the presidency. Zedillo had been Secretary of Education, a relatively unimportant ministry; he had resigned to run the campaign of Colosio. Zedillo had never held elective office, sharing that trait with De la Madrid and Salinas, and was not otherwise experienced politically. He was perceived as a weak candidate. There is speculation that Salinas wished to perpetuate his power as Plutarco Elías Calles had in the wake of the 1928 assassination of president-elect Alvaro Obregón, controlling successor presidents.

===1994 general election===

After considering whether to postpone the general election scheduled for 21 August 1994, Salinas chose Zedillo to run as the PRI candidate for the presidency and the elections took place as scheduled. Voters came out in large numbers to choose between three main candidates, Zedillo for the PRI, Cárdenas for the Party of Democratic Revolution, and Diego Fernández de Cevallos for the PAN. Zedillo won a clear victory, in what was considered by foreign observers as a free and fair election. In results published by the Federal Electoral Institute (IFE), Zedillo got 48.7%, Cevallos 25.9%, and Cárdenas 16.6%.

===Another political assassination===
Following the election in September 1994, Secretary General of the PRI José Francisco Ruiz Massieu, Salinas&#x27; former brother-in-law, was assassinated in downtown Mexico City in broad daylight. The murder was not solved during Salinas&#x27;s presidency, even when Mario Ruiz Massieu (Francisco&#x27;s brother) was the attorney general and in charge of the investigation.

===Economic issues===
The economic bubble gave Mexico a prosperity not seen in a generation. This period of rapid growth coupled with low inflation prompted some political thinkers and the media to state that Mexico was on the verge of becoming a &quot;First World nation&quot;. In fact, it was the first of the &quot;newly industrialized nations&quot; to be admitted into the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) in May 1994. It was known that the peso was overvalued, but the extent of the Mexican economy&#x27;s vulnerability was either not well known or downplayed by both the Salinas administration and the media. This vulnerability was further aggravated by several unexpected events and macroeconomic mistakes made in the last year of his administration.

Several economists and historians have analyzed some of the events and policy mistakes that precipitated the crisis of December 1994. In keeping with the PRI election-year practices, Salinas launched a spending spree to finance popular projects, which translated into a historically high deficit. This budget deficit was coupled with a current account deficit, fueled by excessive consumer spending as allowed by the overvalued peso. In order to finance this deficit, the Salinas administration issued &quot;tesobonos&quot;, an attractive debt instrument that insured payment in dollars instead of pesos.

Increasing current account deficit fostered by government spending, caused alarm among Mexican and foreign T-bill (&quot;tesobono&quot;) investors, who sold them rapidly, thereby depleting the already-low central bank reserves (which eventually hit a record low of $9 billion). The economically orthodox thing to do, in order to maintain the fixed exchange rate (at 3.3 pesos per dollar, within a variation band), would have been to sharply increase interest rates by allowing the monetary base to shrink, as dollars were being withdrawn from the reserves. Given the fact that it was an election year, whose outcome might have changed as a result of a pre-election-day economic downturn, the Bank of Mexico decided to buy Mexican Treasury Securities in order to maintain the monetary base, and thus prevent the interest rates from rising. This, in turn, caused an even more dramatic decline in the dollar reserves. These decisions aggravated the already delicate situation, to a point at which a crisis became inevitable and devaluation was only one of many necessary adjustments.

==Successor first days crises==
===Peso devaluation===

Soon after taking office, Zedillo announced that his government would let the fixed exchange rate band increase 15 percent (up to 4 pesos per US$), by stopping the unorthodox measures employed by the previous administration to keep it at the previous fixed level (e.g., by selling dollars, assuming debt, and so on). This measure, however, was not enough, and the government was unable to hold this line, and decided to let the exchange rate float. While experts agree that devaluation was necessary, some critics of Zedillo&#x27;s 22-day-old administration argue that, although economically coherent, the way the crisis was handled was a political mistake. By having announced its plans for devaluation, they argue that many foreigners withdrew their investments, thus aggravating the effects. Whether the effects were aggravated further or not, the result was that the peso crashed under a floating regime from four pesos to the dollar (with the previous increase of 15%) to 7.2 to the dollar in the space of a week.

Mexican businesses with debts to be paid in dollars, or that relied on supplies bought from the United States, suffered an immediate hit, with mass industrial lay-offs and several suicides. To make matters worse, the devaluation announcement was made mid-week, on a Wednesday, and for the remainder of the week foreign investors fled the Mexican market without any government action to prevent or discourage the flight until the following Monday, when it was too late.

Salinas faced widespread criticism in Mexico. He was widely blamed for the collapse of the economy and his privatization of several government-run businesses such as Telmex. With respect to the collapse of the economy, he rapidly responded by blaming Zedillo&#x27;s &quot;inept&quot; handling of the situation, coining the term &quot;December mistake&quot; to refer to the crisis and Zedillo&#x27;s mistakes. He then argued that he had talked to Zedillo of a possibility of &quot;sharing the burden&quot; of the devaluation by allowing the peso to devaluate a certain percent before his term was over, and the rest of the necessary devaluation would have been done during Zedillo&#x27;s administration.

===Zapatista Crisis===
Initially the Zedillo administration followed Salinas&#x27;s policies regarding the negotiations with the Zapatistas, pledging to reach a peaceful resolution to the Chiapas crisis. Zedillo then reversed course and on 9 February 1995, identifying Subcomandante Marcos to be Rafael Sebastián Guillén Vicente, and pursued military intervention. He abandoned that unsuccessful strategy and peace talks were subsequently re-established. Zedillo&#x27;s zigzag policies in Chiapas were consistent with some others of his administration.

===Break with Zedillo, Raúl Salinas arrest and self-exile===
Ernesto Zedillo had been an accidental presidential candidate who had no political experience or independent base of power. There was a perception that Salinas wanted to follow the precedent of Plutarco Elías Calles who wielded tremendous power over three successor presidents following the 1928 assassination of president-elect Alvaro Obregón. However, this changed when by order of president Zedillo Salinas&#x27;s older brother Raúl Salinas was arrested on 28 February 1995 under charges of orchestrating the assassination of Ruiz Massieu; the arrest dramatically shifted the political situation. Since 1940 when president Lázaro Cárdenas left the presidency and turned power over to his successor, Mexican former presidents had not directly intervened in politics. After the arrest of his brother, Salinas went on television, expressing his outrage at Zedillo. In the broadcast he placed the blame for the December peso crisis on Zedillo, resulting in the loss of Mexican jobs, bankruptcies, and the tarnishing of Mexico&#x27;s image.

Salinas abandoned his campaign—which had been backed by the United States—to become the Director-General of the World Trade Organization and left Mexico City, going to Monterrey where he staged a publicized hunger strike in the home of a PRI supporter. Arturo Warman, Minister of Agrarian Reform, was sent to Monterrey to persuade Salinas to return to Mexico City. Salinas demanded that the government issue a statement clearing him of responsibility for the Colosio case and the 20 December devaluation. Salinas returned to Mexico City and he and Zedillo met. Zedillo&#x27;s government issued a statement absolving Salinas of the Colosio murder and tempered his criticism of Salinas in the peso crisis. Salinas left Mexico for self-imposed exile and settled in Ireland for a period.

==Post-Presidential years==

Salinas&#x27;s reputation was to be further clouded by a series of controversies involving close family members. His brother Raúl had been arrested in February 1995. In November 1995, Raúl&#x27;s wife, Paulina Castañón, and his brother-in-law, Antonio Castañón, were arrested in Geneva, Switzerland, after attempting to withdraw US$84 million from an account owned by Raúl Salinas under an alias. Their capture led to the unveiling of a vast fortune spread around the world and amounting to hundreds of millions of dollars, even though Raúl Salinas had never officially received an annual income of more than $190,000. A report by the U.S. General Accounting Office indicated that Raúl Salinas had transferred over $90 million out of Mexico into private bank accounts in London and Switzerland through a complex set of transactions between 1992 and 1994. In 2008, the government of Switzerland turned over $74 million, out of the $110 million in frozen bank accounts held by Raúl Salinas, to the government of Mexico. The Swiss Justice Ministry indicated that the Mexican government had demonstrated that $66 million of the funds had been misappropriated, and the funds, with interest, were returned to Mexico. The Salinas family would not receive back any of the frozen funds.

In 1997, while Salinas was in exile and his brother Raúl in jail, their father, Raúl Salinas Lozano was accused in a U.S court of being connected to drug dealing by a convicted Mexican trafficker, Magdalena Ruiz Pelayo; the senior Salinas denied the charges.

Salinas divorced his first wife, Cecilia Occelli González, in 1995 soon after leaving office. That same year he married his second wife, Ana Paula Gerard.

In January 1999, after a four-year trial, Salinas&#x27; older brother Raúl was convicted of ordering the murder of the PRI official (and Salinas&#x27; brother-in-law) José Francisco Ruiz Massieu and sentenced to 50 years in prison. In July 1999, an appeals court cut the sentence to years. In June 2005, the conviction was overturned, and Raúl Salinas was freed.

On 6 December 2004, Salinas&#x27;s youngest brother, Enrique, was found dead in Huixquilucan, Estado de México, inside his car with a plastic bag strapped around his head. The case remains unsolved.

In the last years of Zedillo&#x27;s term, Carlos Salinas returned to Mexico to announce the publication of his book, &quot;Mexico: The Policy and the Politics of Modernization&quot;. Written during his stay in Ireland and full of quotations from press articles and political memoirs, it defended his achievements and blamed Zedillo for the crisis that followed his administration.

As of May 2010, Salinas was still living in Dublin, Ireland. Salinas also attended his son&#x27;s civil wedding in Mexico City and promised to attend the subsequent religious wedding in late September.

Salinas returned to Mexico in the late 1990s and has continued to influence Mexican politics since then. In April 2018, he celebrated his 70th birthday with a party attended by a number of political elites. On 5 December 2018, he attended George H. W. Bush&#x27;s funeral.

==Public opinion and legacy==
Salinas de Gortari remains a highly controversial figure in Mexican history. In a 2005 national survey conducted by Parametría, 73% of the respondents had a negative image of Salinas de Gortari, 9% had a positive opinion, and 18% had no opinion about him.

In another national survey conducted in 2012 by BGC-Excelsior about former Presidents, Salinas de Gortari by far received the worst rating: 20% of the respondents considered that his administration was &quot;very good&quot; or &quot;good&quot;, 13% of the responded considered that it was an &quot;average&quot; administration, and 66% of the respondents considering that it was a &quot;bad&quot; or &quot;very bad&quot; administration.

==In popular culture==

In the Netflix series &quot;&quot; (2018), &quot;the President-elect&quot;, a character based on Salinas, is portrayed by actor Adolfo Madera. Season 2 episode 6 depicts two young boys playing war and shooting a maid and episodes 7 and 8 depict the 1988 Mexican Presidential election.

Salinas was prominently featured in two Netflix series released in 2019, pertaining to the Colosio assassination: as an interviewee in the documentary series &quot;1994&quot;, and portrayed by Ari Brickman in the drama series &quot;Crime Diaries: The Candidate&quot;.

==Honours==
===Foreign honours===
** Knight of the Collar of the Order of Isabella the Catholic (1990)
** Honorary Recipient of the Order of the Crown of the Realm (1991)
** Medal of the Oriental Republic of Uruguay (1993)

==See also==

*List of heads of state of Mexico 
*History of Mexico
*Politics of Mexico

==References==
* Salinas&#x27;s book, print edition: Carlos Salinas de Gortari, &quot;México, un paso difícil a la modernidad&quot; (Mexico, a difficult step into modern times), Plaza &amp; Janés, .
* &quot;Mexico under Salinas&quot;, Mexico Resource Center, Austin, TX, by Philip L. Russell. .

==Further reading==
*Castañeda, Jorge G. &quot;Perpetuating Power: How Mexican Presidents Were Chosen&quot;. New York: The New Press 2000. 
* 
*Krauze, Enrique, &quot;Mexico: Biography of Power&quot;. New York: HarperCollins 1997. 
*Oppenheimer, Andrés. &quot;Bordering on Chaos: Guerillas, Stockbrokers, Aoliticians, and Mexico&#x27;s Road to Prosperity&quot;. Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 1996.
*Serrano, Mónica and Victor Bulmer-Thomas, eds. &quot;Rebuilding the State: Mexico After Salinas&quot;. London: Institute of Latin American Studies, 1996.
* 

==External links==

* Extended biography and presidential tenure by CIDOB Foundation
* Response of Manuel Bartlett to De la Madrid remarks.


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q315633" start="0" end="25" title="Carlos Salinas de Gortari" label="Carlos Salinas de Gortari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209676" start="53" end="60" title="Mexicans" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q628004" start="116" end="135" title="president of Mexico" label="president of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q682969" start="175" end="208" title="Institutional Revolutionary Party" label="Institutional Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6826046" start="372" end="393" title="1988 Mexican general election" label="1988 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q188094" start="462" end="471" title="economist" label="economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115013" start="549" end="561" title="Law degree" label="law graduate"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="623" end="633" title="Neoliberalism" label="neoliberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="635" end="645" title="Free market" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q296691" start="693" end="712" title="Miguel de la Madrid" label="Miguel de la Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q948495" start="734" end="754" title="Washington Consensus" label="Washington Consensus"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="761" end="774" title="privatization" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314288" start="807" end="822" title="reprivatization" label="reprivatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q181574" start="862" end="867" title="NAFTA" label="NAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q851087" start="919" end="922" title="National Action Party (Mexico)" label="PAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500812" start="1068" end="1083" title="Catholic clergy" label="Catholic clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730" start="1105" end="1119" title="Mexican peso" label="a new currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="1510" end="1523" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1602" end="1615" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="1680" end="1704" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q23895035" start="1936" end="1954" title="Zapatista uprising" label="Zapatista uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q280555" start="1981" end="2001" title="Luis Donaldo Colosio Murrieta" label="Luis Donaldo Colosio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837640" start="2066" end="2092" title="1994 Mexican general election" label="1994 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q597425" start="2098" end="2125" title="José Francisco Ruiz Massieu" label="José Francisco Ruiz Massieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q298149" start="2480" end="2495" title="Ernesto Zedillo" label="Ernesto Zedillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q599806" start="2562" end="2598" title="Mexican peso crisis" label="worst economic crises of its history"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355170" start="2627" end="2650" title="Raúl Salinas de Gortari" label="Raúl Salinas de Gortari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="3273" end="3284" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2190200" start="3363" end="3382" title="Raúl Salinas Lozano" label="Raúl Salinas Lozano"/>
<link wikidata="Q335533" start="3460" end="3479" title="Adolfo López Mateos" label="Adolfo López Mateos"/>
<link wikidata="Q315637" start="3595" end="3613" title="Gustavo Díaz Ordaz" label="Gustavo Díaz Ordaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355170" start="3941" end="3945" title="Raúl Salinas de Gortari" label="Raúl"/>
<link wikidata="Q555578" start="4722" end="4732" title="Chespirito" label="Chespirito"/>
<link wikidata="Q315637" start="4756" end="4774" title="Gustavo Díaz Ordaz" label="Gustavo Díaz Ordaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q222738" start="4909" end="4949" title="National Autonomous University of Mexico" label="National Autonomous University of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5073" end="5093" title="1968 Summer Olympics#Controversies" label="1968 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348545" start="5433" end="5451" title="1971 Pan American Games" label="Pan-American Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q51103" start="5455" end="5469" title="Cali, Colombia" label="Cali, Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="5637" end="5655" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49127" start="5695" end="5717" title="Harvard Kennedy School" label="Harvard Kennedy School"/>
<link wikidata="Q492346" start="6323" end="6345" title="Williamsburg, Virginia" label="Williamsburg, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="6445" end="6456" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q8263870" start="6803" end="6811" title="Emiliano Salinas" label="Emiliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066216" start="6925" end="6945" title="First Lady of Mexico" label="First Lady of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="7042" end="7055" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665236" start="7399" end="7439" title="Instituto Tecnológico Autónomo de México" label="Instituto Tecnológico Autónomo de México"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800230" start="7892" end="7911" title="Spanish nationality law" label="Spanish nationality"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="7967" end="7981" title="Sephardic Jews" label="Sephardic Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q296691" start="8043" end="8062" title="Miguel de la Madrid" label="Miguel de la Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q315613" start="8281" end="8300" title="José López Portillo" label="José López Portillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10752694" start="8687" end="8705" title="Jesús Silva Herzog Flores" label="Jesús Silva Herzog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863124" start="8915" end="8930" title="Manuel Bartlett" label="Manuel Bartlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q528185" start="9294" end="9308" title="Enrique Krauze" label="Enrique Krauze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455519" start="9756" end="9781" title="National Democratic Front (Mexico)" label="National Democratic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q851087" start="9803" end="9824" title="National Action Party (Mexico)" label="National Action Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267931" start="9861" end="9877" title="Manuel Clouthier" label="Manuel Clouthier"/>
<link wikidata="Q922837" start="9880" end="9899" title="Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas" label="Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q296718" start="9918" end="9933" title="Lázaro Cárdenas" label="Lázaro Cárdenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348507" start="10140" end="10146" title="Zócalo" label="Zócalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507054" start="10306" end="10331" title="Secretaría de Gobernación" label="Secretaría de Gobernación"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484825" start="11148" end="11156" title="Congress of the Union" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q682969" start="11186" end="11213" title="Institutional Revolutionary Party" label="Revolutionary Institutional"/>
<link wikidata="Q851087" start="11218" end="11233" title="National Action Party (Mexico)" label="National Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q296691" start="11517" end="11536" title="Miguel de la Madrid" label="Miguel de la Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q99675913" start="12120" end="12130" title="Blue shift (politics)" label="blue shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863124" start="12417" end="12432" title="Manuel Bartlett" label="Manuel Bartlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454225" start="12802" end="12822" title="Carlos Loret de Mola" label="Carlos Loret de Mola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295046" start="12922" end="12954" title="Legislative Palace of San Lázaro" label="Legislative Palace of San Lázaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484825" start="12986" end="13007" title="Congress of the Union" label="Congress of the Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q117384" start="13306" end="13332" title="Fernando Gutiérrez Barrios" label="Fernando Gutiérrez Barrios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863124" start="13366" end="13381" title="Manuel Bartlett" label="Manuel Bartlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395368" start="13416" end="13436" title="Carlos Hank González (politician)" label="Carlos Hank González"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="13507" end="13517" title="neoliberal" label="neoliberal"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13797" end="13814" title=":es:Anexo:Gabinete de Carlos Salinas de Gortari" label="cabinet ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071644" start="13872" end="13888" title="Chiapas conflict" label="Chiapas conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q357432" start="13963" end="13976" title="Jorge Carpizo McGregor" label="Jorge Carpizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5779179" start="14014" end="14046" title="National Human Rights Commission (Mexico)" label="National Human Rights Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q222738" start="14080" end="14120" title="National Autonomous University of Mexico" label="National Autonomous University of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q280555" start="14168" end="14188" title="Luis Donaldo Colosio" label="Luis Donaldo Colosio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170072" start="15054" end="15074" title="Constitution of 1917" label="Constitution of 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q478004" start="15154" end="15169" title="anticlericalism" label="anticlericalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170419" start="15744" end="15755" title="Carlos Slim" label="Carlos Slim"/>
<link wikidata="Q315613" start="15804" end="15823" title="José López Portillo" label="José López Portillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="16097" end="16107" title="neoliberal" label="neoliberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q296691" start="16143" end="16162" title="Miguel de la Madrid" label="Miguel de la Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q315613" start="16398" end="16417" title="José López Portillo" label="José López Portillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q599806" start="16783" end="16799" title="Mexican peso crisis" label="December Mistake"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730" start="16888" end="16891" title="MXN" label="MXN"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803467" start="17234" end="17256" title="Social Welfare in Mexico" label="social welfare program"/>
<link wikidata="Q922837" start="18466" end="18485" title="Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas" label="Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23895035" start="18579" end="18597" title="Zapatista uprising" label="Zapatista uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q17634857" start="20416" end="20443" title="Instituto Nacional Electoral" label="Federal Electoral Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837640" start="20571" end="20585" title="1994 Mexican general election" label="1994 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5779179" start="20900" end="20932" title="National Human Rights Commission (Mexico)" label="National Human Rights Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q298149" start="21130" end="21145" title="Ernesto Zedillo" label="Ernesto Zedillo"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21261" end="21279" title=":es:Enrique Florescano" label="Enrique Florescano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587431" start="21284" end="21304" title="Héctor Aguilar Camín" label="Héctor Aguilar Camín"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755467" start="21389" end="21399" title="Porfiriato" label="Porfiriato"/>
<link wikidata="Q41718" start="21436" end="21451" title="Emiliano Zapata" label="Emiliano Zapata"/>
<link wikidata="Q6826311" start="21529" end="21550" title="U.S.-Mexico relations" label="U.S.-Mexico relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q979079" start="21604" end="21629" title="Catholic Church in Mexico" label="Catholic Church in Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q181574" start="22086" end="22121" title="North American Free Trade Agreement" label="North American Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="22859" end="22866" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621643" start="23805" end="23832" title="Miguel Ángel Félix Gallardo" label="Miguel Ángel Félix Gallardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q181574" start="23954" end="23989" title="North American Free Trade Agreement" label="North American Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740101" start="24560" end="24585" title="Chapultepec Peace Accords" label="Chapultepec Peace Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="24740" end="24747" title="Holy See" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q170481" start="24787" end="24820" title="Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation" label="Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="24836" end="24890" title="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" label="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q535086" start="24909" end="24930" title="Ibero-American Summit" label="Ibero-American Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740101" start="24948" end="24973" title="Chapultepec Peace Accords" label="Chapultepec Peace Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q735247" start="25102" end="25119" title="James R. Thompson" label="James R. Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q734643" start="25441" end="25450" title="Jim Edgar" label="Jim Edgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q280555" start="26146" end="26166" title="Luis Donaldo Colosio" label="Luis Donaldo Colosio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2174052" start="26207" end="26221" title="Manuel Camacho Solis" label="Manuel Camacho"/>
<link wikidata="Q10752694" start="26268" end="26286" title="Jesús Silva Herzog Flores" label="Jesús Silva Herzog"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159458" start="26291" end="26301" title="Pedro Aspe" label="Pedro Aspe"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="26340" end="26343" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q188590" start="26985" end="27022" title="Zapatista Army of National Liberation" label="Zapatista Army of National Liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q60123" start="27134" end="27141" title="Chiapas" label="Chiapas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950402" start="27501" end="27509" title="1995 Zapatista Crisis" label="uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q280555" start="28391" end="28411" title="Luis Donaldo Colosio" label="Luis Donaldo Colosio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2174052" start="29146" end="29160" title="Manuel Camacho" label="Manuel Camacho"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444306" start="29201" end="29228" title="Secretary of Foreign Affairs (Mexico)" label="Minister of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q24056909" start="29230" end="29263" title="Head of Government of Mexico City" label="Head of Government of Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q315066" start="30159" end="30180" title="Plutarco Elías Calles" label="Plutarco Elías Calles"/>
<link wikidata="Q217498" start="30242" end="30256" title="Alvaro Obregón" label="Alvaro Obregón"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108989" start="30671" end="30698" title="Diego Fernández de Cevallos" label="Diego Fernández de Cevallos"/>
<link wikidata="Q597425" start="31042" end="31069" title="José Francisco Ruiz Massieu" label="José Francisco Ruiz Massieu"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31238" end="31256" title=":es:Mario Ruiz Massieu" label="Mario Ruiz Massieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q60700696" start="31292" end="31308" title="Attorney General of Mexico" label="attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="31723" end="31777" title="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" label="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164722" start="32515" end="32532" title="consumer spending" label="consumer spending"/>
<link wikidata="Q806208" start="33432" end="33446" title="Bank of Mexico" label="Bank of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q491635" start="36341" end="36361" title="Subcomandante Marcos" label="Subcomandante Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q491635" start="36368" end="36400" title="Subcomandante Marcos" label="Rafael Sebastián Guillén Vicente"/>
<link wikidata="Q315066" start="36881" end="36902" title="Plutarco Elías Calles" label="Plutarco Elías Calles"/>
<link wikidata="Q217498" start="37016" end="37030" title="Alvaro Obregón" label="Alvaro Obregón"/>
<link wikidata="Q298149" start="37071" end="37088" title="Ernesto Zedillo" label="president Zedillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355170" start="37118" end="37130" title="Raúl Salinas" label="Raúl Salinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q296718" start="37313" end="37328" title="Lázaro Cárdenas" label="Lázaro Cárdenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="37839" end="37863" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069541" start="37980" end="37993" title="Arturo Warman" label="Arturo Warman"/>
<link wikidata="" start="38743" end="38759" title=":es:Paulina Castañón" label="Paulina Castañón"/>
<link wikidata="Q16223098" start="38785" end="38801" title="Antonio Castañón" label="Antonio Castañón"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="38820" end="38826" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="38828" end="38839" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q749118" start="39181" end="39206" title="General Accounting Office" label="General Accounting Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q597425" start="40403" end="40430" title="José Francisco Ruiz Massieu" label="José Francisco Ruiz Massieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1803019" start="40653" end="40660" title="Enrique Salinas" label="Enrique"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271761" start="40680" end="40692" title="Huixquilucan" label="Huixquilucan"/>
<link wikidata="Q82112" start="40694" end="40710" title="Estado de México" label="Estado de México"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="41226" end="41232" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q59344430" start="41624" end="41656" title="Death and state funeral of George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush&amp;#x27;s funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="42415" end="42422" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42536" end="42549" title="Adolfo Madera" label="Adolfo Madera"/>
<link wikidata="Q99477691" start="42858" end="42862" title="1994 (Mexican TV series)" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="" start="42926" end="42954" title="Crime Diaries: The Candidate" label="Crime Diaries: The Candidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q931502" start="43028" end="43058" title="Order of Isabella the Catholic" label="Order of Isabella the Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q94405" start="43095" end="43126" title="Order of the Crown of the Realm" label="Order of the Crown of the Realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q96279182" start="43137" end="43178" title="Medal of the Oriental Republic of Uruguay" label="Medal of the Oriental Republic of Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q8310435" start="43202" end="43234" title="List of heads of state of Mexico" label="List of heads of state of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q212763" start="43237" end="43254" title="History of Mexico" label="History of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155509" start="43256" end="43274" title="Politics of Mexico" label="Politics of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399260" start="43593" end="43612" title="Jorge G. Castañeda" label="Castañeda, Jorge G."/>
<link wikidata="Q528185" start="43716" end="43731" title="Enrique Krauze" label="Krauze, Enrique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863124" start="44229" end="44244" title="Manuel Bartlett" label="Manuel Bartlett"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64489" wikidata="Q82135" url="?curid=64489" title="Purchasing power parity">
<text>Purchasing power parity (PPP) is a measure of the price of specific goods in different countries and is used to compare the absolute purchasing power of the countries&#x27; currencies. PPP is effectively the ratio of the price of a market basket at one location divided by the price 
of the basket of goods at a different location. The PPP inflation and exchange rate may differ from the market exchange rate because of tariffs, and other transaction costs.

The purchasing power parity indicator can be used to compare economies regarding their gross domestic product (GDP), labour productivity and actual individual consumption, and in some cases to analyse price convergence and to compare the cost of living between places. The calculation of the PPP, according to the OECD, is made through a &quot;basket of goods&quot; that contains a &quot;final product list [that] covers around 3,000 consumer goods and services, 30 occupations in government, 200 types of equipment goods and about 15 construction projects&quot;.

==Concept==

Purchasing power parity is an economic term for measuring prices at different locations. It is based on the law of one price, which says that, if there are no transaction costs nor trade barriers for a particular good, then the price for that good should be the same at every location. Ideally, a computer in New York and in Hong Kong should have the same price. If its price is 500 US dollars in New York and the same computer costs 2,000 HK dollars in Hong Kong, PPP theory says the exchange rate should be 4 HK dollars for every 1 US dollar.

Poverty, tariffs, transportation, and other frictions prevent the trading and purchasing of various goods, so measuring a single good can cause a large error. The PPP term accounts for this by using a basket of goods, that is, many goods with different quantities. PPP then computes an inflation and exchange rate as the ratio of the price of the basket in one location to the price of the basket in the other location. For example, if a basket consisting of 1 computer, 1 ton of rice, and half a ton of steel was 1000 US dollars in New York and the same goods cost 6000 HK dollars in Hong Kong, the PPP exchange rate would be 6 HK dollars for every 1 US dollar.

The name &quot;purchasing power parity&quot; comes from the idea that, with the right exchange rate, consumers in every location will have the same purchasing power.

The value of the PPP exchange rate is very dependent on the basket of goods chosen. In general, goods are chosen that might closely obey the law of one price. Thus, one attempts to select goods which are traded easily and are commonly available in both locations. Organizations that compute PPP exchange rates use different baskets of goods and can come up with different values.

The PPP exchange rate may not match the market exchange rate. The market rate is more volatile because it reacts to changes in demand at each location. Also, tariffs and differences in the price of labour (see Balassa–Samuelson theorem) can contribute to longer-term differences between the two rates. One use of PPP is to predict longer-term exchange rates.

Because PPP exchange rates are more stable and are less affected by tariffs, they are used for many international comparisons, such as comparing countries&#x27; GDPs or other national income statistics. These numbers often come with the label &quot;PPP-adjusted&quot;.

There can be marked differences between purchasing power adjusted incomes and those converted via market exchange rates. A well-known purchasing power adjustment is the Geary–Khamis dollar (the &quot;GK dollar&quot; or &quot;international dollar&quot;). The World Bank&#x27;s &quot;World Development Indicators 2005&quot; estimated that in 2003, one Geary–Khamis dollar was equivalent to about 1.8 Chinese yuan by purchasing power parity—considerably different from the nominal exchange rate. This discrepancy has large implications; for instance, when converted via the nominal exchange rates, GDP per capita in India is about US$1,965 while on a PPP basis, it is about Int$7,197. At the other extreme, Denmark&#x27;s nominal GDP per capita is around US$53,242, but its PPP figure is Int$46,602, in line with other developed nations.

===Variations===

There are variations in calculating PPP. The EKS method (developed by Ö. Éltető, P. Köves and B. Szulc) uses the geometric mean of the exchange rates computed for individual goods. The EKS-S method (by Éltető, Köves, Szulc, and Sergeev) uses two different baskets, one for each country, and then averages the result. While these methods work for 2 countries, the exchange rates may be inconsistent if applied to 3 countries, so further adjustment may be necessary so that the rate from currency A to B times the rate from B to C equals the rate from A to C.

===Relative PPP===

Relative PPP is a weaker statement based on the law of one price, covering changes in the exchange rate and inflation rates. It seems to mirror the exchange rate closer than PPP does.

==Usage==
===Conversion===

Purchasing power parity exchange rate is used when comparing national production and consumption and other places where the prices of non-traded goods are considered important. (Market exchange rates are used for individual goods that are traded). PPP rates are more stable over time and can be used when that attribute is important.

PPP exchange rates help costing but exclude profits and above all do not consider the different quality of goods among countries. The same product, for instance, can have a different level of quality and even safety in different countries, and may be subject to different taxes and transport costs. Since market exchange rates fluctuate substantially, when the GDP of one country measured in its own currency is converted to the other country&#x27;s currency using market exchange rates, one country might be inferred to have higher real GDP than the other country in one year but lower in the other. Both of these inferences would fail to reflect the reality of their &quot;relative levels of production&quot;.

If one country&#x27;s GDP is converted into the other country&#x27;s currency using PPP exchange rates instead of observed market exchange rates, the false inference will not occur. Essentially GDP measured at PPP controls for the different costs of living and price levels, usually relative to the United States dollar, enabling a more accurate estimate of a nation&#x27;s level of production.

The exchange rate reflects transaction values for traded goods &quot;between&quot; countries in contrast to non-traded goods, that is, goods produced for home-country use. Also, currencies are traded for purposes other than trade in goods and services, &quot;e.g.&quot;, to buy capital assets whose prices vary more than those of physical goods. Also, different interest rates, speculation, hedging or interventions by central banks can influence the purchasing power parity of a country in the international markets.

The PPP method is used as an alternative to correct for possible statistical bias. The Penn World Table is a widely cited source of PPP adjustments, and the associated Penn effect reflects such a systematic bias in using exchange rates to outputs among countries.

For example, if the value of the Mexican peso falls by half compared to the US dollar, the Mexican gross domestic product measured in dollars will also halve. However, this exchange rate results from international trade and financial markets. It does not necessarily mean that Mexicans are poorer by a half; if incomes and prices measured in pesos stay the same, they will be no worse off assuming that imported goods are not essential to the quality of life of individuals.

Measuring income in different countries using PPP exchange rates helps to avoid this problem, as the metrics give an understanding of relative wealth regarding local goods and services at domestic markets. On the other hand, it is poor for measuring the relative cost of goods and services in international markets. The reason is it does not take into account how much US$1 stands for in a respective country. Using the above-mentioned example: in an international market, Mexicans can buy less than Americans after the fall of their currency, though their GDP PPP changed a little.

===Exchange rate prediction===

PPP exchange rates are never valued because market exchange rates tend to move in their general direction, over a period of years. There is some value to knowing in which direction the exchange rate is more likely to shift over the long run.

In neoclassical economic theory, the &quot;purchasing power parity theory&quot; assumes that the exchange rate between two currencies actually observed in the different international markets is the one that is used in the purchasing power parity comparisons, so that the same amount of goods could actually be purchased in either currency with the same beginning amount of funds. Depending on the particular theory, purchasing power parity is assumed to hold either in the long run or, more strongly, in the short run. Theories that invoke purchasing power parity assume that in some circumstances a fall in either currency&#x27;s purchasing power (a rise in its price level) would lead to a proportional decrease in that currency&#x27;s valuation on the foreign exchange market.

===Identifying manipulation===

PPP exchange rates are especially useful when official exchange rates are artificially manipulated by governments. Countries with strong government control of the economy sometimes enforce official exchange rates that make their own currency artificially strong. By contrast, the currency&#x27;s black market exchange rate is artificially weak. In such cases, a PPP exchange rate is likely the most realistic basis for economic comparison. Similarly, when exchange rates deviate significantly from their long term equilibrium due to speculative attacks or carry trade, a PPP exchange rate offers a better alternative for comparison.

In 2011, the Big Mac Index was used to identify manipulation of inflation numbers by Argentina.

==Issues==

The PPP exchange-rate calculation is controversial because of the difficulties of finding comparable baskets of goods to compare purchasing power across countries.

Estimation of purchasing power parity is complicated by the fact that countries do not simply differ in a uniform price level; rather, the difference in food prices may be greater than the difference in housing prices, while also less than the difference in entertainment prices. People in different countries typically consume different baskets of goods. It is necessary to compare the cost of baskets of goods and services using a price index. This is a difficult task because purchasing patterns and even the goods available to purchase differ across countries.

Thus, it is necessary to make adjustments for differences in the quality of goods and services. Furthermore, the basket of goods representative of one economy will vary from that of another: Americans eat more bread; Chinese more rice. Hence a PPP calculated using the US consumption as a base will differ from that calculated using China as a base. Additional statistical difficulties arise with multilateral comparisons when (as is usually the case) more than two countries are to be compared.

Various ways of averaging bilateral PPPs can provide a more stable multilateral comparison, but at the cost of distorting bilateral ones. These are all general issues of indexing; as with other price indices there is no way to reduce complexity to a single number that is equally satisfying for all purposes. Nevertheless, PPPs are typically robust in the face of the many problems that arise in using market exchange rates to make comparisons.

For example, in 2005 the price of a gallon of gasoline in Saudi Arabia was US$0.91, and in Norway the price was US$6.27. The significant differences in price would not contribute to accuracy in a PPP analysis, despite all of the variables that contribute to the significant differences in price. More comparisons have to be made and used as variables in the overall formulation of the PPP.

When PPP comparisons are to be made over some interval of time, proper account needs to be made of inflationary effects.

In addition to methodological issues presented by the selection of a basket of goods, PPP estimates can also vary based on the statistical capacity of participating countries. The International Comparison Program (ICP), which PPP estimates are based on, require the disaggregation of national accounts into production, expenditure or (in some cases) income, and not all participating countries routinely disaggregate their data into such categories.

Some aspects of PPP comparison are theoretically impossible or unclear. For example, there is no basis for comparison between the Ethiopian labourer who lives on teff with the Thai labourer who lives on rice, because teff is not commercially available in Thailand and rice is not in Ethiopia, so the price of rice in Ethiopia or teff in Thailand cannot be determined. As a general rule, the more similar the price structure between countries, the more valid the PPP comparison.

PPP levels will also vary based on the formula used to calculate price matrices. Possible formulas include GEKS-Fisher, Geary-Khamis, IDB, and the superlative method. Each has advantages and disadvantages.

Linking regions presents another methodological difficulty. In the 2005 ICP round, regions were compared by using a list of some 1,000 identical items for which a price could be found for 18 countries, selected so that at least two countries would be in each region. While this was superior to earlier &quot;bridging&quot; methods, which do not fully take into account differing quality between goods, it may serve to overstate the PPP basis of poorer countries, because the price indexing on which PPP is based will assign to poorer countries the greater weight of goods consumed in greater shares in richer countries.

There are a number of reasons that different measures do not perfectly reflect standard of living. In 2011, interviewed by the &quot;Financial Times&quot;, a spokesperson for the IMF declared:

===Range and quality of goods===
The goods that the currency has the &quot;power&quot; to purchase are a basket of goods of different types:
# Local, non-tradable goods and services (like electric power) that are produced and sold domestically.
# Tradable goods such as non-perishable commodities that can be sold on the international market (like diamonds).

The more that a product falls into category 1, the further its price will be from the currency exchange rate, moving towards the PPP exchange rate. Conversely, category 2 products tend to trade close to the currency exchange rate. (See also Penn effect).

More processed and expensive products are likely to be tradable, falling into the second category, and drifting from the PPP exchange rate to the currency exchange rate. Even if the PPP &quot;value&quot; of the Ethiopian currency is three times stronger than the currency exchange rate, it will not buy three times as much of internationally traded goods like steel, cars and microchips, but non-traded goods like housing, services (&quot;haircuts&quot;), and domestically produced crops. The relative price differential between tradables and non-tradables from high-income to low-income countries is a consequence of the Balassa–Samuelson effect and gives a big cost advantage to labour-intensive production of tradable goods in low income countries (like Ethiopia), as against high income countries (like Switzerland).

The corporate cost advantage is nothing more sophisticated than access to cheaper workers, but because the pay of those workers goes farther in low-income countries than high, the relative pay differentials (inter-country) can be sustained for longer than would be the case otherwise. (This is another way of saying that the wage rate is based on average local productivity and that this is below the per capita productivity that factories selling tradable goods to international markets can achieve.) An equivalent cost benefit comes from non-traded goods that can be sourced locally (nearer the PPP-exchange rate than the nominal exchange rate in which receipts are paid). These act as a cheaper factor of production than is available to factories in richer countries. It is difficult by GDP PPP to consider the different quality of goods among the countries.

The Bhagwati–Kravis–Lipsey view provides a somewhat different explanation from the Balassa–Samuelson theory. This view states that price levels for nontradables are lower in poorer countries because of differences in endowment of labor and capital, not because of lower levels of productivity. Poor countries have more labor relative to capital, so marginal productivity of labor is greater in rich countries than in poor countries. Nontradables tend to be labor-intensive; therefore, because labor is less expensive in poor countries and is used mostly for nontradables, nontradables are cheaper in poor countries. Wages are high in rich countries, so nontradables are relatively more expensive.

PPP calculations tend to overemphasise the primary sectoral contribution, and underemphasise the industrial and service sectoral contributions to the economy of a nation.

===Trade barriers and nontradables===
The law of one price is weakened by transport costs and governmental trade restrictions, which make it expensive to move goods between markets located in different countries. Transport costs sever the link between exchange rates and the prices of goods implied by the law of one price. As transport costs increase, the larger the range of exchange rate fluctuations. The same is true for official trade restrictions because the customs fees affect importers&#x27; profits in the same way as shipping fees. According to Krugman and Obstfeld, &quot;Either type of trade impediment weakens the basis of PPP by allowing the purchasing power of a given currency to differ more widely from country to country.&quot; They cite the example that a dollar in London should purchase the same goods as a dollar in Chicago, which is certainly not the case.

Nontradables are primarily services and the output of the construction industry. Nontradables also lead to deviations in PPP because the prices of nontradables are not linked internationally. The prices are determined by domestic supply and demand, and shifts in those curves lead to changes in the market basket of some goods relative to the foreign price of the same basket. If the prices of nontradables rise, the purchasing power of any given currency will fall in that country.

===Departures from free competition===
Linkages between national price levels are also weakened when trade barriers and imperfectly competitive market structures occur together. Pricing to market occurs when a firm sells the same product for different prices in different markets. This is a reflection of inter-country differences in conditions on both the demand side (&quot;e.g.&quot;, virtually no demand for pork in Islamic states) and the supply side (&quot;e.g.&quot;, whether the existing market for a prospective entrant&#x27;s product features few suppliers or instead is already near-saturated). According to Krugman and Obstfeld, this occurrence of product differentiation and segmented markets results in violations of the law of one price and absolute PPP. Over time, shifts in market structure and demand will occur, which may invalidate relative PPP.

===Differences in price level measurement===
Measurement of price levels differ from country to country. Inflation data from different countries are based on different commodity baskets; therefore, exchange rate changes do not offset official measures of inflation differences. Because it makes predictions about price changes rather than price levels, relative PPP is still a useful concept. However, change in the relative prices of basket components can cause relative PPP to fail tests that are based on official price indexes.

===Global poverty line===
The global poverty line is a worldwide count of people who live below an international poverty line, referred to as the dollar-a-day line. This line represents an average of the national poverty lines of the world&#x27;s poorest countries, expressed in international dollars. These national poverty lines are converted to international currency and the global line is converted back to local currency using the PPP exchange rates from the ICP. PPP exchange rates include data from the sales of high end non-poverty related items which skews the value of food items and necessary goods which is 70 percent of poor peoples&#x27; consumption. Angus Deaton argues that PPP indices need to be reweighted for use in poverty measurement; they need to be redefined to reflect local poverty measures, not global measures, weighing local food items and excluding luxury items that are not prevalent or are not of equal value in all localities.

==History==

The idea originated with the School of Salamanca in the 16th century, and was developed in its modern form by Gustav Cassel in 1916, in &quot;The Present Situation of the Foreign Trade&quot;. While Gustav Cassel&#x27;s use of PPP concept has been traditionally interpreted as his attempt to formulate a positive theory of exchange rate determination, the policy and theoretical context in which Cassel wrote about exchange rates suggests different interpretation. In the years immediately preceding the end of WWI and following it economists and politicians were involved in discussions on possible ways of restoring the gold standard, which would automatically restore the system of fixed exchange rates among participating nations.

The stability of exchange rates was widely believed to be crucial for restoring the international trade and for its further stable and balanced growth. Nobody then was mentally prepared for the idea that flexible exchange rates determined by market forces do not necessarily cause chaos and instability in the peaceful time (and that is what the abandoning of the gold standard during the war was blamed for). Gustav Cassel was among those who supported the idea of restoring the gold standard, although with some alterations. The question, which Gustav Cassel tried to answer in his works written during that period, was not how exchange rates are determined in the free market, but rather how to determine the appropriate level at which exchange rates were to be fixed during the restoration of the system of fixed exchange rates.

His recommendation was to fix exchange rates at the level corresponding to the PPP, as he believed that this would prevent trade imbalances between trading nations. Thus, PPP doctrine proposed by Cassel was not really a positive (descriptive) theory of exchange rate determination (as Cassel was perfectly aware of numerous factors that prevent exchange rates from stabilizing at PPP level if allowed to float), but rather a normative (prescriptive) policy advice, formulated in the context of discussions on returning to the gold standard.

==Examples==
===Professional===
====OECD comparative price levels====
Each month, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) measures the differences in price levels between its member countries by calculating the ratios of PPPs for private final consumption expenditure to exchange rates. The OECD table below indicates the number of US dollars needed in each of the countries listed to buy the same representative basket of consumer goods and services that would cost US$100 in the United States.

According to the table, an American living or travelling in Switzerland on an income denominated in US dollars would find that country to be the most expensive of the group, having to spend 27% more US dollars to maintain a standard of living comparable to the US in terms of consumption.

=====Extrapolating PPP rates=====

Since global PPP estimates—such as those provided by the ICP—are not calculated annually, but for a single year, PPP exchange rates for years other than the benchmark year need to be extrapolated. One way of doing this is by using the country&#x27;s GDP deflator. To calculate a country&#x27;s PPP exchange rate in Geary–Khamis dollars for a particular year, the calculation proceeds in the following manner:

formula_1

Where PPPrateX,i is the PPP exchange rate of country X for year i, PPPrateX,b is the PPP exchange rate of country X for the benchmark year, PPPrateU,b is the PPP exchange rate of the United States (US) for the benchmark year (equal to 1), GDPdefX,i is the GDP deflator of country X for year i, GDPdefX,b is the GDP deflator of country X for the benchmark year, GDPdefU,i is the GDP deflator of the US for year i, and GDPdefU,b is the GDP deflator of the US for the benchmark year.

==== UBS ====

The bank UBS produces its &quot;Prices and Earnings&quot; report every three years. The 2012 report says, &quot;Our reference basket of goods is based on European consumer habits and includes 122 positions&quot;.

===Educational===

To teach PPP, the basket of goods is often simplified to a single good.

====Big Mac Index====

The Big Mac Index is a simple implementation of PPP where the basket contains a single good: a Big Mac burger from McDonald&#x27;s restaurants. The index was created and popularized by &quot;The Economist&quot; in 1986 as a way to teach economics and to identify over- and under-valued currencies.

The Big Mac has the value of being a relatively standardized consumer product that includes input costs from a wide range of sectors in the local economy, such as agricultural commodities (beef, bread, lettuce, cheese), labor (blue and white collar), advertising, rent and real estate costs, transportation, etc.

There are some problems with the Big Mac Index. A Big Mac is perishable and not easily transported. That means the law of one price is not likely to keep prices the same in different locations. McDonald&#x27;s restaurants are not present in every country, which limits the index&#x27;s usage. Moreover, Big Macs are not sold at every McDonald&#x27;s (notably in India), which limits its usage further.

In the white paper, &quot;Burgernomics&quot;, the authors computed a correlation of 0.73 between the Big Mac Index&#x27;s prices and prices calculated using the Penn World Tables. This single-good index captures most, but not all, of the effects captured by more professional (and more complex) PPP measurement.

&quot;The Economist&quot; uses The Big Mac Index to identify overvalued and undervalued currencies. That is, ones where the Big Mac is expensive or cheap, when measured using current exchange rates. The January 2019 article states that a Big Mac costs HK$20.00 in Hong Kong and US$5.58 in the United States. The implied PPP exchange rate is 3.58 HK$ per US$. The difference between this and the actual exchange rate of 7.83 suggests that the Hong Kong dollar is 54.2% undervalued. That is, it is cheaper to convert US dollars into Hong Kong dollars and buy a Big Mac in Hong Kong than it is to buy a Big Mac directly in US dollars.

====KFC Index====
Similar to the Big Mac Index, the KFC Index measures PPP with a basket that contains a single item: a KFC Original 12/15 pc. bucket. The Big Mac Index cannot be used for most countries in Africa because most do not have a McDonald&#x27;s restaurant. Thus, the KFC Index was created by Sagaci Research (a market research firm focusing solely on Africa) to identify over- and under-valued currencies in Africa.

For example, the average price of KFC&#x27;s Original 12 pc. Bucket in the United States in January 2016 was $20.50; while in Namibia it was only $13.40 at market exchange rates. Therefore, the index states the Namibian dollar was undervalued by 33% at that time.

====iPad Index====
Like the Big Mac Index, the iPad index (elaborated by CommSec) compares an item&#x27;s price in various locations. Unlike the Big Mac, however, each iPad is produced in the same place (except for the model sold in Brazil) and all iPads (within the same model) have identical performance characteristics. Price differences are therefore a function of transportation costs, taxes, and the prices that may be realized in individual markets. In 2013, an iPad cost about twice as much in Argentina as in the United States.

==PPP vs. CPI==

Consumer price index (CPI) and purchasing power parity (PPP) conversion factors share conceptual similarities. The CPI measures differences in levels of prices of goods and services over time within a country, whereas PPPs measure the change in levels of prices across regions within a country.

==See also==

* List of countries by GDP (PPP)
* List of countries by GDP (PPP) per capita
* List of IMF ranked countries by GDP, Includes IMF ranked PPP of 186 countries
* Measures of national income and output
* Relative purchasing power parity

==References==
==External links==
* Penn World Table 
* Purchasing power parities updated by Organisation of Cooperation and Development (OECD) from OECD data
* Explanations from the U. of British Columbia (also provides daily updated PPP charts)
* Purchasing power parities as example of international statistical cooperation from Eurostat – Statistics Explained
* World Bank International Comparison Project provides PPP estimates for a large number of countries
* UBS&#x27;s &quot;Prices and Earnings&quot; Report 2006 Good report on purchasing power containing a Big Mac index as well as for staples such as bread and rice for 71 world cities.
* &quot;Understanding PPPs and PPP based national accounts&quot; provides an overview of methodological issues in calculating PPP and in designing the ICP under which the main PPP tables (Maddison, Penn World Tables, and World Bank WDI) are based.
* List of Countries by Purchasing Power Parity since 1990 (World Bank)
* The Big Mac Index
* Purchasing power parity Definition, Unesco
* Purchasing power parity Converter (PPP Converter </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="0" end="23" title="Purchasing power parity" label="Purchasing power parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="25" end="28" title="Purchasing power parity" label="PPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q271969" start="133" end="149" title="purchasing power" label="purchasing power"/>
<link wikidata="Q8142" start="173" end="183" title="currency" label="currencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758955" start="232" end="245" title="market basket" label="market basket"/>
<link wikidata="Q66100" start="388" end="408" title="Exchange rate" label="market exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="420" end="426" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q877496" start="439" end="455" title="transaction cost" label="transaction cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="546" end="568" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q575619" start="697" end="711" title="cost of living" label="cost of living"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="773" end="777" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="1067" end="1075" title="Economics" label="economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364085" start="1145" end="1161" title="law of one price" label="law of one price"/>
<link wikidata="Q877496" start="1196" end="1212" title="transaction cost" label="transaction cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q377302" start="1218" end="1231" title="trade barrier" label="trade barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="1420" end="1430" title="United States dollar" label="US dollars"/>
<link wikidata="Q31015" start="1477" end="1487" title="Hong Kong dollar" label="HK dollars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758955" start="1784" end="1799" title="Market basket" label="basket of goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q271969" start="2395" end="2411" title="purchasing power" label="purchasing power"/>
<link wikidata="Q756115" start="2881" end="2889" title="Volatility (finance)" label="volatile"/>
<link wikidata="Q305411" start="3005" end="3030" title="Balassa–Samuelson theorem" label="Balassa–Samuelson theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q66100" start="3167" end="3180" title="exchange rate" label="exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q550207" start="3594" end="3613" title="International dollar" label="Geary–Khamis dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="3683" end="3700" title="World Bank" label="World Bank&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q39099" start="3823" end="3835" title="Renminbi" label="Chinese yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q108977" start="4020" end="4034" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal) per capita" label="GDP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="4038" end="4043" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="4053" end="4056" title="United States dollar" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="4129" end="4143" title="Denmark" label="Denmark&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="4241" end="4258" title="developed nations" label="developed nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q185049" start="4392" end="4406" title="geometric mean" label="geometric mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="5132" end="5151" title="Gross domestic product" label="national production"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077518" start="5430" end="5437" title="costing" label="costing"/>
<link wikidata="Q185957" start="5502" end="5518" title="Quality (business)" label="quality of goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q66100" start="5711" end="5731" title="market exchange rate" label="market exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301159" start="5939" end="5947" title="real GDP" label="real GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997169" start="6565" end="6577" title="tradable goods" label="traded goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035695" start="6793" end="6806" title="capital asset" label="capital asset"/>
<link wikidata="Q179179" start="6877" end="6890" title="interest rate" label="interest rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q107885" start="6893" end="6904" title="speculation" label="speculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q547416" start="6906" end="6913" title="Hedge (finance)" label="hedging"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="6934" end="6946" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163352" start="7121" end="7137" title="Penn World Table" label="Penn World Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054271" start="7202" end="7213" title="Penn effect" label="Penn effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q196372" start="7230" end="7245" title="systematic bias" label="systematic bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730" start="7332" end="7344" title="Mexican peso" label="Mexican peso"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="7375" end="7384" title="US dollar" label="US dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="7398" end="7420" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q60571" start="8637" end="8649" title="Neoclassical economics" label="neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="8650" end="8665" title="economic theory" label="economic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519415" start="9107" end="9115" title="long run" label="long run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519415" start="9142" end="9151" title="short run" label="short run"/>
<link wikidata="Q309187" start="10094" end="10107" title="Big Mac Index" label="Big Mac Index"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10120" end="10175" title="Big Mac Index#Manipulation" label="identify manipulation of inflation numbers by Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758955" start="10291" end="10307" title="Market basket" label="baskets of goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936341" start="10469" end="10480" title="price level" label="price level"/>
<link wikidata="Q24886253" start="10508" end="10519" title="food prices" label="food prices"/>
<link wikidata="Q631360" start="10788" end="10799" title="price index" label="price index"/>
<link wikidata="Q631360" start="11612" end="11625" title="price index" label="price indices"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="12354" end="12363" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28195799" start="12557" end="12589" title="International Comparison Program" label="International Comparison Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q843942" start="12990" end="12994" title="teff" label="teff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="13031" end="13035" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q175850" start="14214" end="14232" title="standard of living" label="standard of living"/>
<link wikidata="Q183399" start="14268" end="14283" title="Financial Times" label="Financial Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="14314" end="14317" title="International Monetary Fund" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q317088" start="14614" end="14625" title="Commodity" label="commodities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="14677" end="14684" title="diamond" label="diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q66100" start="14784" end="14797" title="exchange rate" label="exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054271" start="14930" end="14941" title="Penn effect" label="Penn effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997169" start="15000" end="15008" title="tradable" label="tradable"/>
<link wikidata="Q305411" start="15567" end="15591" title="Balassa–Samuelson effect" label="Balassa–Samuelson effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="15702" end="15710" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="15752" end="15763" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q240673" start="16283" end="16287" title="cost" label="cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q210947" start="16465" end="16485" title="factor of production" label="factor of production"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200129" start="19527" end="19550" title="product differentiation" label="product differentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="20380" end="20392" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q752401" start="20501" end="20531" title="least developed country" label="world&amp;#x27;s poorest countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334000" start="21270" end="21289" title="School of Salamanca" label="School of Salamanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555719" start="21351" end="21364" title="Gustav Cassel" label="Gustav Cassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q173509" start="21862" end="21875" title="gold standard" label="gold standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q66143" start="21925" end="21945" title="Fixed exchange-rate system" label="fixed exchange rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="23438" end="23492" title="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" label="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915827" start="23608" end="23645" title="household final consumption expenditure" label="private final consumption expenditure"/>
<link wikidata="Q192270" start="24151" end="24162" title="Consumption (economics)" label="consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q796024" start="24450" end="24462" title="GDP deflator" label="GDP deflator"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="24804" end="24817" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q309187" start="25451" end="25464" title="Big Mac Index" label="Big Mac Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q506796" start="25542" end="25549" title="Big Mac" label="Big Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="25562" end="25577" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s Corporation" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="25638" end="25651" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241092" start="26411" end="26427" title="Cattle slaughter in India" label="notably in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q309187" start="27442" end="27455" title="Big Mac Index" label="Big Mac Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q25898355" start="27461" end="27470" title="KFC Index" label="KFC Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q524757" start="27529" end="27532" title="KFC" label="KFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q913709" start="27731" end="27746" title="market research" label="market research"/>
<link wikidata="Q309187" start="28130" end="28143" title="Big Mac Index" label="Big Mac Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153857" start="28175" end="28182" title="Commonwealth Securities" label="CommSec"/>
<link wikidata="Q506796" start="28247" end="28254" title="Big Mac" label="Big Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q180687" start="28657" end="28677" title="Consumer price index" label="Consumer price index"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000322" start="28969" end="28999" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP)" label="List of countries by GDP (PPP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q207987" start="29002" end="29043" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP) per capita" label="List of countries by GDP (PPP) per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q19093" start="29046" end="29081" title="List of IMF ranked countries by GDP" label="List of IMF ranked countries by GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057397" start="29126" end="29164" title="Measures of national income and output" label="Measures of national income and output"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310798" start="29167" end="29199" title="Relative purchasing power parity" label="Relative purchasing power parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="30156" end="30166" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q309187" start="30170" end="30187" title="Big Mac Index" label="The Big Mac Index"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64491" wikidata="Q931008" url="?curid=64491" title="Igor Dmitriyevich Novikov">
<text>Igor Dmitriyevich Novikov (; born November 10, 1935) is a Russian (and former Soviet) theoretical astrophysicist and cosmologist.

Novikov put forward the idea of white holes in 1964. He also formulated the Novikov self-consistency principle in the mid-1980s, a contribution to the theory of time travel.

Novikov moved to Copenhagen, Denmark, where he worked and taught at the Niels Bohr Institute. He returned to Russia in 2001.

==Biography==
Novikov gained his PhD degree in astrophysics in 1965 and the Russian D.Sc. degree in astrophysics in 1970. From 1974 to 1990 he was head of the Department of Relativistic Astrophysics at the Russian Space Research Institute in Moscow. Before 1991 he was head of the Department of Theoretical Astrophysics at the Lebedev Physical Institute in Moscow and has been a professor at Moscow State University. Since 1994 he has been director of the Theoretical Astrophysics Center (TAC) of the University of Copenhagen, Denmark. He is currently also a professor of astrophysics at the Observatory of the University of Copenhagen, where he has been since 1991. Since 1998 he has been a Fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society.

He is awarded the First John Archibald Wheeler Prize (2020), together with physicist Kip Thorne (Caltech) and Oxford University professor Roger Penrose. This award is presented for his contribution to the development of the general theory of relativity and the physics of black holes. The prize is awarded by the President of the Italian Physical Society at the official awards ceremony in Rome on May 22, 2020.

==See also==
*Closed timelike curve
*Cosmic microwave background
*Observational cosmology
*Quantum mechanics of time travel
*Primordial black hole
*Superradiance
*White hole

==References==
===General references===
*

== External links ==
* Oral history interview transcript with Igor Dmitriyevich Novikov on 21 August 1979, American Institute of Physics, Niels Bohr Library &amp; Archives - interview conducted with Spencer R. Weart in Montreal, Canada </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q931008" start="0" end="25" title="Igor Dmitriyevich Novikov" label="Igor Dmitriyevich Novikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="58" end="65" title="Russians" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="78" end="84" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q37547" start="86" end="112" title="astrophysics" label="theoretical astrophysicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346" start="117" end="128" title="physical cosmology" label="cosmologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q131468" start="163" end="173" title="white hole" label="white hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003641" start="207" end="241" title="Novikov self-consistency principle" label="Novikov self-consistency principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q182154" start="292" end="303" title="time travel" label="time travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q263761" start="378" end="398" title="Niels Bohr Institute" label="Niels Bohr Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="465" end="468" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628227" start="516" end="521" title="Doktor nauk" label="D.Sc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1433237" start="638" end="670" title="Russian Space Research Institute" label="Russian Space Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="674" end="680" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810862" start="759" end="785" title="Lebedev Physical Institute" label="Lebedev Physical Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q13164" start="824" end="847" title="Moscow State University" label="Moscow State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q186285" start="933" end="957" title="University of Copenhagen" label="University of Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="959" end="966" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q37547" start="1004" end="1016" title="astrophysics" label="astrophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q753299" start="1138" end="1164" title="Royal Astronomical Society" label="Royal Astronomical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q323320" start="1252" end="1262" title="Kip Thorne" label="Kip Thorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q193803" start="1305" end="1318" title="Roger Penrose" label="Roger Penrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="1391" end="1419" title="general theory of relativity" label="general theory of relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="1439" end="1450" title="black holes" label="black holes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3963829" start="1497" end="1521" title="Italian Physical Society" label="Italian Physical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876815" start="1594" end="1615" title="Closed timelike curve" label="Closed timelike curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="1617" end="1644" title="Cosmic microwave background" label="Cosmic microwave background"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998314" start="1646" end="1669" title="Observational cosmology" label="Observational cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269069" start="1671" end="1703" title="Quantum mechanics of time travel" label="Quantum mechanics of time travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155939" start="1705" end="1726" title="Primordial black hole" label="Primordial black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063080" start="1728" end="1741" title="Superradiance" label="Superradiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q131468" start="1743" end="1753" title="White hole" label="White hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q513324" start="1997" end="2013" title="Spencer R. Weart" label="Spencer R. Weart"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="2017" end="2033" title="Montreal" label="Montreal, Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64493" wikidata="Q11229" url="?curid=64493" title="Percentage">
<text>In mathematics, a percentage () is a number or ratio expressed as a fraction of 100. It is often denoted using the &quot;percent sign&quot; (%), although the abbreviations &quot;pct.&quot;, &quot;pct&quot;, and sometimes &quot;pc&quot; are also used. A percentage is a dimensionless number (pure number), primarily used for expressing proportions, but percent is nonetheless a unit of measurement in its orthography and usage.

== Examples ==
For example, 45% (read as &quot;forty-five percent&quot;) is equal to the fraction , the ratio 45:55 (or 45:100 when comparing to the total rather than the other portion), or 0.45. 
Percentages are often used to express a proportionate part of a total.

(Similarly, one can also express a number as a fraction of 1,000, using the term &quot;per mille&quot; or the symbol &quot;&quot;.)

===Example 1===
If 50% of the total number of students in the class are male, that means that 50 out of every 100 students are male. If there are 500 students, then 250 of them are male.

===Example 2===
An increase of $0.15 on a price of $2.50 is an increase by a fraction of = 0.06. Expressed as a percentage, this is a 6% increase.

While many percentage values are between 0 and 100, there is no mathematical restriction and percentages may take on other values. For example, it is common to refer to 111% or −35%, especially for percent changes and comparisons.

== History ==
In Ancient Rome, long before the existence of the decimal system, computations were often made in fractions in the multiples of . For example, Augustus levied a tax of on goods sold at auction known as &quot;centesima rerum venalium&quot;. Computation with these fractions was equivalent to computing percentages.

As denominations of money grew in the Middle Ages, computations with a denominator of 100 became increasingly standard, such that from the late 15th century to the early 16th century, it became common for arithmetic texts to include such computations. Many of these texts applied these methods to profit and loss, interest rates, and the Rule of Three. By the 17th century, it was standard to quote interest rates in hundredths.

==Percent sign==
The term &quot;percent&quot; is derived from the Latin &quot;per centum&quot;, meaning &quot;hundred&quot; or &quot;by the hundred&quot;. 
The sign for &quot;percent&quot; evolved by gradual contraction of the Italian term &quot;per cento&quot;, meaning &quot;for a hundred&quot;. The &quot;per&quot; was often abbreviated as &quot;p.&quot;—eventually disappeared entirely. The &quot;cento&quot; was contracted to two circles separated by a horizontal line, from which the modern &quot;%&quot; symbol is derived.

== Calculations ==
The percent value is computed by multiplying the numeric value of the ratio by 100. For example, to find 50 apples as a percentage of 1,250 apples, one first computes the ratio = 0.04, and then multiplies by 100 to obtain 4%. The percent value can also be found by multiplying first instead of later, so in this example, the 50 would be multiplied by 100 to give 5,000, and this result would be divided by 1,250 to give 4%.

To calculate a percentage of a percentage, convert both percentages to fractions of 100, or to decimals, and multiply them. For example, 50% of 40% is:
It is not correct to divide by 100 and use the percent sign at the same time; it would literally imply division by 10,000. For example, , not , which actually is . A term such as would also be incorrect, since it would be read as 1 percent, even if the intent was to say 100%.

Whenever communicating about a percentage, it is important to specify what it is relative to (i.e., what is the total that corresponds to 100%). The following problem illustrates this point.

We are asked to compute the ratio of female computer science majors to all computer science majors. We know that 60% of all students are female, and among these 5% are computer science majors, so we conclude that × = or 3% of all students are female computer science majors. Dividing this by the 10% of all students that are computer science majors, we arrive at the answer: = or 30% of all computer science majors are female.

This example is closely related to the concept of conditional probability.

Because of the commutative property of multiplication, reversing expressions does not change the result; for example, 50% of 20 is 10, and 20% of 50 is 10.

== Variants of the percentage calculation ==
The calculation of percentages is carried out and taught in different ways depending on the prerequisites and requirements. In this way, the usual formulas can be obtained with proportions, which saves them from having to remember them. In so-called mental arithmetic, the intermediary question is usually asked what 100% or 1% is (corresponds to).

Example:

42 kg is 7%. How much is (corresponds to) 100%?Given are &quot;W&quot; (percentage) and &quot;p&quot; % (percentage).We are looking for &quot;G&quot; (basic value).
== Percentage increase and decrease ==
Due to inconsistent usage, it is not always clear from the context what a percentage is relative to. When speaking of a &quot;10% rise&quot; or a &quot;10% fall&quot; in a quantity, the usual interpretation is that this is relative to the &quot;initial value&quot; of that quantity. For example, if an item is initially priced at $200 and the price rises 10% (an increase of $20), the new price will be $220. Note that this final price is 110% of the initial price (100% + 10% = 110%).

Some other examples of percent changes:
* An increase of 100% in a quantity means that the final amount is 200% of the initial amount (100% of initial + 100% of increase = 200% of initial). In other words, the quantity has doubled.
* An increase of 800% means the final amount is 9 times the original (100% + 800% = 900% = 9 times as large).
* A decrease of 60% means the final amount is 40% of the original (100% – 60% = 40%).
* A decrease of 100% means the final amount is &quot;zero&quot; (100% – 100% = 0%).

In general, a change of percent in a quantity results in a final amount that is 100 +  percent of the original amount (equivalently, (1 + 0.01) times the original amount).

==Compounding percentages==

Percent changes applied sequentially &quot;do not add up&quot; in the usual way. For example, if the 10% increase in price considered earlier (on the $200 item, raising its price to $220) is followed by a 10% decrease in the price (a decrease of $22), then the final price will be $198—&quot;not&quot; the original price of $200. The reason for this apparent discrepancy is that the two percent changes (+10% and −10%) are measured relative to different initial values ($200 and $220, respectively), and thus do not &quot;cancel out&quot;.

In general, if an increase of percent is followed by a decrease of percent, and the initial amount was , the final amount is ; hence the net change is an overall decrease by percent &quot;of&quot; percent (the square of the original percent change when expressed as a decimal number). Thus, in the above example, after an increase and decrease of , the final amount, $198, was 10% of 10%, or 1%, less than the initial amount of $200. The net change is the same for a decrease of percent, followed by an increase of percent; the final amount is .

This can be expanded for a case where one does not have the same percent change. If the initial amount leads to a percent change , and the second percent change is , then the final amount is . To change the above example, after an increase of and decrease of , the final amount, $209, is 4.5% more than the initial amount of $200.

As shown above, percent changes can be applied in any order and have the same effect.

In the case of interest rates, a very common but ambiguous way to say that an interest rate rose from 10% per annum to 15% per annum, for example, is to say that the interest rate increased by 5%, which could &quot;theoretically&quot; mean that it increased from 10% per annum to 10.5% per annum. It is clearer to say that the interest rate increased by 5 percentage points (pp). The same confusion between the different concepts of percent(age) and percentage points can potentially cause a major misunderstanding when journalists report about election results, for example, expressing both new results and differences with earlier results as percentages. For example, if a party obtains 41% of the vote and this is said to be a 2.5% increase, does that mean the earlier result was 40% (since 41 = ) or 38.5% (since 41 = )?

In financial markets, it is common to refer to an increase of one percentage point (e.g. from 3% per annum to 4% per annum) as an increase of &quot;100 basis points&quot;.

== Word and symbol ==
In most forms of English, &quot;percent&quot; is usually written as two words (&quot;per cent&quot;), although &quot;percentage&quot; and &quot;percentile&quot; are written as one word. In American English, &quot;percent&quot; is the most common variant (but &quot;per mille&quot; is written as two words).

In the early 20th century, there was a dotted abbreviation form &quot;&quot;per cent.&quot;, as opposed to &quot;per cent&quot;. The form &quot;per cent.&quot;&quot; is still in use in the highly formal language found in certain documents like commercial loan agreements (particularly those subject to, or inspired by, common law), as well as in the &quot;Hansard&quot; transcripts of British Parliamentary proceedings. The term has been attributed to Latin &quot;per centum&quot;. The symbol for percent (%) evolved from a symbol abbreviating the Italian &quot;per cento&quot;. In some other languages, the form &quot;procent&quot; or &quot;prosent&quot; is used instead. Some languages use both a word derived from &quot;percent&quot; and an expression in that language meaning the same thing, e.g. Romanian &quot;procent&quot; and &quot;la sută&quot; (thus, &quot;10%&quot; can be read or sometimes written &quot;ten for [each] hundred&quot;, similarly with the English &quot;one out of ten&quot;). Other abbreviations are rarer, but sometimes seen.

Grammar and style guides often differ as to how percentages are to be written. For instance, it is commonly suggested that the word percent (or per cent) be spelled out in all texts, as in &quot;1 percent&quot; and not &quot;1%&quot;. Other guides prefer the word to be written out in humanistic texts, but the symbol to be used in scientific texts. Most guides agree that they always be written with a numeral, as in &quot;5 percent&quot; and not &quot;five percent&quot;, the only exception being at the beginning of a sentence: &quot;Ten percent of all writers love style guides.&quot; Decimals are also to be used instead of fractions, as in &quot;3.5 percent of the gain&quot; and not &quot; percent of the gain&quot;. However the titles of bonds issued by governments and other issuers use the fractional form, e.g. &quot;% Unsecured Loan Stock 2032 Series 2&quot;. (When interest rates are very low, the number 0 is included if the interest rate is less than 1%, e.g. &quot;% Treasury Stock&quot;, not &quot;% Treasury Stock&quot;.) It is also widely accepted to use the percent symbol (%) in tabular and graphic material.

In line with common English practice, style guides—such as &quot;The Chicago Manual of Style&quot;—generally state that the number and percent sign are written without any space in between.
However, the International System of Units and the ISO 31-0 standard require a space.

== Other uses ==

The word &quot;percentage&quot; is often a misnomer in the context of sports statistics, when the referenced number is expressed as a decimal proportion, not a percentage: &quot;The Phoenix Suns&#x27; Shaquille O&#x27;Neal led the NBA with a .609 field goal percentage (FG%) during the 2008–09 season.&quot; (O&#x27;Neal made 60.9% of his shots, not 0.609%.) Likewise, the winning percentage of a team, the fraction of matches that the club has won, is also usually expressed as a decimal proportion; a team that has a .500 winning percentage has won 50% of their matches. The practice is probably related to the similar way that batting averages are quoted.

As &quot;percent&quot; it is used to describe the grade or slope, the steepness of a road or railway, formula for which is 100 ×  which could also be expressed as the tangent of the angle of inclination times 100. This is the ratio of distances a vehicle would advance vertically and horizontally, respectively, when going up- or downhill, expressed in percent.

Percentage is also used to express composition of a mixture by mass percent and mole percent.

== Related units ==

* Percentage point difference of 1 part in 100
* Per mille (‰) 1 part in 1,000
* Basis point (bp) difference of 1 part in 10,000
* Permyriad (‱) 1 part in 10,000
* Per cent mille (pcm) 1 part in 100,000
* Centiturn

== Practical applications ==
* Baker percentage
* Volume percent

==See also==
*1000 percent
*Relative change and difference
*Percent difference
*Percentage change
*Parts-per notation
*Per-unit system
*Percent point function

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11229" start="18" end="28" title="Percentage" label="percentage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481047" start="47" end="52" title="ratio" label="ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q66055" start="68" end="76" title="fraction (mathematics)" label="fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189753" start="97" end="104" title="Denotation" label="denoted"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559698" start="121" end="133" title="percent sign" label="percent sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q126818" start="269" end="289" title="dimensionless quantity" label="dimensionless number"/>
<link wikidata="Q47574" start="377" end="396" title="unit of measurement" label="unit of measurement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481047" start="532" end="537" title="ratio" label="ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q181011" start="784" end="793" title="per mille" label="per mille"/>
<link wikidata="Q4339852" start="1364" end="1378" title="percent change" label="percent change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="1415" end="1427" title="Ancient Rome" label="Ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="1555" end="1563" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q28229068" start="1620" end="1644" title="centesima rerum venalium" label="centesima rerum venalium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1765" end="1776" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340162" start="2065" end="2078" title="Rule of three (mathematics)" label="Rule of Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559698" start="2317" end="2345" title="percentage sign" label="sign for &amp;quot;percent&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="2384" end="2391" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481047" start="3782" end="3787" title="ratio" label="ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q327069" start="4232" end="4255" title="conditional probability" label="conditional probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q165474" start="4273" end="4293" title="commutative property" label="commutative property"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5534" end="5549" title="Percent difference#Percentage change" label="percent changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q179179" start="7748" end="7761" title="interest rate" label="interest rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049848" start="8089" end="8105" title="percentage point" label="percentage point"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378587" start="8757" end="8778" title="Commonwealth English" label="most forms of English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913954" start="8898" end="8908" title="percentile" label="percentile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="8943" end="8959" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q181011" start="9019" end="9028" title="per mille" label="per mille"/>
<link wikidata="Q524352" start="9418" end="9425" title="Hansard" label="Hansard"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="9514" end="9519" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559698" start="9548" end="9566" title="percent sign" label="symbol for percent"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020" start="11312" end="11339" title="The Chicago Manual of Style" label="The Chicago Manual of Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="11450" end="11479" title="International System of Units" label="International System of Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654708" start="11488" end="11496" title="ISO 31-0" label="ISO 31-0"/>
<link wikidata="Q6875856" start="11585" end="11593" title="misnomer" label="misnomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q164177" start="11724" end="11736" title="Phoenix Suns" label="Phoenix Suns"/>
<link wikidata="Q169452" start="11743" end="11764" title="Shaquille O&amp;#x27;Neal" label="Shaquille O&amp;#x27;Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="11773" end="11776" title="NBA" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447003" start="11789" end="11810" title="field goal percentage" label="field goal percentage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025711" start="11915" end="11933" title="winning percentage" label="winning percentage"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739794" start="12172" end="12188" title="batting average (baseball)" label="batting averages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139344" start="12252" end="12257" title="grade (slope)" label="grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q34442" start="12287" end="12291" title="road" label="road"/>
<link wikidata="Q160342" start="12295" end="12302" title="Rail tracks" label="railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q93344" start="12369" end="12376" title="Tangent (trigonometry)" label="tangent"/>
<link wikidata="Q899138" start="12628" end="12640" title="mass percent" label="mass percent"/>
<link wikidata="Q125264" start="12645" end="12657" title="mole percent" label="mole percent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049848" start="12683" end="12699" title="Percentage point" label="Percentage point"/>
<link wikidata="Q181011" start="12730" end="12739" title="permille" label="Per mille"/>
<link wikidata="Q750178" start="12762" end="12773" title="Basis point" label="Basis point"/>
<link wikidata="Q750178" start="12812" end="12821" title="Permyriad" label="Permyriad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166837" start="12845" end="12859" title="Per cent mille" label="Per cent mille"/>
<link wikidata="Q304479" start="12886" end="12895" title="Centiturn" label="Centiturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778017" start="12928" end="12944" title="Baker percentage" label="Baker percentage"/>
<link wikidata="Q909482" start="12947" end="12961" title="Volume percent" label="Volume percent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546051" start="12977" end="12989" title="1000 percent" label="1000 percent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4339852" start="12991" end="13021" title="Relative change and difference" label="Relative change and difference"/>
<link wikidata="Q4339852" start="13023" end="13041" title="Percent difference" label="Percent difference"/>
<link wikidata="Q4339852" start="13043" end="13060" title="Percentage change" label="Percentage change"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="13062" end="13080" title="Parts-per notation" label="Parts-per notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852883" start="13082" end="13097" title="Per-unit system" label="Per-unit system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489473" start="13099" end="13121" title="Percent point function" label="Percent point function"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64495" wikidata="Q1147853" url="?curid=64495" title="Tamale">
<text>A tamale, in Spanish , is a traditional Mesoamerican dish made of &quot;masa&quot;, a dough made from nixtamalized corn, which is steamed in a corn husk or banana leaves. The wrapping can either be discarded prior to eating or used as a plate. Tamales can be filled with meats, cheeses, fruits, vegetables, herbs, chilies, or any preparation according to taste, and both the filling and the cooking liquid may be seasoned.

&quot;Tamale&quot; is an anglicized version of the Spanish word (plural: ). comes from the Nahuatl .

The English &quot;tamale&quot; is a back-formation from , with English speakers applying English pluralization rules, and thus interpreting the &quot;-e-&quot; as part of the stem, rather than part of the plural suffix &quot;-es&quot;.
== Origin ==
Tamales originated in Mesoamerica as early as 8000 to 5000 BC.

The preparation of tamales is likely to have spread from the indigenous cultures in Mesoamerica to the rest of the Americas. According to archaeologists Karl Taube, William Saturno, and David Stuart, tamales may date from around 100 AD. They found pictorial references in the Mural of San Bartolo, in Petén, Guatemala.

The Aztec and Maya civilizations, as well as the Olmec and Toltec before them, used tamales as easily portable food for hunting trips, traveling large distances, and nourishing their armies. Tamales were also considered sacred, as they were seen as the food of the gods. The Aztec, Maya, Olmecs, and Toltecs as peoples considered corn as a central part of their cultural identity, so tamales played a large part in their rituals and festivals.

== Mesoamerica ==

=== Aztec ===
The different forms of Tamales eaten and sold in Aztec markets are well documented in the extensive Florentine Codex written by Reverend Bernardino de Sahagún. In book X he describes how Aztec tamales used a variety of corn for their flour base and were cooked in earth ovens, or olla, which were heated by the steam of dried cane grown and harvested for the express purpose of cooking tamales. Fillings would consist of meat (turkey, fish, frog, axolotl, gopher), fruit, bean, squash seed, turkey egg and even no filling. They would be seasoned with chilis or seeds if they were savory and honey if they were sweet.

Tamales also held great religious and spiritual importance within Aztec culture. It was customary for Aztec women to stay up for two to three days cooking tamales before a wedding. (Codex, Book IX). In terms of festivities, the most notable was Uauhquiltamalcualiztli, which was celebrated during the 18th month of the calendar round. The name of the celebration translates to &#x27;The Eating of Tamales Stuffed with Amaranth Greens&#x27; and was a celebration of the fire deity Ixcozauhqui. Another significant ritual for the Aztecs was the feast of Atamalcualiztli (eating of water tamales). This ritual, held every eight years for a whole week, was done by eating tamales without any seasoning, spices, or filling, which allowed the maize freedom from being overworked in the usual tamale cooking methods.

=== Maya (pre-Columbian) ===
In the pre-Columbian era, the Mayas ate tamales and often served them at feasts and festivals. The Classic Maya hieroglyph for tamales has been identified on pots and other objects dating back to the Classic Era (200–1000 CE), although they likely were eaten much earlier. Tamales appear often in ceramic ware from the Mayan Classic era (200–1000 CE). The Fenton vase shows a plate of unwrapped tamales being offered as a penance to a powerful Mayan nobleman. While tortillas are the basis for the contemporary Maya diet, remarkably little evidence exists for tortilla production among the Classic period Maya. A lack of griddles in the archaeological record suggests that the primary foodstuff of the Mesoamerican diet may have been the &quot;tamal&quot;, a cooked, vegetal-wrapped mass of maize dough. Tamales are cooked without the use of ceramic technologies and therefore the form of the tamale is thought to predate the tortilla. Similarities between the two maize products can be found in both the ingredients, preparation techniques, and the linguistic ambiguity exhibited by the pan-Mayan term &quot;wa&quot; referring to a basic, daily consumed maize product that can refer to either tortillas or tamales.

=== Toltec ===
While the exact origin of tamales has yet to be determined, the oldest people confirmed to have eaten them were the Toltecs, as archaeologists have found fossilized corn husks around the Pyramid of the Sun and the Pyramid of the Moon in Teotihuacan. (c. 250 BC – 750 CE)

==Central America==
===Belize===
The tamale is a staple in Belize, where it is also known as &quot;dukunu&quot;, a sweet corn tamale that gets its name from the Garifuna people. Dukunus are mostly vegetarian and consist of roasted corn kernels blended with coconut milk as a base. Butter, salt, and sugar are also added. Dukunus filled with different meats are also made.

=== El Salvador ===
Tamales are a traditional dish in El Salvador. Tamales are typically eaten during holidays, like Christmas. Salvadoran tamales have a corn masa base and are wrapped in banana leaves. They contain fillings like chicken, vegetables, and/or beans. Corn tamales, or &quot;tamales de elote&quot;, are also popular. Bean tamales, or &quot;tamales pisques&quot;, are also consumed, typically during Holy Week.

===Guatemala===
====Pre-Columbian Guatemala====
In the classical times of the Maya of Central America (Guatemala in particular), the great Mayan lords delighted in a baked dough bun during the winter solstice, made of maize mixed with turkey, &quot;tepezcuintle&quot; (lowland paca) or venison, spices, and chili pepper, among other ingredients.

This meal was later integrated into modern Guatemalan traditions. For example, on Christmas Eve, families prepare black, red, or sweet tamales for family and friends to show gratitude. The tamales are often accompanied with chocolate, yolk bread, and punch, and participate in the Mass of Gallo, at midnight.

In Guatemala, eating tamales at midnight on December 24 and 31 is customary. Guatemalans also eat tamales for holiday celebrations, birthdays, and baptisms, so the tamale is considered an important dish in the culture of Guatemala.

Guatemala has many tamale varieties, from the traditional corn-husked tamale called a , to a sweet version of tamale, which uses the same corn dough, but is seasoned with honey or sugar combined with chocolate, almonds, plums, seeds, and peppers. Tamales are sold in stores and private homes (especially on Saturdays). A red light on a home at night is a sign that tamales are for sale at that home.

====Varieties====

*Red tamales owe their color to achiote and tomato and are made with corn dough stuffed with &quot;recado rojo&quot;, raisins, chili peppers, chicken, beef or pork wrapped in banana leaves.
*Cambray tamales contain raisins and almonds. Sweet tamales are filled with sweet . Black tamales are named after the color that chocolate gives them. Chipilin tamales wrapped in corn husks, parrot tamales, and corn tamales among others are also made. Cream tamales and cheese and anise seeds are also mixed with corn tamales.
* is a typical and emblematic dish of Guatemala. It is a variation of the tamale made with corn dough, but a firmer consistency, although lard can be added to the dough to generate a more pleasant taste and consistency. It is usually mixed with of tomato and with a filling that can be with chicken, beef, or pork. It is wrapped with dried cob leaves (tusa or bender). In some places, it is accompanied by cheese, sauce, or both.
*Rice tamales come from the Guatemalan highlands, where the typical corn dough is replaced by a thick dough of annealed rice with water and salt. The preparation of the does not differ much from the original, since only some regions have the ingredients with which it is made.
* is a tamale particularly from the highlands of Guatemala that uses potato instead of maize for the dough.
* or is dough only, with no meats or other fillings. This dish is used to accompany a meal and used to scoop food on the plate, or just eaten plain along with the main dish.

===Nicaragua===

The most popular version of the Tamal in Nicaragua is the &quot;nacatamal&quot; and sometimes serves as an entire meal in itself. It is a traditional dish with indigenous origins. The name comes from the Nawat language spoken by the Nicarao, who were situated on the Southern Pacific coast of Nicaragua, and translates to &quot;meat tamale&quot;. The is perhaps the most produced within traditional Nicaraguan cuisine and it is an event often reserved for Sundays at mid-morning. It is usually eaten together with fresh bread and coffee. Enjoying during special occasions and to invite extended family and neighbors to also partake is a common occurrence.

 are much larger in size in comparison to their counterparts, and made up of mostly nixtamalized corn (a kind of dough traditionally made from a process called ) and lard). The masa and liquified concoction of onion, garlic, tomato, salt, (annatto), naranja agria and bell pepper is cooked and the result becomes the base for the nacatamal and it is also referred to as . This base is ladled onto plantain leaves used for wrapping into large individual portions. The filling usually consists of annatto-seasoned pork meat, rice, slices of potatoes, bell peppers, tomatoes, and onions; olives, spearmint sprigs, and chile, a very small, egg-shaped chile found in Nicaragua. On occasion, prunes, raisins, or capers can be added. The &quot;masa&quot; and filling are then wrapped in plantain leaves, tied with a string, and made into pillow-shaped bundles – . They are then steamed or pressure-cooked for several hours. The entire process is very labor-intensive, and it often requires preparation over the course of two days; involving the whole family may be needed to complete it.

==== Varieties ====
* Are a much simpler version of a tamal in Nicaragua, they are wrapped in a banana leaf, and are eaten with cheese and cooked red beans.
* have a sweet flavor, filled with a mixture of ground beans sweetened with cane sugar or rapadura and are wrapped in banana leaves. They serve as a dessert.
* Is made with tender corn grains that gives it a slightly sweet flavor and wrapped in corn husks. It is generally eaten accompanied by quesillo or cheese, and sour cream.
*. A variety of the above stuffed with a mixture of rapadura and grated or ground cheese.
*. A Northern Nicaraguan tamal make with chicken or hen meat, wrapped in a banana leaf and tied.
* Is a Western Nicaraguan tamal mostly found in León. that consists of masa mixed with mashed green plantain, sugar, honey and salt. It&#x27;s wrapped in tempisque or fig leaf and cooked.

===Modern Mexico===
In the present day, it is common in certain Maya areas to steam tamales in a spherical vessel known as a &quot;tamalero,&quot; as opposed to boiling them&quot;,&quot; this practice has been linked back to the Classic Maya period due to the presence of boiler scale in Classic Maya pottery. The other common method of cooking tamales was on a &quot;comal&quot; which is a large flat stone, this method is also used to cook tortillas. In addition to the leaves of plantain and banana which are commonly used today, Mayan tamales were commonly wrapped in the leaves of avocado or piper plants, which would be gathered by men during the rainy season. While meat and fish were the customary fillings of tamales of this era, squash seeds and flowers, and greens such as &quot;chaya,&quot; or &quot;chipilin&quot; were also common. Fray Diego de Landa Calderón also spoke of &#x27;special breads&#x27; [tamales] which were used specifically as offerings, with fillings such as deer heart, or quail. Because of the convenience offered by tamales, specific tamales were made for hunters and travelers. These tamales were cooked with extra wood ashes in order to create a hard &#x27;shell&#x27; around the tamales when dried, this allowed tamales to keep for up to 20 days.

Tamales begin with a dough made from ground nixtamalized corn (hominy), called &quot;masa&quot;, or alternatively a rehydrated &quot;masa&quot; powder, such as Maseca. It is combined with lard or vegetable shortening, along with broth or water, to bring the dough to the consistency of a very thick batter. It is traditional to whisk the lard, and whisk the resulting batter, with the intent of producing the signature soft and fluffy texture. Modern recipes may use baking powder to achieve a similar effect. Chili purees or dried chili powders are also occasionally added to the batter, which in addition to the spice can cause some tamales to appear red in color. Tamales are generally wrapped in corn husks or plantain leaves before being steamed, with the choice of husk depending on the region. They usually have a sweet or savory filling and are usually steamed until firm.

Tamale-making is a ritual that has been part of Mexican life since pre-Hispanic times, when special fillings and forms were designated for each specific festival or life event. Today, tamales are typically filled with meats, cheese, or vegetables, especially chilies. Preparation is complex and time-consuming, and an excellent example of Mexican communal cooking, where this task usually falls to the women. Tamales are a favorite comfort food in Mexico, eaten as both breakfast and dinner, and often accompanied by hot &quot;atole&quot; or &quot;champurrado&quot; and &quot;arroz con leche&quot; (rice porridge, &quot;rice with milk&quot;) or maize-based beverages of indigenous origin. Street vendors can be seen serving them from huge, steaming, covered pots () or &quot;ollas&quot;.

Instead of corn husks, banana or plantain leaves are used in tropical parts of the country, such as Oaxaca, Chiapas, Veracruz, and the Yucatán Peninsula. These tamales are rather square in shape, often very large—15 inches (40 cm)—and these larger tamales are commonly known as &quot;pibs&quot; in the Yucatán Peninsula. Another very large type of tamale is , made in the Huasteca region of Mexico. Depending on the size, can feed between 50 and 200 people; they are made during festivals and holidays, for quinceañeras, and on Sundays to be sold at the markets.

==Caribbean==

===Cuba===
In Cuba, before the 1959 Revolution, street vendors sold Mexican-style tamales wrapped in corn husks, usually made without any kind of spicy seasoning. Cuban tamales being identical in form to those made in Mexico City suggests they were brought over to Cuba during the period of intense cultural and musical exchange between Cuba and Mexico after the 1920s.

A well-known Cuban song from the 1950s, &quot;&quot;, (a cha-cha-cha sung by Orquesta Aragón) celebrated the delicious tamales sold by a street vendor in Cienfuegos. A peculiarly Cuban invention is the dish known as , basically consisting of tamale masa with the meat stuffing stirred into the masa, and then cooked in a pot on the stove to form a kind of hearty cornmeal porridge.

===Dominican Republic===
In the Dominican Republic, are Dominican tamales stuffed with &quot;picadillo&quot;. The name has its origin in the native Taínos.

===Puerto Rico===
&quot;Guanime&quot; is a Puerto Rican dish that can be traced back to pre-Columbian times. It consists of corn masa that is stuffed with beans, seafood, nuts, or meat, and then wrapped in corn husks slowly cooked on a grill.

 are prepared in a plain version, without the stuffing, and served with stewed salted cod fish. Since the arrival of Europeans, have lost their stuffing. Contemporary are made with corn masa seasoned with coconut milk, lard, broth, and annatto, wrapped in a banana leaf or corn husk.

The several versions of can be made with green plantains, cassava, and a sweet version made with sweet plantains and cornmeal.

The is also related to the pastel, a root tamale dating to around the same time as the native Taíno .

===Trinidad and Tobago===
In Trinidad and Tobago, the dish is called a &quot;pastelle&quot; and is popular in many households during the entire Christmas season and New Year celebrations. It is usually made with cornmeal and filled with cooked, seasoned meat (chicken and beef being the most popular), raisins, olives, capers, and other seasonings. The entire &quot;pastelle&quot; is wrapped in a banana leaf, bound with twine and steamed. When fully cooked, the banana leaf is removed to reveal the brightly yellow-colored dish. It is often enjoyed as is or along with a meal. The sweet version is called &quot;paymee&quot;.
===Jamaica===
In Jamaica, there is a traditional dessert called duckunoo or &quot;duckanoo&quot;, also referred to as &quot;tie-a-leaf&quot; or &quot;blue drawers&quot; (draws). It is a variation of &quot;tamal dulce (sweet tamale)&quot;, and is typically made with batata or sweet potato, coconut, and/or cornmeal, spices like cinnamon, nutmeg and anise, brown sugar, coconut milk and vanilla. Sometimes, raisins and grated green banana are added. The mixture is tied up in a banana leaf or corn husk, and then cooked in boiling water. 

Similarly, it is also made in Belize, Haiti, French Guiana and some other Caribbean islands. Other names include: &quot;dokonon&quot; (in French Guiana), &quot;doukounou&quot; (in Haiti), &quot;paime&quot; (in Trinidad &amp; Tobago), penmi (in St Lucia) and &quot;dukunu&quot; / &quot;ducunu&quot; or &quot;tamalito&quot; (in Belize).

==South America==

Humitas (from Quechua humint&#x27;a) is a Native South American dish from pre-Hispanic times, a traditional food from the Andes and it can be found in Colombia, Bolivia, Chile, Ecuador, Peru, and Northwest Argentina. It consists of fresh choclo (Peruvian corn) pounded to a paste, wrapped in a fresh corn husk, and slowly steamed or boiled in a pot of water. In Bolivia it is known as huminta and in Brazil as pamonha, made of fresh, not nixtamalized, corn paste.

===Venezuela===
Hallaca is a traditional meal from Venezuela that resembles the aspect of a tamal. It consists of corn dough stuffed with a stew of beef, pork, or chicken and other ingredients such as raisins, capers, and olives, fresh onion rings, red and green bell pepper slices. There are also vegetarian options with black beans or tofu. Hallacas are folded in plantain leaves, tied with strings, and boiled. The dish is traditionally served during the Christmas season and has several regional variants in Venezuela. It has been described as a national dish of Venezuela but it can be found also in variants. A characteristic of the hallaca is the delicate corn dough made with consommé or broth and lard colored with annatto.

===Peru===

Tamales were one of the dishes that the Peruvian chef Juan José Cabezudo was famous for serving from his food stand near the Plaza Mayor in Lima.

==Philippines and Guam==

In the Philippines and Guam, which were governed by Spain as a province of Mexico, different forms of tamale-like foods exist. In the Philippines, they merged with the native leaf-wrapped rice cakes (&quot;kakanin&quot;) and are made with a dough derived from ground rice and are filled with seasoned chicken or pork with the addition of peanuts and other seasonings such as sugar. In some places, such as Pampanga, where it is popularly known as &quot;bobotu&quot;, and Batangas provinces, the tamales are wrapped in banana leaves, but sweet corn varieties from the Visayas region are wrapped in corn husks similar to the sweet corn tamales of the American Southwest and Mexico. Because of the work involved in the preparation of tamales, they usually only appear during the special holidays or other big celebrations. Various recipes have practically disappeared under the pressures of modern life and the ease of fast food. Several varieties of tamales are also found in the Philippines.

Tamales, &quot;tamalis&quot;, &quot;tamalos&quot;, and &quot;pasteles&quot; are different varieties found throughout the region. Some are sweet, some are savory, and some are sweet and savory. Mostly wrapped in banana leaves and made of rice, either the whole grain or ground and cooked with coconut milk and other seasonings, they are sometimes filled with meat and seafood, or are plain and have no filling. There are certain varieties, such as &quot;tamalos&quot;, that are made of a sweet corn masa wrapped in a corn husk or leaf. There are also varieties made without masa, like &quot;tamalis&quot;, which are made with small fish fry wrapped in banana leaves and steamed, similar to the from Mexico, where the small fish are cooked whole with herbs and seasonings wrapped inside a corn husk without masa. The number of varieties has dwindled through the years so certain types of tamales that were once popular in the Philippines have become lost or are simply memories. The variety found in Guam, known as &quot;tamales guiso&quot;, is made with corn masa and wrapped in corn husks, and as with the Philippine tamales, are clear evidence of the influence of the galleon trade that occurred between the ports of Manila and Acapulco.

==United States==
While Mexican-style and other Latin American-style tamales are featured at ethnic restaurants throughout the United States, some distinctly indigenous styles also are made.

The Choctaw and Chickasaw make a dish called &quot;banaha&quot;, which can be stuffed or not (plain). Usually, the filling (ranging from none, fried bacon, turkey, deer, nuts, and vegetables such as onions, potatoes, squash, and sweet potatoes) can either be filled or mixed with the masa and steamed in a corn husk.

Cherokee tamales, also known as bean bread or &quot;broadswords&quot;, were made with hominy (in the case of the Cherokee, the masa was made from corn boiled in water treated with wood ashes instead of lime) and beans, and wrapped in green corn leaves or large tree leaves and boiled, similar to the meatless pre-Columbian bean and masa tamales still prepared in Chiapas, central Mexico, and Guatemala.

In northern Louisiana, tamales have been made for several centuries. The Spanish established presidio Los Adaes in 1721 in modern-day Robeline, Louisiana. The descendants of these Spanish settlers from central Mexico were the first tamale makers to arrive in the eastern US. Zwolle, Louisiana, has a Tamale Fiesta every year in October.

In the Mississippi Delta, African Americans developed a spicy tamale called the hot tamale that is made from cornmeal instead of masa and is boiled in corn husks.

Tamales have been eaten in the broader United States since at least 1893, when they were featured at the World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition. In 1894, when tamales were the most popular ethnic food in Los Angeles, XLNT Foods started making them. The company is the oldest continuously operating Mexican food brand in the United States, and one of the oldest companies in Southern California.

A tradition of roving tamale sellers was documented in early 20th-century blues music. They are the subject of the well-known 1937 blues/ragtime song &quot;They&#x27;re Red Hot&quot; by Robert Johnson.

Around the beginning of the 20th century, the name &quot;tamale pie&quot; was given to meat pies and casseroles made with a cornmeal crust and typical tamale fillings arranged in layers. Although characterized as Mexican food, these forms are not popular in Mexican American culture in which the individually wrapped style is preferred.

The Indio International Tamale Festival held every December in Indio, California, has earned two Guinness World Records: the largest tamale festival (154 000 in attendance, December 2002) and the world&#x27;s largest tamale, over one foot (0.3 m) in diameter and 40 feet (12.2 m) in length, created by Chef John Sedlar, since beaten by H. Ayuntamiento de Centro Villahermosa (Mexico) in Villahermosa, Tabasco, Mexico, on 25 November 2018. The current record stands at 50.05 m. The 2006 Guinness book calls the festival &quot;the world&#x27;s largest cooking and culinary festival&quot;.

==See also==
* Ada (food)
* Lepet
* Laulau
* Botok
* Conkies
* Duckunoo
* Hallacas
* Humitas
* List of maize dishes
* List of pork dishes
* List of stuffed dishes
* Pamonha
* Pasteles
* Pepes
* Suman (food)
* Kenkey
* Tamale Guy
* &quot;Zongzi&quot;
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1147853" start="2" end="8" title="Tamale" label="tamale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="13" end="20" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="40" end="51" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006089" start="72" end="76" title="masa" label="masa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052219" start="102" end="114" title="nixtamalization" label="nixtamalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="115" end="119" title="maize" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415859" start="130" end="137" title="steaming" label="steamed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521309" start="156" end="169" title="Banana leaf" label="banana leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="278" end="284" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q165199" start="314" end="321" title="chili pepper" label="chilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q540885" start="449" end="459" title="Anglicisation" label="anglicized"/>
<link wikidata="Q13300" start="515" end="522" title="Nahuatl" label="Nahuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q989162" start="562" end="576" title="back-formation" label="back-formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q210523" start="701" end="705" title="Word stem" label="stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q102047" start="738" end="744" title="suffix" label="suffix"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="797" end="808" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="923" end="934" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891568" start="992" end="1002" title="Karl Taube" label="Karl Taube"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018140" start="1004" end="1019" title="William Saturno" label="William Saturno"/>
<link wikidata="Q434379" start="1025" end="1037" title="David Stuart (Mayanist)" label="David Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q795599" start="1115" end="1135" title="San Bartolo (Maya site)" label="Mural of San Bartolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="1163" end="1168" title="Aztec" label="Aztec"/>
<link wikidata="Q28567" start="1173" end="1177" title="Maya civilization" label="Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q135364" start="1208" end="1213" title="Olmec" label="Olmec"/>
<link wikidata="Q187897" start="1218" end="1224" title="Toltec" label="Toltec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106019" start="1737" end="1753" title="Florentine Codex" label="Florentine Codex"/>
<link wikidata="Q379972" start="1774" end="1795" title="Bernardino de Sahagún" label="Bernardino de Sahagún"/>
<link wikidata="Q498753" start="1917" end="1921" title="Olla (pottery)" label="olla"/>
<link wikidata="Q22718" start="2084" end="2091" title="axolotl" label="axolotl"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2500" end="2522" title="Uauhquiltamalcualiztli" label="Uauhquiltamalcualiztli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012" start="2574" end="2588" title="calendar round" label="calendar round"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410466" start="2735" end="2746" title="Xiuhtecuhtli" label="Ixcozauhqui"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812721" start="2807" end="2822" title="Atamalqualiztli" label="Atamalcualiztli"/>
<link wikidata="Q45914" start="3125" end="3130" title="Maya peoples" label="Mayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q301355" start="3194" end="3206" title="Classic Maya" label="Classic Maya"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3295" end="3306" title="Mesoamerican chronology#Classic Era" label="Classic Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q29238" start="4514" end="4532" title="Pyramid of the Sun" label="Pyramid of the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q29240" start="4541" end="4560" title="Pyramid of the Moon" label="Pyramid of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q172613" start="4564" end="4575" title="Teotihuacan" label="Teotihuacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q242" start="4658" end="4664" title="Belize" label="Belize"/>
<link wikidata="Q863927" start="4760" end="4768" title="Garifuna" label="Garifuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="5026" end="5037" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="5089" end="5098" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q131080" start="5384" end="5393" title="Holy Week" label="Holy Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="5482" end="5497" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q207932" start="5589" end="5604" title="winter solstice" label="winter solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="5614" end="5619" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q33936" start="5665" end="5677" title="lowland paca" label="lowland paca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571145" start="6024" end="6037" title="Misa de Gallo" label="Mass of Gallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302262" start="6805" end="6816" title="recado rojo" label="recado rojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="7999" end="8005" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="8017" end="8022" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="8271" end="8280" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962115" start="8294" end="8303" title="nacatamal" label="nacatamal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186896" start="8434" end="8439" title="Nawat language" label="Nawat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638334" start="8463" end="8470" title="Nicarao people" label="Nicarao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024467" start="8629" end="8647" title="Nicaraguan cuisine" label="Nicaraguan cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q178024" start="9000" end="9005" title="dough" label="dough"/>
<link wikidata="Q72827" start="9053" end="9057" title="lard" label="lard"/>
<link wikidata="Q425902" start="9127" end="9134" title="annatto" label="annatto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9137" end="9150" title="naranja agria" label="naranja agria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548030" start="9155" end="9166" title="bell pepper" label="bell pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="9426" end="9434" title="potatoes" label="potatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="9450" end="9458" title="tomatoes" label="tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23485" start="9464" end="9470" title="onions" label="onions"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="9472" end="9477" title="olive" label="olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640302" start="9502" end="9507" title="Pequin pepper" label="chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q271997" start="9769" end="9784" title="pressure cooking" label="pressure-cooked"/>
<link wikidata="Q10357458" start="10216" end="10224" title="rapadura" label="rapadura"/>
<link wikidata="Q208151" start="10691" end="10695" title="Leon, Nicaragua" label="León"/>
<link wikidata="Q159536" start="11429" end="11434" title="Piper (plant)" label="piper"/>
<link wikidata="Q928244" start="11622" end="11627" title="Cnidoscolus aconitifolius" label="chaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188932" start="11644" end="11652" title="Crotalaria longirostrata" label="chipilin"/>
<link wikidata="Q379672" start="11682" end="11705" title="Diego de Landa" label="Diego de Landa Calderón"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052219" start="12161" end="12173" title="Nixtamalization" label="nixtamalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394051" start="12180" end="12186" title="hominy" label="hominy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006089" start="12202" end="12206" title="masa" label="masa"/>
<link wikidata="Q545402" start="12277" end="12283" title="Gruma" label="Maseca"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524280" start="12822" end="12826" title="husk" label="husk"/>
<link wikidata="Q165449" start="12831" end="12839" title="plantain (cooking)" label="plantain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887327" start="13431" end="13443" title="comfort food" label="comfort food"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312651" start="13526" end="13531" title="atole" label="atole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2955932" start="13547" end="13558" title="champurrado" label="champurrado"/>
<link wikidata="Q19029" start="13575" end="13590" title="Rice pudding" label="arroz con leche"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088245" start="13774" end="13779" title="ollas" label="ollas"/>
<link wikidata="Q34110" start="13888" end="13894" title="Oaxaca" label="Oaxaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q60123" start="13896" end="13903" title="Chiapas" label="Chiapas"/>
<link wikidata="Q60130" start="13905" end="13913" title="Veracruz" label="Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q130978" start="13923" end="13940" title="Yucatán Peninsula" label="Yucatán Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853415" start="14160" end="14168" title="La Huasteca" label="Huasteca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519234" start="14295" end="14306" title="quinceañera" label="quinceañera"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="14381" end="14385" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="14585" end="14596" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986699" start="14795" end="14806" title="cha-cha-cha (music)" label="cha-cha-cha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031558" start="14815" end="14830" title="Orquesta Aragón" label="Orquesta Aragón"/>
<link wikidata="Q190005" start="14892" end="14902" title="Cienfuegos" label="Cienfuegos"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="15153" end="15171" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q166128" start="15214" end="15223" title="picadillo" label="picadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q210623" start="15269" end="15274" title="Taino" label="Taíno"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966194" start="15302" end="15309" title="Guanime" label="Guanime"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682049" start="15321" end="15338" title="Puerto Rican cuisine" label="Puerto Rican dish"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="15865" end="15872" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840853" start="15962" end="15968" title="pasteles" label="pastel"/>
<link wikidata="Q754" start="16067" end="16086" title="Trinidad and Tobago" label="Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q762984" start="16459" end="16464" title="twine" label="twine"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="16681" end="16688" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311505" start="16728" end="16736" title="duckunoo" label="duckunoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q242" start="17233" end="17239" title="Belize" label="Belize"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="17241" end="17246" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769" start="17248" end="17261" title="French Guiana" label="French Guiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="17277" end="17286" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665744" start="17558" end="17564" title="Humita" label="Humita"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="17709" end="17717" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="17719" end="17726" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="17728" end="17733" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="17735" end="17742" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="17744" end="17748" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="17764" end="17773" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171183" start="17796" end="17802" title="choclo" label="choclo"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="17958" end="17964" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461918" start="17968" end="17975" title="pamonha" label="pamonha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052219" start="17996" end="18008" title="nixtamalized" label="nixtamalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085085" start="18039" end="18046" title="Hallaca" label="Hallaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q106765812" start="18823" end="18841" title="Juan José Cabezudo" label="Juan José Cabezudo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536763" start="18894" end="18905" title="Plaza Mayor, Lima" label="Plaza Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15149436" start="19148" end="19155" title="kakanin" label="kakanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="21370" end="21377" title="Choctaw" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q622728" start="21382" end="21391" title="Chickasaw" label="Chickasaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="21684" end="21692" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681850" start="22190" end="22199" title="Los Adaes" label="Los Adaes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2854973" start="22222" end="22241" title="Robeline, Louisiana" label="Robeline, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526883" start="22363" end="22380" title="Zwolle, Louisiana" label="Zwolle, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426203" start="22433" end="22450" title="Mississippi Delta" label="Mississippi Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q122981426" start="22506" end="22516" title="Hot tamale (food)" label="hot tamale"/>
<link wikidata="Q10286140" start="22535" end="22543" title="cornmeal" label="cornmeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q285406" start="22695" end="22728" title="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition" label="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q109974744" start="22802" end="22812" title="XLNT Foods" label="XLNT Foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="23055" end="23066" title="blues music" label="blues music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783628" start="23137" end="23157" title="They&amp;#x27;re Red Hot" label="They&amp;#x27;re Red Hot"/>
<link wikidata="Q192133" start="23167" end="23181" title="Robert Johnson (musician)" label="Robert Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q25327105" start="23241" end="23251" title="tamale pie" label="tamale pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q838789" start="23585" end="23602" title="Indio, California" label="Indio, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678219" start="24125" end="24135" title="Ada (food)" label="Ada (food)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12494547" start="24138" end="24143" title="Lepet" label="Lepet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561177" start="24146" end="24152" title="Laulau" label="Laulau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4197759" start="24155" end="24160" title="Botok" label="Botok"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161211" start="24163" end="24170" title="Conkies" label="Conkies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311505" start="24173" end="24181" title="Duckunoo" label="Duckunoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085085" start="24184" end="24192" title="Hallacas" label="Hallacas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665744" start="24195" end="24202" title="Humitas" label="Humitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098549" start="24205" end="24225" title="List of maize dishes" label="List of maize dishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098837" start="24228" end="24247" title="List of pork dishes" label="List of pork dishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q29915207" start="24250" end="24272" title="List of stuffed dishes" label="List of stuffed dishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461918" start="24275" end="24282" title="Pamonha" label="Pamonha"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840853" start="24285" end="24293" title="Pasteles" label="Pasteles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887922" start="24296" end="24301" title="Pepes" label="Pepes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543376" start="24304" end="24316" title="Suman (food)" label="Suman (food)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742211" start="24319" end="24325" title="Kenkey" label="Kenkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q85805075" start="24328" end="24338" title="Tamale Guy" label="Tamale Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q713466" start="24347" end="24353" title="Zongzi" label="Zongzi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64496" wikidata="Q20753411" url="?curid=64496" title="Comma (disambiguation)">
<text>A [[comma]] (,) is a type of punctuation mark.

Comma, commas, or , may also refer to:


==Arts, entertainment, and media==
===Music===
* Comma (music), a type of interval in music theory
* Comma (rhetoric), a short clause in Ancient Greek rhetoric
* &quot;Commas&quot; (song), the censored version of the Future song &quot;Fuck Up Some Commas&quot;
* &quot;Comma&quot;, an atmospheric metal album by April Weeps

===Other arts, entertainment, and media===
* &quot;Comma&quot;, the journal of the International Council on Archives
* Comma Press, a British publisher

==Other uses==
* Comma (butterfly), the brush-footed butterfly &quot;Polygonia c-album&quot;
* Comma operator, an operator in C and other related programming languages
* Johannine Comma, 1 John 5:7-8
* Oxford comma (also known as Harvard comma, serial comma, or series comma), a disputed usage of the punctuation mark

== See also ==
* Caesura
* Coma (disambiguation)
* Commer
* Kama</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q20753411" start="2" end="11" title="Comma (disambiguation)" label="[[comma]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q20753411" start="48" end="53" title="Comma (disambiguation)" label="Comma"/>
<link wikidata="Q20753411" start="55" end="61" title="Comma (disambiguation)" label="commas"/>
<link wikidata="Q20753411" start="66" end="67" title="Comma (disambiguation)" label=","/>
<link wikidata="Q1071523" start="138" end="151" title="Comma (music)" label="Comma (music)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152061" start="190" end="206" title="Comma (rhetoric)" label="Comma (rhetoric)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20634616" start="251" end="276" title="Commas (song)" label="&amp;quot;Commas&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27817369" start="401" end="412" title="April Weeps" label="April Weeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421986" start="497" end="530" title="International Council on Archives" label="International Council on Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152062" start="533" end="544" title="Comma Press" label="Comma Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754570" start="584" end="601" title="Comma (butterfly)" label="Comma (butterfly)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152063" start="662" end="676" title="Comma operator" label="Comma operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115006" start="737" end="752" title="Johannine Comma" label="Johannine Comma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4150071" start="769" end="781" title="Oxford comma" label="Oxford comma"/>
<link wikidata="Q247417" start="903" end="910" title="Caesura" label="Caesura"/>
<link wikidata="Q345779" start="913" end="934" title="Coma (disambiguation)" label="Coma (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q860390" start="937" end="943" title="Commer" label="Commer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133107" start="946" end="950" title="Kama" label="Kama"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64501" wikidata="Q30059" url="?curid=64501" title="Arrondissement">
<text>An arrondissement (, , ) is any of various administrative divisions of France, Belgium, Haiti, certain other Francophone countries, as well as the Netherlands.

==Europe==

===France===

The 101 French departments are divided into 342 &quot;arrondissements&quot;, which may be roughly translated into English as districts. The capital of an arrondissement is called a subprefecture. When an arrondissement contains the prefecture (capital) of the department, that prefecture is the capital of the arrondissement, acting both as a prefecture and as a subprefecture. Arrondissements are further divided into cantons and communes.

====Municipal arrondissement====
A municipal arrondissement (, pronounced ), is a subdivision of the commune, used in the three largest cities: Paris, Lyon, and Marseille. It functions as an even lower administrative division, with its own mayor. Although usually referred to simply as an &quot;arrondissement&quot;, they should not be confused with departmental arrondissements, which are groupings of communes within one &quot;département&quot;. The official translation into English is &quot;district&quot;.

===Belgium===
Belgium is a federalized country which geographically consists of three regions, of which only Flanders (Flemish Region) and Wallonia (Walloon Region) are subdivided into five provinces each; the Brussels-Capital Region is neither a province nor is it part of one.

In Belgium, there are administrative, judicial and electoral arrondissements. These may or may not relate to identical geographical areas.

* The 43 administrative arrondissements are an administrative level between the municipalities and the provinces.
* Belgium has 12 judicial arrondissements.
* For the elections of the Parliament of Wallonia, 13 electoral arrondissements (or grouped arrondissements) are used as electoral districts.
** Until 2002, the electoral districts for the Chamber of Representatives were electoral arrondissements; at present these are provincial constituencies and one for Brussels-Capital. The electoral districts Brussels-Halle-Vilvoorde and Leuven still existed until 2012.
** Electoral arrondissements were also used for the Flemish Parliament elections, until 2004 when they were changed to provincial electoral districts.

===Netherlands===
In the Netherlands an &quot;arrondissement&quot; is a judicial jurisdiction.

===Switzerland===
Subdivisions of the canton of Bern include districts since 2010, which are called &quot;arrondissements administratifs&quot; in French.

===Post-Soviet states===
In some post-Soviet states, there are cities that are divided into municipal raioni similar to how some French cities are divided into municipal arrondissements (see e.g. Raions of cities in Ukraine, Municipal divisions of Russia, Administrative divisions of Minsk, Tashkent in Uzbekistan).

==Francophone Africa==
Most nations in Africa that have been colonized by France have retained the arrondissement administrative structure. These are normally subunits of a department and may either contain or be coequal with communes (towns). In Mali the arrondissement is a subunit of a cercle, while in some places arrondissements are essentially subdistricts of large cities.

*Each of Senegal&#x27;s departments is subdivided into arrondissements. Dakar is further subdivided into arrondissements; see Arrondissements of Senegal.
*Between 1962 and 2002, each of Niger&#x27;s departments was subdivided into arrondissements; see Arrondissements of Niger: Since 2002, they have been renamed Departments (with the former Departments renamed Regions).
*Each of Mali&#x27;s cercles is subdivided into arrondissements; see Cercles of Mali for maps of arrondissements by cercle.
*Each of Benin&#x27;s departments is subdivided into communes, which are in turn subdivided into arrondissements: they sit above villages in Benin&#x27;s structure; see Communes of Benin for maps of communes by Department.
*Each of Cameroon&#x27;s departments is subdivided into arrondissements: they sit above &quot;subdistricts&quot; and communes in Cameroon&#x27;s structure; see Departments of Cameroon for maps of arrondissements by Department.
*Since 2002, Chad retains arrondissements only in the city of N&#x27;Djamena, which is divided into 10 municipal arrondissements.
*Djibouti retains arrondissements only in the city of Djibouti City, which is divided into six arrondissements.
*Morocco&#x27;s cercles are subdivided into communes rurales, municipalities, communes urbaines, and arrondissements, depending on the classification of the community.
*The Republic of the Congo retains arrondissements only in the city of Brazzaville, which is divided into seven arrondissements. See Administrative divisions of the Republic of the Congo.

==North America==
===Haiti===

As of 2015, Haiti&#x27;s ten departments are sub-divided into 42 arrondissements.

===Quebec===

In the Canadian province of Quebec, eight cities are divided into arrondissements, known as boroughs in English. In Quebec, boroughs are provincially organized and recognized sub-municipal entities that have mayors and councilors.

==References==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q30059" start="3" end="17" title="Arrondissement" label="arrondissement"/>
<link wikidata="Q56061" start="43" end="66" title="administrative division" label="administrative division"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="71" end="77" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="79" end="86" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="88" end="93" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="109" end="120" title="French language" label="Francophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="147" end="158" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="202" end="213" title="Departments of France" label="departments"/>
<link wikidata="Q16481846" start="368" end="381" title="Subprefectures in France" label="subprefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q179831" start="419" end="429" title="Prefectures in France" label="prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q184188" start="606" end="613" title="Cantons of France" label="cantons"/>
<link wikidata="Q484170" start="618" end="626" title="Communes of France" label="communes"/>
<link wikidata="Q702842" start="664" end="688" title="municipal arrondissement" label="municipal arrondissement"/>
<link wikidata="Q484170" start="730" end="737" title="Communes of France" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="780" end="784" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="790" end="799" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q194203" start="992" end="1007" title="Arrondissements of France" label="arrondissements"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="1058" end="1069" title="département" label="département"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="1155" end="1162" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="1168" end="1179" title="Federation" label="federalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="1250" end="1258" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="1280" end="1288" title="Wallonia" label="Wallonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="1351" end="1374" title="Brussels-Capital Region" label="Brussels-Capital Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q493522" start="1641" end="1655" title="Municipalities of Belgium" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q83116" start="1664" end="1673" title="Provinces of Belgium" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449493" start="1745" end="1767" title="Parliament of Wallonia" label="Parliament of Wallonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192611" start="1839" end="1857" title="electoral district" label="electoral district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347545" start="1907" end="1933" title="Chamber of Representatives (Belgium)" label="Chamber of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q90870" start="2025" end="2041" title="Arrondissement of Brussels-Capital" label="Brussels-Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469495" start="2067" end="2091" title="Brussels-Halle-Vilvoorde" label="Brussels-Halle-Vilvoorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q93392" start="2096" end="2102" title="Arrondissement of Leuven" label="Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292" start="2181" end="2199" title="Flemish Parliament" label="Flemish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="2306" end="2317" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="2353" end="2361" title="judiciary" label="judicial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631098" start="2395" end="2429" title="Subdivisions of the canton of Bern" label="Subdivisions of the canton of Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q302045" start="2565" end="2583" title="post-Soviet states" label="post-Soviet states"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688" start="2634" end="2639" title="raion" label="raion"/>
<link wikidata="Q97586533" start="2728" end="2755" title="Raions of cities in Ukraine" label="Raions of cities in Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849719" start="2757" end="2786" title="Municipal divisions of Russia" label="Municipal divisions of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057737" start="2788" end="2821" title="Administrative divisions of Minsk" label="Administrative divisions of Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q269" start="2823" end="2831" title="Tashkent" label="Tashkent"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="3096" end="3100" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115792" start="3138" end="3144" title="Cercle (Mali)" label="cercle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="3239" end="3246" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718" start="3302" end="3307" title="Dakar" label="Dakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424478" start="3356" end="3382" title="Arrondissements of Senegal" label="Arrondissements of Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="3416" end="3421" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914501" start="3482" end="3506" title="Arrondissements of Niger" label="Arrondissements of Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115792" start="3671" end="3686" title="Cercles of Mali" label="Cercles of Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="3735" end="3740" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780506" start="3895" end="3912" title="Communes of Benin" label="Communes of Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="3958" end="3966" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306813" start="4109" end="4132" title="Departments of Cameroon" label="Departments of Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="4189" end="4193" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3659" start="4238" end="4252" title="N&amp;#x27;Djamena" label="N&amp;#x27;Djamena"/>
<link wikidata="Q977" start="4307" end="4315" title="Djibouti" label="Djibouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604" start="4360" end="4373" title="Djibouti City" label="Djibouti City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="4419" end="4426" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q971" start="4591" end="4612" title="Republic of the Congo" label="Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844" start="4657" end="4668" title="Brazzaville" label="Brazzaville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161597" start="4719" end="4772" title="Administrative divisions of the Republic of the Congo" label="Administrative divisions of the Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="4818" end="4823" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q62127" start="4835" end="4846" title="Departments of Haiti" label="departments"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="4910" end="4927" title="Provinces and territories of Canada" label="Canadian province"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="4931" end="4937" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195043" start="4995" end="5002" title="borough" label="borough"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64503" wikidata="Q4545737" url="?curid=64503" title="1-2-3">
<text>1-2-3; 1, 2, 3; or One, Two, Three may refer to:

==Brands==
* 1-2-3 (fuel station), in Norfolk
* Lotus 1-2-3, a computer spreadsheet program
* .123, a file extension used by Lotus 1-2-3
* Jell-O 1-2-3, a dessert

==Film, TV and books==
* &quot;One, Two, Three&quot;, a 1961 film by Billy Wilder 
* &quot;One Two Three&quot;, a 2008 Indian comedy film
* 123 (film), a 2002 Indian Tamil-language romantic comedy
* &quot;One, Two, Three and Away!&quot;, a set of children&#x27;s stories by Sheila K. McCullagh

==Music==
* 1,2,3, a band from Pittsburgh later reformed as Animal Scream
* 1-2-3, a band from Edinburgh later known as Clouds
* One, Two, Three, a 1980s electronic disco group produced by Bobby Orlando

===Albums===
* &quot;1-2-3&quot; (APO Hiking Society album)
* &quot;1-2-3&quot; (Howling Hex album)
* &quot;I-II-III&quot; (Icon of Coil albums), a set of three albums released in 2006
* &quot;Uno Dos Tres 1•2•3&quot;, a 1966 album by Willie Bobo

===Songs===
* &quot;1-2-3&quot; (Len Barry song), 1965
* &quot;1, 2, 3&quot; (Sofía Reyes song), 2018
* &quot;1-2-3&quot; (The Chimes song), 1990
* &quot;1-2-3&quot; (Gloria Estefan and Miami Sound Machine song), 1988
*&quot;1, 2, 3!&quot; (Seungri song), 2018
* &quot;1. 2. 3. ...&quot;, a 2006 song by Bela B. and Charlotte Roche from the album &quot;Bingo&quot;
* &quot;123&quot; (Nikki Laoye song), 2012
* &quot;1 2 3&quot; (Moneybagg Yo song), 2020 
* &quot;One, Two, Three&quot; (Ch!pz song), 2005
* &quot;One Two Three / The Matenrō Show&quot;, a 2012 song by Morning Musume
* &quot;One, Two, Three, Go!&quot;, a 2008 song by Belanova
* &quot;One Two Three&quot;, a 2012 song by E-girls
* &quot;1-2-3! (Train with Me)&quot;, a song by Playahitty
* &quot;Ichi Ni San&quot; (Japanese for One Two Three), a song by Gen Hoshino from the single &quot;Sun&quot;, 2015

==Other uses==
* A 1-2-3 inning, in baseball

==See also==
* 123 (disambiguation)
* 1234 (disambiguation)
* 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + ⋯
* 321 (disambiguation)
* Raz, Dwa, Trzy, Polish music band
* &quot;Raz, dwa, trzy&quot; (newspaper), Polish sports weekly
* &quot;(Un, Dos, Tres) María&quot;, a 1995 song by Ricky Martin
* &quot;Un, dos, tres... responda otra vez&quot;, a Spanish game show</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4545737" start="0" end="5" title="1-2-3" label="1-2-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545737" start="7" end="14" title="1-2-3" label="1, 2, 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545737" start="19" end="34" title="1-2-3" label="One, Two, Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545742" start="63" end="83" title="1-2-3 (fuel station)" label="1-2-3 (fuel station)"/>
<link wikidata="Q653999" start="98" end="109" title="Lotus 1-2-3" label="Lotus 1-2-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q653999" start="144" end="148" title=".123" label=".123"/>
<link wikidata="Q6176823" start="189" end="201" title="Jell-O 1-2-3" label="Jell-O 1-2-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283810" start="245" end="260" title="One, Two, Three" label="One, Two, Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093319" start="305" end="318" title="One Two Three" label="One Two Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548302" start="354" end="364" title="123 (film)" label="123 (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093324" start="419" end="444" title="One Two Three and Away" label="One, Two, Three and Away!"/>
<link wikidata="Q104846598" start="569" end="582" title="Animal Scream" label="Animal Scream"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111939" start="629" end="635" title="Clouds (60s rock band)" label="Clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907992" start="698" end="711" title="Bobby Orlando" label="Bobby Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545224" start="728" end="772" title="1-2-3 (APO Hiking Society album)" label="&amp;quot;1-2-3&amp;quot; (APO Hiking Society album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5922329" start="775" end="812" title="1-2-3 (Howling Hex album)" label="&amp;quot;1-2-3&amp;quot; (Howling Hex album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040947" start="815" end="857" title="I-II-III (Icon of Coil albums)" label="&amp;quot;I-II-III&amp;quot; (Icon of Coil albums)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16619864" start="906" end="924" title="Uno Dos Tres 1•2•3" label="Uno Dos Tres 1•2•3"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545739" start="975" end="1009" title="1-2-3 (Len Barry song)" label="&amp;quot;1-2-3&amp;quot; (Len Barry song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q50130717" start="1018" end="1056" title="1, 2, 3 (Sofía Reyes song)" label="&amp;quot;1, 2, 3&amp;quot; (Sofía Reyes song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545741" start="1065" end="1100" title="1-2-3 (The Chimes song)" label="&amp;quot;1-2-3&amp;quot; (The Chimes song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2806573" start="1109" end="1172" title="1-2-3 (Gloria Estefan and Miami Sound Machine song)" label="&amp;quot;1-2-3&amp;quot; (Gloria Estefan and Miami Sound Machine song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55955426" start="1180" end="1215" title="1, 2, 3! (Seungri song)" label="&amp;quot;1, 2, 3!&amp;quot; (Seungri song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q77462" start="1314" end="1319" title="Bingo (Bela B. album)" label="Bingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q20013306" start="1328" end="1362" title="123 (Nikki Laoye song)" label="&amp;quot;123&amp;quot; (Nikki Laoye song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q96368704" start="1371" end="1408" title="1 2 3 (Moneybagg Yo song)" label="&amp;quot;1 2 3&amp;quot; (Moneybagg Yo song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q96397430" start="1418" end="1458" title="One, Two, Three (Ch!pz song)" label="&amp;quot;One, Two, Three&amp;quot; (Ch!pz song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q774987" start="1473" end="1505" title="One Two Three / The Matenrō Show" label="One Two Three / The Matenrō Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050882" start="1551" end="1571" title="One, Two, Three, Go!" label="One, Two, Three, Go!"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331241" start="1647" end="1654" title="E-girls" label="E-girls"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1663" end="1685" title="1-2-3! (Train with Me)" label="1-2-3! (Train with Me)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968084" start="1703" end="1713" title="Playahitty" label="Playahitty"/>
<link wikidata="Q20044607" start="1814" end="1817" title="Sun (Gen Hoshino song)" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237411" start="1850" end="1862" title="1-2-3 inning" label="1-2-3 inning"/>
<link wikidata="Q395779" start="1892" end="1912" title="123 (disambiguation)" label="123 (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197562" start="1915" end="1936" title="1234 (disambiguation)" label="1234 (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605420" start="1939" end="1956" title="1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + ⋯" label="1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + ⋯"/>
<link wikidata="Q564941" start="1959" end="1979" title="321 (disambiguation)" label="321 (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134353" start="1982" end="1996" title="Raz, Dwa, Trzy" label="Raz, Dwa, Trzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7299428" start="2018" end="2056" title="Raz, dwa, trzy (newspaper)" label="&amp;quot;Raz, dwa, trzy&amp;quot; (newspaper)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720678" start="2087" end="2108" title="(Un, Dos, Tres) María" label="(Un, Dos, Tres) María"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392773" start="2152" end="2186" title="Un, dos, tres... responda otra vez" label="Un, dos, tres... responda otra vez"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64506" wikidata="Q546389" url="?curid=64506" title="Fast Ethernet">
<text>In computer networking, Fast Ethernet physical layers carry traffic at the nominal rate of . The prior Ethernet speed was . Of the Fast Ethernet physical layers, 100BASE-TX is by far the most common.

Fast Ethernet was introduced in 1995 as the IEEE 802.3u standard and remained the fastest version of Ethernet for three years before the introduction of Gigabit Ethernet. The acronym &quot;GE/FE&quot; is sometimes used for devices supporting both standards.

== Nomenclature ==
The &quot;100&quot; in the media type designation refers to the transmission speed of , while the &quot;BASE&quot; refers to baseband signaling. The letter following the dash (&quot;T&quot; or &quot;F&quot;) refers to the physical medium that carries the signal (twisted pair or fiber, respectively), while the last character (&quot;X&quot;, &quot;4&quot;, etc.) refers to the line code method used. Fast Ethernet is sometimes referred to as 100BASE-X, where &quot;X&quot; is a placeholder for the FX and TX variants.

== General design ==
Fast Ethernet is an extension of the 10-megabit Ethernet standard. It runs on twisted pair or optical fiber cable in a star wired bus topology, similar to the IEEE standard 802.3i called 10BASE-T, itself an evolution of 10BASE5 (802.3) and 10BASE2 (802.3a). Fast Ethernet devices are generally backward compatible with existing 10BASE-T systems, enabling plug-and-play upgrades from 10BASE-T. Most switches and other networking devices with ports capable of Fast Ethernet can perform autonegotiation, sensing a piece of 10BASE-T equipment and setting the port to 10BASE-T half duplex if the 10BASE-T equipment cannot perform autonegotiation itself. The standard specifies the use of CSMA/CD for media access control. A full-duplex mode is also specified and in practice, all modern networks use Ethernet switches and operate in full-duplex mode, even as legacy devices that use half duplex still exist.

A Fast Ethernet adapter can be logically divided into a media access controller (MAC), which deals with the higher-level issues of medium availability, and a physical layer interface (PHY). The MAC is typically linked to the PHY by a four-bit 25 MHz synchronous parallel interface known as a media-independent interface (MII), or by a two-bit 50 MHz variant called reduced media independent interface (RMII). In rare cases, the MII may be an external connection but is usually a connection between ICs in a network adapter or even two sections within a single IC. The specs are written based on the assumption that the interface between MAC and PHY will be an MII but they do not require it. Fast Ethernet or Ethernet hubs may use the MII to connect to multiple PHYs for their different interfaces.

The MII fixes the theoretical maximum data bit rate for all versions of Fast Ethernet to . The information rate actually observed on real networks is less than the theoretical maximum, due to the necessary header and trailer (addressing and error-detection bits) on every Ethernet frame, and the required interpacket gap between transmissions.

== Copper ==
100BASE-T is any of several Fast Ethernet standards for twisted pair cables, including: 100BASE-TX ( over two-pair Cat5 or better cable), 100BASE-T4 (100 Mbit/s over four-pair Cat3 or better cable, defunct), 100BASE-T2 ( over two-pair Cat3 or better cable, also defunct). The segment length for a 100BASE-T cable is limited to (the same limit as 10BASE-T and gigabit Ethernet). All are or were standards under IEEE 802.3 (approved 1995). Almost all 100BASE-T installations are 100BASE-TX.



=== 100BASE-TX ===

100BASE-TX is the predominant form of Fast Ethernet, and runs over two pairs of wire inside a Category 5 or above cable. Cable distance between nodes can be up to . One pair is used for each direction, providing full-duplex operation at in each direction.

Like 10BASE-T, the active pairs in a standard connection are terminated on pins 1, 2, 3 and 6. Since a typical Category 5 cable contains four pairs and the performance requirements of 100BASE-TX do not exceed the capabilities of even the worst-performing pair, one typical cable can carry two 100BASE-TX links with a simple wiring adaptor on each end. Cabling is conventionally wired to one of ANSI/TIA-568&#x27;s termination standards, T568A or T568B. 100BASE-TX uses pairs 2 and 3 (orange and green).

The configuration of 100BASE-TX networks is very similar to 10BASE-T. When used to build a local area network, the devices on the network (computers, printers etc.) are typically connected to a hub or switch, creating a star network. Alternatively, it is possible to connect two devices directly using a crossover cable. With today&#x27;s equipment, crossover cables are generally not needed as most equipment supports auto-negotiation along with auto MDI-X to select and match speed, duplex and pairing.

With 100BASE-TX hardware, the raw bits, presented 4 bits wide clocked at 25 MHz at the MII, go through 4B5B binary encoding to generate a series of 0 and 1 symbols clocked at a 125 MHz symbol rate. The 4B5B encoding provides DC equalization and spectrum shaping. Just as in the 100BASE-FX case, the bits are then transferred to the physical medium attachment layer using NRZI encoding. However, 100BASE-TX introduces an additional, medium-dependent sublayer, which employs MLT-3 as a final encoding of the data stream before transmission, resulting in a maximum fundamental frequency of 31.25 MHz. The procedure is borrowed from the ANSI X3.263 FDDI specifications, with minor changes.

=== 100BASE-T1 ===
In 100BASE-T1 the data is transmitted over a single copper pair, 3 bits per symbol, each transmitted as code pair using PAM3. It supports full-duplex transmission. The twisted-pair cable is required to support 66 MHz, with a maximum length of 15 m. No specific connector is defined. The standard is intended for automotive applications or when Fast Ethernet is to be integrated into another application. It was developed as Open Alliance BroadR-Reach (OABR) before IEEE standardization.

=== 100BASE-T2 === 
In 100BASE-T2, standardized in IEEE 802.3y, the data is transmitted over two copper pairs, but these pairs are only required to be Category 3 rather than the Category 5 required by 100BASE-TX. Data is transmitted and received on both pairs simultaneously thus allowing full-duplex operation. Transmission uses 4 bits per symbol. The 4-bit symbol is expanded into two 3-bit symbols through a non-trivial scrambling procedure based on a linear-feedback shift register. This is needed to flatten the bandwidth and emission spectrum of the signal, as well as to match transmission line properties. The mapping of the original bits to the symbol codes is not constant in time and has a fairly large period (appearing as a pseudo-random sequence). The final mapping from symbols to PAM-5 line modulation levels obeys the table on the right. 100BASE-T2 was not widely adopted but the technology developed for it is used in 1000BASE-T.

=== 100BASE-T4 ===

100BASE-T4 was an early implementation of Fast Ethernet. It required four twisted copper pairs of voice grade twisted pair, a lower-performing cable compared to Category 5 cable used by 100BASE-TX. Maximum distance was limited to 100 meters. One pair was reserved for transmit and one for receive, and the remaining two switched direction. The fact that three pairs were used to transmit in each direction made 100BASE-T4 inherently half-duplex. Using three cable pairs allowed it to reach while running at lower carrier frequencies, which allowed it to run on older cabling that many companies had recently installed for 10BASE-T networks.

A very unusual 8B6T code was used to convert 8 data bits into 6 base-3 digits (the signal shaping is possible as there are nearly three times as many 6-digit base-3 numbers as there are 8-digit base-2 numbers). The two resulting 3-digit base-3 symbols were sent in parallel over three pairs using 3-level pulse-amplitude modulation (PAM-3).

100BASE-T4 was not widely adopted but some of the technology developed for it is used in 1000BASE-T. Very few hubs were released with 100BASE-T4 support. Some examples include the 3com 3C250-T4 Superstack II HUB 100, IBM 8225 Fast Ethernet Stackable Hub and Intel LinkBuilder FMS 100 T4. The same applies to network interface controllers. Bridging 100BASE-T4 with 100BASE-TX required additional network equipment.

=== 100BaseVG ===

Proposed and marketed by Hewlett-Packard, 100BaseVG was an alternative design using category 3 cabling and a token concept instead of CSMA/CD. It was slated for standardization as IEEE 802.12 but it quickly vanished when switched 100BASE-TX became popular. The IEEE standard was later withdrawn.

VG was similar to T4 in that it used more cable pairs combined with a lower carrier frequency to allow it to reach on voice-grade cables. It differed in the way those cables were assigned. Whereas T4 would use the two extra pairs in different directions depending on the direction of data exchange, VG instead used two transmission modes. In one, control, two pairs are used for transmission and reception as in classic Ethernet, while the other two pairs are used for flow control. In the second mode, transmission, all four are used to transfer data in a single direction. The hubs implemented a token passing scheme to choose which of the attached nodes were allowed to communicate at any given time, based on signals sent to it from the nodes using control mode. When one node was selected to become active, it would switch to transfer mode, send or receive a packet, and return to control mode.

This concept was intended to solve two problems. The first was that it eliminated the need for collision detection and thereby reduced contention on busy networks. While any particular node may find itself throttled due to heavy traffic, the network as a whole would not end up losing efficiency due to collisions and the resulting rebroadcasts. Under heavy use, the total throughput was increased compared to the other standards. The other was that the hubs could examine the payload types and schedule the nodes based on their bandwidth requirements. For instance, a node sending a video signal may not require much bandwidth but will require it to be predictable in terms of when it is delivered. A VG hub could schedule access on that node to ensure it received the transmission timeslots it needed while opening up the network at all other times to the other nodes. This style of access was known as demand priority.

== Fiber optics ==
Fiber variants use fiber-optic cable with the listed interface types. Interfaces may be fixed or modular, often as small form-factor pluggable (SFP).

===Fast Ethernet SFP ports===
Fast Ethernet speed is not available on all SFP ports, but supported by some devices. An SFP port for Gigabit Ethernet should not be assumed to be backwards compatible with Fast Ethernet.

=== Optical interoperability ===
To have interoperability there are some criteria that have to be met:
* Line encoding
* Wavelength
* Duplex mode
* Media count
* Media type and dimension

100BASE-X Ethernet is not backward compatible with 10BASE-F and is not forward compatible with 1000BASE-X.

===100BASE-FX=== 
100BASE-FX is a version of Fast Ethernet over optical fiber. The 100BASE-FX physical medium dependent (PMD) sublayer is defined by FDDI&#x27;s PMD, so 100BASE-FX is not compatible with 10BASE-FL, the version over optical fiber.

100BASE-FX is still used for existing installation of multimode fiber where more speed is not required, like industrial automation plants.

===100BASE-LFX=== 
100BASE-LFX is a non-standard term to refer to Fast Ethernet transmission. It is very similar to 100BASE-FX but achieves longer distances up to 4–5 km over a pair of multi-mode fibers through the use of Fabry–Pérot laser transmitter running on 1310 nm wavelength. The signal attenuation per km at 1300 nm is about half the loss of 850 nm.

===100BASE-SX===
100BASE-SX is a version of Fast Ethernet over optical fiber standardized in TIA/EIA-785-1-2002. It is a lower-cost, shorter-distance alternative to 100BASE-FX. Because of the shorter wavelength used (850 nm) and the shorter distance supported, 100BASE-SX uses less expensive optical components (LEDs instead of lasers).

Because it uses the same wavelength as 10BASE-FL, the version of Ethernet over optical fiber, 100BASE-SX can be backward-compatible with 10BASE-FL. Cost and compatibility makes 100BASE-SX an attractive option for those upgrading from 10BASE-FL and those who do not require long distances.

===100BASE-LX10===
100BASE-LX10 is a version of Fast Ethernet over optical fiber standardized in 802.3ah-2004 clause 58. It has a 10 km reach over a pair of single-mode fibers.

===100BASE-BX10===
100BASE-BX10 is a version of Fast Ethernet over optical fiber standardized in 802.3ah-2004 clause 58. It uses an optical multiplexer to split TX and RX signals into different wavelengths on the same fiber. It has a 10 km reach over a single strand of single-mode fiber.

===100BASE-EX===
100BASE-EX is very similar to 100BASE-LX10 but achieves longer distances up to 40 km over a pair of single-mode fibers due to higher quality optics than a LX10, running on 1310 nm wavelength lasers. 100BASE-EX is not a formal standard but industry-accepted term. It is sometimes referred to as 100BASE-LH (long haul), and is easily confused with 100BASE-LX10 or 100BASE-ZX because the use of -LX(10), -LH, -EX, and -ZX is ambiguous between vendors.

===100BASE-ZX===
100BASE-ZX is a non-standard but multi-vendor term to refer to Fast Ethernet transmission using 1,550 nm wavelength to achieve distances of at least 70 km over single-mode fiber. Some vendors specify distances up to 160 km over single-mode fiber, sometimes called 100BASE-EZX. Ranges beyond 80 km are highly dependent upon the path loss of the fiber in use, specifically the attenuation figure in dB per km, the number and quality of connectors/patch panels and splices located between transceivers.

== See also ==
* List of interface bit rates

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* Common Hardware Variations
* Origins and History of Ethernet
* IEEE802.3 standards free download
* ProCurve Networking 100BASE-FX Technical Brief</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="3" end="19" title="computer network" label="computer network"/>
<link wikidata="Q546389" start="24" end="37" title="Fast Ethernet" label="Fast Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16301248" start="38" end="53" title="Ethernet physical layer" label="physical layers"/>
<link wikidata="Q60788403" start="97" end="111" title="Classic Ethernet" label="prior Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q546389" start="162" end="172" title="Fast Ethernet" label="100BASE-TX"/>
<link wikidata="Q546389" start="245" end="256" title="Fast Ethernet" label="IEEE 802.3u"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069084" start="354" end="370" title="Gigabit Ethernet" label="Gigabit Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q575784" start="604" end="612" title="baseband" label="baseband"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457387" start="856" end="865" title="line code" label="line code"/>
<link wikidata="Q79984" start="1067" end="1075" title="Ethernet" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q192808" start="1097" end="1109" title="twisted pair" label="twisted pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q197961" start="1113" end="1132" title="optical fiber cable" label="optical fiber cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q841749" start="1138" end="1161" title="Star topology" label="star wired bus topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q102039327" start="1206" end="1214" title="10BASE-T" label="10BASE-T"/>
<link wikidata="Q366052" start="1503" end="1518" title="autonegotiation" label="autonegotiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q373155" start="1702" end="1709" title="CSMA/CD" label="CSMA/CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q625306" start="1738" end="1749" title="full-duplex" label="full-duplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4503" start="1814" end="1829" title="Ethernet switch" label="Ethernet switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295108" start="1979" end="1999" title="media access control" label="media access control"/>
<link wikidata="Q192727" start="2107" end="2110" title="PHY" label="PHY"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468650" start="2215" end="2242" title="media-independent interface" label="media-independent interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468650" start="2288" end="2323" title="reduced media independent interface" label="reduced media independent interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q128003" start="2632" end="2644" title="Ethernet hub" label="Ethernet hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q194158" start="2818" end="2834" title="information rate" label="information rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11331406" start="2995" end="3009" title="Ethernet frame" label="Ethernet frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q187848" start="3028" end="3043" title="interpacket gap" label="interpacket gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q192808" start="3137" end="3155" title="twisted pair cable" label="twisted pair cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q925780" start="3196" end="3200" title="Category 5 cable" label="Cat5"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555425" start="3257" end="3261" title="Category 3 cable" label="Cat3"/>
<link wikidata="Q102039327" start="3427" end="3435" title="10BASE-T" label="10BASE-T"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069084" start="3440" end="3456" title="gigabit Ethernet" label="gigabit Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q570951" start="3491" end="3501" title="IEEE 802.3" label="IEEE 802.3"/>
<link wikidata="Q925780" start="3687" end="3697" title="Category 5 cable" label="Category 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q625306" start="3805" end="3816" title="full-duplex" label="full-duplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q102039327" start="3855" end="3863" title="10BASE-T" label="10BASE-T"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142434" start="4244" end="4256" title="ANSI/TIA-568" label="ANSI/TIA-568"/>
<link wikidata="Q11381" start="4445" end="4463" title="local area network" label="local area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q128003" start="4548" end="4551" title="Ethernet hub" label="hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q4503" start="4555" end="4561" title="Network switch" label="switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q841749" start="4574" end="4586" title="star network" label="star network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141308" start="4658" end="4673" title="Ethernet crossover cable" label="crossover cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421871" start="4801" end="4811" title="auto MDI-X" label="auto MDI-X"/>
<link wikidata="Q352986" start="4963" end="4967" title="4B5B" label="4B5B"/>
<link wikidata="Q428083" start="5045" end="5056" title="symbol rate" label="symbol rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377934" start="5231" end="5235" title="NRZI" label="NRZI"/>
<link wikidata="Q361607" start="5333" end="5338" title="MLT-3" label="MLT-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331774" start="5422" end="5443" title="fundamental frequency" label="fundamental frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q181382" start="5505" end="5509" title="FDDI" label="FDDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q15622064" start="5990" end="6016" title="Open Alliance BroadR-Reach" label="Open Alliance BroadR-Reach"/>
<link wikidata="Q681101" start="6509" end="6539" title="linear-feedback shift register" label="linear-feedback shift register"/>
<link wikidata="Q186130" start="6850" end="6855" title="PAM-5" label="PAM-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555425" start="7121" end="7145" title="Category 3 cable" label="voice grade twisted pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q925780" start="7184" end="7200" title="Category 5 cable" label="Category 5 cable"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7680" end="7684" title="8B6T" label="8B6T"/>
<link wikidata="Q186130" start="7970" end="7996" title="pulse-amplitude modulation" label="pulse-amplitude modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069084" start="8096" end="8106" title="1000BASE-T" label="1000BASE-T"/>
<link wikidata="Q229329" start="8187" end="8191" title="3com" label="3com"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="8224" end="8227" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="8265" end="8270" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q165233" start="8315" end="8343" title="network interface controller" label="network interface controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q80978" start="8466" end="8481" title="Hewlett-Packard" label="Hewlett-Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403359" start="9207" end="9219" title="Ethernet flow control" label="flow control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639854" start="9336" end="9349" title="token passing" label="token passing"/>
<link wikidata="Q492788" start="10544" end="10559" title="demand priority" label="demand priority"/>
<link wikidata="Q197961" start="10600" end="10617" title="fiber-optic cable" label="fiber-optic cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855582" start="10696" end="10723" title="small form-factor pluggable" label="small form-factor pluggable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069084" start="10864" end="10880" title="Gigabit Ethernet" label="Gigabit Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457387" start="11056" end="11069" title="Line encoding" label="Line encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="11072" end="11082" title="Wavelength" label="Wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q625306" start="11085" end="11096" title="Duplex (telecommunications)" label="Duplex mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q60788403" start="11190" end="11198" title="10BASE-F" label="10BASE-F"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069084" start="11234" end="11244" title="1000BASE-X" label="1000BASE-X"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="11311" end="11324" title="optical fiber" label="optical fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7189568" start="11341" end="11366" title="physical medium dependent" label="physical medium dependent"/>
<link wikidata="Q181382" start="11396" end="11400" title="FDDI" label="FDDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q60788403" start="11450" end="11459" title="10BASE-FL" label="10BASE-FL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781857" start="11548" end="11563" title="multimode fiber" label="multimode fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359945" start="11856" end="11867" title="Fabry–Pérot" label="Fabry–Pérot"/>
<link wikidata="Q60788403" start="12370" end="12379" title="10BASE-FL" label="10BASE-FL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149752" start="14091" end="14118" title="List of interface bit rates" label="List of interface bit rates"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64516" wikidata="Q200" url="?curid=64516" title="2">
<text>2 (two) is a number, numeral and digit. It is the natural number following 1 and preceding 3. It is the smallest and the only even prime number.

Because it forms the basis of a duality, it has religious and spiritual significance in many cultures.

== As a word ==
&quot;Two&quot; is most commonly a determiner used with plural countable nouns, as in &quot;two days&quot; or &quot;I&#x27;ll take these two&quot;. &quot;Two&quot; is a noun when it refers to the number two as in &quot;two plus two is four.&quot;

=== Etymology of &quot;two&quot; ===
The word &quot;two&quot; is derived from the Old English words (feminine), (neuter), and (masculine, which survives today in the form ).

The pronunciation , like that of &quot;who&quot; is due to the labialization of the vowel by the &quot;w&quot;, which then disappeared before the related sound. The successive stages of pronunciation for the Old English would thus be , , , , and finally .

== Mathematics ==
An integer is determined to be even if it is divisible by two. When written in base 10, all multiples of 2 will end in 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8. 2 is the smallest and the only even prime number, and the first Ramanujan prime. It is also the first superior highly composite number, and the first colossally abundant number.

=== Geometry ===
A digon is a polygon with two sides (or edges) and two vertices. Two distinct points in a plane are always sufficient to define a unique line in a nontrivial Euclidean space.

=== Set theory ===
A set that is a field has a minimum of two elements. A Cantor space is a topological space formula_1 homeomorphic to the Cantor set.

== Base 2 ==

Binary is a number system with a base of two, it is used extensively in computing.

== List of basic calculations ==


== Evolution of the Arabic digit ==

The digit used in the modern Western world to represent the number 2 traces its roots back to the Indic Brahmic script, where &quot;2&quot; was written as two horizontal lines. The modern Chinese and Japanese languages (and Korean Hanja) still use this method. The Gupta script rotated the two lines 45 degrees, making them diagonal. The top line was sometimes also shortened and had its bottom end curve towards the center of the bottom line. In the Nagari script, the top line was written more like a curve connecting to the bottom line. In the Arabic Ghubar writing, the bottom line was completely vertical, and the digit looked like a dotless closing question mark. Restoring the bottom line to its original horizontal position, but keeping the top line as a curve that connects to the bottom line leads to our modern digit.

In fonts with text figures, digit 2 usually is of x-height, for example, .

== In science ==
*The first magic number.

== See also ==
*Binary number

== References ==
==External links==
*Prime curiosities: 2</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q200" start="0" end="1" title="2" label="2"/>
<link wikidata="Q200" start="3" end="6" title="2" label="two"/>
<link wikidata="Q11563" start="13" end="19" title="number" label="number"/>
<link wikidata="Q63116" start="21" end="28" title="numeral (linguistics)" label="numeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q82990" start="33" end="38" title="numerical digit" label="digit"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="50" end="64" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q199" start="75" end="76" title="1" label="1"/>
<link wikidata="Q201" start="91" end="92" title="3" label="3"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="131" end="143" title="prime number" label="prime number"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310255" start="178" end="185" title="Dualistic cosmology" label="duality"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="194" end="203" title="Religion" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q168796" start="208" end="217" title="Spirituality" label="spiritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="239" end="247" title="Culture" label="cultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378540" start="301" end="311" title="English determiners" label="determiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q104083" start="322" end="328" title="Grammatical number" label="plural"/>
<link wikidata="Q12045976" start="435" end="439" title="English nouns" label="noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="596" end="607" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="615" end="623" title="Grammatical gender" label="feminine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147016" start="752" end="765" title="labialization" label="labialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="967" end="974" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q230967" start="995" end="999" title="Parity (mathematics)" label="even"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226939" start="1009" end="1018" title="Division (mathematics)" label="divisible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055293" start="1056" end="1065" title="Multiple (mathematics)" label="multiples"/>
<link wikidata="Q204" start="1083" end="1084" title="0" label="0"/>
<link wikidata="Q23355" start="1098" end="1099" title="8" label="8"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="1137" end="1149" title="prime number" label="prime number"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044802" start="1165" end="1180" title="Ramanujan prime" label="Ramanujan prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q12355440" start="1203" end="1235" title="superior highly composite number" label="superior highly composite number"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281381" start="1251" end="1277" title="colossally abundant number" label="colossally abundant number"/>
<link wikidata="Q854818" start="1299" end="1304" title="digon" label="digon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26382" start="1337" end="1342" title="Edge (geometry)" label="edges"/>
<link wikidata="Q26401" start="1352" end="1360" title="Vertex (geometry)" label="vertices"/>
<link wikidata="Q44946" start="1375" end="1381" title="point (geometry)" label="points"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285" start="1387" end="1392" title="Plane (geometry)" label="plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q875267" start="1404" end="1414" title="Necessity and sufficiency" label="sufficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q37105" start="1434" end="1438" title="line (geometry)" label="line"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="1455" end="1470" title="Euclidean space" label="Euclidean space"/>
<link wikidata="Q12482" start="1494" end="1497" title="Set theory" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q190109" start="1508" end="1513" title="field (mathematics)" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q379825" start="1535" end="1543" title="Element (mathematics)" label="elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q616653" start="1547" end="1559" title="Cantor space" label="Cantor space"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="1565" end="1582" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q202906" start="1593" end="1605" title="homeomorphic" label="homeomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q273188" start="1613" end="1623" title="Cantor set" label="Cantor set"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913" start="1640" end="1646" title="Binary number" label="Binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q843684" start="1673" end="1677" title="radix" label="base"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="1712" end="1721" title="Computer" label="computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q467037" start="1900" end="1914" title="Brahmic script" label="Brahmic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110592" start="1984" end="1991" title="Chinese written language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q190502" start="1996" end="2004" title="Japanese writing system" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q485619" start="2027" end="2032" title="Hanja" label="Hanja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992659" start="2061" end="2073" title="Gupta script" label="Gupta script"/>
<link wikidata="Q38592" start="2247" end="2253" title="Devanagari" label="Nagari"/>
<link wikidata="Q29961325" start="2350" end="2356" title="Ghubār numerals" label="Ghubar"/>
<link wikidata="Q956716" start="2640" end="2652" title="text figures" label="text figures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916348" start="2676" end="2684" title="x-height" label="x-height"/>
<link wikidata="Q11606" start="2730" end="2742" title="Magic number (physics)" label="magic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913" start="2761" end="2774" title="Binary number" label="Binary number"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64519" wikidata="Q810209" url="?curid=64519" title="Basic Rate Interface">
<text>Basic Rate Interface (BRI, 2B+D, 2B1D) or Basic Rate Access is an Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) configuration intended primarily for use in subscriber lines similar to those that have long been used for voice-grade telephone service.
As such, an ISDN BRI connection can use the existing telephone infrastructure at a business.

The BRI configuration provides 2 data (bearer) channels (B channels) at 64 kbit/s each and 1 control (delta) channel (D channel) at 16 kbit/s. The B channels are used for voice or user data, and the D channel is used for any combination of data, control signaling, and X.25 packet networking. The 2 B channels can be aggregated by channel bonding providing a total data rate of 128 kbit/s. The BRI ISDN service is commonly installed for residential or small business service (ISDN PABX) in many countries.

In contrast to the BRI, the Primary Rate Interface (PRI) configuration provides more B channels and operates at a higher bit rate.

==Physical interfaces==
The BRI is split in two sections:
a) in-house cabling (S/T reference point or S-bus) from the ISDN terminal up to the network termination 1 (NT1) and
b) transmission from the NT1 to the central office (U reference point).

* The in-house part is defined in I.430 produced by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU). The S/T-interface (S0) uses four wires; one pair for the uplink and another pair for the downlink. It offers a full-duplex mode of operation. The I.430 protocol defines 48-bit packets comprising 16 bits from the B1 channel, 16 bits from B2 channel, 4 bits from the D channel, and 12 bits used for synchronization purposes. These packets are sent at a rate of , resulting in a gross bit rate of 192 kbit/s andgiving the data rates listed abovea maximum possible throughput of . The S0 offers point-to-point or point-to-multipoint operation; Max length: (point-to-point), (point-to-multipoint).
* The Up Interface uses two wires. The gross bit rate is 160 kbit/s; 144 kbit/s throughput, 12 kbit/s sync and 4 kbit/s maintenance. The signals on the U reference point are encoded by two modulation techniques: 2B1Q in North America, Italy and Switzerland, and 4B3T elsewhere. Depending on the applicable cable length, two varieties are implemented, UpN and Up0. The Uk0 interface uses one wire pair with echo cancellation for the long last mile cable between the telephone exchange and the network terminator. The maximum length of this BRI section is between .

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q810209" start="0" end="20" title="Basic Rate Interface" label="Basic Rate Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q810209" start="22" end="25" title="Basic Rate Interface" label="BRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q810209" start="27" end="31" title="Basic Rate Interface" label="2B+D"/>
<link wikidata="Q810209" start="33" end="37" title="Basic Rate Interface" label="2B1D"/>
<link wikidata="Q810209" start="42" end="59" title="Basic Rate Interface" label="Basic Rate Access"/>
<link wikidata="Q170397" start="66" end="101" title="Integrated Services Digital Network" label="Integrated Services Digital Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117061" start="153" end="168" title="subscriber line" label="subscriber line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462168" start="216" end="245" title="Plain old telephone service" label="voice-grade telephone service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462168" start="291" end="324" title="Plain old telephone service" label="existing telephone infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q353607" start="398" end="407" title="B channel" label="B channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151301" start="459" end="468" title="D channel" label="D channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390" start="512" end="517" title="Human voice" label="voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q42848" start="526" end="530" title="data" label="data"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501541" start="587" end="604" title="Signaling (telecommunications)" label="control signaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q622993" start="610" end="614" title="X.25" label="X.25"/>
<link wikidata="Q353607" start="640" end="649" title="B channel" label="B channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q352072" start="672" end="687" title="channel bonding" label="channel bonding"/>
<link wikidata="Q674950" start="778" end="789" title="residential" label="residential"/>
<link wikidata="Q204896" start="822" end="826" title="PABX" label="PABX"/>
<link wikidata="Q519361" start="876" end="898" title="Primary Rate Interface" label="Primary Rate Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q353607" start="933" end="942" title="B channel" label="B channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q194158" start="969" end="977" title="bit rate" label="bit rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17071347" start="1122" end="1143" title="network termination 1" label="network termination 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967771" start="1261" end="1266" title="I.430" label="I.430"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="1283" end="1320" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="International Telecommunication Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2204601" start="1347" end="1349" title="S_interface" label="S0"/>
<link wikidata="Q3833047" start="1385" end="1391" title="uplink" label="uplink"/>
<link wikidata="Q3833047" start="1417" end="1425" title="downlink" label="downlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q214111" start="1504" end="1510" title="data packet" label="packet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="1526" end="1529" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058791" start="1625" end="1640" title="synchronization" label="synchronization"/>
<link wikidata="Q194158" start="1710" end="1718" title="bit rate" label="bit rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q507271" start="1927" end="1939" title="U interface" label="Up Interface"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2272" end="2275" title="UPN interface" label="UpN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616388" start="2280" end="2283" title="Up0-interface" label="Up0"/>
<link wikidata="Q507271" start="2289" end="2292" title="UK0-Interface" label="Uk0"/>
<link wikidata="Q365756" start="2327" end="2344" title="echo cancellation" label="echo cancellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q32365" start="2358" end="2367" title="Last mile (telecommunications)" label="last mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q256132" start="2386" end="2404" title="telephone exchange" label="telephone exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q17071347" start="2413" end="2431" title="Network termination 1" label="network terminator"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64523" wikidata="Q172896" url="?curid=64523" title="Catacombs">
<text>Catacombs are man-made underground passages primarily used for religious purposes, particularly for burial. Any chamber used as a burial place is considered a catacomb, although the word is most commonly associated with the Roman Empire.

==Etymology and history==
The first place to be referred to as &quot;catacombs&quot; was the system of underground tombs between the 2nd and 3rd milestones of the Appian Way in Rome, where the bodies of the apostles Peter and Paul, among others, were said to have been buried. The name of that place in Late Latin was L.L. fem. nom. pl. n. &quot;catacumbas&quot; (sing. &quot;catacumba&quot;) a word of obscure origin, possibly deriving from a proper name or a derivation of the Greek phrase &quot;cata cumbas&quot;, &quot;near the quarries&quot;. The word referred originally only to the Roman catacombs, but was extended by 1836 to refer to any subterranean receptacle of the dead, as in the 18th-century Paris catacombs. The ancient Christians carved the first catacombs from soft tufa rock. (ref)&quot; (World Book Encyclopedia, page 296)

All Roman catacombs were located outside city walls since it was illegal to bury a dead body within the city, providing &quot;a place…where martyrs&#x27; tombs could be openly marked&quot; and commemorative services and feasts held safely on sacred days.

==Around the world==

Catacombs around the world include:

* Austria – Catacombs of St. Stephen&#x27;s Cathedral, Vienna
* Czech Republic – Catacombs of Znojmo
* Bosnia and Herzegovina – Catacombs of Jajce
* Egypt – Catacombs of Kom el Shoqafa (or &quot;Kom al Sukkfa&quot;, &quot;Shuqafa&quot;, etc.) in Alexandria
* United Kingdom – Catacombs of London and others
* Finland – Catacombs of the Helsinki Orthodox cemetery at Hietaniemi cemetery
* France – Catacombs of Paris. Mine workings were used at end of the 18th century and had no religious purpose other than as an ossuary for storing the bones of cleared graveyards.
* Greece – Catacombs of Milos
* Italy – Catacombs of Rome; Catacombs of Naples; Capuchin catacombs of Palermo, Catacombs of Syracuse and others
* Israel – Beit She&#x27;arim necropolis
* Malta – Catacombs of Malta
* Peru – Catacombs of Lima
* Philippines – Catacomb of Nagcarlan Underground Cemetery
*Spain – Catacombs of Sacromonte in Granada
* Serbia – Petrovaradin Fortress catacombs
* Tunisia – Catacombs of Sousse
* Ukraine – Odesa Catacombs
* United States – Old St. Patrick&#x27;s Cathedral
There are also catacomb-like burial chambers in Anatolia, Turkey; in Sousse, Tunisia; in Syracuse, Italy; Trier, Germany; Kyiv, Ukraine. Capuchin catacombs of Palermo, Sicily, were used as late as the 1920s. Catacombs were available in some of the grander English cemeteries founded in the 19th century, such as Sheffield General Cemetery (above ground) and West Norwood Cemetery (below ground). There are catacombs in Bulgaria near Aladzha Monastery and in Romania as medieval underground galleries in Bucharest. In Ukraine and Russia, catacomb (used in the local languages&#x27; plural &quot;katakomby&quot;) also refers to the network of abandoned caves and tunnels earlier used to mine stone, especially limestone.

In Italy, possible Catacombs are also located in Alezio, beside the &quot;Sanctuary of Santa Maria dell&#x27;Assunta&quot;, as well as the basement of &quot;&quot;.

==Decorations==
Catacombs, although most notable as underground passageways and cemeteries, also house many decorations. There are thousands of decorations in the centuries-old catacombs of Rome, catacombs of Paris, and other known, some of which include inscriptions, paintings, statues, ornaments, and other items placed in the graves over the years.

Most of these decorations were used to identify, immortalize and show respect to the dead. Decorations in the catacombs of Rome were primarily decorated with images and words exalting Christ or depicting scenes from the Old and New Testaments of the Bible. Much of the sculpture work and art, other than engravings on the walls or tombs, has been preserved in places such as the Museum of Saint John Lateran, Christian Museum of Berlin University, and the Vatican.

Three representations of Christ as Orpheus charming animals with peaceful music have been found in the catacombs of Domatilla and St. Callista. Another figure was made of gilded glass and dates back to the fourth century, featuring Jesus with the world balanced in his hand and a scroll at his feet.

===Inscriptions===
Although thousands of inscriptions were lost as time passed, many of those remaining indicate the social rank or job title of its inhabitants; however, most of the inscriptions simply indicate how loving a couple was, or the love of parents and such. A common and particularly interesting one found in Roman catacombs is the Ichthys, or &quot;Monogram of Christ&quot; which reads ΙΧΘΥΣ, standing for &quot;Jesus Christ, Son of God, Savior&quot;.

==Bacteria==
In recent years unique strains of bacteria have been discovered that thrive in catacombs, inducing mineral efflorescence and decay. These include &quot;Kribbella sancticallisti&quot;, &quot;Kribbella catacumbae&quot;, and three types of non-thermophilic (low-temperature) &quot;Rubrobacter&quot;.

==See also==
*Cemetery
*Crypt
* Ossuary
*&quot;The Cask of Amontillado&quot;
*Underground city
*Necropolis

==Notes==
==References==
* Blyton, Enid &quot;Five go to Smuggler&#x27;s Top&quot; Hodder and Stroughton (1945) 
* Éamonn Ó Carragáin, Carol L. Neuman de Vegvar &quot;Roma felix: formation and reflections of medieval Rome&quot; Ashgate (14 March 2008) p. 33 Roma Felix: Formation and Reflections of Medieval Rome
* Nicholson, Paul Thomas (2005) &quot;The sacred animal necropolis at North Saqqara: the cults and their catacombs&quot; In Salima Ikram (ed) &quot;Divine creatures: animal mummies in Ancient Egypt&quot;. American University in Cairo Press, 2005 pp. 44–71. 

==External links==

*The Catacombs of Saint Sebastian
*The Catacombs of Naples
*The Catacombs of Odesa
*The Catacombs of Paris
*Catacombs
*The Catacombs of Saint Callist
*Subterranean Britannica
*The Catacombs of Lima, Peru </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172896" start="0" end="9" title="Catacombs" label="Catacombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="224" end="236" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q189417" start="402" end="412" title="Appian Way" label="Appian Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="416" end="420" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="455" end="460" title="Saint Peter" label="Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="465" end="469" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="542" end="552" title="Latin" label="Late Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q741051" start="828" end="843" title="Catacombs of Rome" label="Roman catacombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q28924" start="946" end="961" title="Catacombs of Paris" label="Paris catacombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q193685" start="1023" end="1027" title="tufa" label="tufa"/>
<link wikidata="Q107013" start="1223" end="1230" title="Christian martyrs" label="martyrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="1400" end="1407" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5943" start="1423" end="1459" title="St. Stephen&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Vienna" label="St. Stephen&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="1462" end="1476" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10861229" start="1479" end="1498" title="Znojmo Catacombs" label="Catacombs of Znojmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="1501" end="1523" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q31365493" start="1526" end="1544" title="Catacombs of Jajce" label="Catacombs of Jajce"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="1547" end="1552" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671839" start="1555" end="1582" title="Catacombs of Kom el Shoqafa" label="Catacombs of Kom el Shoqafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="1644" end="1654" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1657" end="1671" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051175" start="1674" end="1693" title="Catacombs of London" label="Catacombs of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="1707" end="1714" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972543" start="1764" end="1783" title="Hietaniemi cemetery" label="Hietaniemi cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q28924" start="1795" end="1813" title="Catacombs of Paris" label="Catacombs of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q255595" start="1912" end="1919" title="ossuary" label="ossuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="1967" end="1973" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q18386664" start="1976" end="1994" title="Catacombs of Milos" label="Catacombs of Milos"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="1997" end="2002" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q741051" start="2005" end="2022" title="Catacombs of Rome" label="Catacombs of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3663206" start="2024" end="2043" title="Catacombs of Naples" label="Catacombs of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728834" start="2045" end="2074" title="Capuchin catacombs of Palermo" label="Capuchin catacombs of Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2076" end="2097" title="Catacombs of Syracuse" label="Catacombs of Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="2111" end="2117" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q830805" start="2120" end="2149" title="Beit She&amp;#x27;arim necropolis" label="Beit She&amp;#x27;arim necropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="2152" end="2157" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358795" start="2160" end="2178" title="Catacombs of Malta" label="Catacombs of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="2181" end="2185" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q24960211" start="2188" end="2205" title="Catacombs of Lima" label="Catacombs of Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="2208" end="2219" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q18128430" start="2234" end="2264" title="Nagcarlan Underground Cemetery" label="Nagcarlan Underground Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="2266" end="2271" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2287" end="2308" title="Sacromonte in Granada" label="Sacromonte in Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="2311" end="2317" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2320" end="2351" title="Petrovaradin Fortress catacombs" label="Petrovaradin Fortress catacombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="2354" end="2361" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2364" end="2383" title=":fr:Catacombes de Sousse" label="Catacombs of Sousse"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="2386" end="2393" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q375856" start="2396" end="2411" title="Odesa Catacombs" label="Odesa Catacombs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2430" end="2462" title="Old St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Cathedral#Cathedral complex" label="Old St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="2511" end="2519" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="2521" end="2527" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q180717" start="2532" end="2538" title="Sousse" label="Sousse"/>
<link wikidata="Q13670" start="2552" end="2567" title="Syracuse, Italy" label="Syracuse, Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138" start="2569" end="2574" title="Trier" label="Trier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="2585" end="2589" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q124862" start="2600" end="2608" title="Order of Friars Minor Capuchin" label="Capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="2622" end="2637" title="Palermo, Sicily" label="Palermo, Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492668" start="2775" end="2801" title="Sheffield General Cemetery" label="Sheffield General Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290155" start="2821" end="2842" title="West Norwood Cemetery" label="West Norwood Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="2882" end="2890" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767605" start="2896" end="2913" title="Aladzha Monastery" label="Aladzha Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="2921" end="2928" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="2966" end="2975" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q44377" start="3124" end="3130" title="tunnel" label="tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="3171" end="3180" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q52111" start="3232" end="3238" title="Alezio" label="Alezio"/>
<link wikidata="Q741051" start="3526" end="3543" title="catacombs of Rome" label="catacombs of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q28924" start="3545" end="3563" title="catacombs of Paris" label="catacombs of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q741051" start="3813" end="3830" title="catacombs of Rome" label="catacombs of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495756" start="4082" end="4110" title="Museum of Saint John Lateran" label="Museum of Saint John Lateran"/>
<link wikidata="Q174353" start="4204" end="4211" title="Orpheus" label="Orpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q211751" start="4814" end="4821" title="Ichthys" label="Ichthys"/>
<link wikidata="Q778128" start="5056" end="5069" title="efflorescence" label="efflorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436960" start="5101" end="5125" title="Kribbella sancticallisti" label="Kribbella sancticallisti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436958" start="5139" end="5159" title="Kribbella catacumbae" label="Kribbella catacumbae"/>
<link wikidata="Q873931" start="5227" end="5238" title="Rubrobacter" label="Rubrobacter"/>
<link wikidata="Q39614" start="5261" end="5269" title="Cemetery" label="Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q192619" start="5271" end="5276" title="Crypt" label="Crypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q255595" start="5279" end="5286" title="Ossuary" label="Ossuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130590" start="5294" end="5317" title="The Cask of Amontillado" label="The Cask of Amontillado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348073" start="5325" end="5341" title="Underground city" label="Underground city"/>
<link wikidata="Q200141" start="5343" end="5353" title="Necropolis" label="Necropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192069" start="5382" end="5394" title="Enid Blyton" label="Blyton, Enid"/>
<link wikidata="Q83553386" start="5490" end="5515" title="Carol Neuman de Vegvar" label="Carol L. Neuman de Vegvar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64524" wikidata="Q221998" url="?curid=64524" title="2B1Q">
<text>Two-binary, one-quaternary (2B1Q) is a line code used in the U interface of the Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) Basic Rate Interface (BRI) and the high-bit-rate digital subscriber line (HDSL). 2B1Q is a four-level pulse-amplitude modulation (PAM-4) scheme without redundancy, mapping two bits (2B) into one quaternary symbol (1Q). Symbol rate is half of data rate.

A competing encoding technique in the ISDN basic rate U interface, mainly used in Europe, is 4B3T.

==Encoding==
To minimize error propagation, bit pairs (dibits) are assigned to voltage levels according to a Gray code, as follows:

If the voltage is misread as an adjacent level, this causes only a 1-bit error in the decoded data. 2B1Q code is not DC-balanced. 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q221998" start="0" end="26" title="2B1Q" label="Two-binary, one-quaternary"/>
<link wikidata="Q221998" start="28" end="32" title="2B1Q" label="2B1Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457387" start="39" end="48" title="line code" label="line code"/>
<link wikidata="Q507271" start="61" end="72" title="U interface" label="U interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q170397" start="80" end="115" title="Integrated Services Digital Network" label="Integrated Services Digital Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q810209" start="123" end="143" title="Basic Rate Interface" label="Basic Rate Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572356" start="158" end="195" title="high-bit-rate digital subscriber line" label="high-bit-rate digital subscriber line"/>
<link wikidata="Q186130" start="225" end="251" title="pulse-amplitude modulation" label="pulse-amplitude modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913" start="299" end="303" title="binary numeral system" label="bits"/>
<link wikidata="Q303727" start="318" end="328" title="quaternary numeral system" label="quaternary"/>
<link wikidata="Q428083" start="342" end="353" title="Symbol rate" label="Symbol rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227342" start="365" end="374" title="data rate" label="data rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881632" start="470" end="474" title="4B3T" label="4B3T"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364905" start="502" end="519" title="error propagation" label="error propagation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550873" start="532" end="537" title="dibit" label="dibit"/>
<link wikidata="Q332772" start="586" end="595" title="Gray code" label="Gray code"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907415" start="727" end="738" title="DC-balanced" label="DC-balanced"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64577" wikidata="Q191866" url="?curid=64577" title="AIESEC">
<text>AIESEC ( ) is an international &quot;youth-run&quot; and led, non-governmental and not-for-profit organization that provides young people with business development internships. The organization focuses on empowering young people to make a progressive social impact. The AIESEC network includes approximately 40,000 members in 120+ countries.

AIESEC is a non-governmental in consultative status with the United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC), is an independent arm of the UN DPI and UN&#x27;s Office of the Secretary-General&#x27;s Envoy on Youth, member of ICMYO, and is recognized by UNESCO. AIESEC&#x27;s international headquarters are in Montreal, Canada.

==Name==
&quot;AIESEC&quot; (pronounced: eye-sek) was originally a French acronym for (English: International Association of Students in Economics and Business). The full name is no longer officially used, as members can now be graduate and undergraduate from any university background.

==History==

=== Founding ===

The idea behind AIESEC started after World War II, when representatives from schools across Europe exchanged information about various programs and schools that specialized in business and economics. Students had been carrying out internships in other countries, mostly on their own initiative, but this came to a standstill with the onslaught of World War II. In 1944, the neutral Scandinavian countries were still exchanging students. Bertil Hedberg, an official at the Stockholm School of Economics, and students Jaroslav Zich (of Czechoslovakia) and Stanislas Callens (of Belgium), founded &quot;AIESEC&quot; on July 2, 1948, under the name (&quot;AIESEc&quot;) with a headquarter in Prague and Jaroslav Zich as the first President of the association.

At the time of AIESEC&#x27;s founding at the end of the 1940s, Europe was in the midst of recovery from the war that dealt grave losses to its population. Factories and enterprises were in desperate need of executives, managers and leaders. The continent needed more than just business development, however; the war had severely damaged relations between European nations, and many members of the community felt steps needed to be taken to address this problem. AIESEC was formed to address both of these concerns. In 1948, a renewing development of the association was initiated, with implementation of international meetings (congresses), replacing the practice of governance from the headquarter. The first broad meeting was held by students from 9 universities of 7 countries in April 1948 in Liège (Belgium). Then the official, constitutive assembly (the congress) was organized in 1949 in Stockholm with Bengt Sjӧstrand as the President and Sweden as the Presiding Country for 1949/1950. Students from seven nations: Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Netherlands, Norway and Sweden, came together for that first International Congress of AIESEC.

In 1949, 89 students were exchanged by AIESEC among the member nations. The next two annual congresses were conducted in Stockholm, presided by Bengt Sjӧstrand, and in Paris, presided by Jean Choplin, respectively. At those congresses the organization&#x27;s mission was stated: &quot;to expand the understanding of a nation by expanding the understanding of the individuals, changing the world one person at a time.&quot; Also a constitution for the organization defined a purpose: &quot;AIESEC is an independent, non-political, and international organization which has as its purpose to establish and promote the friendly relations between the members.&quot;

=== Global expansion ===

The organization grew exponentially in the following years, with more than 1,000 exchanges taking place in 1955 alone. In the following few years, AIESEC quickly became global by establishing its first North American member, the United States, in 1957, and its first South American and African members, Colombia, Venezuela, and South Africa, in 1958.

For the first years of its existence, AIESEC had no central governing body, but was instead managed jointly by a Presiding Country Committee composed of the National Committee Presidents of each member nation. As the organization grew, a central governing body was created and led by a democratically elected Secretary General. Morris Wolff, from the United States, was chosen as the first Secretary General in 1960, and established the first permanent international office for AIESEC in Geneva, Switzerland. Over the following decade, AIESEC expanded to eastern Asia, Australia, and deeper within Europe, Africa, North America, and South America, having a presence in 43 countries by 1969.

In 2010, AIESEC surpassed 10,000 exchanges delivered in a single year for the first time. By 2020, more than 230,000 interactions will have been provided.

=== Global Volunteer ===
&quot;AIESEC is a global network of people that simply believe that youth leadership is not an option, but our responsibility.&quot; The &quot;Global Volunteer&quot; portfolio in AIESEC is an international volunteer program which allows youth aged 18–29 to contribute to the United Nations&#x27; sustainable development goals of 2030. The Global Volunteering programs are short-term in nature (6–8 weeks) and provide youth with opportunities to travel abroad and work for Non-profit organizations with a special focus of second and third world countries. Projects include teaching, promoting HIV/AIDS awareness, working in human rights, environmental sustainability, leadership development and more. Since AIESEC is a non-profit organization, the exchange participants are to bear all expenses associated with travel including airfare, medical insurance, and transportation. Some of AIESEC&#x27;s projects will provide food and accommodation. AIESEC&#x27;s partnership with the United Nations seeks to tap the undiscovered potential of the youth globally and allow them to create a long-lasting impact to boost the international community.

=== Global Talent ===
&quot;Global Talent&quot; is a global internship opportunity at a startup, SME or an MNC for young people who seek to develop themselves and their career. They range from 6 weeks to 1.5 years in nature.

== Awards and recognition ==
In July 2015, AIESEC was recognized for the 9th time on the WorldBlu list of &quot;Most Freedom Centred Workplaces.&quot; An organization makes it onto the WorldBlu List through a rigorous Freedom at Work assessment process completed by employees. The assessment evaluates the overall design of an organization along a fear-based to freedom-centred continuum in three core areas: leadership, individual performance and systems and processes.

==Members==
As of 2023, AIESEC is found in 100+ countries and territories worldwide, including:
==Alumni==
This is a non-exhaustive list of notable AIESEC alumni:
* Aleksander Kwaśniewski, President of Poland from 1995 to 2005.
* Andrei Spînu, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Infrastructure and Regional Development of the Republic of Moldova. 
* Aníbal Cavaco Silva, former Prime Minister and President of Portugal
* Aziz Akhannouch, Prime Minister of Morocco since 2021. 
* César Gaviria, Colombian economist and politician who served as the President of Colombia from 1990 to 1994, Secretary General of the Organization of American States from 1994 to 2004. 
* Francisco Gil Díaz, Mexican economist and Secretary of Finance during 2000–2006, and current regional chairman for Telefónica Movistar. 
* Fernando Carro (businessman), Spanish business director currently CEO of Bayern Leverkusen.
* Gunter Pauli - is an entrepreneur, economist, and author. 
* Helmut Kohl, former German Chancellor. 
* James Shaw, Minister of Statistics and Climate Change Issues of New Zealand. 
* Janez Drnovšek, former Prime Minister of Slovenia.
* Junichiro Koizumi, former Prime Minister of Japan. 
* Mario Monti, former Prime Minister of Italy
* Martti Ahtisaari, the tenth President of Finland (1994–2000), Nobel Peace Prize laureate and United Nations diplomat and mediator
* Moulay Hafid Elalamy, Former Minister of Industry, Trade, &amp; New Technologies in Morocco until 2021.
* Nerses Yeritsyan, Deputy Chairman of the Central Bank of Armenia, former Minister of Economy of Armenia

==See also==
* United Nations
* IAESTE

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q191866" start="0" end="6" title="AIESEC" label="AIESEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="62" end="78" title="Non-governmental organization" label="non-governmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q43229" start="83" end="97" title="organization" label="not-for-profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500754" start="164" end="174" title="internship" label="internship"/>
<link wikidata="Q821102" start="239" end="250" title="Progressivism" label="progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q170075" start="404" end="455" title="ECOSOC" label="United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708827" start="486" end="492" title="United Nations Department of Public Information" label="UN DPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151941" start="507" end="560" title="Office of the Secretary-General&amp;#x27;s Envoy on Youth" label="Office of the Secretary-General&amp;#x27;s Envoy on Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049828" start="572" end="577" title="International Coordination Meeting of Youth Organisations" label="ICMYO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="600" end="606" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="656" end="664" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="749" end="756" title="acronym" label="acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1031" end="1043" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="1086" end="1092" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830453" start="1170" end="1178" title="business" label="business"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="1183" end="1192" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="1376" end="1398" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavian countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061504" start="1466" end="1495" title="Stockholm School of Economics" label="Stockholm School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="1528" end="1542" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="1570" end="1577" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="1682" end="1688" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q83405" start="1906" end="1915" title="Factory" label="Factories"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="2503" end="2515" title="University" label="universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6256" start="2521" end="2530" title="Country" label="countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992" start="2548" end="2553" title="Liège" label="Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="2555" end="2562" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495862" start="2611" end="2619" title="congress" label="congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="2646" end="2655" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="2698" end="2704" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="2774" end="2781" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="2783" end="2790" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="2792" end="2799" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="2801" end="2807" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="2809" end="2820" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="2822" end="2828" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="2833" end="2839" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="3026" end="3035" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="3073" end="3078" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3822" end="3835" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="3896" end="3904" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="3906" end="3915" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="3921" end="3933" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="4433" end="4439" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="4441" end="4452" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="4500" end="4512" title="East Asia" label="eastern Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="4514" end="4523" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="4551" end="4557" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="4559" end="4572" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="4578" end="4591" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q188844" start="5024" end="5041" title="Volunteering" label="volunteer program"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649586" start="5114" end="5143" title="Sustainable Development Goals" label="sustainable development goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="5290" end="5314" title="Nonprofit organization" label="Non-profit organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q180194" start="5350" end="5361" title="Third World" label="third world"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="5410" end="5413" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="5414" end="5418" title="HIV/AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="5441" end="5453" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="5469" end="5483" title="sustainability" label="sustainability"/>
<link wikidata="Q334911" start="5654" end="5671" title="Health insurance" label="medical insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="5796" end="5810" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q129238" start="6047" end="6054" title="Startup company" label="startup"/>
<link wikidata="Q622439" start="6056" end="6059" title="Small and medium-sized enterprises" label="SME"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="6066" end="6069" title="Multinational corporation" label="MNC"/>
<link wikidata="Q55758" start="6822" end="6844" title="Aleksander Kwaśniewski" label="Aleksander Kwaśniewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q108051533" start="6887" end="6899" title="Andrei Spînu" label="Andrei Spînu"/>
<link wikidata="Q57398" start="7010" end="7029" title="Aníbal Cavaco Silva" label="Aníbal Cavaco Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="7038" end="7052" title="Prime minister" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638114" start="7081" end="7096" title="Aziz Akhannouch" label="Aziz Akhannouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q332020" start="7139" end="7152" title="César Gaviria" label="César Gaviria"/>
<link wikidata="Q188094" start="7164" end="7173" title="economist" label="economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q82955" start="7178" end="7188" title="politician" label="politician"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501749" start="7248" end="7265" title="Secretary (title)" label="Secretary General"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333856" start="7327" end="7345" title="Francisco Gil Díaz" label="Francisco Gil Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q52083927" start="7466" end="7494" title="Fernando Carro (businessman)" label="Fernando Carro (businessman)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104761" start="7539" end="7556" title="Bayer 04 Leverkusen" label="Bayern Leverkusen"/>
<link wikidata="Q509756" start="7560" end="7572" title="Gunter Pauli" label="Gunter Pauli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="7581" end="7593" title="Entrepreneurship" label="entrepreneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q482980" start="7610" end="7616" title="author" label="author"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518" start="7621" end="7632" title="Helmut Kohl" label="Helmut Kohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q373085" start="7648" end="7658" title="Chancellor" label="Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18167139" start="7663" end="7673" title="James Shaw (New Zealand politician)" label="James Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q171228" start="7743" end="7757" title="Janez Drnovšek" label="Janez Drnovšek"/>
<link wikidata="Q130852" start="7796" end="7813" title="Junichiro Koizumi" label="Junichiro Koizumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q47904" start="7850" end="7861" title="Mario Monti" label="Mario Monti"/>
<link wikidata="Q29230" start="7896" end="7912" title="Martti Ahtisaari" label="Martti Ahtisaari"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="7958" end="7975" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q193391" start="8004" end="8012" title="diplomat" label="diplomat"/>
<link wikidata="Q223871" start="8017" end="8025" title="Mediation" label="mediator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325540" start="8028" end="8048" title="Moulay Hafid Elalamy" label="Moulay Hafid Elalamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985828" start="8134" end="8150" title="Nerses Yeritsyan" label="Nerses Yeritsyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="8254" end="8268" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q841250" start="8271" end="8277" title="IAESTE" label="IAESTE"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64578" wikidata="Q151128" url="?curid=64578" title="History of Iceland">
<text>The recorded history of Iceland began with the settlement by Viking explorers and the people they enslaved from Western Europe, particularly in modern-day Norway and the British Isles, in the late ninth century. Iceland was still uninhabited long after the rest of Western Europe had been settled. Recorded settlement has conventionally been dated back to 874, although archaeological evidence indicates Gaelic monks from Ireland, known as papar from sagas, may have settled Iceland earlier.

The land was settled quickly, mainly by Norsemen who may have been fleeing conflict or seeking new land to farm. By 930, the chieftains had established a form of governance, the &quot;Althing&quot;, making it one of the world&#x27;s oldest parliaments. Towards the end of the tenth century, Christianity came to Iceland through the influence of the Norwegian king Olaf Tryggvason. During this time, Iceland remained independent, a period known as the Old Commonwealth, and Icelandic historians began to document the nation&#x27;s history in books referred to as sagas of Icelanders. In the early thirteenth century, the internal conflict known as the age of the Sturlungs weakened Iceland, which eventually became subjugated to Norway over the 13th century. The Old Covenant (1262–1264), and the adoption of Jónsbók (1281) effectively ended the Icelandic Commonwealth. Norway, in turn, was united with Sweden (1319) and then Denmark (1376). Eventually all of the Nordic states were united in one alliance, the Kalmar Union (1397–1523), but on its dissolution, Iceland fell under Danish rule. The subsequent strict Danish–Icelandic Trade Monopoly in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries was detrimental to the economy. Iceland&#x27;s resultant poverty was aggravated by severe natural disasters like the Móðuharðindin or &quot;Mist Hardships&quot;. During this time, the population declined.

Iceland remained part of Denmark, but in keeping with the rise of nationalism around Europe in the nineteenth century, an independence movement emerged. The Althing, which had been suspended in 1799, was restored in 1844, and Iceland gained sovereignty after World War I, becoming the Kingdom of Iceland on 1 December 1918. However, Iceland shared the Danish Monarchy until World War II. Although Iceland was neutral in the Second World War, the United Kingdom invaded and peacefully occupied it in 1940 to forestall a Nazi occupation, after Denmark was overrun by the German Wehrmacht. Due to the island&#x27;s strategic position in the North Atlantic, the Allies occupied the island until the end of the war, with the United States taking over occupation duties from the British in 1941. In 1944, Iceland severed its remaining ties with Denmark (then still under Nazi occupation) and declared itself a republic. Following the Second World War, Iceland was a founding member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and joined the United Nations one year after its establishment. Its economy grew rapidly, largely through fishing, although this was marred by disputes with other nations.

Vigdis Finnbogadottir assumed Iceland&#x27;s presidency on August 1, 1980, the first elected female head of state in the world.

Following rapid financial growth, the 2008–2011 Icelandic financial crisis occurred. Iceland continues to remain outside the European Union.

Iceland is very remote, and so has been spared the ravages of European wars but has been affected by other external events, such as the Black Death and the Protestant Reformation imposed by Denmark. Iceland&#x27;s history has also been marked by a number of natural disasters.

Iceland is a relatively young island in the geological sense, being formed about 20 million years ago by a series of volcanic eruptions in the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, but it is still growing from fresh volcanic eruptions. The oldest stone specimens found in Iceland date back to million years ago.

==Geological background==
In geological terms, Iceland is a young island. It started to form in the Miocene era about 20 million years ago from a series of volcanic eruptions on the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, where it lies between the North American Plate and Eurasian Plate. These plates spread at a rate of approximately 2.5 centimeters per year. This elevated portion of the ridge is known as the &quot;Reykjanes Ridge&quot;. The volcanic activity is attributed to a hotspot, the &quot;Iceland hotspot&quot;, which in turn lies over a mantle plume (the &quot;Iceland Plume&quot;), a column of anomalously hot rock in the Earth&#x27;s mantle which is likely to be partly responsible for the island&#x27;s creation and continued existence. For comparison, it is estimated that other volcanic islands, such as the Faroe Islands have existed for about 55 million years,
 the Azores (on the same ridge) about 8 million years, and Hawaii less than a million years. The younger rock strata in the southwest of Iceland and the central highlands are only about 700,000 years old. The Geological history of the Earth is divided into ice ages, based on temperature and climate. The last glacial period, commonly referred to as &quot;The Ice Age&quot; is thought to have begun about 110,000 years ago and ended about 10,000 years ago. While covered in ice, Iceland&#x27;s icefalls, fjords and valleys were formed.

==Early history==
Iceland remained, for a long time, one of the world&#x27;s last uninhabited larger islands (alongside New Zealand and Madagascar). It has been suggested that the land called Thule by the Greek geographer Pytheas (fourth century BCE) was actually Iceland, although it seems highly unlikely considering Pytheas&#x27; description of it as an agricultural country with plenty of milk, honey, and fruit; the name is more likely to have referred to Norway, or possibly the Faroe Islands or Shetland. Many of the early settlers were Thelir, fleeing the recent union of Norway under Harald Fairhair and came from Telemark. A similar argument explains the name of Greenland from Grenland, neighbouring Telemark and also populated by Thelir. The exact date that humans first reached the island is uncertain. Roman currency dating to the third century has been found in Iceland, but it is unknown whether they were brought there at that time or came later with Vikings after circulating for centuries.

===Irish monks===
There is some literary evidence that monks from a Hiberno-Scottish mission may have settled in Iceland before the arrival of the Norsemen. The &quot;Landnámabók&quot; (&quot;Book of Settlements&quot;), written in the 1100s, mentions the presence of Irish monks, called the Papar, prior to Norse settlement and states that the monks left behind Irish books, bells, and crosiers, among other things. According to the same account, the Irish monks abandoned the country when the Norse arrived or had left prior to their arrival. The twelfth-century scholar Ari Þorgilsson&#x27;s &quot;Íslendingabók&quot; reasserts that items including bells corresponding to those used by Irish monks were found by the settlers. No such artifacts have been discovered by archaeologists, however. Some Icelanders claimed descent from Cerball mac Dúnlainge, King of Osraige in southeastern Ireland, at the time of the &quot;Landnámabók&quot;″s creation.

Another source mentioning the Papar is Íslendingabók, dating from between 1122 and 1133. According to this account, the previous inhabitants, a few Irish monks known as the Papar, left the island since they did not want to live with pagan Norsemen. One theory suggests that those monks were members of a Hiberno-Scottish mission, Irish and Scottish monks who spread Christianity during the Middle Ages. They may also have been hermits.

An archaeological excavation has revealed the ruins of a cabin in Hafnir on the Reykjanes peninsula (close to Keflavík International Airport). Carbon dating reveals that the cabin was abandoned somewhere between 770 and 880, suggesting that Iceland was populated well before 874. This archaeological find may also indicate that the monks left Iceland before the Norse arrived.

===Norse discovery===
According to the &quot;Landnámabók&quot;, Iceland was discovered by Naddodd, one of the first settlers in the Faroe Islands, who was sailing from Norway to the Faroes but lost his way and drifted to the east coast of Iceland. Naddodd called the country &quot;Snæland&quot; &quot;Snowland&quot;. Swedish sailor Garðar Svavarsson also accidentally drifted to the coast of Iceland. He discovered that the country was an island and called it &quot;Garðarshólmi&quot; &quot;Garðar&#x27;s Islet&quot; and stayed for the winter at Húsavík.

The first Norseman who deliberately sailed to Iceland was Hrafna-Flóki Vilgerðarson. Flóki settled for one winter at Barðaströnd. After the cold winter passed, the summer came and the whole island became green, which stunned Flóki. Realizing that this place was in fact habitable, despite the horribly cold winter, and full of useful resources, Flóki restocked his boat. He then returned east to Norway with resources and knowledge.

==Settlement (874–930)==
The first permanent settler in Iceland is usually considered to have been a Norwegian chieftain named Ingólfur Arnarson and his wife, Hallveig Fróðadóttir. According to the &quot;Landnámabók&quot;, he threw two carved pillars (Öndvegissúlur) overboard as he neared land, vowing to settle wherever they landed. He then sailed along the coast until the pillars were found in the southwestern peninsula, now known as Reykjanesskagi. There he settled with his family around 874, in a place he named Reykjavík &quot;Smoke Cove&quot;, probably from the geothermal steam rising from the earth. This place eventually became the capital and the largest city of modern Iceland. It is recognized, however, that Ingólfur Arnarson may not have been the first one to settle permanently in Iceland—that may have been Náttfari, one of Garðar Svavarsson&#x27;s men who stayed behind when Garðar returned to Scandinavia.

Much of the information on Ingólfur comes from the &quot;Landnámabók&quot;, written some three centuries after the settlement. Archeological findings in Reykjavík are consistent with the date given there: there was a settlement in Reykjavík around 870.
According to Landnámabók, Ingólfur was followed by many more Norse chieftains, their families and slaves who settled all the habitable areas of the island in the next decades. Archeological evidence strongly suggests that the timing is roughly accurate; &quot;that the whole country was occupied within a couple of decades towards the end of the 9th century.&quot; These people were primarily of Norwegian, Irish, and Scottish origin. Some of the Irish and Scots were slaves and servants of the Norse chiefs, according to the sagas of Icelanders, the &quot;Landnámabók&quot;, and other documents. Some settlers coming from the British Isles were &quot;Hiberno-Norse,&quot; with cultural and family connections both to the coastal and island areas of Ireland and/or Scotland and to Norway.

The traditional explanation for the exodus from Norway is that people were fleeing the harsh rule of the Norwegian king Harald Fairhair, whom medieval literary sources credit with the unification of some parts of modern Norway during this period. Viking incursions into Britain were also expelled thoroughly during this time, potentially leading to a need for peaceful settlement in other lands. It is also believed that the western fjords of Norway were simply overcrowded in this period.

The settlement of Iceland is thoroughly recorded in the aforementioned &quot;Landnámabók&quot;, although the book was compiled in the early 12th century when at least 200 years had passed from the age of settlement. Ari Þorgilsson&#x27;s &quot;Íslendingabók&quot; is generally considered more reliable as a source and is probably somewhat older, but it is far less thorough. It does say that Iceland was fully settled within 60 years, which likely means that all arable land had been claimed by various settlers.

In 2016, archaeologists uncovered a longhouse in Stöðvarfjörður that has been dated to as early as 800. Other, similar finds in Iceland have been dated to a similar time, preceding the traditional settlement date significantly.

==Commonwealth (930–1262)==

In 930, the ruling chiefs established an assembly called the &quot;Alþingi&quot; (Althing). The parliament convened each summer at Þingvellir, where chieftains (Goðorðsmenn or Goðar) amended laws, settled disputes and appointed juries to judge lawsuits. Laws were not written down but were instead memorized by an elected Lawspeaker (&quot;lǫgsǫgumaðr&quot;). The Alþingi is sometimes said to be the world&#x27;s oldest existing parliament. Importantly, there was no central executive power, and therefore laws were enforced by the chieftains. This gave rise to feuds, which provided the writers of the sagas with plenty of material.

Iceland enjoyed a mostly uninterrupted period of growth in its commonwealth years. Settlements from that era have been found in southwest Greenland and eastern Canada, and sagas such as &quot;Saga of Erik the Red&quot; and &quot;Greenland saga&quot; speak of the settlers&#x27; exploits.

===Christianisation===
The settlers of Iceland were predominantly pagans and worshiped the Norse gods, among them Odin, Thor, Freyr, and Freyja. By the tenth century, political pressure from Europe to convert to Christianity mounted. As the end of the first millennium grew near, many prominent Icelanders had accepted the new faith.

Around 961, Eldgjá, a volcano in Southern Iceland, erupted 7.7 square miles of lava and lifted up huge clouds of sulfuric gas that affected all of Northern Europe and spanned out as far as Northern China. It also created rare hazes and multiple food crises in different parts of the world, including that year and many years that followed. Early Norse settlers in Iceland followed Paganism, however, after the Eldgjá volcano eruption, many thought of it as an act from God and started to convert to Christianity instead with the help of Alþingi. It is also believed they converted to Christianity to maintain peace with their European neighbors and the Catholic church.

In the year 1000, as a civil war between the religious groups seemed likely, the Alþingi appointed one of the chieftains, Thorgeir Ljosvetningagodi, to decide the issue of religion by arbitration. He decided that the country should convert to Christianity as a whole, but that pagans would be allowed to worship privately.

The first Icelandic bishop, Ísleifur Gissurarson, was consecrated by bishop Adalbert of Hamburg in 1056.

===Civil war and the end of the commonwealth===
During the 11th and 12th centuries, the centralization of power had worn down the institutions of the commonwealth, as the former, notable independence of local farmers and chieftains gave way to the growing power of a handful of families and their leaders. The period from around 1200 to 1262 is generally known as the Age of the Sturlungs. This refers to Sturla Þórðarson and his sons, Sighvatr Sturluson, and Snorri Sturluson, who were one of two main clans fighting for power over Iceland, causing havoc in a land inhabited almost entirely by farmers who could ill-afford to travel far from their farms, across the island to fight for their leaders.

In 1220, Snorri Sturluson became a vassal of Haakon IV of Norway; his nephew Sturla Sighvatsson also became a vassal in 1235. Sturla used the power and influence of the Sturlungar family clan to wage war against the other clans in Iceland. The Norwegian king&#x27;s power of Iceland increased over the course of the 13th century. After decades of internal conflict, the Icelandic chieftains agreed to accept the sovereignty of Norway and signed the Old Covenant (&quot;Gamli sáttmáli&quot;) establishing a union with the Norwegian monarchy. The end of the Icelandic Commonwealth is typically dated to the signing of the Old Covenant (1262–1264) or to the adoption of Jónsbók in 1281.

The period also saw the &quot;staðamál&quot;, two major disputes over whether secular aristocrats should benefit from the tithes of proprietary churches they had founded. The latter, concluded in 1297, saw a significant shift of wealth and power from the aristocracy to the Church, which was increasingly independent of secular influence.

==Iceland under Norwegian and Danish kings (1262–1944)==

===Norwegian rule===
Little changed in the decades following the treaty. Norway&#x27;s consolidation of power in Iceland was slow, and the Althing intended to hold onto its legislative and judicial power. Nonetheless, the Christian clergy had unique opportunities to accumulate wealth via the tithe, and power gradually shifted to ecclesiastical authorities as Iceland&#x27;s two bishops in Skálholt and Hólar acquired land at the expense of the old chieftains.
Around the time Iceland became a vassal state of Norway, a climate shift occurred—a phenomenon now called the Little Ice Age. Areas near the Arctic Circle such as Iceland and Greenland began to have shorter growing seasons and colder winters. Since Iceland had marginal farmland in good times, the climate change resulted in hardship for the population. A serfdom-like institution called the vistarband developed, in which peasants were bound to landowners for a year at a time.

It became more difficult to raise barley, the primary cereal crop, and livestock required additional fodder to survive longer and colder winters. Icelanders began to trade for grain from continental Europe, which was an expensive proposition. Church fast days increased demand for dried codfish, which was easily caught and prepared for export, and the cod trade became an important part of the economy.

===Kalmar Union===
Iceland remained under Norwegian kingship until 1380, when the death of Olaf II of Denmark extinguished the Norwegian male royal line. Norway (and thus Iceland) then became part of the Kalmar Union, along with Sweden and Denmark, with Denmark as the dominant power. Unlike Norway, Denmark did not need Iceland&#x27;s fish and homespun wool. This created a dramatic deficit in Iceland&#x27;s trade. The small Greenland colony, established in the late 10th century, died out completely before 1500.

With the introduction of absolute monarchy in Denmark–Norway in 1660 under Frederick III of Denmark, the Icelanders relinquished their autonomy to the crown, including the right to initiate and consent to legislation. Denmark, however, did not provide much protection to Iceland, which was raided in 1627 by a Barbary pirate fleet that abducted almost 300 Icelanders into slavery, in an episode known as the Turkish Abductions.

After the end of the Kalmar Union, the royal government asserted greater control of Iceland. In particular, it took stronger actions to stop the involvement of English traders with Iceland.

=== Foreign merchants and fishermen ===
English and German merchants became more prominent in Iceland at the start of the 15th century. Some historians refer to the 15th century as the &quot;English Age&quot; in Iceland&#x27;s history, due to the prominence of English traders and fishing fleets. What drew foreigners to Iceland was primarily fishing in the fruitful waters off the coast of Iceland. The Icelandic trade was important to some British ports; for example, in Hull, the Icelandic trade accounted for more than ten percent of Hull&#x27;s total trade. The trade has been credited with raising Icelandic living standards.

The 16th century has been referred to as the &quot;German Age&quot; by Icelandic historians due to the prominence of German traders. The Germans did not engage in much fishing themselves, but they owned fishing boats, rented them to Icelanders and then bought the fish from Icelandic fishermen to export to the European Continent.

An illicit trade continued with foreigners after the Danes implemented a trade monopoly. Dutch and French traders became more prominent in the mid-17th century.

===Reformation and Danish trade monopoly===
By the middle of the 16th century, Christian III of Denmark began to impose Lutheranism on his subjects. Jón Arason and Ögmundur Pálsson, the Catholic bishops of Skálholt and Hólar respectively, opposed Christian&#x27;s efforts at promoting the Protestant Reformation in Iceland. Ögmundur was deported by Danish officials in 1541, but Jón Arason put up a fight.

Opposition to the reformation ended in 1550 when Jón Arason was captured after being defeated in the Battle of Sauðafell by loyalist forces under the leadership of Daði Guðmundsson. Jón Arason and his two sons were subsequently beheaded in Skálholt. Following this, the Icelanders became Lutherans and remain largely so to this day.

In 1602, Iceland was forbidden to trade with countries other than Denmark, by order of the Danish government, which at this time pursued mercantilist policies. The Danish–Icelandic Trade Monopoly remained in effect until 1786.

===The eruption of Laki===

In the 18th century, climatic conditions in Iceland reached an all-time low since the original settlement. On top of this, Laki erupted in 1783, spitting out of lava. Floods, ash, and fumes killed 9,000 people and 80% of the livestock. The ensuing starvation killed a quarter of Iceland&#x27;s population. This period is known as the &quot;Móðuharðindin&quot; or &quot;Mist Hardships&quot;.

===Danish Iceland in the beginning of the 19th century===
In 1809 Danish adventurer Jørgen Jørgensen arrived in Iceland, declared the country independent from Denmark–Norway and pronounced himself its ruler. However, with the arrival of HMS &quot;Talbot&quot; two months later, Danish rule in Iceland was restored and Jørgensen was arrested.

When the two kingdoms of Denmark and Norway were separated by the Treaty of Kiel in 1814 following the Napoleonic Wars, Denmark kept Iceland, as well as Faroe and Greenland, as dependencies.

===Independence movement===
Throughout the 19th century, the country&#x27;s climate continued to grow worse, resulting in mass emigration to the New World, particularly Manitoba in Canada. However, a new national consciousness was revived in Iceland, inspired by romantic nationalist ideas from continental Europe. This revival was spearheaded by the &quot;Fjölnismenn&quot;, a group of Danish-educated Icelandic intellectuals.

An independence movement developed under the leadership of a lawyer named Jón Sigurðsson. In 1843, a new Althing was founded as a consultative assembly. It claimed continuity with the Althing of the Icelandic Commonwealth, which had remained for centuries as a judicial body and had been abolished in 1800.

===Home rule and sovereignty===


In 1874, a thousand years after the first acknowledged settlement, Denmark granted Iceland a constitution and limited home rule over domestic matters, which was expanded in 1904. The constitution was revised in 1903, and a minister for Icelandic affairs, residing in Reykjavík, was made responsible to the Althing, the first of whom was Hannes Hafstein.

Iceland and Denmark signed the Danish–Icelandic Act of Union on 1 December 1918, recognizing the Kingdom of Iceland as a fully sovereign state joined with Denmark in a personal union with the Danish king. Iceland established its own flag. Denmark was to represent its foreign affairs and defense interests. Iceland had no military or naval forces, and Denmark was to give notice to other countries that it was permanently neutral. The act would be up for revision in 1940 and could be revoked three years later if agreement was not reached. By the 1930s the consensus in Iceland was to seek complete independence by 1944 at the latest.

=== World War I ===
In the quarter of a century preceding the war, Iceland had prospered. However, Iceland became more isolated during World War I and suffered a significant decline in living standards. The treasury became highly indebted, and there was a shortage of food and fears over an imminent famine.

Iceland was part of neutral Denmark during the war. Icelanders were, in general, sympathetic to the cause of the Allies. Iceland also traded significantly with the United Kingdom during the war, as Iceland found itself within its sphere of influence. In their attempts to stop the Icelanders from trading with the Germans indirectly, the British imposed costly and time-consuming constraints on Icelandic exports going to the Nordic countries. There is no evidence of any German plans to invade Iceland during the war.

1,245 Icelanders, Icelandic Americans, and Icelandic Canadians were registered as soldiers during World War I. 989 fought for Canada, whereas 256 fought for the United States. 391 of the combatants were born in Iceland, the rest were of Icelandic descent. 10 women of Icelandic descent and 4 women born in Iceland served as nurses for the Allies during World War I. At least 144 of the combatants died during World War I (96 in combat, 19 from wounds suffered during combat, 2 from accidents, and 27 from disease), 61 of them were Iceland-born. Ten men were taken as prisoners of war by the Germans.

The war had a lasting impact on Icelandic society and Iceland&#x27;s external relations. It led to major government interference in the marketplace that lasted until the post-World War II period. Iceland&#x27;s competent governance of internal affairs and relations with other states—while relations with Denmark were interrupted during the war—showed that Iceland was capable of acquiring further powers, which resulted in Denmark recognizing Iceland as a fully sovereign state in 1918. It has been argued that the thirst for news of the war helped &quot;Morgunblaðið&quot; to gain a dominant position among Icelandic newspapers.

=== The Great Depression ===
Icelandic post-World War I prosperity ended with the outbreak of the Great Depression, a severe worldwide economic crash. The depression hit Iceland hard as the value of exports plummeted. The total value of Icelandic exports fell from 74 million kronur in 1929 to 48 million kronur in 1932, and did not rise again to the pre-1930 level until after 1939. Government involvement in the economy increased: &quot;Imports were regulated, trade with foreign currency was monopolized by state-owned banks, and loan capital was largely distributed by state-regulated funds&quot;. The outbreak of the Spanish Civil War cut Iceland&#x27;s exports of saltfish by half, and the depression lasted in Iceland until the outbreak of World War II, when prices for fish exports soared.

===World War II===


With war looming in the spring of 1939, Iceland realized its exposed position would be very dangerous in wartime. An all-party government was formed, and Lufthansa&#x27;s request for civilian airplane landing rights was rejected. German ships were all about, however, until the British blockade of Germany put a stop to that when the war began in September. Iceland demanded Britain allow it to trade with Germany, to no avail.

The occupation of Denmark by Nazi Germany began on 9 April 1940, severing communications between Iceland and Denmark. As a result, on 10 April, the Parliament of Iceland took temporary control of foreign affairs (setting up what would be the forerunner of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs) and the Coast Guard. Parliament also elected a provisional governor, Sveinn Björnsson, who later became the Republic&#x27;s first president. Iceland became &quot;de facto&quot; fully sovereign with these actions. At the time, Icelanders and the Danish King considered this state of affairs to be temporary and believed that Iceland would return these powers to Denmark when the occupation was over.

Iceland turned down British offers of protection after the occupation of Denmark, because that would violate Iceland&#x27;s neutrality. Britain and the U.S. opened direct diplomatic relations, as did Sweden and Norway. The German takeover of Norway left Iceland highly exposed; Britain decided it could not risk a German takeover of Iceland.
On 10 May 1940, British military forces began an invasion of Iceland when they sailed into Reykjavík harbour in Operation Fork.
There was no resistance, but the government protested against what it called a &quot;flagrant violation&quot; of Icelandic neutrality, though Prime Minister Hermann Jónasson called on Icelanders to treat the British troops with politeness, as if they were guests. They behaved accordingly, and there were no mishaps. The occupation of Iceland lasted throughout the war.
At the peak, the British had 25,000 troops stationed in Iceland, all but eliminating unemployment in the Reykjavík area and other strategically important places. In July 1941, responsibility for Iceland&#x27;s occupation and defence passed to the United States under a U.S.-Icelandic agreement which included a provision that the U.S. recognize Iceland&#x27;s absolute independence. The British were replaced by up to 40,000 Americans, who outnumbered all adult Icelandic men. (At the time, Iceland had a population of around 120,000.)

Approximately 159 Icelanders&#x27; lives have been confirmed to have been lost in World War II hostilities. Most were killed on cargo and fishing vessels sunk by German aircraft, U-boats or mines. An additional 70 Icelanders died at sea, but it has not been confirmed whether they lost their lives as a result of hostilities.

The occupation of Iceland by the British and the Americans proved to be an economic boom, as the occupiers injected money into the Icelandic economy and launched various projects. This eradicated unemployment in Iceland and raised wages considerably. According to one study, &quot;by the end of World War II, Iceland had been transformed from one of Europe’s poorest countries to one of the world’s wealthiest.&quot;

==Republic of Iceland (1944–present)==

===Founding of the republic===
On 31 December 1943, the Act of Union agreement expired after 25 years. Beginning on 20 May 1944, Icelanders voted in a four-day plebiscite on whether to terminate the personal union with the King of Denmark and establish a republic. The vote was 97% in favour of ending the union and 95% in favour of the new republican constitution. Iceland became an independent republic on 17 June 1944, with Sveinn Björnsson as its first president. Denmark was still occupied by Germany at the time. Danish King Christian X sent a message of congratulations to the Icelandic people.

Iceland had prospered during the course of the war, amassing considerable currency reserves in foreign banks. In addition to this, the country received the most Marshall Aid per capita of any European country in the immediate postwar years (at US$209, with the war-ravaged Netherlands a distant second at US$109).

The new republican government, led by an unlikely three-party majority cabinet made up of conservatives (the Independence Party, &quot;Sjálfstæðisflokkurinn&quot;), social democrats (the Social Democratic Party, &quot;Alþýðuflokkurinn&quot;), and socialists (People&#x27;s Unity Party – Socialist Party, &quot;Sósíalistaflokkurinn&quot;), decided to put the funds into a general renovation of the fishing fleet, the building of fish processing facilities, the construction of a cement and fertilizer factory, and a general modernization of agriculture. These actions were aimed at keeping Icelanders&#x27; standard of living as high as it had become during the prosperous war years.

The government&#x27;s fiscal policy was strictly Keynesian, and their aim was to create the necessary industrial infrastructure for a prosperous developed country. It was considered essential to keep unemployment down and to protect the export fishing industry through currency manipulation and other means. Because of the country&#x27;s dependence both on reliable fish catches and foreign demand for fish products, Iceland&#x27;s economy remained unstable well into the 1990s, when the country&#x27;s economy was greatly diversified.

===NATO membership, US defense agreement, and the Cold War===
In October 1946, the Icelandic and United States governments agreed to terminate U.S. responsibility for the defense of Iceland, but the United States retained certain rights at Keflavík, such as the right to re-establish a military presence there, should war threaten.

Iceland became a charter member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) on 30 March 1949, with the reservation that it would never take part in offensive action against another nation. The membership came amid an anti-NATO riot in Iceland. After the outbreak of the Korean War in 1950, and pursuant to the request of NATO military authorities, the United States and Iceland agreed that the United States should again take responsibility for Iceland&#x27;s defense. This agreement, signed on 5 May 1951, was the authority for the controversial U.S. military presence in Iceland, which remained until 2006. The U.S. base served as a hub for transports and communications to Europe, a key chain in the GIUK gap, a monitor of Soviet submarine activity, and a linchpin in the early warning system for incoming Soviet attacks and interceptor of Soviet reconnaissance bombers.
Although U.S. forces no longer maintain a military presence in Iceland, the U.S. still assumes responsibility over the country&#x27;s defense through NATO. Iceland has retained strong ties to the other Nordic countries. As a consequence, Norway, Denmark, Germany, and other European nations have increased their defense and rescue cooperation with Iceland since the withdrawal of U.S. forces.

According to a 2018 study in the &quot;Scandinavian Journal of History&quot;, Iceland benefited massively from its relationship with the United States during the Cold War. The United States provided extensive economic patronage, advocated on Iceland&#x27;s behalf in international organizations, allowed Iceland to violate the rules of international organizations, and helped Iceland to victory in the Cod Wars. Despite this, the relationship with the United States was contentious in Icelandic domestic politics, leaving some scholars to describe Iceland as a &quot;rebellious ally&quot; and &quot;reluctant ally.&quot; Iceland repeatedly threatened to leave NATO or cancel the US defence agreement during the Cold War, which is one reason why the United States went to great lengths to please the Icelanders.

===Cod Wars===

The Cod Wars were a series of militarized interstate disputes between Iceland and the United Kingdom from the 1950s to the mid-1970s. The Proto Cod War (1952–1956) revolved around Iceland&#x27;s extension of its fishery limits from 3 to 4 nautical miles. The First Cod War (1958–1961) was fought over Iceland&#x27;s extension from 4 to 12 nautical miles (7 to 22 km). The Second Cod War (1972–1973) occurred when Iceland extended the limits to 50 miles (93 km). The Third Cod War (1975–1976) was fought over Iceland&#x27;s extension of its fishery limits to 200 miles (370 km). Icelandic patrol ships and British trawlers clashed in all four Cod Wars. The Royal Navy was sent to the contested waters in the last three Cod Wars, leading to highly publicized clashes.

During these disputes, Iceland threatened closure of the U.S. base at Keflavík, and the withdrawal of its NATO membership. Due to Iceland&#x27;s strategic importance during the Cold War, it was important for the U.S. and NATO to maintain the base on Icelandic soil and to keep Iceland as a member of NATO. While the Icelandic government did follow through on its threat to break off diplomatic relations with the UK during the Third Cod War, it never went through on its threats to close the U.S. base or to withdraw from NATO.

It is rare for militarized interstate disputes of this magnitude and intensity to occur between two democracies with as close economic, cultural, and institutional ties as Iceland and the UK.

===EEA membership and economic reform===

In 1991, the Independence Party, led by Davíð Oddsson, formed a coalition government with the Social Democrats. This government set in motion market liberalisation policies, privatising a number of state-owned companies. Iceland then became a member of the European Economic Area in 1994. Economic stability increased and previously chronic inflation was drastically reduced.

In 1995, the Independence Party formed a coalition government with the Progressive Party. This government continued with free market policies, privatising two commercial banks and the state-owned telecom Landssíminn. Corporate income tax was reduced to 18% (from around 50% at the beginning of the decade), inheritance tax was greatly reduced, and the net wealth tax was abolished. A system of individual transferable quotas in the Icelandic fisheries, first introduced in the late 1970s, was further developed.
The coalition government remained in power through elections in 1999 and 2003. In 2004, Davíð Oddsson stepped down as prime minister after 13 years in office. Davíð Oddsson was Iceland&#x27;s longest-serving Prime Minister and held the job from 1991 until 2004. Halldór Ásgrímsson, leader of the Progressive Party, took over as prime minister from 2004 to 2006, followed by Geir H. Haarde, Davíð Oddsson&#x27;s successor as leader of the Independence Party.

Following a recession in the early 1990s, economic growth was considerable, averaging about 4% per year from 1994. The governments of the 1990s and 2000s adhered to a staunch but domestically controversial pro-U.S. foreign policy, lending nominal support to the NATO action in the Kosovo War and signing up as a member of the Coalition of the willing during the 2003 invasion of Iraq.

In March 2006, the United States announced that it intended to withdraw the greater part of the Icelandic Defence Force. On 12 August 2006, the last four F-15&#x27;s left Icelandic airspace. The United States closed the Keflavík Air Base in September 2006. In 2016, it was reported that the United States was considering re-opening the base.

Following elections in May 2007, the Independence Party, headed by Haarde, remained in government, albeit in a new coalition with the Social Democratic Alliance.

===Financial crisis===
In October 2008, the Icelandic banking system collapsed, prompting Iceland to seek large loans from the International Monetary Fund and friendly countries. Widespread protests in late 2008 and early 2009 resulted in the resignation of the Haarde government, which was replaced on 1 February 2009 by a coalition government led by the Social Democratic Alliance and the Left-Green Movement. Social Democrat minister Jóhanna Sigurðardóttir was appointed prime minister, becoming the world&#x27;s first openly homosexual head of government of the modern era. Elections took place in April 2009, and a continuing coalition government consisting of the Social Democrats and the Left-Green Movement was established in May 2009.

The financial crisis gave rise to the Icesave dispute, where Iceland on the one hand and the United Kingdom and Netherlands on the other disputed whether Iceland was obligated to repay British and Dutch depositors who lost their savings when Icesave collapsed.

The crisis resulted in the greatest migration from Iceland since 1887, with a net exodus of 5,000 people in 2009.

=== Since 2012 ===

Iceland&#x27;s economy stabilized under the government of Jóhanna Sigurðardóttir, and grew by 1.6% in 2012, but many Icelanders remained unhappy with the state of the economy and government austerity policies; the centre-right Independence Party was returned to power, in coalition with the Progressive Party, in the 2013 elections. In September 2017, the 9-month-old center-right coalition of Prime Minister Bjarni Benediktsson, leader of the Independence Party, collapsed after one party, a small centrist Bright Future, left the government. However, the ruling centre-right parties lost their majority after a tight 2017 election. On 30 November 2017, Katrín Jakobsdóttir became Iceland&#x27;s new prime minister despite the fact her party, Left-Green Movement, came second in the election - behind the Independence Party.

On 1 August 2016, Guðni Th. Jóhannesson became the new president of Iceland. He was re-elected with an overwhelming majority of the vote in the 2020 presidential election.

After the 2021 parliamentary election, the new government was, just like the previous government, a tri-party coalition of the Independence Party, the Progressive Party and the Left-Green Movement, headed by Prime Minister Katrín Jakobsdóttir. In April 2024, Bjarni Benediktsson of the Independence party succeeded Katrín Jakobsdóttir as prime minister. In June 2024, Halla Tomasdottir won Iceland’s presidential election to become the country’s second female president. In November 2024, centre-left Social Democratic Alliance became the biggest party in a snap election, meaning Social Democratic Kristrun Frostadottir became the next Prime Minister of Iceland.

==Historiography==

===Division of history into named periods===
While it is convenient to divide history into named periods, it is also misleading because the course of human events neither starts nor ends abruptly in most cases, and movements and influences often overlap. One period in Icelandic history, as Gunnar Karlsson describes, can be considered the period from 930 CE to 1262–1264, when there was no central government or leader, political power being characterised by chieftains (&quot;goðar&quot;). This period is referred to therefore as the &quot;þjóðveldisöld&quot; or &quot;goðaveldisöld&quot; (National or Chieftain State) period by Icelandic authors, and the &quot;Old Commonwealth&quot; or &quot;Freestate&quot; by English ones.

There is little consensus on how to divide Icelandic history. Gunnar&#x27;s own book &quot;A Brief History of Iceland&quot; (2010) has 33 chapters with considerable overlap in dates. Jón J. Aðils&#x27; 1915 text, &quot;Íslandssaga&quot; (A History of Iceland) uses ten periods:
* Landnámsöld (Settlement Age) c. 870–930
* Söguöld (Saga Age) 930–1030
* Íslenska kirkjan í elstu tíð (The early Icelandic church) 1030–1152
* Sturlungaöld (Sturlung Age) 1152–1262
* Ísland undir stjórn Noregskonunga og uppgangur kennimanna (Norwegian royal rule and the rise of the clergy) 1262–1400
* Kirkjuvald (Ecclesiastical power) 1400–1550
* Konungsvald (Royal authority) 1550–1683
* Einveldi og einokun (Absolutism and monopoly trading) 1683–1800
* Viðreisnarbarátta (Campaign for restoration [of past glories]) 1801–1874
* Framsókn (Progress) 1875–1915

In another of Gunnar&#x27;s books, &quot;Iceland&#x27;s 1100 Years&quot; (2000), Icelandic history is divided into four periods:
* Colonisation and Commonwealth c. 870–1262
* Under foreign rule 1262 – c. 1800
* A primitive society builds a state 1809–1918
* The great 20th-century transformation
These are based mainly on forms of government, except for the last which reflects mechanisation of the fishing industry.

==See also==

* Military history of Iceland
* Politics of Iceland
* President of Iceland
* Prime Minister of Iceland
* Timeline of Icelandic history

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Axel Kristinsson. &quot;Is there any tangible proof that there were Irish monks in Iceland before the time of the Viking settlements?&quot; (2005) in English in Icelandic
* Bergsteinn Jónsson and Björn Þorsteinsson. &quot;Íslandssaga til okkar daga&quot; Sögufélag. Reykjavík. (1991) (in Icelandic) 
* Byock, Jesse. &quot;Medieval Iceland: Society, Sagas and Power&quot; University of California Press (1988) 
* Guðmundur Hálfdanarson; &quot;Historical Dictionary of Iceland&quot; Scarecrow Press. Maryland, USA. (1997) 
* Gunnar Karlsson. &quot;History of Iceland&quot; Univ. of Minneapolis. (2000) 
* Gunnar Karlsson. &quot;Iceland&#x27;s 1100 Years: History of a Marginal Society&quot;. Hurst. London. (2000) .
* Gunnar Karlsson. &quot;A Brief History of Iceland&quot;. Forlagið 2000. 2nd ed. 2010. Trans. Anna Yates. 
* Helgi Skúli Kjartansson; &quot;Ísland á 20. öld&quot;. Reykjavík. (2002) 
* Sverrir Jakobsson. ‘The Process of State-Formation in Medieval Iceland’, Viator. Journal of Medieval and Renaissance Studies 40:2 (Autumn 2009), 151–70.
* Sverrir Jakobsson. The Territorialization of Power in the Icelandic Commonwealth, in Statsutvikling i Skandinavia i middelalderen, eds. Sverre Bagge, Michael H. Gelting, Frode Hervik, Thomas Lindkvist &amp; Bjørn Poulsen (Oslo 2012), 101–18.
* Sigurður Gylfi Magnússon. &quot;Wasteland with Words. A Social History of Iceland&quot; (London: Reaktion Books, 2010)
* Miller, William Ian; &quot;Bloodtaking and Peacemaking: Feud, Law, and Society in Saga Iceland&quot;. University of Chicago Press (1997) 

==External links==
* History of Iceland from the Icelandic embassy in Japan
* U.S. Government text public domain
* History of Iceland: Primary Documents
* &quot;The physical anthropology of the mediaeval Icelanders with special reference to their racial origin&quot; Manuscript at Dartmouth College Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q151128" start="13" end="31" title="History of Iceland" label="history of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="61" end="67" title="Vikings" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="112" end="126" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="155" end="161" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="170" end="183" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="212" end="219" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="411" end="415" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530553" start="440" end="445" title="papar" label="papar"/>
<link wikidata="Q300" start="451" end="456" title="Sagas of Icelanders" label="sagas"/>
<link wikidata="Q131279" start="677" end="684" title="Althing" label="Althing"/>
<link wikidata="Q213801" start="857" end="872" title="Olaf Tryggvason" label="Olaf Tryggvason"/>
<link wikidata="Q300" start="1055" end="1074" title="sagas of Icelanders" label="sagas of Icelanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314899" start="1144" end="1164" title="age of the Sturlungs" label="age of the Sturlungs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717020" start="1255" end="1267" title="Old Covenant (Iceland)" label="Old Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026239" start="1289" end="1308" title="Law of Iceland" label="adoption of Jónsbók"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="1418" end="1425" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q62623" start="1503" end="1515" title="Kalmar Union" label="Kalmar Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219872" start="1607" end="1638" title="Danish–Icelandic Trade Monopoly" label="Danish–Icelandic Trade Monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1800" end="1813" title="Laki#Consequences in Iceland" label="Móðuharðindin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="1955" end="1966" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2148" end="2159" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q62567" start="2174" end="2192" title="Kingdom of Iceland" label="Kingdom of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q48198" start="2241" end="2256" title="Rulers of Denmark" label="Danish Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2263" end="2275" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215761" start="2286" end="2305" title="Iceland in World War II" label="Iceland was neutral"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088915" start="2335" end="2384" title="Invasion of Iceland" label="United Kingdom invaded and peacefully occupied it"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308186" start="2431" end="2474" title="German invasion of Denmark (1940)" label="Denmark was overrun by the German Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680331" start="2688" end="2735" title="founding of the Republic of Iceland" label="Iceland severed its remaining ties with Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="2872" end="2906" title="North Atlantic Treaty Organization" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q189797" start="3080" end="3101" title="Vigdís Finnbogadóttir" label="Vigdis Finnbogadottir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137483" start="3247" end="3283" title="2008–2011 Icelandic financial crisis" label="2008–2011 Icelandic financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="3334" end="3348" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="3487" end="3498" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="3507" end="3529" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q207313" start="3772" end="3790" title="Mid-Atlantic Ridge" label="Mid-Atlantic Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="4024" end="4031" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="4080" end="4098" title="volcano" label="volcanic eruptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q207313" start="4106" end="4124" title="Mid-Atlantic Ridge" label="Mid-Atlantic Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q220305" start="4152" end="4172" title="North American Plate" label="North American Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q188521" start="4177" end="4191" title="Eurasian Plate" label="Eurasian Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q105131" start="4387" end="4394" title="Hotspot (geology)" label="hotspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393383" start="4406" end="4421" title="Iceland hotspot" label="Iceland hotspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q878045" start="4455" end="4467" title="mantle plume" label="mantle plume"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393383" start="4473" end="4498" title="Iceland plume" label="&amp;quot;Iceland Plume&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q101949" start="4541" end="4560" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s mantle" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="4731" end="4744" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="4791" end="4797" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389585" start="4995" end="5026" title="Geological history of the Earth" label="Geological history of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q49367" start="5043" end="5051" title="ice ages" label="ice ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q602963" start="5096" end="5110" title="glacial period" label="glacial period"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="5136" end="5159" title="Last glacial period" label="&amp;quot;The Ice Age&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310961" start="5280" end="5287" title="icefall" label="icefall"/>
<link wikidata="Q45776" start="5290" end="5296" title="fjords" label="fjords"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="5443" end="5454" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="5459" end="5469" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q671008" start="5515" end="5520" title="Thule" label="Thule"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="5528" end="5533" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q189971" start="5545" end="5552" title="Pytheas" label="Pytheas"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="5784" end="5790" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="5808" end="5821" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="5825" end="5833" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q56404811" start="5867" end="5873" title="Thelir" label="Thelir"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="5903" end="5909" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254" start="5946" end="5954" title="Telemark" label="Telemark"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="5996" end="6005" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545695" start="6011" end="6019" title="Grenland" label="Grenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q56404811" start="6065" end="6071" title="Thelir" label="Thelir"/>
<link wikidata="Q952064" start="6139" end="6153" title="Roman currency" label="Roman currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="6291" end="6298" title="Vikings" label="Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="6388" end="6392" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q592459" start="6401" end="6425" title="Hiberno-Scottish mission" label="Hiberno-Scottish mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211290" start="6480" end="6488" title="Norsemen" label="Norsemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q217835" start="6500" end="6511" title="Landnámabók" label="Landnámabók"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530553" start="6624" end="6629" title="Papar" label="Papar"/>
<link wikidata="Q355194" start="6905" end="6919" title="Ari Þorgilsson" label="Ari Þorgilsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q183362" start="6933" end="6946" title="Íslendingabók" label="Íslendingabók"/>
<link wikidata="Q773609" start="7165" end="7186" title="Cerball mac Dúnlainge" label="Cerball mac Dúnlainge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254085" start="7188" end="7203" title="Kings of Osraige" label="King of Osraige"/>
<link wikidata="Q183362" start="7324" end="7337" title="Íslendingabók" label="Íslendingabók"/>
<link wikidata="Q592459" start="7589" end="7613" title="Hiberno-Scottish mission" label="Hiberno-Scottish mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568128" start="7788" end="7794" title="Hafnir" label="Hafnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q15221453" start="7802" end="7811" title="Reykjanes" label="Reykjanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q139921" start="7832" end="7862" title="Keflavík International Airport" label="Keflavík International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q559109" start="8190" end="8197" title="Naddodd" label="Naddodd"/>
<link wikidata="Q523104" start="8432" end="8449" title="Garðar Svavarsson" label="Garðar Svavarsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q219417" start="8646" end="8653" title="Húsavík" label="Húsavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q737030" start="8714" end="8739" title="Hrafna-Flóki Vilgerðarson" label="Hrafna-Flóki Vilgerðarson"/>
<link wikidata="Q557895" start="8773" end="8784" title="Barðaströnd" label="Barðaströnd"/>
<link wikidata="Q209138" start="9217" end="9234" title="Ingólfur Arnarson" label="Ingólfur Arnarson"/>
<link wikidata="Q14351935" start="9249" end="9269" title="Hallveig Fróðadóttir" label="Hallveig Fróðadóttir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775587" start="9342" end="9355" title="Öndvegissúlur" label="Öndvegissúlur"/>
<link wikidata="Q212768" start="9529" end="9543" title="Reykjanesskagi" label="Reykjanesskagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764" start="9610" end="9619" title="Reykjavík" label="Reykjavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q983482" start="9917" end="9925" title="Náttfari" label="Náttfari"/>
<link wikidata="Q523104" start="9934" end="9951" title="Garðar Svavarsson" label="Garðar Svavarsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q217835" start="10076" end="10087" title="Landnámabók" label="Landnámabók"/>
<link wikidata="Q300" start="10798" end="10817" title="sagas of Icelanders" label="sagas of Icelanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293452" start="10924" end="10937" title="Norse–Gaels" label="Hiberno-Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="11110" end="11116" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q206123" start="11182" end="11197" title="Harald Fairhair" label="Harald Fairhair"/>
<link wikidata="Q355194" start="11769" end="11783" title="Ari Þorgilsson" label="Ari Þorgilsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q183362" start="11797" end="11810" title="Íslendingabók" label="Íslendingabók"/>
<link wikidata="Q504106" start="12103" end="12112" title="longhouse" label="longhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427727" start="12116" end="12130" title="Stöðvarfjörður" label="Stöðvarfjörður"/>
<link wikidata="Q131279" start="12407" end="12414" title="Althing" label="Althing"/>
<link wikidata="Q107370" start="12456" end="12466" title="Þingvellir" label="Þingvellir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501813" start="12486" end="12497" title="Gothi" label="Goðorðsmenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466992" start="12647" end="12657" title="Lawspeaker" label="Lawspeaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q467033" start="12887" end="12891" title="feud" label="feud"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="13098" end="13107" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q930237" start="13152" end="13172" title="Saga of Erik the Red" label="Saga of Erik the Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424005" start="13189" end="13203" title="Greenland saga" label="Greenland saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122452" start="13315" end="13321" title="Germanic paganism" label="pagans"/>
<link wikidata="Q862030" start="13340" end="13350" title="list of Germanic deities" label="Norse gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="13363" end="13367" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42952" start="13369" end="13373" title="Thor" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131474" start="13375" end="13380" title="Freyr" label="Freyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647325" start="13386" end="13392" title="Freyja" label="Freyja"/>
<link wikidata="Q59532" start="13450" end="13473" title="Christianization" label="convert to Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q388641" start="13596" end="13602" title="Eldgjá" label="Eldgjá"/>
<link wikidata="Q612285" start="14377" end="14402" title="Thorgeir Ljosvetningagodi" label="Thorgeir Ljosvetningagodi"/>
<link wikidata="Q291836" start="14607" end="14627" title="Ísleifur Gissurarson" label="Ísleifur Gissurarson"/>
<link wikidata="Q347852" start="14655" end="14674" title="Adalbert of Hamburg" label="Adalbert of Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314899" start="15053" end="15073" title="Age of the Sturlungs" label="Age of the Sturlungs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480327" start="15121" end="15139" title="Sighvatr Sturluson" label="Sighvatr Sturluson"/>
<link wikidata="Q102323" start="15145" end="15161" title="Snorri Sturluson" label="Snorri Sturluson"/>
<link wikidata="Q316039" start="15433" end="15452" title="Haakon IV of Norway" label="Haakon IV of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427752" start="15465" end="15483" title="Sturla Sighvatsson" label="Sturla Sighvatsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861748" start="15557" end="15579" title="Sturlungar family clan" label="Sturlungar family clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717020" start="15837" end="15849" title="Old Covenant (Iceland)" label="Old Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q16427140" start="16103" end="16111" title="staðamál" label="staðamál"/>
<link wikidata="Q184664" start="16195" end="16201" title="tithes" label="tithes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303187" start="16205" end="16225" title="proprietary churches" label="proprietary churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q184664" start="16764" end="16769" title="tithe" label="tithe"/>
<link wikidata="Q831538" start="16862" end="16870" title="Skálholt" label="Skálholt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019455" start="16875" end="16880" title="Hólar" label="Hólar"/>
<link wikidata="Q190530" start="17043" end="17057" title="Little Ice Age" label="Little Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q176609" start="17074" end="17087" title="Arctic Circle" label="Arctic Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="17108" end="17117" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16255703" start="17325" end="17335" title="vistarband" label="vistarband"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="17447" end="17453" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q213725" start="17694" end="17707" title="stockfish" label="dried codfish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17766" end="17775" title="Cod#Cod trade/history" label="cod trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q313879" start="17909" end="17927" title="Olaf II of Denmark" label="Olaf II of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q62623" start="18022" end="18034" title="Kalmar Union" label="Kalmar Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="18058" end="18065" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q513705" start="18239" end="18261" title="Eastern Settlement" label="small Greenland colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="18360" end="18377" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q62651" start="18381" end="18395" title="Denmark–Norway" label="Denmark–Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q157812" start="18410" end="18434" title="Frederick III of Denmark" label="Frederick III of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q899359" start="18645" end="18665" title="Barbary pirates" label="Barbary pirate fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="18707" end="18714" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149737" start="18743" end="18761" title="Turkish Abductions" label="Turkish Abductions"/>
<link wikidata="Q154998" start="20161" end="20185" title="Christian III of Denmark" label="Christian III of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="20202" end="20213" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheranism"/>
<link wikidata="Q382167" start="20231" end="20241" title="Jón Arason" label="Jón Arason"/>
<link wikidata="Q16420346" start="20246" end="20262" title="Ögmundur Pálsson" label="Ögmundur Pálsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="20371" end="20393" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872326" start="20590" end="20609" title="Battle of Sauðafell" label="Battle of Sauðafell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11693149" start="20653" end="20669" title="Daði Guðmundsson" label="Daði Guðmundsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q162527" start="20960" end="20972" title="mercantilism" label="mercantilist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219872" start="20987" end="21018" title="Danish–Icelandic Trade Monopoly" label="Danish–Icelandic Trade Monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21202" end="21206" title="Laki#Consequences in Iceland" label="Laki"/>
<link wikidata="Q203726" start="21448" end="21462" title="Mist Hardships" label="Mist Hardships"/>
<link wikidata="Q119681" start="21555" end="21571" title="Jørgen Jørgensen" label="Jørgen Jørgensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q62651" start="21630" end="21644" title="Denmark–Norway" label="Denmark–Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5634559" start="21708" end="21730" title="HMS Talbot (1807)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Talbot&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q156556" start="21880" end="21894" title="Treaty of Kiel" label="Treaty of Kiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="21917" end="21932" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="21967" end="21972" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="21977" end="21986" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="22151" end="22160" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="22175" end="22183" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q263985" start="22269" end="22289" title="romantic nationalism" label="romantic nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="22301" end="22319" title="continental Europe" label="continental Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346786" start="22363" end="22374" title="Fjölnismenn" label="Fjölnismenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q321275" start="22509" end="22523" title="Jón Sigurðsson" label="Jón Sigurðsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764" start="23044" end="23053" title="Reykjavík" label="Reykjavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q609571" start="23114" end="23129" title="Hannes Hafstein" label="Hannes Hafstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219870" start="23163" end="23192" title="Danish–Icelandic Act of Union" label="Danish–Icelandic Act of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q62567" start="23229" end="23247" title="Kingdom of Iceland" label="Kingdom of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="23300" end="23314" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="23904" end="23915" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q151036" start="25755" end="25767" title="Morgunblaðið" label="Morgunblaðið"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630476" start="25808" end="25828" title="List of newspapers in Iceland" label="Icelandic newspapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="25929" end="25945" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q131473" start="26107" end="26113" title="Icelandic króna" label="kronur"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="26453" end="26470" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q290162" start="26805" end="26814" title="Deutsche Luft Hansa" label="Lufthansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q819136" start="27084" end="27105" title="occupation of Denmark" label="occupation of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="27109" end="27121" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q15983772" start="27340" end="27368" title="Ministry for Foreign Affairs (Iceland)" label="Ministry for Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q207206" start="27439" end="27455" title="Sveinn Björnsson" label="Sveinn Björnsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088915" start="28161" end="28180" title="invasion of Iceland" label="invasion of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088915" start="28224" end="28238" title="Operation Fork" label="Operation Fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q165477" start="28397" end="28413" title="Hermann Jónasson" label="Hermann Jónasson"/>
<link wikidata="Q207206" start="30359" end="30375" title="Sveinn Björnsson" label="Sveinn Björnsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q156617" start="30463" end="30474" title="Christian X of Denmark" label="Christian X"/>
<link wikidata="Q317617" start="30609" end="30625" title="currency reserve" label="currency reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="30696" end="30708" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="30808" end="30819" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="30940" end="30953" title="conservativism" label="conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q218303" start="30959" end="30977" title="Independence Party (Iceland)" label="Independence Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="31015" end="31031" title="social democracy" label="social democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753703" start="31037" end="31060" title="Social Democratic Party (Iceland)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="31097" end="31107" title="socialism" label="socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974972" start="31109" end="31152" title="People&amp;#x27;s Unity Party – Socialist Party" label="People&amp;#x27;s Unity Party – Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q175850" start="31456" end="31474" title="standard of living" label="standard of living"/>
<link wikidata="Q187021" start="31556" end="31569" title="fiscal policy" label="fiscal policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83937" start="31583" end="31592" title="Keynesian economics" label="Keynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="31679" end="31696" title="developed country" label="developed country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983653" start="31803" end="31824" title="currency manipulation" label="currency manipulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170693" start="32311" end="32319" title="Keflavík" label="Keflavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="32479" end="32483" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481304" start="32626" end="32651" title="1949 anti-NATO riot in Iceland" label="anti-NATO riot in Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="32679" end="32689" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q922019" start="33112" end="33120" title="GIUK gap" label="GIUK gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="33485" end="33501" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q15751723" start="33716" end="33747" title="Scandinavian Journal of History" label="Scandinavian Journal of History"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851939" start="34535" end="34565" title="militarized interstate dispute" label="militarized interstate dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q170693" start="35342" end="35350" title="Keflavík" label="Keflavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q5985704" start="35402" end="35457" title="Iceland in the Cold War" label="Iceland&amp;#x27;s strategic importance during the Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q218303" start="36049" end="36067" title="Independence Party (Iceland)" label="Independence Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q298030" start="36076" end="36089" title="Davíð Oddsson" label="Davíð Oddsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753703" start="36130" end="36146" title="Social Democratic Party (Iceland)" label="Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="36293" end="36315" title="European Economic Area" label="European Economic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900936" start="36369" end="36386" title="chronic inflation" label="chronic inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046777" start="36484" end="36501" title="Progressive Party (Iceland)" label="Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q493719" start="36617" end="36628" title="Síminn" label="Landssíminn"/>
<link wikidata="Q208879" start="37187" end="37205" title="Halldór Ásgrímsson" label="Halldór Ásgrímsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q202032" start="37299" end="37313" title="Geir H. Haarde" label="Geir H. Haarde"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="37646" end="37650" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q190029" start="37665" end="37675" title="Kosovo War" label="Kosovo War"/>
<link wikidata="Q115959594" start="37710" end="37734" title="Coalition of the willing" label="Coalition of the willing"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="37746" end="37767" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656151" start="37866" end="37889" title="Icelandic Defence Force" label="Icelandic Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q29251" start="37924" end="37935" title="McDonnell Douglas F-15 Eagle" label="F-15&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481748" start="37990" end="38007" title="Keflavík Air Base" label="Keflavík Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636250" start="38123" end="38132" title="2007 Icelandic parliamentary election" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141127" start="38247" end="38273" title="Social Democratic Alliance" label="Social Democratic Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137483" start="38320" end="38354" title="2008–2011 Icelandic financial crisis" label="Icelandic banking system collapsed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="38403" end="38430" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130754" start="38667" end="38686" title="Left-Green Movement" label="Left-Green Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q57772" start="38713" end="38735" title="Jóhanna Sigurðardóttir" label="Jóhanna Sigurðardóttir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574320" start="38798" end="38804" title="closeted" label="openly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="38805" end="38815" title="homosexual orientation" label="homosexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656185" start="39059" end="39074" title="Icesave dispute" label="Icesave dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q57772" start="39476" end="39498" title="Jóhanna Sigurðardóttir" label="Jóhanna Sigurðardóttir"/>
<link wikidata="Q218303" start="39645" end="39663" title="Independence Party (Iceland)" label="Independence Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046777" start="39709" end="39726" title="Progressive Party (Iceland)" label="Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813845" start="39740" end="39749" title="2013 Icelandic parliamentary election" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q879376" start="39827" end="39846" title="Bjarni Benediktsson (born 1970)" label="Bjarni Benediktsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019160" start="39926" end="39939" title="Bright Future (Iceland)" label="Bright Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q28454452" start="40042" end="40050" title="2017 Icelandic parliamentary election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q467464" start="40073" end="40092" title="Katrín Jakobsdóttir" label="Katrín Jakobsdóttir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130754" start="40162" end="40181" title="Left-Green Movement" label="Left-Green Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q24045706" start="40263" end="40284" title="Guðni Th. Jóhannesson" label="Guðni Th. Jóhannesson"/>
<link wikidata="Q80557242" start="40394" end="40415" title="2020 Icelandic presidential election" label="presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q97694916" start="40447" end="40455" title="2021 Icelandic parliamentary election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q24494577" start="40786" end="40803" title="Halla Tómasdóttir" label="Halla Tomasdottir"/>
<link wikidata="Q106749042" start="40831" end="40839" title="2024 Icelandic presidential election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141127" start="40919" end="40945" title="Social Democratic Alliance" label="Social Democratic Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q109385503" start="40976" end="40989" title="2024 Icelandic parliamentary election" label="snap election"/>
<link wikidata="Q108856371" start="41017" end="41038" title="Kristrún Frostadóttir" label="Kristrun Frostadottir"/>
<link wikidata="Q85851447" start="41394" end="41409" title="Gunnar Karlsson" label="Gunnar Karlsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q62389" start="41767" end="41783" title="Icelandic Commonwealth" label="Old Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409498" start="42888" end="42905" title="Urgesellschaft" label="primitive society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857592" start="43109" end="43136" title="Military history of Iceland" label="Military history of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154893" start="43139" end="43158" title="Politics of Iceland" label="Politics of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188924" start="43161" end="43181" title="President of Iceland" label="President of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19190022" start="43184" end="43209" title="Prime Minister of Iceland" label="Prime Minister of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966953" start="43212" end="43241" title="Timeline of Icelandic history" label="Timeline of Icelandic history"/>
<link wikidata="Q27816" start="43648" end="43678" title="University of California Press" label="University of California Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814982" start="44799" end="44826" title="University of Chicago Press" label="University of Chicago Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64579" wikidata="Q678377" url="?curid=64579" title="Geography of Iceland">
<text>Iceland is an island country at the confluence of the North Atlantic and Arctic oceans, east of Greenland and immediately south of the Arctic Circle, atop the constructive boundary of the northern Mid-Atlantic Ridge. The island country is the world&#x27;s 18th largest in area and one most sparsely populated. It is the westernmost European country when not including Greenland and has more land covered by glaciers than continental Europe. Its total size is and possesses an exclusive economic zone of .

== Statistics ==
Iceland is an island country in Northern Europe, straddling the Eurasian and North American plates between the Greenland Sea and the North Atlantic Ocean, northwest of the British Isles.

Extent (locations outside mainland in parentheses)
:North: Rifstangi, 66°32′3&quot; N (Kolbeinsey, 67°08,9 N)
:South: Kötlutangi, 63°23′6&quot; N (Surtsey, 63°17,7 N)
:West: Bjargtangar, 24°32′1&quot; W
:East: Gerpir, 13°29′6&quot; W (Hvalbakur, 13°16,6 W)

Area: 
:&quot;Total&quot;: 
:&quot;Land&quot;: 100,329 km2
:&quot;Water&quot;: 2,796 km2
; Coastline: Iceland has a coastline of 4,970 km.

Maritime claims: 
:&quot;Territorial sea&quot;: 
:&quot;Exclusive economic zone&quot;: with 
:&quot;Continental shelf&quot;: or to the edge of the continental margin

Elevation extremes: 
:&quot;Lowest point&quot;: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
:&quot;Highest point&quot;: Hvannadalshnúkur 2,110 m

Natural resources:
:Marine life, diatomite, hydropower, geothermal power

== Land use ==
:&quot;Arable land:&quot; 1.21%
:&quot;Permanent crops&quot;: 0%
:&quot;Other&quot;: 98.79% (2012)
; Total renewable water resources
: 170 km3 (2011)
; Freshwater withdrawal (domestic/industrial/agricultural)
:&quot;Total&quot;: 0.17 km3/yr (49%/8%/42%)
:&quot;Per capita&quot;: 539.2 m3/yr (2005)
; Natural hazards
:Volcanism, earthquakes, avalanches, and glacial lake outburst flooding (or &quot;jökulhlaups&quot;)
; Environment—current issues
:Water pollution from fertilizer runoff; inadequate wastewater treatment

== Physical geography ==
Iceland consists of eight geographical regions, Capital Region, Southern Peninsula, West, Westfjords, Northwest, Northeast, East and South. Twenty per cent of the land is used for grazing, while only one per cent is cultivated. Iceland has lost most of the woodland that previously covered large areas of the country, but an ambitious reforestation program is currently underway. Fossilized tree pollen and descriptions by the early settlers indicate that prior to human settlement, now thought to have occurred from around AD 800 onwards, trees covered between thirty and forty per cent of the island. Today, however, there are only small patches of the original birch forests left, the most prominent being Hallormsstaðaskógur and Vaglaskógur. The country of Iceland contains 36 islands. The longest river on the island is Þjórsá at . Iceland has three national parks: Vatnajökull National Park, Snæfellsjökull National Park, and Þingvellir National Park. The inhabited areas are on the coast, particularly in the southwest, while the central highlands are all but uninhabited. The island&#x27;s terrain is mostly plateau interspersed with mountain peaks, icefields and a coast deeply indented by bays and fjords.

=== Highlands ===

The Highlands make up about half of Iceland&#x27;s land area, which is of recent volcanic origin and consists of a mountainous lava desert (highest elevation above sea level) and other wastelands. The area is mostly uninhabited and uninhabitable.

=== Westfjords ===
The Westfjords region is composed of a large, mountainous peninsula on Iceland&#x27;s northwestern coast. The coastline is marked by numerous fjords as its name suggests. The peninsula contains Iceland&#x27;s northernmost glacier, Drangajökull.

=== Southern Peninsula ===
The Southern Peninsula, also known as the Reykjanes Peninsula, is located in the southwestern corner of Iceland. The area contains little vegetation because of active volcanism and large lava fields. There are hot springs and sulphur springs in the southern portion of the peninsula, in the Kleifarvatn lake and the Krýsuvík geothermal area.

=== Capital Region ===
Home to Iceland&#x27;s capital, Reykjavík, the Capital Region is the most densely populated area in Iceland. It is located on the southwest coast of the island near the Southern Peninsula. The majority of Reykjavík is located on the Seltjarnarnes peninsula. Mount Esja, at 914 metres (2,999 ft), is the highest mountain in the vicinity of Reykjavík. Several natural harbours exist and provide good fishing grounds.

=== West ===
Located in the western portion of the island and north of the Capital Region. In Hvalfjörður fjord rests the second-tallest waterfall in Iceland, Glymur. West is also home to Borgarfjörður, a fjord with volcanic activity such as Deildartunguhver, a powerful hotspring. The Hafnarfjall Mountain rises over the landscape.

=== South ===
The southern portion of Iceland contains some of its most notable volcanoes such as Hekla, Eldgjá, and Katla. Alongside the volcanoes exist numerous glaciers such as Vatnajökull, Mýrdalsjökull, and Eyjafjallajökull. Basalt columns and black sand beaches are examples of the volcanic activity of the area. The area also contains mountain ranges and Iceland&#x27;s highest peak, Hvannadalshnjúkur, as well as the Vestmannaeyjar (Westman Islands) archipelago.

=== East ===
East Iceland contains the majority of the island&#x27;s vegetation and birch forests.

=== Atlantic ===
Atlantic contains large amounts of ice.

=== Glaciers ===

Around 10.2 per cent of the total land area is covered by glaciers, although these are retreating at an accelerating rate. The four largest Icelandic glaciers are:

*Hofsjökull (827 km2)
*Langjökull (868 km2)
*Mýrdalsjökull (542 km2)
*Vatnajökull (7,764 km2)

Other notable glaciers include:

*Drangajökull (145 km2)
*Eiríksjökull (21 km2)
*Eyjafjallajökull (70 km2)
*Snæfellsjökull (10 km2).
*Tindfjallajökull (11 km2)
*Torfajökull (10 km2)
*Tungnafellsjökull (33 km2)
*Þórisjökull (25 km2)
*Þrándarjökull (16 km2)

== Climate ==
Because of the moderating influence of the North Atlantic Current, the climate is temperate and characterized by damp, cool summers and relatively mild but windy winters. Reykjavík has an average temperature of in July and in January It has a Köppen Climate Classification of Subpolar oceanic climate (&quot;Cfc&quot;) with most of the island classified as Tundra (&quot;ET&quot;).

==Geology==

Iceland has extensive volcanic and geothermal activity. The rift associated with the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, which marks the division between the Eurasian Plate and North American tectonic plates, runs across Iceland from the southwest to the northeast. This geographic feature is prominent at the Þingvellir National Park, where the promontory creates an extraordinary natural amphitheatre. The site was the home of Iceland&#x27;s parliament, the Alþing, which was first convened in 930. It is a common misconception that Þingvellir is at the juncture between the North American and Eurasian continental plates. However, they are in fact at the juncture of the North American continental plate and a smaller plate (approx. 10,000 km2) called the Hreppar Microplate (Hreppaflekinn). From 1963 to 1967, the island of Surtsey was created on the southwest coast by a volcanic eruption.

===Geological activity===
A geologically young land, Iceland is located on both the Iceland hotspot and the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, which runs right through it. This location means that the island is highly geologically active with earthquakes and volcanoes, notably Hekla, Eldgjá, Herðubreið and Eldfell. Eyjafjallajökull (1,666 m) erupted in 2010, disrupting European air traffic. To demonstrate the geothermal activity, the Icelandic Meteorological Office said that during a single week in February 2021, around 17,000 earthquakes have hit the southwestern region of Reykjanes.

Iceland has many geysers, including Geysir, from which the English word &quot;geyser&quot; is derived. With the widespread availability of geothermal power, and the harnessing of many rivers and waterfalls for hydroelectricity, most residents have access to inexpensive hot water, heating, and electricity. The island is composed primarily of basalt, a low-silica lava associated with effusive volcanism as has occurred also in Hawaii. Iceland, however, has a variety of volcanic types (composite and fissure), many producing more evolved lavas such as rhyolite and andesite. Iceland has hundreds of volcanoes, with approximately 30 active volcanic systems.

== Environment—international agreements ==
Party to:

:Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution (MARPOL 73/78), Wetlands, Whaling

Signed, but not ratified:

:Environmental Modification, Marine Life Conservation

== Images ==
== Maps ==
==See also==
* Extreme points of Europe
* Highlands of Iceland
* Iceland hotspot
* Iceland plume
* List of earthquakes in Iceland
* List of extreme points of Iceland
* List of fjords of Iceland
* List of islands of Iceland
* List of lakes of Iceland
* List of national parks of Iceland
* List of rivers of Iceland
* List of valleys of Iceland
* List of waterfalls of Iceland
== References ==
==External links==
*Iceland at the CIA World Factbook</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="0" end="7" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q112099" start="14" end="28" title="island country" label="island country"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="54" end="68" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="North Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q788" start="73" end="79" title="Arctic Ocean" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="96" end="105" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q176609" start="135" end="148" title="Arctic Circle" label="Arctic Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150308" start="159" end="180" title="constructive boundary" label="constructive boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q207313" start="197" end="215" title="Mid-Atlantic Ridge" label="Mid-Atlantic Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="256" end="276" title="List of islands by area#Islands" label="18th largest in area"/>
<link wikidata="Q176310" start="290" end="308" title="List of sovereign states and dependent territories by population density" label="sparsely populated"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="407" end="414" title="glacier" label="glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="421" end="439" title="continental Europe" label="continental Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="476" end="499" title="exclusive economic zone" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q132868" start="634" end="647" title="Greenland Sea" label="Greenland Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="695" end="708" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333283" start="770" end="779" title="Rifstangi" label="Rifstangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q430569" start="798" end="808" title="Kolbeinsey" label="Kolbeinsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500264" start="829" end="839" title="Kötlutangi" label="Kötlutangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q178124" start="858" end="865" title="Surtsey" label="Surtsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q879329" start="885" end="896" title="Bjargtangar" label="Bjargtangar"/>
<link wikidata="Q678377" start="921" end="927" title="Gerpir" label="Gerpir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639526" start="946" end="955" title="Hvalbakur" label="Hvalbakur"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="1165" end="1188" title="Exclusive economic zone" label="Exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290577" start="1256" end="1274" title="continental margin" label="continental margin"/>
<link wikidata="Q140084" start="1371" end="1387" title="Hvannadalshnúkur" label="Hvannadalshnúkur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230015" start="1417" end="1428" title="Marine life" label="Marine life"/>
<link wikidata="Q193414" start="1430" end="1439" title="diatomite" label="diatomite"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="1441" end="1451" title="hydropower" label="hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215493" start="1453" end="1469" title="geothermal power" label="geothermal power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935" start="1827" end="1836" title="avalanche" label="avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254417" start="1843" end="1870" title="glacial lake outburst flood" label="glacial lake outburst flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q203304" start="2079" end="2093" title="Capital Region (Iceland)" label="Capital Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239189" start="2211" end="2218" title="grazing" label="grazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q815818" start="2366" end="2379" title="reforestation" label="reforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25243" start="2695" end="2700" title="birch" label="birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q787618" start="2740" end="2759" title="Hallormsstaðaskógur" label="Hallormsstaðaskógur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474041" start="2764" end="2775" title="Vaglaskógur" label="Vaglaskógur"/>
<link wikidata="Q207136" start="2856" end="2862" title="Þjórsá" label="Þjórsá"/>
<link wikidata="Q375678" start="2880" end="2900" title="List of national parks of Iceland" label="three national parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353292" start="2902" end="2927" title="Vatnajökull National Park" label="Vatnajökull National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315012" start="2929" end="2943" title="Snæfellsjökull" label="Snæfellsjökull"/>
<link wikidata="Q107370" start="2963" end="2973" title="Þingvellir" label="Þingvellir"/>
<link wikidata="Q291004" start="3271" end="3280" title="Highlands of Iceland" label="Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="3394" end="3398" title="lava" label="lava"/>
<link wikidata="Q727267" start="3538" end="3548" title="Westfjords" label="Westfjords"/>
<link wikidata="Q212768" start="3811" end="3829" title="Southern Peninsula (Iceland)" label="Southern Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q15221453" start="3849" end="3858" title="Reykjanes" label="Reykjanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q505748" start="3974" end="3983" title="volcanism" label="volcanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q177380" start="4017" end="4028" title="hot springs" label="hot springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="4033" end="4040" title="Sulfur" label="sulphur"/>
<link wikidata="Q574165" start="4098" end="4109" title="Kleifarvatn" label="Kleifarvatn"/>
<link wikidata="Q776480" start="4123" end="4131" title="Krýsuvík" label="Krýsuvík"/>
<link wikidata="Q117266912" start="4132" end="4142" title="Geothermal activity" label="geothermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764" start="4205" end="4214" title="Reykjavík" label="Reykjavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q203304" start="4220" end="4234" title="Capital Region (Iceland)" label="Capital Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q214057" start="4406" end="4419" title="Seltjarnarnes" label="Seltjarnarnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q116693" start="4437" end="4441" title="Esja" label="Esja"/>
<link wikidata="Q593040" start="4683" end="4694" title="Hvalfjörður" label="Hvalfjörður"/>
<link wikidata="Q38577" start="4748" end="4754" title="Glymur" label="Glymur"/>
<link wikidata="Q619490" start="4777" end="4790" title="Borgarfjörður" label="Borgarfjörður"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183213" start="4831" end="4847" title="Deildartunguhver" label="Deildartunguhver"/>
<link wikidata="Q575449" start="5172" end="5182" title="black sand" label="black sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q140084" start="5314" end="5331" title="Hvannadalshnjúkur" label="Hvannadalshnjúkur"/>
<link wikidata="Q187251" start="5348" end="5362" title="Vestmannaeyjar" label="Vestmannaeyjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501687" start="5629" end="5637" title="glaciers of Iceland" label="glaciers"/>
<link wikidata="Q554383" start="5737" end="5747" title="Hofsjökull" label="Hofsjökull"/>
<link wikidata="Q737657" start="5759" end="5769" title="Langjökull" label="Langjökull"/>
<link wikidata="Q214818" start="5781" end="5794" title="Mýrdalsjökull" label="Mýrdalsjökull"/>
<link wikidata="Q179734" start="5806" end="5817" title="Vatnajökull" label="Vatnajökull"/>
<link wikidata="Q555948" start="5865" end="5877" title="Drangajökull" label="Drangajökull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310658" start="5889" end="5901" title="Eiríksjökull" label="Eiríksjökull"/>
<link wikidata="Q39651" start="5912" end="5928" title="Eyjafjallajökull" label="Eyjafjallajökull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315012" start="5939" end="5953" title="Snæfellsjökull" label="Snæfellsjökull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432927" start="5965" end="5981" title="Tindfjallajökull" label="Tindfjallajökull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474799" start="5992" end="6003" title="Torfajökull" label="Torfajökull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474806" start="6014" end="6031" title="Tungnafellsjökull" label="Tungnafellsjökull"/>
<link wikidata="Q335883" start="6042" end="6053" title="Þórisjökull" label="Þórisjökull"/>
<link wikidata="Q335712" start="6064" end="6077" title="Þrándarjökull" label="Þrándarjökull"/>
<link wikidata="Q211798" start="6145" end="6167" title="North Atlantic Current" label="North Atlantic Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482145" start="6173" end="6180" title="Climate of Iceland" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="6345" end="6351" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11282196" start="6520" end="6528" title="volcanism of Iceland" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q117266912" start="6533" end="6552" title="geothermal activity" label="geothermal activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q473935" start="6558" end="6562" title="rift" label="rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q188521" start="6640" end="6654" title="Eurasian Plate" label="Eurasian Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q220305" start="6659" end="6673" title="North American Plate" label="North American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="6674" end="6689" title="plate tectonics" label="tectonic plates"/>
<link wikidata="Q107370" start="6792" end="6802" title="Þingvellir" label="Þingvellir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245089" start="6828" end="6838" title="promontory" label="promontory"/>
<link wikidata="Q54831" start="6872" end="6884" title="amphitheatre" label="amphitheatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q131279" start="6942" end="6948" title="Alþing" label="Alþing"/>
<link wikidata="Q178124" start="7310" end="7317" title="Surtsey" label="Surtsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393383" start="7462" end="7477" title="Iceland hotspot" label="Iceland hotspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q269442" start="7707" end="7714" title="2010 eruptions of Eyjafjallajökull" label="erupted"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481337" start="7801" end="7832" title="Icelandic Meteorological Office" label="Icelandic Meteorological Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q15221453" start="7944" end="7953" title="Reykjanes" label="Reykjanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q83471" start="7973" end="7979" title="geyser" label="geyser"/>
<link wikidata="Q216846" start="7992" end="7998" title="Geysir" label="Geysir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215493" start="8095" end="8111" title="geothermal power" label="geothermal power"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="8166" end="8182" title="hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="8299" end="8305" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="8313" end="8319" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="8320" end="8324" title="lava" label="lava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296340" start="8341" end="8359" title="effusive eruption" label="effusive volcanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q190727" start="8509" end="8517" title="rhyolite" label="rhyolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q181908" start="8522" end="8530" title="andesite" label="andesite"/>
<link wikidata="Q331611" start="8670" end="8683" title="Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution" label="Air Pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856099" start="8685" end="8728" title="POP Air Pollution Protocol" label="Air Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants"/>
<link wikidata="Q152805" start="8730" end="8742" title="Convention on Biological Diversity" label="Biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q208645" start="8744" end="8758" title="United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change" label="Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q331520" start="8760" end="8775" title="United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification" label="Desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q191836" start="8777" end="8795" title="CITES" label="Endangered Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069369" start="8797" end="8813" title="Hazardous Wastes" label="Hazardous Wastes"/>
<link wikidata="Q216996" start="8815" end="8829" title="United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea" label="Law of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156234" start="8831" end="8845" title="Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter" label="Marine Dumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q521306" start="8847" end="8863" title="Nuclear Test Ban" label="Nuclear Test Ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q219438" start="8865" end="8887" title="Ozone Layer Protection" label="Ozone Layer Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q651219" start="8905" end="8917" title="MARPOL 73/78" label="MARPOL 73/78"/>
<link wikidata="Q170170" start="8920" end="8928" title="Ramsar Convention" label="Wetlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q42767" start="8930" end="8937" title="Whaling" label="Whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q488546" start="8967" end="8993" title="Environmental Modification" label="Environmental Modification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166287" start="8995" end="9019" title="Marine Life Conservation" label="Marine Life Conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344897" start="9060" end="9084" title="Extreme points of Europe" label="Extreme points of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q291004" start="9087" end="9107" title="Highlands of Iceland" label="Highlands of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393383" start="9110" end="9125" title="Iceland hotspot" label="Iceland hotspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393383" start="9128" end="9141" title="Iceland plume" label="Iceland plume"/>
<link wikidata="Q97258848" start="9144" end="9174" title="List of earthquakes in Iceland" label="List of earthquakes in Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861864" start="9177" end="9210" title="List of extreme points of Iceland" label="List of extreme points of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q592997" start="9213" end="9238" title="List of fjords of Iceland" label="List of fjords of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853767" start="9241" end="9267" title="List of islands of Iceland" label="List of islands of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413579" start="9270" end="9294" title="List of lakes of Iceland" label="List of lakes of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q375678" start="9297" end="9330" title="List of national parks of Iceland" label="List of national parks of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q733416" start="9333" end="9358" title="List of rivers of Iceland" label="List of rivers of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644547" start="9361" end="9387" title="List of valleys of Iceland" label="List of valleys of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296764" start="9390" end="9419" title="List of waterfalls of Iceland" label="List of waterfalls of Iceland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64580" wikidata="Q2001615" url="?curid=64580" title="Demographics of Iceland">
<text>The demographics of Iceland include population density, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

As of 2022, the Icelandic population was just over 376,000. About 86,000 residents (23.7%) were of foreign background.

About 99% of the nation&#x27;s inhabitants live in localities with populations greater than 200, and 64% live in the Capital Region.

==History==

The population of Iceland probably wavered between about 30,000 and 80,000 for most of the time since settlement. Official statistics begin in 1703, since when the population has grown from 50,358 to 376,248 (January 2022).

===Migration===

==== Settlement ====
Most Icelandic people are descendants of Norwegian settlers, and of Gaels from Ireland and Scotland who were brought over as slaves during the settlement of Iceland in the ninth century AD. Recent DNA analysis suggests that about 66 percent of the male settler-era population was of Norse ancestry and that the female population was 60 percent Celtic. Iceland remained extremely homogenous from its settlement era until the twentieth century.

==== Emigration ====
Large numbers of Icelanders began to emigrate from Iceland in the 1850s. It has been estimated that 17,000 Icelanders migrated to North America in the period 1870–1914, and that 2,000 of them moved back to Iceland; this net loss, 15,000, was about 20% of the Icelandic population in 1887. According to historian Gunnar Karlsson, &quot;migration from Iceland is unique in that most went to Canada, whereas from most or all other European countries the majority went to the United States. This was partly due to the late beginning of emigration from Iceland after the Canadian authorities had begun to promote emigration in cooperation with the Allan Line, which already had an agent in Iceland in 1873. Contrary to most European countries, this promotion campaign was successful in Iceland, because emigration was only just about to start from there and Icelandic emigrants had no relatives in the United States to help them take the first steps&quot;.

In the wake of the 2008 Icelandic financial crisis, many Icelanders went to work abroad.

====Immigration====
Before the 1990s, there was little immigration to Iceland, and most of it was from other Scandinavian countries: about 1% of Icelanders in 1900 were of Danish heritage (born either in Denmark or to Danish parents). In the mid-1990s, 95% of Icelanders had parents of Icelandic origin, and 2% of Icelanders were first-generation immigrants (born abroad with both parents and all grandparents foreign-born).

Immigration to Iceland rose rapidly in the late twentieth century, encouraged by Iceland&#x27;s accession to the European Economic Area in 1994, its entry into the Schengen Agreement in 2001, and the country&#x27;s economic boom in the early twenty-first century. The largest ethnic minority is Poles, who are about a third of the immigrant population. In 2017, 10.6% of the people were first-generation immigrants.

Iceland is also developing relatively small populations of religious minorities, including Catholics (about 15,000 in 2020, 4.02% of Icelanders), Baháʼís (about 400 in 2010), Jews (about 250 in 2018), Buddhists (about 1,500 in 2021), Muslims (about 1,300 in 2015), and Eastern Orthodox (about 995 in 2024).

Research on the experience of immigrants to Iceland is in its early days. There is some evidence that racism is not as acute in Iceland as in neighbouring countries. But, while it is popularly believed in Iceland that racism does not exist there, there is evidence that in some respects immigrant populations experience prejudice and inequalities. For example, Iceland has a higher dropout rate from upper secondary school among young immigrants than the EEA average.

Iceland does not formally collect data on the ethnicity or racial identification of its citizens, but does collect data of the origin and background group by birth.

===Migration data===


Due to a shortage of labor, immigration to Iceland will most likely increase in the future. As of 2024, immigrants made up over 18% of Iceland&#x27;s total population.

== Patronymy ==

Most Icelandic names are based on patronymy, and consist of the given name(s) followed by the father&#x27;s first given name (in the genitive case), followed by &quot;son&quot; or &quot;daughter&quot;. For example, Magnús and Anna, children of a man named Pétur Jónsson, would have the full names Magnús Pétursson and Anna Pétursdóttir, respectively. Magnús&#x27;s daughter Sigríður Ásta would be Sigríður Ásta Magnúsdóttir, and would remain so for the rest of her life regardless of marriage. An Icelandic patronymic is essentially only a designation of fatherhood, and is therefore redundant in Icelandic social life except to differentiate people of the same first name the phone directory, for example, lists people by their given name first, patronymic second. Thus it has little in common with surnames in other countries except for its position after the given name. It is legally possible in Iceland to use a matronymic instead of a patronymic, using the mother&#x27;s name instead of the father&#x27;s. Use of the patronymic system is required by law, except for descendants of those who acquired family names before 1913 (about 10% of the population). One notable Icelander with an inherited family name is football star Eiður Smári Guðjohnsen.

== Urbanisation ==

According to University of Iceland economists Davíd F. Björnsson and Gylfi Zoega, &quot;The policies of the colonial masters in Copenhagen delayed urbanisation. The Danish king maintained a monopoly in trade with Iceland from 1602 until 1855, which made the price of fish artificially low – the price of fish was higher in Britain – and artificially raised the price of agricultural products. Instead, Denmark bought the fish caught from Iceland at below world market prices. Although the trade monopoly ended in 1787, Icelanders could not trade freely with other countries until 1855. Following trade liberalisation, there was a substantial increase in fish exports to Britain, which led to an increase in the number of sailing ships used in fishing, introduced for the first time in 1780. The growth of the fishing industry then created demand for capital, and in 1885 Parliament created the first state bank (Landsbanki). In 1905 came the first motorised fishing vessel, which marked an important step in the development of a specialised fishing industry in Iceland. Iceland exported fresh fish to Britain and salted cod to southern Europe, with Portugal an important export market. Fishing replaced agriculture as the country’s main industry. These developments set the stage for the urbanisation that was to follow in the twentieth century.&quot;

A 2017 study looking at individuals going to the capital area for higher education found that &quot;Only about one in three University of Iceland students from regions beyond commuting distance return after graduation, while about half remain in the capital area and others mostly emigrate.&quot;
== Religion ==
In 2016, 71.6% of the population belonged to the state church (the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Iceland), approximately 5% in free churches, 3.7% to the Roman Catholic Church, approximately 1% to the &quot;Ásatrúarfélagið&quot; (a legally recognized revival of the pre-Christian religion of Iceland), approximately 1% to Zuism, 8% in unrecognized or unspecified religious groups, and 9% do not belong to any religious group.

== Icelandic National Registry ==

All living Icelanders, as well as all foreign citizens with permanent residence in Iceland, have a personal identification number (&quot;kennitala&quot;) identifying them in the National Registry. This number is composed of 10 digits, whereof the first six are made up of the individual&#x27;s birth date in the format DDMMYY. The next two digits are chosen at random when the &quot;kennitala&quot; is allocated, the 9th digit is a check digit, and the last digit indicates the period of one hundred years in which the individual was born (for instance, &#x27;9&#x27; for the period 1900–1999). An example would be 120192-3389. While similar, all-inclusive personal registries exist in other countries, the use of the national registry is unusually extensive in Iceland. It is worth noting that the completeness of the National Registry eliminates any need for census to be performed.

== Summary of vital statistics since 1900 ==
Data according to Statistics Iceland, which collects the official statistics for Iceland.



===Current vital statistics===


===Structure of the population===

===Population projection===

=== Life expectancy ===


Source: &quot;UN World Population Prospects&quot;

== CIA World Factbook demographic statistics ==
The following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.

;Age structure:
&quot;0–14 years:&quot;
19.8% (male 36,692/female 35,239)
&quot;15–64 years:&quot;
63.2% (male 116,210/female 113,810)
&quot;65 years and over:&quot;
17.1% (male 29,366/female 32,719) (2024 est.)

;Sex ratio:
&quot;at birth:&quot;
1.05 males: 1 female
&quot;under 15 years:&quot;
1.04 males: 1 female

&quot;15–64 years:&quot;
1.02 males: 1 female
&quot;65 years and over:&quot;
0.9 males: 1 female
&quot;total population:&quot;
1 male: 1 female (2024 est.)

;Maternal mortality rate:
3 deaths/100,000 live births (2020 est.)

;Infant mortality rate:
1.6 deaths/1,000 live births (2024 est.)

;Life expectancy at birth:
&quot;total population:&quot;
84 years
&quot;male:&quot;
81.8 years
&quot;female:&quot;
86.3 years (2024 est.)

;Health expenditures:
9.6% of GDP (2020)

;Physicians density:
4.14 physicians/1,000 population (2019)

;Obesity adult prevalence rate:
21.9% (2016)

;Education expenditures:
7.7% of GDP (2020 est.)

;Mother&#x27;s mean age at first birth:
28.7 (2020 est.)

;Nationality:
&quot;noun:&quot;
Icelander(s)
&quot;adjective:&quot;
Icelandic

;Ethnic groups:
78.7% Icelandic, 5.8% Polish, 1% Danish, 1% Ukrainian, 13.5% other (2024 est.)

;Religions:
Evangelical Lutheran Church of Iceland (official) 58.6%, Roman Catholic 3.8%, Independent Congregation of Reykjavik 2.6%, Independent Congregation of Hafnarfjordur 1.9%, Pagan Worship 1.5%, Icelandic Ethical Humanist Association 1.4%, other or unspecified 18.7%, none 7.7% (2024 est.)

;Languages:
Icelandic (English and a second Nordic language, Danish by default, are also a part of the Icelandic compulsory education).

==References==
==External links==
* the national statistical institute of Iceland
* A 2012 report by the Ministry of Welfare on migration to and from Iceland 1961–2011.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2001615" start="4" end="27" title="Demographics of Iceland" label="demographics of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="36" end="54" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q203304" start="412" end="426" title="Capital Region (Iceland)" label="Capital Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q191356" start="710" end="726" title="Icelandic people" label="Icelandic people"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="746" end="755" title="Norway" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q692312" start="773" end="778" title="Gaels" label="Gaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="784" end="791" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="796" end="804" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725768" start="848" end="869" title="settlement of Iceland" label="settlement of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="1300" end="1313" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137483" start="2142" end="2173" title="2008 Icelandic financial crisis" label="2008 Icelandic financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q164714" start="2385" end="2391" title="Danes" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="2752" end="2774" title="European Economic Area" label="European Economic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822795" start="2803" end="2821" title="Schengen Agreement" label="Schengen Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5985822" start="2854" end="2901" title="Icelandic outvasion" label="economic boom in the early twenty-first century"/>
<link wikidata="Q11821999" start="2934" end="2939" title="Polish immigrants in Iceland" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187861" start="3147" end="3156" title="Catholic Church in Iceland" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4842998" start="3202" end="3209" title="Baháʼí Faith in Iceland" label="Baháʼís"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505848" start="3231" end="3235" title="History of the Jews in Iceland" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000859" start="3257" end="3266" title="Buddhism in Iceland" label="Buddhists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661424" start="3290" end="3297" title="Islam in Iceland" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q110874" start="4242" end="4251" title="patronymic" label="patronymy"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="4341" end="4354" title="genitive case" label="genitive case"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076664" start="5125" end="5135" title="matronymic" label="matronymic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="5425" end="5433" title="football (soccer)" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q187396" start="5439" end="5461" title="Eiður Guðjohnsen" label="Eiður Smári Guðjohnsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q196559" start="5497" end="5518" title="University of Iceland" label="University of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q196559" start="6961" end="6982" title="University of Iceland" label="University of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413245" start="7198" end="7210" title="National Church of Iceland" label="state church"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="7216" end="7227" title="Evangelicalism" label="Evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="7228" end="7243" title="Lutheran Church" label="Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q426043" start="7277" end="7288" title="free church" label="free church"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="7304" end="7318" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717028" start="7357" end="7372" title="Ásatrúarfélagið" label="Ásatrúarfélagið"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="7420" end="7429" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q21686687" start="7472" end="7477" title="Zuism" label="Zuism"/>
<link wikidata="Q191356" start="7623" end="7633" title="Icelanders" label="Icelanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q674050" start="7711" end="7741" title="personal identification number" label="personal identification number"/>
<link wikidata="Q3782407" start="8561" end="8579" title="Statistics Iceland" label="Statistics Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="8908" end="8926" title="CIA World Factbook" label="CIA World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q294" start="10448" end="10457" title="Icelandic language" label="Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="10459" end="10466" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="10497" end="10503" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q511009" start="10549" end="10569" title="compulsory education" label="compulsory education"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64581" wikidata="Q1154893" url="?curid=64581" title="Politics of Iceland">
<text>The politics of Iceland take place in the framework of a parliamentary representative democratic republic, whereby the president is the head of state, while the prime minister of Iceland serves as the head of government in a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the parliament, the Althingi. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.

Iceland is arguably the world&#x27;s oldest assembly democracy, and has been rated as a &quot;full democracy&quot; in 2021.

==Executive branch==

|President
|Halla Tómasdóttir
|Independent
|1 August 2024
|Prime Minister
|Kristrún Frostadóttir
|Social Democratic Alliance
|21 December 2024

Elected to a four-year term, the President has limited powers and is poised in a largely ceremonial office that serves as a diplomat and figurehead.
On 1 August 2024, Halla Tómasdóttir was elected as the current President.

The prime minister and cabinet exercise most executive functions. The head of government is the prime minister, who, together with the cabinet, takes care of the executive part of government. The cabinet is appointed by the president after general elections to Althing; however, this process is usually conducted by the leaders of the political parties, who decide among themselves after discussions which parties can form the cabinet and how its seats are to be distributed (under the condition that it has majority support in Althing). Only when the party leaders are unable to reach a conclusion by themselves in reasonable time does the president exercise this power and appoint the cabinet themselves. This has never happened since the republic was founded in 1944, but in 1942 the regent of the country (Sveinn Björnsson, who had been installed in that position by the Althing in 1941) appointed a non-parliamentary government. The regent had, for all practical purposes, the position of a president, and Sveinn in fact became the country&#x27;s first president in 1944. The governments of Iceland have almost always been coalitions with two or more parties involved because no single political party has received a majority of seats in the Althing during Iceland&#x27;s republican period. The extent of the political powers possessed by the office of the president is disputed by legal scholars in Iceland; several provisions of the constitution appear to give the president some important powers but other provisions and traditions suggest differently.

The president is elected every four years (last 2024), the cabinet is elected every four years (last 2021) and town council elections are held every four years (last 2022).

==Legislative branch==
The modern parliament, called the &quot;Althing&quot; or &quot;&quot;, was founded in 1845 as an advisory body to the Danish king. It was widely seen as a re-establishment of the assembly founded in 930 in the Commonwealth period and suspended in 1799. The Althing is composed of 63 members, elected every 4 years unless it is dissolved sooner. Suffrage for presidential and parliamentary elections is 18 years of age and is universal. Members of the Althing are elected on the basis of proportional representation from six constituencies. Until 1991, membership of the Althing was divided between a lower and upper house but this was changed to a fully unicameral system.

==Political parties and the elections==

After four four-year terms as the world&#x27;s first elected woman president, the widely popular Vigdís Finnbogadóttir chose not to run for re-election in 1996. More than 86% of voters turned out in the 29 June 1996 presidential elections to give former leftist party chairman Ólafur Ragnar Grímsson a 41% plurality and relatively comfortable 12% victory margin over the closest of three other candidates. Traditionally limited to 6–12 weeks, Iceland&#x27;s campaign season was marked by several intensely personal attacks on Ólafur Ragnar, a former finance minister who tried to erase memories of his controversial support of inflationary policies and opposition to the U.S. military presence at the NATO base in Keflavík. Ólafur Ragnar successfully used his largely ceremonial office to promote Icelandic trade abroad and family values at home. The last presidential elections took place on 27 June 2020.

The last parliamentary elections took place on 25 September 2021. A three-party coalition was formed following the 2017 parliamentary elections by the Independence Party (&quot;Sjálfstæðisflokkurinn&quot;), the Progressive Party (&quot;Framsóknarflokkurinn&quot;) and the Left-Green Movement (&quot;Vinstrihreyfingin – grænt framboð&quot;). These political parties were again the three largest in Iceland after the latest elections and subsequently continued the coalition for another term. This was the first time since 2009 in which existing coalition is renewed in Iceland. A total of 203,898 votes were cast consulting 80.1% of the 254,681 electorates.

==Political history==

===1990s===
In losing four seats in April 1995 parliamentary elections, the IP and SDP (so-called &quot;Viðey government&quot;) mustered a simple majority in the 63-seat Althing. However, Prime Minister and IP leader Davíð Oddsson chose the resurgent Progressive Party (PP) as a more conservative partner to form a stronger and more stable majority with 40 seats. Splintered by factionalism over the economy and Iceland&#x27;s role in the European Union (EU), the SDP also suffered from being the only party to support Iceland&#x27;s EU membership application.

===2000s - 2010s===
The beginning of the millennium saw a merger of all the left parties to form the Social Democratic Alliance. Some members chose to join another new left party instead, the Left-Green Movement. After the PP&#x27;s loss in the 2007 elections its longstanding alliance with the IP ended despite still being able to form a majority. Instead, the IP&#x27;s leader Geir Haarde chose a stronger but somewhat unstable coalition with the Social Democrats (the Þingvellir government).

Geir&#x27;s administration fell apart in January 2009 and he called for an early election before standing down as party leader. The Social Democrats subsequently formed an interim government with the LGM. In the resulting election, Jóhanna Sigurðardóttir&#x27;s administration prevailed, the first time Icelanders voted for a majority left-wing government.

After the 2008 financial crisis, there has been an increasing fractionalization of the Icelandic party system. The increase in the number of parties has made it harder for coalition governments to form. What&#x27;s more, since the initial resignation of the government in January 2009 after the banking collapse, revelations of subsequent political scandals have resulted in the government collapsing in 2016, following the Panama Papers, and again in 2017, following revelations of impropriety within the ranks of the political class; both instances culminated in anti-government protests being staged. Organized protests held to highlight and challenge political corruption since 2008 have therefore come to stress the necessity for the new Icelandic constitution that was co-drafted by the 2009 leftist government and select members of the public to be enshrined into law.
=== 2020s ===
After the 2021 parliamentary election, the new government was, just like the previous government, a tri-party coalition of the Independence Party, the Progressive Party and the Left-Green Movement, headed by Prime Minister Katrín Jakobsdóttir. In April 2024, Bjarni Benediktsson of the Independence party succeeded Katrín Jakobsdóttir as prime minister. In November 2024, centre-left Social Democratic Alliance became the biggest party in a snap election, meaning Social Democratic Kristrun Frostadottir became the next Prime Minister of Iceland.

==Judicial branch==
The judiciary consists of the Supreme Court (Hæstiréttur) and district courts. Justices are appointed for life by the minister of justice. The Constitution protects the judiciary from infringement by the other two branches.

==Administrative divisions==
Iceland is divided into 8 regions, which are further subdivided into 77 municipalities.

Until 1988, Iceland was divided in 23 counties (&quot;sýslur&quot;, singular &quot;sýsla&quot;) and 14 independent towns* (&quot;kaupstaðir&quot;, singular &quot;kaupstaður&quot;); Akranes*, Akureyri*, Árnessýsla, Austur-Barðastrandarsýsla, Austur-Húnavatnssýsla, Austur-Skaftafellssýsla, Borgarfjarðarsýsla, Dalasýsla, Eyjafjarðarsýsla, Gullbringusýsla, Hafnarfjörður*, Húsavík*, Ísafjörður*, Keflavík*, Kjósarsýsla, Kópavogur*, Mýrasýsla, Neskaupstaður*, Norður-Ísafjarðarsýsla, Norður-Múlasýsla, Norður-Þingeyjarsýsla, Ólafsfjörður*, Rangárvallasýsla, Reykjavík*, Sauðárkrókur*, Seyðisfjörður*, Siglufjörður*, Skagafjarðarsýsla, Snæfellsnes- og Hnappadalssýsla, Strandasýsla, Suður-Múlasýsla, Suður-Þingeyjarsýsla, Vestmannaeyjar*, Vestur-Barðastrandarsýsla, Vestur-Húnavatnssýsla, Vestur-Ísafjarðarsýsla, Vestur-Skaftafellssýsla

==International organization participation==

Arctic Council, Australia Group, BIS, CBSS, CE, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, EFTA, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICCt, ICC, ICRM, IDA, IEA (observer), IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, ITUC, NATO, NC, NEA, NIB, OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNMIK, UNU, UPU, WCO, WEU (associate), WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

== See also ==

* List of Icelandic ministries
* election history
* Icelandic constitutional reform, 2010–13

==Further reading==

* Baldur Thorhallsson (ed.). 2018. &quot;Small States and Shelter Theory: Iceland&#x27;s External Affairs&quot;. Routledge.
* Baldur Thorhallsson (ed.). 2021. &quot;Iceland&#x27;s Shelter-Seeking Behavior: From Settlement to Republic&quot;. Cornell University Library
* Gunnar Helgi Kristinsson. 2007. &quot;Íslenska stjórnkerfið&quot;. Háskólaútgáfan.
* Gunnar Helgi Kristinsson. 2021. &quot;Elítur og valdakerfi á Íslandi.&quot; Háskólaútgáfan.
* Hulda Thórisdóttir, Ólafur Th. Harðarson, Eva H. Önnudóttir, and Agnar Freyr Helgason. 2021. &quot;Electoral Politics in Crisis After the Great Recession: Change, Fluctuations and Stability in Iceland&quot;. Routledge.

==References==
==External links==
* Government Offices of Iceland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1154893" start="4" end="23" title="Politics of Iceland" label="politics of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="57" end="70" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="71" end="96" title="representative democracy" label="representative democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="97" end="105" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188924" start="119" end="128" title="President of Iceland" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="136" end="149" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q19190022" start="161" end="186" title="prime minister of Iceland" label="prime minister of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="201" end="219" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="225" end="243" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="245" end="260" title="Executive (government)" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="293" end="310" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="333" end="343" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q131279" start="368" end="376" title="Althingi" label="Althingi"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="382" end="391" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="446" end="453" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q387834" start="490" end="508" title="assembly democracy" label="assembly democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188924" start="594" end="603" title="President of Iceland" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q24494577" start="605" end="622" title="Halla Tómasdóttir" label="Halla Tómasdóttir"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="624" end="635" title="Independent (politician)" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q19190022" start="652" end="666" title="Prime Minister of Iceland" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q108856371" start="668" end="689" title="Kristrún Frostadóttir" label="Kristrún Frostadóttir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141127" start="691" end="717" title="Social Democratic Alliance" label="Social Democratic Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188924" start="770" end="779" title="President of Iceland" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q24494577" start="904" end="921" title="Halla Tómasdóttir" label="Halla Tómasdóttir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="1031" end="1049" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="1057" end="1071" title="prime minister" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="1123" end="1132" title="executive (government)" label="executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="1141" end="1151" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q131279" start="1222" end="1229" title="Althing" label="Althing"/>
<link wikidata="Q207206" start="1771" end="1787" title="Sveinn Björnsson" label="Sveinn Björnsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q131279" start="2760" end="2767" title="Althing" label="Althing"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="2838" end="2844" title="Denmark" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273134" start="2845" end="2849" title="Danish monarchy" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q62389" start="2930" end="2942" title="Icelandic Commonwealth" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q185387" start="3065" end="3073" title="Suffrage" label="Suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="3374" end="3384" title="unicameral" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q189797" start="3532" end="3553" title="Vigdís Finnbogadóttir" label="Vigdís Finnbogadóttir"/>
<link wikidata="Q57284" start="3712" end="3734" title="Ólafur Ragnar Grímsson" label="Ólafur Ragnar Grímsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="4106" end="4110" title="United States" label="U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="4136" end="4140" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q170693" start="4149" end="4157" title="Keflavík" label="Keflavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q80557242" start="4286" end="4313" title="2020 Icelandic presidential election" label="last presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q97694916" start="4347" end="4375" title="2021 Icelandic parliamentary election" label="last parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q28454452" start="4458" end="4486" title="2017 Icelandic parliamentary election" label="2017 parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q218303" start="4494" end="4512" title="Independence Party (Iceland)" label="Independence Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046777" start="4554" end="4571" title="Progressive Party (Iceland)" label="Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130754" start="4615" end="4634" title="Left-Green Movement" label="Left-Green Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035405" start="5066" end="5094" title="1995 Icelandic parliamentary election" label="1995 parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q218303" start="5100" end="5102" title="Independence Party (Iceland)" label="IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753703" start="5107" end="5110" title="Social Democratic Party (Iceland)" label="SDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q116492" start="5128" end="5133" title="Viðey" label="Viðey"/>
<link wikidata="Q298030" start="5241" end="5254" title="Davíð Oddsson" label="Davíð Oddsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046777" start="5275" end="5292" title="Progressive Party (Iceland)" label="Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="5463" end="5477" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="5662" end="5674" title="Left-wing politics" label="left parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141127" start="5687" end="5713" title="Social Democratic Alliance" label="Social Democratic Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130754" start="5778" end="5797" title="Left-Green Movement" label="Left-Green Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636250" start="5831" end="5845" title="2007 Icelandic parliamentary election" label="2007 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q202032" start="5965" end="5976" title="Geir Haarde" label="Geir Haarde"/>
<link wikidata="Q107370" start="6057" end="6067" title="Þingvellir" label="Þingvellir"/>
<link wikidata="Q574195" start="6294" end="6312" title="2009 Icelandic parliamentary election" label="resulting election"/>
<link wikidata="Q57772" start="6314" end="6336" title="Jóhanna Sigurðardóttir" label="Jóhanna Sigurðardóttir"/>
<link wikidata="Q23702848" start="6864" end="6877" title="Panama Papers" label="Panama Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508765" start="7183" end="7205" title="Icelandic constitution" label="Icelandic constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q97694916" start="7359" end="7367" title="2021 Icelandic parliamentary election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q218303" start="7457" end="7475" title="Independence Party (Iceland)" label="Independence Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046777" start="7481" end="7498" title="Progressive Party (Iceland)" label="Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130754" start="7507" end="7526" title="Left-Green Movement" label="Left-Green Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q467464" start="7553" end="7572" title="Katrín Jakobsdóttir" label="Katrín Jakobsdóttir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141127" start="7714" end="7740" title="Social Democratic Alliance" label="Social Democratic Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q109385503" start="7771" end="7784" title="2024 Icelandic parliamentary election" label="snap election"/>
<link wikidata="Q108856371" start="7812" end="7833" title="Kristrún Frostadóttir" label="Kristrun Frostadottir"/>
<link wikidata="Q135356" start="7943" end="7954" title="Supreme Court of Iceland" label="Hæstiréttur"/>
<link wikidata="Q842100" start="8176" end="8185" title="Regions of Iceland" label="8 regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q955655" start="8221" end="8238" title="Municipalities of Iceland" label="77 municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q107398" start="8422" end="8429" title="Akranes" label="Akranes"/>
<link wikidata="Q29042" start="8432" end="8440" title="Akureyri" label="Akureyri"/>
<link wikidata="Q107024302" start="8443" end="8453" title="Árnessýsla" label="Árnessýsla"/>
<link wikidata="Q107024302" start="8455" end="8480" title="Austur-Barðastrandarsýsla" label="Austur-Barðastrandarsýsla"/>
<link wikidata="Q107024302" start="8482" end="8503" title="Austur-Húnavatnssýsla" label="Austur-Húnavatnssýsla"/>
<link wikidata="Q107024302" start="8505" end="8528" title="Austur-Skaftafellssýsla" label="Austur-Skaftafellssýsla"/>
<link wikidata="Q107024302" start="8530" end="8548" title="Borgarfjarðarsýsla" label="Borgarfjarðarsýsla"/>
<link wikidata="Q921840" start="8550" end="8559" title="Dalasýsla" label="Dalasýsla"/>
<link wikidata="Q107024302" start="8561" end="8577" title="Eyjafjarðarsýsla" label="Eyjafjarðarsýsla"/>
<link wikidata="Q107024302" start="8579" end="8594" title="Gullbringusýsla" label="Gullbringusýsla"/>
<link wikidata="Q103725" start="8596" end="8609" title="Hafnarfjörður" label="Hafnarfjörður"/>
<link wikidata="Q219417" start="8612" end="8619" title="Húsavík" label="Húsavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q106896" start="8622" end="8632" title="Ísafjörður" label="Ísafjörður"/>
<link wikidata="Q170693" start="8635" end="8643" title="Keflavík" label="Keflavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764" start="8646" end="8657" title="Kjósarsýsla" label="Kjósarsýsla"/>
<link wikidata="Q163852" start="8659" end="8668" title="Kópavogur" label="Kópavogur"/>
<link wikidata="Q107024302" start="8671" end="8680" title="Mýrasýsla" label="Mýrasýsla"/>
<link wikidata="Q176728" start="8682" end="8695" title="Neskaupstaður" label="Neskaupstaður"/>
<link wikidata="Q107024302" start="8698" end="8720" title="Norður-Ísafjarðarsýsla" label="Norður-Ísafjarðarsýsla"/>
<link wikidata="Q107024302" start="8722" end="8738" title="Norður-Múlasýsla" label="Norður-Múlasýsla"/>
<link wikidata="Q107024302" start="8740" end="8761" title="Norður-Þingeyjarsýsla" label="Norður-Þingeyjarsýsla"/>
<link wikidata="Q615213" start="8763" end="8775" title="Ólafsfjörður" label="Ólafsfjörður"/>
<link wikidata="Q107024302" start="8778" end="8794" title="Rangárvallasýsla" label="Rangárvallasýsla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764" start="8796" end="8805" title="Reykjavík" label="Reykjavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q831718" start="8808" end="8820" title="Sauðárkrókur" label="Sauðárkrókur"/>
<link wikidata="Q623557" start="8823" end="8836" title="Seyðisfjörður" label="Seyðisfjörður"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887662" start="8839" end="8851" title="Siglufjörður" label="Siglufjörður"/>
<link wikidata="Q107024302" start="8854" end="8871" title="Skagafjarðarsýsla" label="Skagafjarðarsýsla"/>
<link wikidata="Q107024302" start="8873" end="8904" title="Snæfellsnes- og Hnappadalssýsla" label="Snæfellsnes- og Hnappadalssýsla"/>
<link wikidata="Q107024302" start="8906" end="8918" title="Strandasýsla" label="Strandasýsla"/>
<link wikidata="Q107024302" start="8920" end="8935" title="Suður-Múlasýsla" label="Suður-Múlasýsla"/>
<link wikidata="Q107024302" start="8937" end="8957" title="Suður-Þingeyjarsýsla" label="Suður-Þingeyjarsýsla"/>
<link wikidata="Q187251" start="8959" end="8973" title="Vestmannaeyjar" label="Vestmannaeyjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q107024302" start="8976" end="9001" title="Vestur-Barðastrandarsýsla" label="Vestur-Barðastrandarsýsla"/>
<link wikidata="Q107024302" start="9003" end="9024" title="Vestur-Húnavatnssýsla" label="Vestur-Húnavatnssýsla"/>
<link wikidata="Q107024302" start="9026" end="9048" title="Vestur-Ísafjarðarsýsla" label="Vestur-Ísafjarðarsýsla"/>
<link wikidata="Q107024302" start="9050" end="9073" title="Vestur-Skaftafellssýsla" label="Vestur-Skaftafellssýsla"/>
<link wikidata="Q674182" start="9121" end="9135" title="Arctic Council" label="Arctic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q782942" start="9137" end="9152" title="Australia Group" label="Australia Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q309195" start="9154" end="9157" title="Bank for International Settlements" label="BIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q789769" start="9159" end="9163" title="Council of the Baltic Sea States" label="CBSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="9165" end="9167" title="Council of Europe" label="CE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374456" start="9169" end="9173" title="Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council" label="EAPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q488981" start="9175" end="9179" title="European Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="EBRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q659012" start="9181" end="9184" title="United Nations Economic Commission for Europe" label="ECE"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="9186" end="9190" title="European Free Trade Association" label="EFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="9192" end="9195" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="FAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="9197" end="9201" title="International Atomic Energy Agency" label="IAEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q191384" start="9203" end="9207" title="International Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="IBRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="9209" end="9213" title="International Civil Aviation Organization" label="ICAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="9215" end="9219" title="International Criminal Court" label="ICCt"/>
<link wikidata="Q848633" start="9221" end="9224" title="International Chamber of Commerce" label="ICC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="9226" end="9230" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="ICRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q827525" start="9232" end="9235" title="International Development Association" label="IDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q826700" start="9237" end="9240" title="International Energy Agency" label="IEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q656801" start="9253" end="9256" title="International Finance Corporation" label="IFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="9258" end="9263" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="IFRCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q233611" start="9265" end="9268" title="International Hydrographic Organization" label="IHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="9270" end="9273" title="International Labour Organization" label="ILO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="9275" end="9278" title="International Monetary Fund" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q201054" start="9280" end="9283" title="International Maritime Organization" label="IMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666759" start="9285" end="9293" title="International Mobile Satellite Organization" label="Inmarsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="9295" end="9303" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="9305" end="9313" title="Interpol (organization)" label="Interpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="9315" end="9318" title="IOC" label="IOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="9320" end="9323" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="ISO"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="9325" end="9328" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="ITU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071706" start="9330" end="9334" title="International Trade Union Confederation" label="ITUC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="9336" end="9340" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q146165" start="9342" end="9344" title="Nordic Council" label="NC"/>
<link wikidata="Q369760" start="9346" end="9349" title="Nuclear Energy Agency" label="NEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020649" start="9351" end="9354" title="Nordic Investment Bank" label="NIB"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="9356" end="9360" title="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q842490" start="9362" end="9366" title="Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons" label="OPCW"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="9368" end="9372" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="OSCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045198" start="9374" end="9377" title="Permanent Court of Arbitration" label="PCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="9379" end="9381" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q182000" start="9383" end="9389" title="United Nations Conference on Trade and Development" label="UNCTAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="9391" end="9397" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q504557" start="9399" end="9404" title="United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo" label="UNMIK"/>
<link wikidata="Q492442" start="9406" end="9409" title="United Nations University" label="UNU"/>
<link wikidata="Q17495" start="9411" end="9414" title="Universal Postal Union" label="UPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q605326" start="9416" end="9419" title="World Customs Organization" label="WCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q189946" start="9421" end="9424" title="Western European Union" label="WEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="9438" end="9441" title="World Health Organization" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q177773" start="9443" end="9447" title="World Intellectual Property Organization" label="WIPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q170424" start="9449" end="9452" title="World Meteorological Organization" label="WMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="9454" end="9458" title="World Trade Organization" label="WTrO"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821343" start="9478" end="9506" title="List of Icelandic ministries" label="List of Icelandic ministries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091301" start="9528" end="9568" title="Icelandic constitutional reform, 2010–13" label="Icelandic constitutional reform, 2010–13"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64582" wikidata="Q8064" url="?curid=64582" title="Economy of Iceland">
<text>The economy of Iceland is small and subject to high volatility. In 2011, gross domestic product was US$12 billion, but by 2018 it had increased to a nominal GDP of US$27 billion. With a population of 387,000, this is $55,000 per capita, based on purchasing power parity (PPP) estimates. The 2008–2011 Icelandic financial crisis produced a decline in GDP and employment, which has since been reversed entirely by a recovery aided by a tourism boom starting in 2010. Tourism accounted for more than 10% of Iceland&#x27;s GDP in 2017. After a period of robust growth, Iceland&#x27;s economy slowed down according to an economic outlook for the years 2018–2020 published by Arion Research in April of 2018.

Iceland has a mixed economy with high levels of free trade and government intervention. However, government consumption is less than other Nordic countries. Hydro-power is the primary source of home and industrial electrical supply in Iceland.

In the 1990s Iceland undertook extensive free market reforms, which initially produced strong economic growth. As a result, Iceland was rated as having one of the world&#x27;s highest levels of economic freedom as well as civil freedoms. In 2007, Iceland topped the list of nations ranked by Human Development Index and was one of the most egalitarian, according to the calculation provided by the Gini coefficient.

From 2006 onwards, the economy faced problems of growing inflation and current account deficits. Partly in response, and partly as a result of earlier reforms, the financial system expanded rapidly before collapsing entirely in the 2008–2011 Icelandic financial crisis. Iceland had to obtain emergency funding from the International Monetary Fund and a range of European countries in November 2008. The economy has since rebounded since 2010, and continues to grow to this day.
==History==
In medieval Iceland, trade was traditionally conducted through barter. The traditional nationalistic historical narrative says that Iceland had experienced a golden age from 874 until the 11th century, when the country came under foreign rule and &quot;suffered humiliation&quot; as its economy declined. There is very little evidence to support this narrative.

Iceland had among the lowest GDP per capita out of all the Western European countries at the start of the 20th century. An assessment by economists at the Central Bank of Iceland stated that the country&#x27;s &quot;post-World War II economic growth has been both significantly higher and more volatile than in other OECD countries&quot;, and that &quot;the Icelandic business cycle has been largely independent of the business cycle in other industrialised countries.&quot; Iceland has had a total of twenty financial crashes since 1875, according to Reuters.

Fishing became a large part of the Icelandic economy after the 1880s, partly due to expanded fishing with sailing smacks. During the Second World War, the UK imposed trade sanctions on Iceland to prevent them from trading with Germany. After the British and later American occupations of the island, the economy was boosted by a substantial amount, and Iceland went from one of the poorest countries in Europe to one of the wealthiest. This was furthered by Iceland being included as part of the post-WWII Marshall Plan, receiving the largest amount per capita between 1948 and 1951, almost double the amount of the next highest recipient.

Towards the end of the 20th century, Iceland&#x27;s economy continued to grow. A coalition between the Independence and Progressive parties led to the privatization of state-owned banks and telecommunications. Corporate income tax was reduced to 18%, inheritance tax was greatly reduced, and the net wealth tax was completely abolished. The term &quot;Nordic Tiger&quot; became heavily used refer to the period of economic prosperity in Iceland that began in the 1990s.

The &quot;Nordic Tiger&quot; period came to a sudden end as a result of the 2008 financial crisis. Iceland went from being the 10th richest country in the world in 2007 to the 21st in 2010. Banks made risky loans and manipulated markets, with the country&#x27;s regulators understaffed and not properly supervising them. The Icelandic króna underwent sharp inflation, with the three largest banks in the country being placed under government control. Iceland&#x27;s central bank raised its interest rate to 18% in an attempt to combat the inflation.

With help from the International Monetary Fund (IMF), Iceland&#x27;s economy stabilized and managed to pay off all of its loans by the end of 2015. Economists Ásgeir Jónsson and Hersir Sigurjónsson said that &quot;Iceland was treated differently from developing countries and former IMF clients. There was no call for Iceland to adopt sharp austerity measures at the inception of the joint economic plan. Instead, the government would be allowed to maintain large public deficits in the first year – 2009 – allowing fiscal multipliers to counteract the output contraction that was underway. Iceland also was not asked to downsize its Scandinavian-type welfare system.&quot;

==Geography and resources==
Iceland occupies a land area of 103,000 square kilometers. It has a 4,790 kilometer coastline and a 200 nautical mile (370.4 km) exclusive economic zone extending over 758,000 square kilometers of water. Approximately only 0.7% of Iceland&#x27;s surface area is arable, since the island&#x27;s terrain is mostly mountainous and volcanic.

Iceland has few proven mineral resources. In the past, deposits of sulphur have been mined, and diatomite (skeletal algae) was extracted from Lake Mývatn until recently. However, today most sulphur is obtained in the refining of oil. The diatomite plant has closed for environmental reasons. The only natural resource conversion in Iceland is the manufacture of cement. Concrete is widely used as building material, including for all types of residential housing.

By harnessing the abundant hydroelectric and geothermal power sources, Iceland&#x27;s renewable energy industry provides close to 85% of all the nation&#x27;s primary energy – proportionally more than any other country – with 99.9% of Iceland&#x27;s electricity being generated from renewables.

By far the largest of the many Icelandic hydroelectric power stations is Kárahnjúkar Hydropower Plant (690 MW) in the area north of Vatnajökull. Other stations include Búrfell (270 MW), Hrauneyjarfoss (210 MW), Sigalda (150 MW), Blanda (150 MW), and more. Iceland has explored the feasibility of exporting hydroelectric energy via submarine cable to mainland Europe and also actively seeks to expand its power-intensive industries, including aluminium and ferro-silicon smelting plants.

Recent geological research has improved the likelihood of Iceland having sizable off-shore oil reserves within its 200 mile economic zone in the seabed of the Jan Mayen area.

==Sectors==
In 2017 the proportion of Iceland&#x27;s exports was: tourism 42%, seafood 17%, aluminium 16%, other 24%.

===Tourism===

Tourism is Iceland&#x27;s largest export sector by far. Tourism accounted for more than 33% of the country&#x27;s GDP in 2019. Iceland is one of the most tourism-dependent countries on Earth. In October 2017 the tourism sector directly employed around 26,800 people, with the total number of employees in the country being 186,900.

At the start of the growth period around 2010, tourism benefited from a weak ISK, but a strong ISK then cooled down the sector. From 2010 to 2018, tourist arrivals in Iceland increased by 378%.

===Manufacturing===
Iceland is the world&#x27;s largest electricity producer per capita. The presence of abundant electrical power due to Iceland&#x27;s geothermal and hydroelectric energy sources has led to the growth of the manufacturing sector. Power-intensive industries, which are the largest components of the manufacturing sector, produce mainly for export. Manufactured products constituted 36% of all merchandise exports, an increase from the 1997 figure of 22%. Power-intensive products&#x27; share of merchandise exports is 21%, compared to 12% in 1997.

====Aluminium====
Aluminium smelting is the most important power-intensive industry in Iceland. There are currently three plants in operation with a total capacity of over 850,000 metric tons per year (t/yr) in 2019, putting Iceland at 11th place among aluminium-producing nations worldwide.

Rio Tinto Alcan operates Iceland&#x27;s first aluminium smelter (plant name: ISAL), in Straumsvík, near the town of Hafnarfjörður. The plant has been in operation since 1969. Its initial capacity was 33,000 metric tons (t) per year, but it has since been expanded several times and now has a capacity of about 189,000 t/yr.

The second plant started production in 1998 and is operated by Norðurál, a wholly owned subsidiary of U.S.-based Century Aluminum Company. It is located in Grundartangi in Western Iceland near the town of Akranes. Its former capacity was 220,000 t/yr but an expansion to 260,000 t/yr has already finished. In 2012, the plant produced 280,000 metric tons which was valued at 610 million dollars or 76 billion krónur. 4,300 gigawatts hours were used in the production that year, amounting to nearly one-fourth of all electrical energy produced in the country. In October 2013, Norðurál announced the start of a five-year project aimed at increasing its production by a further 50,000 t/yr.

United States–based aluminium manufacturer Alcoa runs a plant near the town of Reyðarfjörður. The plant, known as &quot;Fjardaál&quot; (or &quot;aluminium of the fjords&quot;), has a capacity of 346,000 t/yr and was put into operation in April 2008. To power the plant, Landsvirkjun built Kárahnjúkar, a 690-MW hydropower station. The project was enormous in the context of the Icelandic economy, increasing total installed electric power capacity from under 1,600 MW to around 2,300 MW.

According to Alcoa, construction of Fjardaál entailed no human displacement, no impact on endangered species, and no danger to commercial fisheries; there will also be no significant effect on reindeer, bird and seal populations. However, the project drew considerable opposition from environmentalist groups such as the World Wide Fund for Nature, which called on Alcoa to abandon the plan to build Fjardaál. In addition, Icelandic singer Björk was a notable early opponent to the plan; protesting the proposed construction, the singer&#x27;s mother, Hildur Rúna Hauksdóttir, went on a hunger strike in 2002.

Several other aluminium smelter projects have been planned. Between 2005 and 2011, Alcoa conducted a feasibility study for a second plant in Iceland near Húsavík. That plant was to have a 250,000 t/yr capacity, to be powered entirely by geothermal power, although later estimates showed a potential need for other sources of power. In October 2011, Alcoa announced its decision to cancel the Bakki project. In 2006, Nordurál signed a memorandum of understanding with two Icelandic geothermal power producers, Hitaveita Suðurnesja and Orkuveita Reykjavíkur, to purchase electricity for its own aluminium reduction project in Helguvík. The power supplied will initially support aluminium production of 150,000 t/yr, which will eventually grow to support 250,000 t/yr.

===Fisheries===
Fisheries and related sectors—in recent years labelled &quot;the ocean cluster&quot;—was the single most important part of the Icelandic economy (it has now been replaced by tourism) representing an overall contribution to GDP of 27.1% in 2011. The fisheries sector directly employs around 9,000 people (4,900 in fishing and 4,100 in fish processing; approximately 5 per cent of Iceland&#x27;s workforce), although it is estimated that a total of between 25,000 and 35,000 people (up to 20 per cent of the workforce) depend on the ocean cluster for their livelihood. Many of these jobs are provided by technological companies that manufacture equipment for fisheries firms and by companies engaged in the advanced processing of marine products or in biotechnical production. By contrast, aquaculture remains a very small industry in Iceland, employing only around 250 people for a production of 5,000 tonnes.

Iceland is the second biggest fisheries nation in the North East Atlantic behind Norway, having overtaken the United Kingdom in the early 1990s. Since 2006, Icelandic fishing waters have yielded a total catch of between 1.1m and 1.4m tonnes of fish annually, although this is down from a peak of over 2m tonnes in 2003. Iceland has been affected by a general decline in fishing yields in the Northeast Atlantic, with a one-way decrease of 18% from 2003 to 2009, although this trend appears to have been halted or reversed.

Cod remains the most important species harvested by Icelandic fisheries, with a total catch of 178,516 tonnes in 2010. The catch of cod has stagnated in recent years due to quotas, and was supplemented by the catch of blue whiting, which is used mainly for processing. The Icelandic catch of this previously insignificant fish increased from a negligible 369 tonnes in 1995 to a peak of 501,505 tonnes in 2003. Subsequently, the stock showed signs of instability and quotas were reduced, leading to a decline in the catch to 87,121 tonnes in 2010. There have been increased numbers of Atlantic mackerel (the &quot;Miracle of the Mackerel&quot;) in the 21st century as the Atlantic Ocean has slightly warmed.

===Finance===
====Banks====
The Icelandic banking system has been completely overhauled after the 2007–2008 financial crisis. There are now three major commercial banks: Landsbankinn (National Bank since 2008), Arion Bank (formerly Kaupthing Bank) and Islandsbanki (formerly Glitnir), and Kvika banki (formerly MP Straumur). There are smaller banks and some savings banks, however they are not publicly traded. 

There has been extensive consolidation of smaller banks, with Sparisjodur Keflavikur being taken over by Landsbanki and Byr being taken over by Islandsbanki. Arion Bank, Islandsbanki, and Kvika Banki are the only banks listed on Iceland Stock Exchange. Arion Bank is mostly owned by foreign creditors while Landsbanki and Islandsbanki are now wholly owned by the State. The ownership stake of the Icelandic State in the banks is managed by Bankasysla rikisins (State Financial Investments), which aims to privatise its shares in the banks in coming years.

====Stock market====
Because of historically persistent inflation, historical reliance on fish production and the long-standing public ownership of the commercial banks, equity markets were slow to develop. Nasdaq Iceland, formerly the Iceland Stock Exchange (XICE) was created in 1985. Trading in Icelandic T-Bonds began in 1986 and trading in equities commenced in 1990. All domestic trading in Icelandic stocks, bonds and mutual funds takes place on Nasdaq Iceland.

Nasdaq Iceland has used electronic trading systems since its creation. Since 2000, SAXESS, the joint trading system of the NOREX alliance, has been used. There are currently two equities markets on Nasdaq Iceland. The Main Market is the larger and better known of the two. The Alternative Market is a less regulated over-the-counter market. Because of the small size of the market, trading is illiquid in comparison with larger markets. A variety of firms across all sectors of the Icelandic economy are listed on Nasdaq Iceland.

The most important stock market index was the OMX Iceland 15; however, this index was discontinued after the 2007–2008 financial crisis following a decade in which it had been the worst-performing stock market index in the entire world, being &quot;more or less wiped out.&quot;

====Other financial markets====
Historically, investors tended to be reluctant to hold Icelandic bonds because of the persistence of high inflation and the volatility of the króna. What did exist was largely limited to bonds offered by the central government. The bond market on the ICEX has boomed since the 2010s, however, largely because of the resale of mortgages as housing bonds.

A mutual fund market exists on the ICEX in theory, but no funds are currently listed. A small derivatives market formerly existed, but was closed in 1999 because of illiquidity.

By the end of 2018, Bitcoin mining was expected to consume more electricity in Iceland than all the country&#x27;s residents combined.

==Data==



The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2017. Inflation under 2% is in green.
==External trade==
Iceland&#x27;s economy is highly export-driven. Marine products account for the majority of goods exports. Other important exports include aluminium, ferro-silicon alloys, machinery and electronic equipment for the fishing industry, software, woollen goods. Most of Iceland&#x27;s exports go to the European Union (EU) and European Free Trade Association (EFTA) countries, the United States, and Japan. The 2020 value of Iceland&#x27;s exports was $7.43 billion FOB.

The main imports are machinery and equipment, petroleum products, foodstuffs and textiles. Cement is Iceland&#x27;s most imported product. The total 2020 value of imports was $7.55 billion. In 2019, Iceland&#x27;s primary import partner was Norway (11%), followed by the Netherlands (10%), Germany (8%), Denmark (8%), United States (7%), United Kingdom (6%), PRC China (6%), and Sweden (5%). Most agricultural products are subject to high tariffs; the import of some products, such as uncooked meat, is greatly restricted for phyto-sanitary reasons.

Iceland&#x27;s relatively liberal trading policy has been strengthened by accession to the European Economic Area in 1993 and by the Uruguay Round, which also brought significantly improved market access for Iceland&#x27;s exports, particularly seafood products. However, the agricultural sector remains heavily subsidized and protected; some tariffs range as high as 700%.

The fishing industry is one of the most important industries. It provides 40% of export income and employs 7.0% of the workforce; therefore, the state of the economy remains sensitive to world prices for fish products.

When corrected for the dramatic depreciation of the Icelandic króna in 2008 (approximately 50% against the euro and US dollar), imports since the 2007 peak have been negative.


===Imports===



===Exports===


==Economic agreements and policies==
Iceland became a full European Free Trade Association member in 1970 and entered into a free trade agreement with the European Community in 1973. Under the agreement on a European Economic Area, effective January 1, 1994, there is basically free cross-border movement of capital, labor, goods, and services between Iceland, Norway, and the EU countries. However, many of Iceland&#x27;s political parties remain opposed to EU membership, primarily because of Icelanders&#x27; concern about losing control over their fishing resources. Iceland also has bilateral free trade agreements with several countries outside the EEA. The most extensive of these is the Hoyvík Agreement between Iceland and the Faroe Islands, this agreement goes even further than the EEA agreement by establishing free trade in agricultural products between the nations. Iceland has a free trade agreement with Mexico on November 27, 2000.

==Currency and monetary policy==

The currency of Iceland is the &quot;króna&quot; (plural: &quot;krónur&quot;), issued exclusively by the Central Bank of Iceland since the bank&#x27;s founding in 1961. Iceland is the least populous country to have its own currency and monetary policy.

During the 1970s the oil shocks (1973 and 1979 energy crisis) hit Iceland hard. Inflation rose to 43% in 1974 and 59% in 1980, falling to 15% in 1987 but rising to 30% in 1988. Iceland experienced moderately strong GDP growth (3% on average) from 1995 to 2004. Growth slowed between 2000 and 2002, but the economy expanded by 4.3% in 2003 and grew by 6.2% in 2004. Growth in 2005 exceeded 6%. Inflation averaged merely 1.5% from 1993 to 1994, and only 1.7% from 1994 to 1995. Inflation over 2006 topped at 8.6%, with a rate of 6.9% as of January 2007. Standard &amp; Poor&#x27;s reduced their rating for Iceland to AA− from A+ (long term) in December 2006, following a loosening of fiscal policy by the Icelandic government ahead of the 2007 elections. Foreign debt rose to more than five times the value of Iceland&#x27;s GDP, and Iceland&#x27;s Central Bank raised short-term interest rates to nearly 15% in 2007. Due to the plunging currency against the euro and dollar, in 2008 inflation was speculated to be at 20-25%.

The inflation was increased by the 2008-2011 financial crisis in the country, and the Central Bank of Iceland pegged the krona&#x27;s value to the euro at increasingly higher and higher rates in an attempt to keep the currency stable, eventually pegging it at 340 euros before all trade in the currency was suspended. The krona similarly fell in value against the US dollar, going from around 50–80 per dollar to about 110–115 per dollar. By November 2008, it had continued to lower to 135 to the dollar. By early April 2009, the value hovered around 119 per dollar, roughly maintaining that value over the next two years. The currency has stabalized since the crisis, with 1 US$ being worth worth 137.22 Icelandic kronur in September 2024.

Despite being in both the European Union (EU) and the European Economic Area (EEA), Iceland does not use the euro. Then-Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, Arnór Sighvatsson, said that Iceland would not adopt the euro &quot;as it entails extra cost of purchase of new base money for the banking system and larger precautionary foreign exchange reserves.

==Growth==
Iceland&#x27;s economy had been diversifying into manufacturing and service industries in the 1990s, and new developments in software production, biotechnology, and financial services were taking place. The tourism sector was also expanding, with the recent trends in ecotourism and whale watching. However, in 2008, the Icelandic economy entered a deep recession during the Great Recession. Although Iceland&#x27;s economy grew 3.3% during the last quarter of 2009, the overall contraction in GDP over 2009 was 6.5%, less than the 10% originally forecasted by the IMF.

==See also==
*List of companies of Iceland
*List of Icelandic brands
*Accession of Iceland to the European Union

==Notes==
==External links==

*OECD&#x27;s Iceland country Web site
*OECD Economic Survey of Iceland
*Icelandic Bureau of Statistics
*Iceland Stock Exchange (ICEX)
*Icelandic Energy Portal
*Integrated financial services in Iceland
*Iceland Country Exports Profile
*Exploding Range Rovers Tell Iceland&#x27;s Story &quot;NPR&quot;, March 19, 2009
*Wall Street on the Tundra by Michael Lewis, &quot;Vanity Fair&quot;, April 2009 issue</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8064" start="4" end="22" title="Economy of Iceland" label="economy of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="73" end="95" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="100" end="103" title="United States dollar" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="164" end="167" title="United States dollar" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q558635" start="225" end="235" title="per capita" label="per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="246" end="269" title="purchasing power parity" label="purchasing power parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137483" start="291" end="327" title="2008–2011 Icelandic financial crisis" label="2008–2011 Icelandic financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="434" end="441" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="704" end="711" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q191675" start="718" end="731" title="mixed economy" label="mixed economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="752" end="762" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="843" end="859" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q59821903" start="861" end="872" title="Renewable energy in Iceland" label="Hydro-power"/>
<link wikidata="Q322996" start="1143" end="1159" title="economic freedom" label="economic freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="1241" end="1264" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q188958" start="1289" end="1300" title="egalitarianism" label="egalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q683667" start="1347" end="1363" title="List of countries by income equality" label="Gini coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="1423" end="1432" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q746687" start="1437" end="1460" title="current account deficit" label="current account deficit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137483" start="1598" end="1634" title="2008–2011 Icelandic financial crisis" label="2008–2011 Icelandic financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="1685" end="1712" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1859" end="1875" title="History of Iceland#Settlement (874–930)" label="medieval Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2075" end="2098" title="History of Iceland#Iceland under Norwegian and Danish kings (1262–1944)" label="came under foreign rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="2248" end="2262" title="Gross domestic product" label="GDP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="2278" end="2304" title="Western-European countries" label="Western European countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="2536" end="2540" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="2771" end="2778" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q382586" start="2895" end="2901" title="Smack (ship)" label="smacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2914" end="2930" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="3008" end="3015" title="Nazi Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088915" start="3027" end="3034" title="Invasion of Iceland" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050460" start="3045" end="3079" title="Allied occupation of Iceland" label="American occupations of the island"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="3287" end="3300" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q218303" start="3525" end="3537" title="Independence Party (Iceland)" label="Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046777" start="3542" end="3561" title="Progressive Party (Iceland)" label="Progressive parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="3969" end="3990" title="2008 financial crisis" label="2008 financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131473" start="4218" end="4233" title="Icelandic króna" label="Icelandic króna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="4463" end="4490" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="5409" end="5415" title="Arable land" label="arable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="5509" end="5516" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="5553" end="5560" title="sulphur" label="sulphur"/>
<link wikidata="Q193414" start="5582" end="5591" title="diatomite" label="diatomite"/>
<link wikidata="Q212051" start="5633" end="5639" title="Mývatn" label="Mývatn"/>
<link wikidata="Q45190" start="5848" end="5854" title="cement" label="cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q22657" start="5856" end="5864" title="Concrete" label="Concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="5978" end="5991" title="hydroelectric" label="hydroelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215493" start="5996" end="6006" title="Geothermal power" label="geothermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q59821903" start="6022" end="6062" title="renewable energy in Iceland" label="Iceland&amp;#x27;s renewable energy industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059714" start="6110" end="6124" title="primary energy" label="primary energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="6201" end="6212" title="electricity" label="electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q59821903" start="6278" end="6316" title="Icelandic hydroelectric power stations" label="Icelandic hydroelectric power stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q692897" start="6320" end="6348" title="Kárahnjúkar Hydropower Plant" label="Kárahnjúkar Hydropower Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q179734" start="6379" end="6390" title="Vatnajökull" label="Vatnajökull"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="6689" end="6698" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q899309" start="6703" end="6716" title="ferro-silicon" label="ferro-silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845437" start="6826" end="6838" title="Petroleum reservoir" label="oil reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="6850" end="6872" title="Exclusive economic zone" label="200 mile economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q468469" start="6880" end="6886" title="seabed" label="seabed"/>
<link wikidata="Q14056" start="6894" end="6903" title="Jan Mayen" label="Jan Mayen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090234" start="8157" end="8175" title="Aluminium smelting" label="Aluminium smelting"/>
<link wikidata="Q997712" start="8375" end="8385" title="List of countries by aluminium production" label="11th place"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022261" start="8432" end="8447" title="Rio Tinto Alcan" label="Rio Tinto Alcan"/>
<link wikidata="Q103725" start="8548" end="8561" title="Hafnarfjörður" label="Hafnarfjörður"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="8639" end="8650" title="metric tons" label="metric tons"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619982" start="8870" end="8886" title="Century Aluminum" label="Century Aluminum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8913" end="8925" title="Grundartangi" label="Grundartangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q107398" start="8962" end="8969" title="Akranes" label="Akranes"/>
<link wikidata="Q135325" start="9489" end="9494" title="Alcoa" label="Alcoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019443" start="9525" end="9538" title="Reyðarfjörður" label="Reyðarfjörður"/>
<link wikidata="Q45776" start="9608" end="9613" title="fjord" label="fjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780417" start="9716" end="9728" title="Landsvirkjun" label="Landsvirkjun"/>
<link wikidata="Q692897" start="9735" end="9746" title="Kárahnjúkar Hydropower Plant" label="Kárahnjúkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="9754" end="9756" title="megawatt" label="MW"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="10025" end="10043" title="endangered species" label="endangered species"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="10256" end="10282" title="World Wide Fund for Nature" label="World Wide Fund for Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q42455" start="10375" end="10380" title="Björk" label="Björk"/>
<link wikidata="Q191355" start="10522" end="10535" title="hunger strike" label="hunger strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q219417" start="10700" end="10707" title="Húsavík" label="Húsavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215493" start="10783" end="10799" title="geothermal power" label="geothermal power"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138618" start="11055" end="11075" title="Hitaveita Suðurnesja" label="Hitaveita Suðurnesja"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356432" start="11080" end="11101" title="Orkuveita Reykjavíkur" label="Orkuveita Reykjavíkur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11170" end="11178" title="Helguvík" label="Helguvík"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="12320" end="12326" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="12349" end="12363" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q13194939" start="12763" end="12766" title="Cod" label="Cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q743248" start="12981" end="12993" title="blue whiting" label="blue whiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q30153" start="13348" end="13365" title="Atlantic mackerel" label="Atlantic mackerel"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="13570" end="13596" title="2007–2008 financial crisis" label="2007–2008 financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q848507" start="13624" end="13639" title="commercial bank" label="commercial bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952818" start="13642" end="13654" title="Landsbankinn" label="Landsbankinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q662664" start="13683" end="13693" title="Arion Bank" label="Arion Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q965594" start="13704" end="13718" title="Kaupthing Bank" label="Kaupthing Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q15614925" start="13724" end="13736" title="Islandsbanki" label="Islandsbanki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13761" end="13772" title="Kvika Bank" label="Kvika banki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13947" end="13969" title="Sparisjodur Keflavikur" label="Sparisjodur Keflavikur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674303" start="14114" end="14136" title="Iceland Stock Exchange" label="Iceland Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14282" end="14297" title="Icelandic State" label="Icelandic State"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589125" start="14325" end="14344" title="Government agencies in Iceland" label="Bankasysla rikisins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674303" start="14678" end="14700" title="Iceland Stock Exchange" label="Iceland Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196314" start="14849" end="14854" title="stock" label="stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11693" start="14857" end="14862" title="Bond (finance)" label="bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q791974" start="14867" end="14878" title="mutual fund" label="mutual fund"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14995" end="15001" title="SAXESS" label="SAXESS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954935" start="15035" end="15040" title="NOREX" label="NOREX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969512" start="15130" end="15134" title="ICEX Main" label="Main"/>
<link wikidata="Q223371" start="15462" end="15480" title="stock market index" label="stock market index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761862" start="15489" end="15503" title="OMX Iceland 15" label="OMX Iceland 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="15552" end="15578" title="2007–2008 financial crisis" label="2007–2008 financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q791974" start="16112" end="16123" title="mutual fund" label="mutual fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934287" start="16204" end="16222" title="derivatives market" label="derivatives market"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001427" start="16309" end="16323" title="Bitcoin mining" label="Bitcoin mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="16856" end="16870" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="16880" end="16911" title="European Free Trade Association" label="European Free Trade Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q188540" start="16934" end="16947" title="Economy of the United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q319831" start="16953" end="16958" title="Economy of Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q877551" start="17019" end="17022" title="FOB (shipping)" label="FOB"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="17071" end="17080" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379783" start="17266" end="17272" title="Economy of Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q676699" start="17292" end="17307" title="Economy of the Netherlands" label="the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q8046" start="17315" end="17322" title="Economy of Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451237" start="17329" end="17336" title="Economy of Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q188540" start="17343" end="17356" title="Economy of the United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q323138" start="17363" end="17377" title="Economy of the United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q209380" start="17384" end="17393" title="Economy of China" label="PRC China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455200" start="17404" end="17410" title="Economy of Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="17464" end="17471" title="tariffs" label="tariffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="17667" end="17689" title="European Economic Area" label="European Economic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136965" start="17709" end="17722" title="Uruguay Round" label="Uruguay Round"/>
<link wikidata="Q192935" start="17821" end="17828" title="seafood" label="seafood"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="17919" end="17925" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="17955" end="17962" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q182722" start="18032" end="18038" title="export" label="export"/>
<link wikidata="Q131473" start="18223" end="18238" title="Icelandic króna" label="Icelandic króna"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="18441" end="18472" title="European Free Trade Association" label="European Free Trade Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="18537" end="18555" title="European Community" label="European Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="18590" end="18612" title="European Economic Area" label="European Economic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q8137" start="18690" end="18697" title="Capital (economics)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q28161" start="18699" end="18704" title="labour (economics)" label="labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q28877" start="18706" end="18711" title="Good (economics)" label="goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="18743" end="18749" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632164" start="19077" end="19093" title="Hoyvík Agreement" label="Hoyvík Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="19118" end="19131" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195916" start="19471" end="19494" title="Central Bank of Iceland" label="Central Bank of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="19653" end="19657" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925730" start="19662" end="19680" title="1979 energy crisis" label="1979 energy crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q106158" start="20172" end="20198" title="Standard &amp;amp; Poor&amp;#x27;s" label="Standard &amp;amp; Poor&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137483" start="20680" end="20721" title="2008–2011 Icelandic financial crisis" label="2008-2011 financial crisis in the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="21413" end="21427" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="21441" end="21463" title="European Economic Area" label="European Economic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="21496" end="21500" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="21815" end="21828" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840846" start="21833" end="21851" title="service industries" label="service industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="21890" end="21898" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108" start="21911" end="21924" title="biotechnology" label="biotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q837171" start="21930" end="21948" title="financial services" label="financial services"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143224" start="21972" end="21986" title="tourism in Iceland" label="tourism sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q187449" start="22033" end="22043" title="ecotourism" label="ecotourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366963" start="22048" end="22062" title="whale watching" label="whale watching"/>
<link wikidata="Q176494" start="22119" end="22128" title="recession" label="recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="22140" end="22155" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242982" start="22350" end="22378" title="List of companies of Iceland" label="List of companies of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19842862" start="22380" end="22404" title="List of Icelandic brands" label="List of Icelandic brands"/>
<link wikidata="Q814931" start="22406" end="22448" title="Accession of Iceland to the European Union" label="Accession of Iceland to the European Union"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64583" wikidata="Q5780459" url="?curid=64583" title="Telecommunications in Iceland">
<text>Telecommunications in [[Iceland]] is a diversified market. Iceland has a highly developed telecommunications sector with modern infrastructure. Multiple wholesale and retail providers are operated in a competitive market. As of 2024, Iceland&#x27;s telecom infrastructure is fully digitised and mostly fibre based, with 93% of households having full-fibre availability. Landlines are based on VoIP technology. Mobile telecoms in Iceland adheres to the GSM standard and 2G, 3G, 4G and 5G services are available, as well as a TETRA network for emergency communications. Iceland is connected by four submarine cables to both Europe and North America. Broadcasting is based on DVB-T2 standard for television and FM for radio. There are a few printed newspapers, although most mass media is consumed online. Postal service is provided under universal obligation by the state-owned Iceland Post, but other private postal companies also operate.

== History ==
The first submarine telegraph cable connection to the British Isles reached Seyðisfjörður in Iceland in 1906 by the Great Northern Telegraph Co. Around the same time telephone communication was opened between Reykjavik and nearby Hafnarfjörður. By 1911 a telephone line connected Reykjavik in the west of Iceland to Seyðisfjörður in the east via Akureyri in the north. A line to the Vestmannaeyjar was constructed a few years later, and by 1929 a line along the south coast of the island connected Reykjavik to Seyðisfjörður via Vík. A teleprinter service was introduced to the island in 1930.

As of 1933, there were 55 telephones for every 1000 inhabitants on the island. The first short-wave radio station was established in Iceland in 1935–36, linking the country up to international radio-telephone services. By January 1936 there were 106 radio-licence holders for every 1000 Icelandic inhabitants. Due to the Icelandic naming system, people were listed by their first name in the telephone directory, and not by their last name (which is usually a patronym).

The first automatic telephone exchanges opened in Reykjavík and Hafnafjörður in 1932, and by 1976 all towns had automatic telephone exchanges.

In 1962, the SCOTICE (to Scotland) and ICECAN (Canada) coaxial submarine telephone cables were put into use, greatly increasing reliability and capacity of international telephone and telegraph traffic as well as opening up telex services for the first time. These new cables rendered the original 1906 telegraph cable obselete and it was taken out of use. They had a capacity of 32 and 24 telephone circuits respectively.

In 1980, the first satellite ground station was opened in Iceland, called Skyggnir. Initially connecting to the Intelsat system, most international telephone and telex traffic now used satellite communications. These new ground stations enabled International Direct Dialling, as well as allowing Iceland to access time-shifted as well as live television broadcast material from abroad, including Iceland&#x27;s participation in Eurovision in 1986. Iceland&#x27;s first internet connection was via satellite in 1986 with a 300–1200 bit/s UUCP link to Amsterdam. By 1987 the older coaxial submarine cables SCOTICE and ICECAN were taken out of use after a secondary backup ground station opened near Höfn in eastern Iceland, leaving Iceland solely dependent on satellite communications for international traffic during this period.

The first digital telephone exchange was opened in 1984 and all telephone exchanges were digitalised in the country by 1995. By 1986 all rural shared party lines were upgraded to individual lines.

In 1986, mobile telephony was available for the first time using an NMT 1G (first generation) network, followed by GSM services in 1994 and SMS messaging in 1997, followed by MMS in 2003.

In 1991, a fibre ring was completed that circles the country, roughly following the route of Iceland&#x27;s ring road (Route 1), passing through most towns and cities. It was constructed by the Icelandic Government and NATO to link radar stations of the Iceland Air Defence System, as well as to enhance domestic telecommunications. It consists of 8 fibres and is still in use as of 2023.

In 1994, the first fibre submarine cable, CANTAT-3, reached Iceland linking it to Canada, Germany, UK and Denmark with a capacity of 7.5 Gbit/s. This greatly increased bandwidth and allowed internet connections to become more widely available.

As bandwidth and reliability demands grew in the 21st century, more fibre submarine cables were launched to Iceland: FARICE in 2003 to the UK and Faroe Islands; DANICE in 2009 to Denmark; Greenland Connect in 2009 to Greenland and Canada and lastly IRIS in 2023 to Ireland. With multiple redundant submarine fibre routes, the satellite ground station Skyggnir was taken out of use in 2005 and CANTAT-3 became defunct in 2009.

In the mid-1990s, the telecom market was opened to competition, breaking the state-owned Iceland Telecom&#x27;s monopoly, and it was later privatised in 2005.

In 1994, dial-up internet services became available; in 1999 ADSL services launched, followed by VDSL in 2009. Fibre to the home services began rolling out in 2004 and had expanded to 90% of the population by 2022.

In 2010, the NMT (1G) mobile network was shut down. 3G launched in 2006, 4G in 2013 and 5G in 2020.

In 2018, telegram services were discontinued.

Analogue PSTN/POTS and ISDN telephone services (along with dial-up internet) were phased out from 2020–2024, replaced by VoIP services. Copper-based DSL services continue to be available. In April 2024, Míla accounced plans for a complete copper shut down by 2028, including DSL services, fully transitioning Icelandic telecoms to fibre based services. 2G and 3G services are due to be shut down by year end 2025.

== Submarine connectivity ==
Current internet and telephone services rely on submarine communications cables for external traffic, with a total capacity of .

=== Current ===
* FARICE-1, 2 fiber pairs, with lit 11 Tbit/s to the United Kingdom and the Faroe Islands laid in 2003
* DANICE, 4 fiber pairs, with lit 36.4 Tbit/s to Denmark, laid in 2009.
* Greenland Connect, 2 fiber pairs, with lit 12.8 Tbit/s to Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada and Greenland, laid in 2009.
* IRIS, 6 fiber pairs, with 108 Tbit/s initial capacity to Galway, Ireland, laid in 2022 and opened in March 2023.

=== Former ===
* CANTAT-3, 3 fiber pairs, with capacity of 7.5 Gbit/s to Denmark, Germany, Faroe Islands and Canada (1994–2009)
* SCOTICE, coaxial cable, to Faroe Islands and from there to Scotland, 32 telephone circuits (1961–1987)
* ICECAN, coaxial cable, to Greenland and onward to Canada, 24 telephone circuits (1961–1987)
* Great Northern Telegraph Co., Seyðisfjörður to Faroe Islands and onward to Shetland Islands (UK) (1906–1962)

== Services ==
=== Internet ===
==== Data centres ====
* THOR Data Center ehf
* DataCell ehf
* Verne Global
* Basis ehf

==== Internet service providers ====
The largest Internet service providers in Iceland:

# Síminn (Síminn hf)
# Vodafone Iceland (Sýn hf)
# Nova (Nova hf)
# Hringiðan (Hringiðan ehf / Vortex Inc)
# Hringdu (Hringdu ehf)

==== Internet hosting service ====
Iceland has numerous internet hosting services:

* (1984 ehf)
* Advania (Advania ehf)
* (Davíð og Golíat ehf)
* FlokiNET (FlokiNET ehf)
* Síminn (Síminn hf)
* (Netmiðlar ehf)
* (Netvistun ehf)
* (Nethönnun ehf)
* TechSupport á Íslandi (TechSupport á Íslandi ehf)
* (Tölvuþjónustan Geymir sf)
* Vodafone Iceland (Sýn hf)
* Vortex (Hringiðan ehf)

==== Internet exchange points ====
Iceland has two Internet exchange points. They are the Reykjavik Internet Exchange (RIX) and Múli-IXP.

=== Mail ===
=== Print ===
==== Daily newspapers ====
* Morgunblaðið

==== Weekly and bi-weekly Newspapers ====
* DV
* Viðskiptablaðið
* Bændablaðið
* Heimildin 

==== English Language Newspapers ====
* The Reykjavík Grapevine

=== Radio ===
Iceland use FM and longwave radio broadcasts. Nationwide networks which cover the whole country include public radio stations Rás 1 and Rás 2 as well as Bylgjan. Other commercial broadcasters mostly operate in the Reykjavík area, and many are available in more populated areas. There are no current plans to implement DAB broadcasting, due to ample bandwidth and cost. All FM stations are also available over internet radio, with some smaller stations being only distributed over internet radio. Longwave radio service is operated by public broadcaster RÚV, however the longwave service will be completely decommissioned in 2024 (with one transmitter site already decommissioned in 2023).

==== Public broadcasters: ====
* RÚV (nationwide coverage)
** Rás 1
** Rás 2
* BBC World Service

===== Commercial broadcasters =====
* Bylgjan (nationwide coverage)
* K100
* FM 957
* X-ið
* Suðurland FM
* 101
* Útvarp Saga
* KissFM
* Gullbylgjan
* Léttbylgjan
* Íslenska Bylgjan
* Retro 89.5
* Flashback 91.9
* Lindin

=== Telephone ===
==== Landline ====
As of 2022 there are 116,142 landlines in use in Iceland of which 80,106 are VoIP, 34,527 are PSTN and 644 are ISDN. The number of landlines in Iceland has been slowly decreasing since their peak in 2001 at 196,528. Meanwhile, the number of VoIP subscriptions have been rising, from 58,311 in 2016 to 76,122 in 2018. 2018 was the first year that VoIP subscriptions surpassed PSTN subscriptions. Analogue PSTN/POTS and ISDN telephone services were phased out from 2020–2024, replaced by VoIP services.

==== Mobile ====

As of 2022, there are 521,722 active mobile subscriptions in use in Iceland. 4G and 5G services are operated by 3 mobile operators, and 2G and 3G are still in operation until 2025. NOVA was the first network to offer 4G in 2013 and first to offer 5G in 2020. Síminn and Vodafone launched their 4G service in 2013 and 5G in 2021. 2G and 3G services are due to be shut down in 2025. The NMT (1G) network was shut down in 2010.


==== Telephone numbers ====
There are no area codes in Iceland as such, and all ordinary telephone numbers have seven digits. The international dialling code is +354. Numbers of mobile phones tend to begin with either 6, 7 or 8, while landline numbers start with 5 (in Reykjavík) or 4 (outside Reykjavík).

=== Television ===
Television in Iceland began in September 1966.

== References ==
== External links ==
* Reykjavik Internet Exchange 
* Reykjavik Internet Exchange </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5780459" start="0" end="33" title="Telecommunications in Iceland" label="Telecommunications in [[Iceland]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="90" end="115" title="Telecommunications" label="telecommunications sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q319676" start="202" end="220" title="Competition (economics)" label="competitive market"/>
<link wikidata="Q389772" start="281" end="290" title="Digital Communication" label="digitised"/>
<link wikidata="Q586034" start="345" end="355" title="Fiber to the x" label="full-fibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="393" end="397" title="Voice over IP" label="VoIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="452" end="455" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060363" start="524" end="529" title="TETRA" label="TETRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q506572" start="597" end="613" title="submarine communications cable" label="submarine cables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352150" start="673" end="679" title="DVB-T2" label="DVB-T2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368380" start="708" end="710" title="FM broadcasting" label="FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q291809" start="876" end="888" title="Íslandspóstur" label="Iceland Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q506572" start="964" end="989" title="submarine communications cable" label="submarine telegraph cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q623557" start="1030" end="1043" title="Seyðisfjörður" label="Seyðisfjörður"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544339" start="1070" end="1097" title="GN Store Nord" label="Great Northern Telegraph Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764" start="1163" end="1172" title="Reykjavík" label="Reykjavik"/>
<link wikidata="Q103725" start="1184" end="1197" title="Hafnarfjörður" label="Hafnarfjörður"/>
<link wikidata="Q29042" start="1300" end="1308" title="Akureyri" label="Akureyri"/>
<link wikidata="Q187251" start="1337" end="1351" title="Vestmannaeyjar" label="Vestmannaeyjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q685369" start="1483" end="1486" title="Vík í Mýrdal" label="Vík"/>
<link wikidata="Q66196" start="1490" end="1501" title="teleprinter" label="teleprinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313348" start="1742" end="1757" title="Radiotelephone" label="radio-telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q220463" start="1870" end="1893" title="Icelandic name" label="Icelandic naming system"/>
<link wikidata="Q220393" start="1941" end="1960" title="telephone directory" label="telephone directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q110874" start="2009" end="2017" title="Patronymic" label="patronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q256132" start="2031" end="2059" title="automatic telephone exchange" label="automatic telephone exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q183389" start="2220" end="2227" title="Coaxial cable" label="coaxial"/>
<link wikidata="Q506572" start="2228" end="2254" title="Submarine communications cable" label="submarine telephone cables"/>
<link wikidata="Q66175" start="2389" end="2394" title="telex" label="telex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349167" start="2608" end="2632" title="ground station" label="satellite ground station"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="2701" end="2709" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242551" start="2834" end="2863" title="International direct dialing" label="International Direct Dialling"/>
<link wikidata="Q187120" start="2903" end="2915" title="Time shifting" label="time-shifted"/>
<link wikidata="Q431102" start="2927" end="2952" title="Live television" label="live television broadcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q276" start="3017" end="3027" title="Eurovision Song Contest" label="Eurovision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047966" start="3126" end="3130" title="UUCP" label="UUCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q817118" start="3286" end="3290" title="Höfn" label="Höfn"/>
<link wikidata="Q256132" start="3429" end="3455" title="telephone exchange" label="digital telephone exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q390750" start="3569" end="3580" title="Party line (telephony)" label="party lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q992968" start="3626" end="3642" title="mobile telephony" label="mobile telephony"/>
<link wikidata="Q854862" start="3685" end="3688" title="Nordic Mobile Telephone" label="NMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046079" start="3689" end="3710" title="1G" label="1G (first generation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="3732" end="3735" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q43024" start="3757" end="3760" title="SMS" label="SMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q189443" start="3792" end="3795" title="Multimedia Messaging Service" label="MMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q593178" start="3914" end="3923" title="Route 1 (Iceland)" label="ring road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="4025" end="4029" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5985661" start="4060" end="4086" title="Iceland Air Defence System" label="Iceland Air Defence System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529430" start="4215" end="4220" title="fiber-optic communication" label="fibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022800" start="4238" end="4246" title="CANTAT-3" label="CANTAT-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477270" start="4558" end="4564" title="FARICE-1" label="FARICE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013574" start="4602" end="4608" title="Danice" label="DANICE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544725" start="4629" end="4646" title="Greenland Connect" label="Greenland Connect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022800" start="4834" end="4842" title="CANTAT-3" label="CANTAT-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q493719" start="4957" end="4972" title="Síminn" label="Iceland Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q192731" start="5037" end="5053" title="dial-up Internet access" label="dial-up internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q161618" start="5089" end="5093" title="ADSL" label="ADSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q823923" start="5125" end="5129" title="VDSL" label="VDSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q586034" start="5139" end="5156" title="Fiber to the x" label="Fibre to the home"/>
<link wikidata="Q854862" start="5257" end="5260" title="NMT 450" label="NMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q79692" start="5296" end="5298" title="3G" label="3G"/>
<link wikidata="Q79697" start="5317" end="5319" title="4G" label="4G"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363408" start="5332" end="5334" title="5G" label="5G"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="5354" end="5362" title="telegraphy" label="telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q243961" start="5401" end="5405" title="public switched telephone network" label="PSTN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462168" start="5406" end="5410" title="plain old telephone service" label="POTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q170397" start="5415" end="5419" title="ISDN" label="ISDN"/>
<link wikidata="Q192731" start="5451" end="5467" title="Dial-up Internet access" label="dial-up internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422735" start="5595" end="5599" title="Míla" label="Míla"/>
<link wikidata="Q104534" start="5667" end="5670" title="digital subscriber line" label="DSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q845349" start="5745" end="5747" title="2G" label="2G"/>
<link wikidata="Q79692" start="5752" end="5754" title="3G" label="3G"/>
<link wikidata="Q506572" start="5884" end="5915" title="submarine communications cables" label="submarine communications cables"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477270" start="5984" end="5992" title="FARICE-1" label="FARICE-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013574" start="6087" end="6093" title="Danice" label="DANICE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544725" start="6159" end="6176" title="Greenland Connect" label="Greenland Connect"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="6217" end="6242" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="6255" end="6264" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022800" start="6413" end="6421" title="CANTAT-3" label="CANTAT-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="6487" end="6500" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544339" start="6725" end="6753" title="GN Store Nord" label="Great Northern Telegraph Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q623557" start="6755" end="6768" title="Seyðisfjörður" label="Seyðisfjörður"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686399" start="6892" end="6912" title="Advania" label="THOR Data Center ehf"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="7005" end="7030" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q493719" start="7047" end="7053" title="Síminn" label="Síminn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529835" start="7068" end="7084" title="Vodafone Iceland" label="Vodafone Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q60775597" start="7086" end="7092" title="Sýn (media corporation)" label="Sýn hf"/>
<link wikidata="Q16423197" start="7096" end="7100" title="Nova (telecommunications)" label="Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527756" start="7113" end="7122" title="Vortex (ISP)" label="Hringiðan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7154" end="7161" title="Hringdu" label="Hringdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210425" start="7233" end="7257" title="internet hosting service" label="internet hosting service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686399" start="7276" end="7283" title="Advania" label="Advania"/>
<link wikidata="Q493719" start="7350" end="7356" title="Síminn" label="Síminn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529835" start="7506" end="7522" title="Vodafone Iceland" label="Vodafone Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q60775597" start="7524" end="7530" title="Sýn (media corporation)" label="Sýn hf"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527756" start="7534" end="7540" title="Vortex (ISP)" label="Vortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433061" start="7609" end="7632" title="Internet exchange point" label="Internet exchange point"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319491" start="7648" end="7681" title="Reykjavik Internet Exchange" label="Reykjavik Internet Exchange (RIX)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7686" end="7694" title="Múli-IXP" label="Múli-IXP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="7729" end="7745" title="Newspaper" label="Daily newspapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q151036" start="7753" end="7765" title="Morgunblaðið" label="Morgunblaðið"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305295" start="7772" end="7778" title="Weekly newspaper" label="Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157195" start="7811" end="7813" title="DV (newspaper)" label="DV"/>
<link wikidata="Q16430188" start="7816" end="7831" title="Viðskiptablaðið" label="Viðskiptablaðið"/>
<link wikidata="Q116938683" start="7848" end="7857" title="Heimildin" label="Heimildin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147151" start="7900" end="7923" title="The Reykjavík Grapevine" label="The Reykjavík Grapevine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368380" start="7951" end="7953" title="FM broadcasting" label="FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082861" start="7958" end="7966" title="longwave" label="longwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q815830" start="8257" end="8260" title="Digital Audio Broadcasting" label="DAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q184973" start="8348" end="8362" title="internet radio" label="internet radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082861" start="8435" end="8449" title="Longwave radio" label="Longwave radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q608708" start="8492" end="8495" title="RÚV" label="RÚV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270024" start="8574" end="8594" title="Eiðar longwave transmitter" label="one transmitter site"/>
<link wikidata="Q26398" start="8634" end="8654" title="Public broadcasting" label="Public broadcasters:"/>
<link wikidata="Q608708" start="8662" end="8665" title="RÚV" label="RÚV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068822" start="8691" end="8696" title="Rás 1" label="Rás 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454153" start="8700" end="8705" title="Rás 2" label="Rás 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q423289" start="8708" end="8725" title="BBC World Service" label="BBC World Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378498" start="8733" end="8756" title="Commercial broadcasting" label="Commercial broadcasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q8253851" start="8765" end="8772" title="Bylgjan" label="Bylgjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482515" start="8804" end="8810" title="FM 957 (Icelandic radio station)" label="FM 957"/>
<link wikidata="Q6331116" start="8855" end="8861" title="KISS-FM (brand)" label="KissFM"/>
<link wikidata="Q738621" start="9015" end="9023" title="landline" label="landline"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="9035" end="9042" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="9063" end="9067" title="Voice over IP" label="VoIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q243961" start="9080" end="9084" title="Public switched telephone network" label="PSTN"/>
<link wikidata="Q170397" start="9097" end="9101" title="Integrated Services Digital Network" label="ISDN"/>
<link wikidata="Q243961" start="9390" end="9394" title="Public switched telephone network" label="PSTN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462168" start="9395" end="9399" title="Plain old telephone service" label="POTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q170397" start="9404" end="9408" title="ISDN" label="ISDN"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="9472" end="9476" title="Voice over IP" label="VoIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q16423197" start="9687" end="9691" title="Nova (Iceland)" label="NOVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q493719" start="9765" end="9771" title="Síminn" label="Síminn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529835" start="9776" end="9784" title="Vodafone Iceland" label="Vodafone"/>
<link wikidata="Q845349" start="9835" end="9837" title="2G" label="2G"/>
<link wikidata="Q79692" start="9842" end="9844" title="3G" label="3G"/>
<link wikidata="Q854862" start="9891" end="9894" title="Nordic Mobile Telephone" label="NMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046079" start="9896" end="9898" title="1G" label="1G"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390458" start="9974" end="9983" title="area code" label="area code"/>
<link wikidata="Q34768" start="10063" end="10090" title="List of country calling codes" label="international dialling code"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="10111" end="10123" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q738621" start="10168" end="10176" title="landline" label="landline"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64584" wikidata="Q1265222" url="?curid=64584" title="Transport in Iceland">
<text>The modes of transport in [[Iceland]] are governed by the country&#x27;s rugged terrain and sparse population. The principal mode of personal transport is the car. There are no public railways, although there are bus services. Domestic flights serve places that reduce travel time significantly, or are seasonally inaccessible by road. 

The only international forms of transport are by air and sea. Most of the country&#x27;s transport infrastructure is concentrated near the Capital Region, which is home to 64% of the country&#x27;s population.

==Rail==

Iceland has no public railways, although proposals to build a passenger line between Keflavík and Reykjavík have been made as well as proposals to build a light rail system in Reykjavík.

In the past, locomotive-powered and hand-operated rails were temporarily set up during certain construction projects, but these have long since been dismantled. Some artifacts from their existence remains in museums and as static exhibits.

==Road==

Iceland has of publicly administered roads, of which are paved. Organized road building began about 1900 and has greatly expanded since 1980. Vegagerðin (Icelandic Roads Administration) is the legal owner and constructor of the roads, and oversees and maintains them as well. 11.4% of passenger-kilometres are by bus and 88.6% by car.

==Sea==
The major harbours in Iceland are:

* Akureyri
* Hornafjördur
* Ísafjörður
* Keflavík
* Raufarhöfn
* Reykjavík
* Seyðisfjörður
* Straumsvík
* Vestmannaeyjar
;Merchant marine
3 ships (with a tonnage of 1,000gt or over) totaling 13,085gt/
1 chemical tanker, 1 container ship, 1 petroleum tanker (1999 est.)

;Transport ferries
The only habitable islands around Iceland are supplied and connected with the mainland by regular ferries. These islands are:
* Vestmannaeyjar The largest and most populated offshore island.
* Hrísey In the middle of Eyjafjörður in northern Iceland.
* Grímsey In the far north, the northernmost part of Iceland.

These ferries are considered part of the infrastructure system, and are therefore run by Vegagerðin like the roads.
* There is also a car ferry between Stykkisholmur on Snæfell peninsula and Brjánslækur in the West Fjords peninsula, stopping at Flatey island.
* There is one international ferry between Seyðisfjörður on the east coast and the Faroe Islands and Denmark.

==Air==


As of 2024, there are 83 airports in Iceland:

==Public transport==
Public transport systems in Iceland are relatively underdeveloped and many areas are poorly served by public transport.

Services are provided in major urban areas, for example Strætó bs operates bus services in the Reykjavík area (including the municipality of Reykjanesbær), and Strætisvagnar Akureyrar in the northern town of Akureyri. There are nationwide coach and bus services linking the major towns, although many Icelanders use domestic flights to get from one major town to another: for example between Reykjavík and Ísafjörður.

Automobile ownership is also relatively high—the country has one of the highest rates in the world—with 580 cars per 1000 people (as of 2000), a figure similar to the United States. 

In the 2000s, and most recently in 2014, there have been proposals to construct a railway between Keflavík Airport and Reykjavík. The airport in Keflavík is Iceland&#x27;s main international airport; however, it is not situated close to the capital. It is currently served by a coach service, but Reykjavik City Council has agreed to conduct a feasibility study on the railway proposal, saying they are prepared to contribute 10 million krónur of funding. A light rail network within the capital has also been proposed.

The country is served by one international ferry service: from the Faroe Islands and Denmark to/from Seyðisfjörður by Smyril Line. There is also a local ferry service between Þorlákshöfn and the Westman Islands, operated by Eimskip.

==See also==
*H-dagurinn
*Rail transport in Iceland
*Road signs in Iceland
*Tunnels in Iceland
*Vegagerðin

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1265222" start="13" end="37" title="Transport in Iceland" label="transport in [[Iceland]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q186131" start="80" end="87" title="terrain" label="terrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="92" end="109" title="population density" label="sparse population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="159" end="162" title="car" label="car"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="184" end="192" title="railways" label="railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638" start="213" end="216" title="bus" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640723" start="236" end="243" title="Commercial flight" label="flights"/>
<link wikidata="Q765633" start="387" end="390" title="Air transport" label="air"/>
<link wikidata="Q25653" start="395" end="398" title="Ferry" label="sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="427" end="451" title="transport infrastructure" label="transport infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q203304" start="477" end="491" title="Capital Region (Iceland)" label="Capital Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q602208" start="571" end="589" title="Rail transport in Iceland" label="no public railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q170693" start="644" end="652" title="Keflavík" label="Keflavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764" start="657" end="666" title="Reykjavík" label="Reykjavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="714" end="724" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754030" start="1140" end="1150" title="Vegagerðin" label="Vegagerðin"/>
<link wikidata="Q283202" start="1352" end="1359" title="harbour" label="harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q29042" start="1380" end="1388" title="Akureyri" label="Akureyri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628322" start="1391" end="1403" title="Hornafjördur" label="Hornafjördur"/>
<link wikidata="Q106896" start="1406" end="1416" title="Ísafjörður" label="Ísafjörður"/>
<link wikidata="Q170693" start="1419" end="1427" title="Keflavík" label="Keflavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q2133209" start="1430" end="1440" title="Raufarhöfn" label="Raufarhöfn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764" start="1443" end="1452" title="Reykjavík" label="Reykjavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q623557" start="1455" end="1468" title="Seyðisfjörður" label="Seyðisfjörður"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354044" start="1471" end="1481" title="Straumsvík" label="Straumsvík"/>
<link wikidata="Q187251" start="1484" end="1498" title="Vestmannaeyjar" label="Vestmannaeyjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15254" start="1581" end="1596" title="chemical tanker" label="chemical tanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q17210" start="1600" end="1614" title="container ship" label="container ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q14928" start="1618" end="1634" title="oil tanker" label="petroleum tanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q187251" start="1795" end="1809" title="Vestmannaeyjar" label="Vestmannaeyjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q631719" start="1860" end="1866" title="Hrísey" label="Hrísey"/>
<link wikidata="Q604986" start="1884" end="1895" title="Eyjafjörður" label="Eyjafjörður"/>
<link wikidata="Q213707" start="1919" end="1926" title="Grímsey" label="Grímsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754030" start="2069" end="2079" title="Vegagerðin" label="Vegagerðin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019452" start="2132" end="2145" title="Stykkisholmur" label="Stykkisholmur"/>
<link wikidata="Q727267" start="2190" end="2201" title="West Fjords" label="West Fjords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427341" start="2225" end="2231" title="Flatey, Breiðafjörður" label="Flatey"/>
<link wikidata="Q623557" start="2283" end="2296" title="Seyðisfjörður" label="Seyðisfjörður"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="2323" end="2336" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="2341" end="2348" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813819" start="2386" end="2405" title="list of airports in Iceland" label="airports in Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="2531" end="2547" title="public transport" label="public transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q966621" start="2606" end="2615" title="Strætó bs" label="Strætó bs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764" start="2645" end="2654" title="Reykjavík" label="Reykjavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q652130" start="2691" end="2703" title="Reykjanesbær" label="Reykjanesbær"/>
<link wikidata="Q29042" start="2758" end="2766" title="Akureyri" label="Akureyri"/>
<link wikidata="Q12334006" start="2789" end="2794" title="Coach (vehicle)" label="coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q191356" start="2851" end="2861" title="Icelanders" label="Icelanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3136" end="3149" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q139921" start="3251" end="3267" title="Keflavík Airport" label="Keflavík Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764" start="3272" end="3281" title="Reykjavík" label="Reykjavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186175" start="3450" end="3472" title="Reykjavik City Council" label="Reykjavik City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q755009" start="3497" end="3514" title="feasibility study" label="feasibility study"/>
<link wikidata="Q131473" start="3590" end="3596" title="Icelandic króna" label="krónur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="3611" end="3621" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="3741" end="3754" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="3759" end="3766" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q387088" start="3792" end="3803" title="Smyril Line" label="Smyril Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q335596" start="3849" end="3860" title="Þorlákshöfn" label="Þorlákshöfn"/>
<link wikidata="Q187251" start="3869" end="3884" title="Vestmannaeyjar" label="Westman Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920326" start="3898" end="3905" title="Eimskip" label="Eimskip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210794" start="3922" end="3932" title="H-dagurinn" label="H-dagurinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q602208" start="3934" end="3959" title="Rail transport in Iceland" label="Rail transport in Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339506" start="3961" end="3982" title="Road signs in Iceland" label="Road signs in Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486753" start="3984" end="4002" title="Tunnels in Iceland" label="Tunnels in Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754030" start="4004" end="4014" title="Vegagerðin" label="Vegagerðin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64585" wikidata="Q745594" url="?curid=64585" title="Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania">
<text>Wilkes-Barre ( ) is a city in and the county seat of Luzerne County, Pennsylvania, United States. Located at the center of the Wyoming Valley in Northeastern Pennsylvania, it had a population of 44,328 in the 2020 census. It is the second-largest city, after Scranton, in the Scranton–Wilkes-Barre–Hazleton, PA Metropolitan Statistical Area, which had a population of 567,559 as of the 2020 census, making it the fifth-largest metropolitan area in Pennsylvania after the Delaware Valley, Greater Pittsburgh, the Lehigh Valley, and Greater Harrisburg. 

The contiguous network of five cities and more than 40 boroughs all built in a straight line in Northeastern Pennsylvania&#x27;s urban core act, culturally and logistically as one continuous city, so while the city of Wilkes-Barre itself is a mid-sized city, the larger Scranton/Wilkes-Barre Urban Area contains half a million residents in roughly . Scranton/Wilkes-Barre is the cultural and economic center of a region called Northeastern Pennsylvania, which is home to over 1.3 million residents. Wilkes-Barre and the surrounding Wyoming Valley are framed by the Pocono Mountains to the east, the Endless Mountains to the north and west, and the Lehigh Valley to the south. The Susquehanna River flows through the center of the valley and defines the northwestern border of the city.

Wilkes-Barre was founded in 1769, incorporated as a borough in 1806, and formally re-incorporated as a city in 1869. The city grew rapidly in the 19th century after the discovery of nearby coal reserves and the arrival of hundreds of thousands of immigrants, who provided a labor force for the city&#x27;s mines. The mining of high-quality anthracite coal fueled industrialization in the city, which reached the height of its prosperity in the first half of the 20th century. Its population peaked at more than 86,000 in 1930.

Following World War II, the city&#x27;s economy declined due to the collapse of industry. The Knox Mine disaster accelerated this trend after large portions of the area&#x27;s coal mines were flooded and could not be reopened. In the 21st century, the city&#x27;s population is roughly half that of its peak population of the 1930s, though it remains the largest city in Luzerne County and the 13th-largest city in Pennsylvania.

Wilkes-Barre is located north-northwest of Allentown, north-northwest of Philadelphia, and west-northwest of New York City .

==History==
===18th century===
By the 18th century, the Wyoming Valley was inhabited by the Shawnee and Lenape, also known as Delaware Indian tribes. In 1753, the Susquehanna Company was founded in Connecticut for settling the Wyoming Valley in present-day Pennsylvania. Connecticut succeeded in purchasing the land from the Native Americans; however, Pennsylvania already claimed the very same territory through a purchase they made in 1736. In 1762, roughly two hundred Connecticut settlers (Yankees) established a settlement near Mill Creek. They planted wheat and constructed log cabins. The Yankees returned to New England for the winter.

The Connecticut settlers returned in the spring of 1763 with their families and additional supplies. A party of Iroquois also visited the area with the dual purpose of turning the Lenape tribe against the colonists and killing Teedyuscung, a local Lenape chief. On April 19, 1763, the residence of the chief, along with several others, was set ablaze. Chief Teedyuscung perished in the inferno. The Iroquois let the Lenape believe that this atrocity was committed by the settlers. As a result, the Lenape attacked the colonists on October 15, 1763, killing thirty settlers and taking several others as prisoners. Those who managed to escape fled back to New England. The Lenape then burned what was left of the settlement.
In 1769, the Yankees returned to the Wyoming Valley. Five townships were established by Connecticut. Each one was five square miles and divided amongst forty settlers. Wilkes-Barre Township was one of the original townships; it was named in honor of John Wilkes and Isaac Barré—two British members of Parliament who supported colonial America. Pennsylvanians (Pennamites) also arrived in the valley that same year.

The Connecticut settlers established Fort Durkee, which was named in honor of their leader, Colonel Durkee. This was immediately followed by the Pennamite-Yankee War—a series of skirmishes between Pennsylvanian and Connecticut settlers. The land changed hands several times between the two groups. The Congress of the Confederation was asked to resolve the matter. With the Decree of Trenton, on December 30, 1782, the confederation government officially decided that the region belonged to Pennsylvania, and the Wyoming Valley became part of Northumberland County.

During the Revolutionary War two forts were built at Wilkes-Barre. Fort Wilkes-Barre was completed in 1778 but was abandoned and burned later that year following the Battle of Wyoming. Fort Wyoming (later renamed Fort Dickinson) was constructed when the Continental Army reoccupied the Wyoming Valley and served as a staging area for the Sullivan Expedition in 1779.

After the Revolutionary War the State of Pennsylvania ruled that the Connecticut settlers were not citizens of Pennsylvania. They were not permitted to vote and were ordered to give up their property claims. In May 1784, armed men from Pennsylvania force-marched the Connecticut settlers away from the valley. By November, the Yankees returned with a greater force. They captured and destroyed Fort Dickinson in Wilkes-Barre. With that victory, a new state (which was separate from both Connecticut and Pennsylvania) was proposed. The new state was to be named Westmoreland. To ensure that they didn&#x27;t lose the land, Pennsylvania&#x27;s state government negotiated a compromise with the Connecticut (Yankee) settlers. The Yankee settlers would become citizens of Pennsylvania and their property claims would be restored prior to the Decree of Trenton. As part of the compromise, Pennsylvania would establish a new county in Northeastern Pennsylvania. The Yankees agreed to the terms.

On September 25, 1786, the Pennsylvania General Assembly passed a resolution which created Luzerne County. It was formed from a section of Northumberland County and named after Chevalier de la Luzerne, a French soldier and diplomat during the 18th century. Wilkes-Barre became the seat of government for the new territory. This resolution ended the idea of creating a new state.

In 1797, several decades after the community&#x27;s founding, Louis Philippe, later the King of France from 1830 to 1848, stayed in Wilkes-Barre while traveling to the French Asylum settlement.

===19th century===

Wilkes-Barre&#x27;s population skyrocketed due to the discovery of anthracite coal in the 19th century. In 1808, Judge Jesse Fell of Wilkes-Barre discovered a solution to ignite anthracite with the usage of an iron grate; it allowed for the coal to light and burn more easily. This invention increased the popularity of anthracite as a fuel source. This led to the expansion of the coal industry in Northeastern Pennsylvania; Wilkes-Barre was nicknamed &quot;The Diamond City&quot; due to its high productivity of mining coal. The growing demand for coal as a domestic heat source resulted in changes to patterns of immigration to Wilkes-Barre in the 19th century. The Pennsylvania guide, compiled by the Writers&#x27; Program of the Works Progress Administration in 1940, noted that:

Throughout the 1800s, canals and railroads were constructed to aid in the mining and transportation of coal. Hundreds of thousands of immigrants flocked to the city; they were seeking jobs in the numerous mines and collieries that sprang up throughout the region. In 1806, Wilkes-Barre Borough was formed from a segment of Wilkes-Barre Township; it was later incorporated as a city in 1871. This was the direct result of the population boom. At its peak, Wilkes-Barre had a population of over 86,000 in the 1930s and 40s.

New industries were established and the Vulcan Iron Works was a well-known manufacturer of railway locomotives from 1849 to 1954. During Wilkes-Barre&#x27;s reign as an industrial and economic force in America, several major companies and franchises became based in the city, such as Woolworth&#x27;s, Sterling Hotels, Miner&#x27;s Bank, Bell Telephone, Luzerne National Bank, and Stegmaier.

Even though the overall economy was doing very well, the city was still prone to natural disasters. Besides frequent flooding from the Susquehanna River, Wilkes-Barre also endured a devastating F3 tornado on August 19, 1890. The twister killed 16 people, injured 50, damaged or destroyed 260 buildings, and cost at least $240,000 (in 1890 money).

===20th century===
Wilkes-Barre is located within Pennsylvania&#x27;s Coal Region. The anthracite coal mining industry, and its extensive use of child labor in the early 20th century, was one of the industries targeted by the National Child Labor Committee and its hired photographer, Lewis Hine. Many of Hine&#x27;s subjects were photographed in the mines and coal fields near Wilkes-Barre. The impact of the Hine photographs led to the enactment of child labor laws across the country.

The coal industry continued despite several disasters, including an explosion at Wilkes-Barre&#x27;s Baltimore Colliery in 1919, which killed 92 miners. The industry declined when the United States switched to other energy sources, and most coal operations had left Wilkes-Barre by the end of World War II. The 1959 Knox Mine Disaster, resulting in the flooding of numerous mines, marked the end of large-scale coal mining in the area. Industrial restructuring also caused the city to lose jobs and begin a decades-long decline.

In 1926, Planters Peanuts Company was founded in Wilkes-Barre by two Italian immigrants. The company maintained its headquarters in the city until 1961. In 1929, baseball player Babe Ruth hit one of the longest home runs in history at Artillery Park in Wilkes-Barre.

On November 8, 1972, Wilkes-Barre became the birthplace of modern cable television programming when Home Box Office (HBO) launched over the city&#x27;s Teleservice Cable system (now Service Electric Cable). Around 365 Teleservice subscribers were the first to receive the premium cable service when it commenced broadcasts. As local ordinances prohibiting direct-to-cable telecasts of theatrical feature films prevented Time-Life from launching HBO over its New York City-based Sterling Manhattan cable franchise, the company initially sought an agreement with Teleservice to launch it on the provider&#x27;s Allentown system; possible television blackout conflicts for HBO-televised NBA games, as Allentown was located within the Philadelphia 76ers&#x27;s blackout radius, resulted in Teleservice electing to offer it on its Wilkes-Barre system instead.

Wilkes-Barre became the site of a mass shooting on September 25, 1982. George Emil Banks killed 13 people and wounded one. Banks was deemed incompetent to be executed yet currently resides on death row.

====Flooding====
Manufacturing and retail remained Wilkes-Barre&#x27;s strongest industries, but the city&#x27;s economy took a major blow from Tropical Storm Agnes in 1972. The storm pushed the Susquehanna River to a height of nearly , four feet above the city&#x27;s levees, flooding downtown with nine feet of water. A total of 128 deaths were attributed to the storm. Most drowning deaths were caused by people trapped in their cars. Almost 400,000 homes and businesses were destroyed and 220,000 Pennsylvanians were left homeless (as were hundreds of thousands in other states). Damage was estimated to be $2.1 billion in Pennsylvania alone. President Richard Nixon sent aid to the area, after flying over in his helicopter on his way to his Camp David retreat (on June 24, 1972).

Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, Wilkes-Barre attempted to prevent the damage from storms as intense as Agnes by building a levee system that rises ; completed in January 2003, the network of levees cost roughly $250 million. It has successfully resisted other threatening floods in 1996, 2004, and 2006. The Army Corps of Engineers has praised the quality of the levees. In 2006, the city made the front page of national newspapers when 200,000 residents were told to evacuate in the wake of flooding that was forecast to reach levels near that of 1972, though the flooding fell short of predictions.

In late August 2011, Hurricane Irene, centered off the New Jersey coast, caused the Susquehanna River to rise to flood level, but there was no cause for alarm. Then, from September 6 to 8, heavy rains from the inland remnants of Tropical Storm Lee and Hurricane Katia offshore funneled heavy rain over the Wyoming Valley and into the Susquehanna River watershed. The Susquehanna swelled to record levels across the state. In Wilkes-Barre, it crested on September 9 at an all-time record of , nearly higher than water levels reached during Hurricane Agnes in 1972. The levees protected Wilkes-Barre, but nearby boroughs did not escape, as West Pittston, Plymouth, and parts of Plains Township were affected by extreme flooding.

===21st century===
====Revitalization and construction====
On June 9, 2005, Thomas M. Leighton, the city&#x27;s mayor, unveiled his &quot;I believe...&quot; campaign for Wilkes-Barre, which was intended to boost the city&#x27;s spirits. Construction began on a planned downtown theatre complex, which had a grand opening on June 30, 2006. Renovation of the landmark Hotel Sterling was being pursued by CityVest, a nonprofit developer. The expansion of Wilkes University and King&#x27;s College took place. Also, the canopy and matching street lights in Public Square and across downtown were removed; they were replaced by new green lampposts.

Wilkes-Barre celebrated its 200th anniversary in 2006. Several events, including a Beach Boys concert, were planned but canceled due to extremely heavy rains. Most of the city&#x27;s population was ordered to evacuate on June 28, 2006, and the celebration was postponed to Labor Day weekend.

The Riverfront revitalization project (River Common), broke ground in 2007 and was completed in early 2010. It has made the riverfront accessible to the public. The area also has a new amphitheater for live performances and improved access through ramps and sidewalks. Fountains and color-changing lights have been added underneath two bridges which carry pedestrian traffic across the normally-open levee. The project stretches approximately four blocks from the Luzerne County Courthouse to the intersection of South River Street and West South Street. The River Common has since hosted concerts and charity events.

Since completion of the River Common, additional improvements to city infrastructure have been progressing. New crosswalks have been installed downtown, including signage emphasizing that pedestrians have the right-of-way. The completion of the James F. Conahan Intermodal Transportation Facility has added parking and relocated Luzerne County buses from their former Public Square staging sites. This has reduced traffic congestion around the square. Private carrier Martz offers coach bus service from the terminal as well.

The widening and realignment of Coal Street, a major road connecting Wilkes-Barre City with Wilkes-Barre Township, was completed in 2012. The new Coal Street provides four lanes over the original two lanes, making travel between the highly commercial Wilkes-Barre Township and the city much easier. In 2013, Hotel Sterling was demolished due to flood damage in the hotel&#x27;s basement (which compromised the building&#x27;s integrity). As of today, several buildings are in the process of being constructed on the site of the former hotel.

== Geography ==

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and , or 4.60%, is water. The city is bordered by the Susquehanna River to the west. Most of Downtown is located on a wide floodplain. Floodwalls were constructed to protect a large percentage of the city. The elevation of the downtown area is about above sea level. As you travel inland, away from the river, the elevation rises. Wilkes-Barre Mountain is a physical barrier southeast of the city.

The contiguous network of 5 cities and more than 40 boroughs all built in a straight line in Northeastern Pennsylvania&#x27;s urban area act culturally and logistically as one continuous city, so while the city of Wilkes-Barre itself is a smaller town, the larger unofficial city of Scranton/Wilkes-Barre contains nearly half a million residents in roughly 200 square miles.

Wilkes-Barre is located approximately northwest of Allentown, and northwest of Philadelphia. Wilkes-Barre and the surrounding Wyoming Valley are framed by the Pocono Mountains to the east, the Endless Mountains to the north and west, and the Lehigh Valley to the south. The Susquehanna River flows through the center of the valley and defines the northwestern border of the city.

=== Neighborhoods ===
Wilkes-Barre houses over one dozen neighborhoods:
* Central City: It is also referred to as &quot;Downtown.&quot; This section of the city is located between the Susquehanna River and Wilkes-Barre Boulevard, and between South and North Streets. It is the original foundation of Wilkes-Barre (the 16 blocks claimed by the Connecticut settlers who founded the city). The neighborhood is home to most of the city&#x27;s high-rises and its one Public Square. Throughout the city&#x27;s history, the area has remained a hub for all of Luzerne County. During the city&#x27;s boom, this small area was home to the headquarters of more than 100 national corporations. Today, it still houses the NEPA Headquarters for Verizon, Citizen&#x27;s Bank, Blue Cross, PNC Bank, Luzerne National Bank, Guard Insurance, and a number of other companies. Thousands of people live and/or work in Downtown Wilkes-Barre every day.
* North End: This is the area northeast of Downtown. It comprises a number of urban and suburban communities. North End is renowned for its architecture.
* Parsons: This neighborhood is also northeast of Downtown. This is a quiet part of the city (with a suburban atmosphere). It includes two city parks, a golf course, and a number of factories.
* Miners&#x27; Mills: This community was named after a prominent local family (who lived in the area). Miners&#x27; Mills is the last neighborhood on the northeastern border of the city.
* East End: This neighborhood is directly east of Downtown. East End, Heights, and Mayflower are fairly new areas compared to the rest of the city, having only been developed in the 20th century. Old pictures of the Stegmaier Building indicate that everything east of Downtown was undeveloped until the 1900s.
* Heights: This section of the city is located southeast of Downtown. It is centered between East End and Mayflower.
* Mayflower: This area is located south of Downtown. It was once home to numerous mansions owned by various &quot;bigwigs.&quot; Today it houses the OKT, Lincoln Plaza, and Park Avenue residential housing communities. The best view of Downtown can be seen from the high streets of Mayflower.
* South Wilkes-Barre: This neighborhood is located directly southwest of Downtown. It was home to the national headquarters of Planter&#x27;s Peanuts and the Bell Telephone Company (in the 20th century). One of the tallest churches in Luzerne County, St. Nicholas Roman Catholic Church, dominates the south end skyline (standing at nearly 200 feet).
* Goose Island: This area is located in the southwestern section of the city between South Wilkes-Barre and Rolling Mill Hill.
* Rolling Mill Hill: This neighborhood is also located in the southwestern part of the city.
* Iron Triangle: This is another community southwest of Downtown.
* Other neighborhoods and sub-neighborhoods: There are other smaller neighborhoods and sub-neighborhoods in Wilkes-Barre City (e.g., Brookside, Upper Miners&#x27; Mills, Lower Miners&#x27; Mills, and Barney Farms).

=== Adjacent municipalities ===
* Wilkes-Barre Township (southeast)
* Plains Township (east and northeast)
* Kingston (north)
* Edwardsville (northwest)
* Larksville (west)
* Hanover Township (southwest)
* Bear Creek Township (southwest)

=== Climate ===
Under the Köppen climate classification, Wilkes-Barre falls within either a hot-summer humid continental climate (&quot;Dfa&quot;) if the isotherm is used or a humid subtropical climate (&quot;Cfa&quot;) if the isotherm is used. Summers are hot and winters are moderately cold with wide variations in temperature. Winters are cold with a January average of . The surrounding mountains have an influence on the climate (including both precipitation and temperatures), leading to wide variations within a short distance. On average, temperatures below are infrequent, occurring 2.5 days per year, and there are 34.9 days where the maximum temperature remains below . The average annual snowfall is during the winter (in which severe snowstorms are rare). However, when snowstorms do occur, they can disrupt normal routines for several days.

Summers are warm with a July average of . In an average summer, temperatures exceeding occur on 11.7 days and but rarely exceed . Spring and fall are unpredictable with temperatures ranging from cold to warm (although they are usually mild). On average, Wilkes-Barre receives of precipitation each year, which is relatively evenly distributed throughout the year (though the summer months receive more precipitation). Extreme temperatures range from on January 21, 1994, to on July 9, 1936. Wilkes-Barre averages 2,303 hours of sunshine per year, ranging from a low of 96 hours in December (or 33% of possible sunshine) to 286 hours in July (or 62% of possible sunshine).

The hardiness zone is 6b except in downtown and other areas near the river which are 7a. The city is significantly warmer than the W-B/Scranton Airport due to the airport&#x27;s higher latitude and elevation.

== Parks and recreation ==

Wilkes-Barre has a Downtown Riverfront Park system that contains 91 acres of open space.

Kirby Park is a public park located along the western bank of the Susquehanna River. Kirby Park is one of the region&#x27;s most valued recreational resources. Given to the city of Wilkes-Barre by the Kirby Family, the park welcomes hundreds of thousands each year. The park is the setting for the city&#x27;s annual Cherry Blossom Festival (held during the last weekend of April) and the city&#x27;s July 4 Celebration. Its amenities include tennis courts, a fitness trail, pond, walking paths, running track, softball fields, parking area, volleyball courts, pavilions, and more.

Nesbitt Park is also located on the west side of the Susquehanna River. It is located across from Kirby Park. Nesbitt is open to the public. It has walking paths and areas for picnicking.

The River Common is located along the eastern bank of the Susquehanna River. The Market Street Bridge bisects the park. The River Common joins with the Luzerne County Courthouse grounds. Its features include a 750-person amphitheater, paved walk-ways, gardens, ornamental trees, seating areas, a fishing pier, and two grand gateways connecting the city to the river.

== Demographics ==

The city&#x27;s population was in constant decline from the 1930s through 2010, but losses stopped that decade, and it saw growth as of 2020. As of the 2020 census, there were 44,328 people and 15,581 households residing in the city. The population density was 5,945 per square mile. The racial makeup of the city was 69.80% White, 14.90% African American, 0.40% Native American, 2.4% Asian, 0.20% Pacific Islander, and 4.60% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 21.0% of the population.

As of the 2010 census, the city was 79.2% White, 10.9% Black or African American, 0.3% Native American, 1.4% Asian, and 2.9% were two or more races. Of the population, 11.3% were of Hispanic or Latino ancestry. The Hispanic population was just 1.58% of the population as of the 2000 census.

As of the 2000 census, there were 43,123 people, 17,961 households, and 9,878 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 20,294 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 92.30% White, 5.09% African American, 0.11% Native American, 0.79% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 0.53% from other races, and 1.15% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.58% of the population.

The average household size was 2.42. With population spread of 22.9% under the age of 18, 61.3% between the ages of 19–64, and 15.8% over the age of 65. Females made up 50.6% of the population.

The median household income was $37,902, while 26.6% of the city were found below the poverty line. The per capita income was $20,197.

===Dialect===
The local accent of American English is Northeast Pennsylvania English.

===Religion===
More than half (59.3%) of the city&#x27;s population is religious: 43.8% Catholic, 4.4% Methodist, 3.1% Lutheran, 2.0% Presbyterian, 1.1% Pentecostal, 0.8% Judaism, 0.6% Episcopalian, 0.5% Baptist, 0.5% Islam, and 0.3% The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

== Economy ==
As of March 2019, income per capita in Wilkes-Barre was $18,375, compared to the national average of $31,177. Household income was $32,484, compared to the national average of $57,652. Family median income was $42,782, compared to the national average of $70,850. The city&#x27;s unemployment rate in March 2019 was 6.4%. Recent job growth was 0.8%. 49% of jobs were in sales, office, administrative support, production, transportation, and material moving sectors. In 2016, 30.1% of residents lived below the poverty line, more than double the Pennsylvania average of 12.9%. Large employers in the city include GUARD Insurance Group and Lord &amp; Taylor.

==Government==
=== City government ===
==== Executive ====
The city is headed by an elected mayor, who serves four-year terms. The current mayor is George Brown (Democrat). He has been in office since 2019. Before becoming mayor he was a business man and a former city councilman.

==== Legislative ====
The legislative branch consists of a five-member City Council. They are elected by a single-member district to four-year terms. The following are current members of the council: Bill Barrett, Mike Belusko, Tony Brooks, Stan Mirin, and Jessica McClay.

==== Audit and Control ====
The office of Audit and Control is the third branch of Wilkes-Barre City government. It is headed by the City Controller, elected to a four-year term. Tony C. Thomas, the current City Controller, is a Democrat and has been in office since 2024.

==== Judicial ====
The city of Wilkes-Barre is served by two City Attorneys (Timothy Henry and Maureen Collins). They advise both the mayor and city council.

=== County government ===
The Luzerne County government operates out of Wilkes-Barre. The city is the administrative center of Luzerne County. The county government is responsible for imposing taxes, providing services to the public, and administering laws and regulations. They govern over a population of nearly 320,000 people. Many government offices are situated within the county courthouse (located at 200 North River Street in Downtown Wilkes-Barre). The Luzerne County Court of Common Pleas also operates out of the same building.

On November 2, 2010, the voters of Luzerne County held a referendum on the question of home rule. A total of 51,413 (55.25%) voted in favor of home rule, while another 41,639 (44.75%) voted against the move. This vote was the direct result of the corruption, wasteful spending, higher property taxes, and out-of-control debt facing the county. The home rule charter took effect on January 2, 2012; the Luzerne County Board of Commissioners was abolished and replaced with the new form of government (council–manager government). This government consists of a county council. The council chair, who is appointed by his or her fellow council members, is both the highest-ranking officer on the assembly and the head of county government for ceremonial purposes. The council also appoints and works alongside a full-time manager (who supervises the county&#x27;s day-to-day operations).

The county government is also made up of many other officials (e.g., the county controller, district attorney, and sheriff).

=== State and federal representation ===
==== State ====
* Eddie Day Pashinski (D) represents Wilkes-Barre in the Pennsylvania House of Representatives.
* Marty Flynn (D) represents the city in the Pennsylvania State Senate.

==== Federal ====
* Rob Bresnahan (R) represents Wilkes-Barre on the federal level (in the U.S. House of Representatives).
* Dave McCormick (R) and John Fetterman (D) represent the entire Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in the U.S. Senate.

== Education ==
===High schools===

Wilkes-Barre City is part of the Wilkes-Barre Area School District. The district operates one high school, Wilkes-Barre Area High School. It opened in 2020 and replaced James M. Coughlin High School, G. A. R. Memorial Junior Senior High School, and Elmer L. Meyers High School.

Holy Redeemer High School is a Catholic school in Wilkes-Baree managed by the Diocese of Scranton.

===Colleges===
The area in and around Wilkes-Barre is home to several colleges and universities:
* Geisinger Commonwealth School of Medicine, Wilkes Barre Campus
* King&#x27;s College
* Luzerne County Community College
* Misericordia University
* Penn State Wilkes-Barre
* Wilkes University

=== Libraries ===
Along with the libraries associated with the colleges, Wilkes-Barre has several libraries. These include three branches of the Osterhout Free Library, with the headquarters for the Luzerne County Library System in the main branch.

== Transportation ==
=== Airports ===
Two international airlines fly from the Wilkes-Barre/Scranton International Airport in nearby Pittston Township. Smaller, private planes may also use the Wilkes-Barre Wyoming Valley Airport in Forty Fort.

===Highways===
Interstate 81 passes north–south near Wilkes-Barre, and the city is also located near the Northeast Extension of the Pennsylvania Turnpike. It is also about north of Interstate 80. The North Cross Valley Expressway, starting at the junction of Interstate 81 and Pennsylvania Route 115, carries Pennsylvania Route 309 through northern Wilkes-Barre, connecting the city to Dallas in the north. Route 115 provides access from the Pennsylvania Turnpike&#x27;s Northeast Extension, but it does not enter Wilkes-Barre city limits.

===Buses===
Public transportation is provided by the Luzerne County Transportation Authority. In addition to servicing the city, it provides transportation for the northern half of the county. It also has a connecting bus to Scranton via an interchange at Pittston with the Transit System of Lackawanna County (COLTS), the public transit authority of Lackawanna County.

Martz Trailways provides intercity bus service from the Martz Trailways Bus Terminal in downtown Wilkes-Barre to Scranton, New York City, Philadelphia, Atlantic City, and Wind Creek Bethlehem.

Several jitney companies operate from Wilkes-Barre through Stroudsburg to Paterson and New York City via I-80.

===Rail===
The city was at one time served by the Lehigh Valley Railroad, Central Railroad of New Jersey, the Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad (later Erie Lackawanna Railway), Delaware and Hudson Railway, the Pennsylvania Railroad, the Wilkes-Barre and Eastern Railroad, and the Lackawanna and Wyoming Valley Railroad (known as the Laurel Line). CNJ trains included the &quot;Interstate Express&quot; (ending in 1957) and local service to Allentown and Philadelphia. The last Lehigh Valley trains were the &quot;Black Diamond&quot; (ending in 1959), &quot;John Wilkes&quot; and &quot;Maple Leaf&quot; (the last two, ending in 1961).

The Wilkes-Barre Traction Company formed a streetcar line from Georgetown to Nanticoke and over the river into Plymouth (it ceased operations in the mid-1940s).

The Norfolk Southern Railway, which acquired the former Delaware and Hudson line from successor Canadian Pacific Railway, and the Luzerne and Susquehanna Railway, provide freight service within the city.

==Arts and culture==
=== Local attractions ===
* Dorothy Dickson Darte Center for the Performing Arts, located on the campus of Wilkes University
* F. M. Kirby Center for the Performing Arts
* Frederick Stegmaier Mansion
* Little Theatre of Wilkes-Barre
* Luzerne County Convention and Visitors Bureau
* Luzerne County Museum
* Mohegan Sun Arena at Casey Plaza
* Mohegan Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania&#x27;s first slots casino
* River Street Historic District
* Stegmaier Brewery
* Wilkes-Barre station
* Wyoming Monument

=== Media ===
&quot;Times Leader&quot; and &quot;The Citizens&#x27; Voice&quot; are the two largest daily newspapers in Wilkes-Barre. The Wyoming Valley&#x27;s NBC affiliate, WBRE-TV 28, is the only television station licensed to Wilkes-Barre, but WNEP-TV 16 (ABC), WYOU 22 (CBS), WVIA-TV 44 (PBS), and WSWB 38 (CW), all in Scranton, WOLF-TV 56 (Fox) in Hazleton, and WQMY 53 (MyNetworkTV) in Williamsport also serve the city. Wilkes-Barre&#x27;s radio market is ranked No. 69 by Arbitron&#x27;s ranking system. There are news, adult alternative, and music radio stations which are receivable in the area.

===Popular culture===
* Wilkes-Barre&#x27;s economic plight is featured in the movie &quot;&quot;, directed by Michael Moore.
* The Wilkes-Barre variation (or Traxler variation, as it is more commonly known) of the Two Knights&#x27; Defense is named for the Wilkes-Barre chess club.
* In the TV series &quot;Supernatural&quot; episode 8.13 &quot;Everyone Hates Hitler,&quot; the lead protagonists investigate a case in Wilkes-Barre.
* In the TV series &quot;The Office&quot;, In the episode &quot;Michael&#x27;s Birthday&quot;, Dwight gives Michael a jersey from the Wilkes-Barre/Scranton Penguins, a local professional hockey team that plays in Wilkes-Barre. Throughout the series, there is a Scranton/Wilkes Barre Yankees magnet on the kitchen fridge.
* In the TV series &quot;Days of Our Lives&quot;, Episode 8/31/2021, Phillip tells Belle that Brady and Chloe are in Wilkes-Barre. At the end of the episode, Phillip tells them to &quot;fuel up the jet for Wilkes-Barre PA.&quot;
* The Wilkes-Barre police department appears on the TV docuseries &quot;On Patrol: Live&quot;.

=== Sports ===
== Notable people ==

* Jane Alexander, lawyer and Pennsylvania state representative
* George Emil Banks, spree killer
* Hazel Barnes, philosopher
* Douglas Carter Beane, playwright
* Al Bedner, NFL player
* Ray Black, Pitcher for the Milwaukee Brewers
* David Bohm, quantum physicist
* Benjamin Burnley, lead singer and guitarist for rock band Breaking Benjamin
* Lillian Cahn, co-founder of Coach, Inc. and Coach handbag designer
* George Catlin, artist
* Britton Chance, bio-physicist and Olympic sailor
* Catherine Chandler, poet
* Mark Ciavarella, disgraced judge in kids for cash scandal
* Mark Cohen, street photographer
* Ed Cole, Major League Baseball pitcher
* Colleen Corby, 1960s fashion model
* Michael Costello, racing driver
* Mary Helen Peck Crane (1827–1891), activist, writer; mother of Stephen Crane
* Amasa Dana, former U.S. Congressman
* Charles B. Dougherty, Army National Guard major general who commanded the 28th Infantry Division
* Mark Duda, NFL player, Lackawanna College football head coach
* Francis A. &quot;Mother&quot; Dunn, football player for the Canton Bulldogs
* Benjamin F. Evans Jr. (1912–1991), U.S. Army major general, U.S. military&#x27;s chief of joint U.S. military aid mission in Turkey
* Pete Elko, Major League Baseball third baseman
* Dave Evans, Hollywood filmmaker most known for the motion picture &quot;The Sandlot&quot;
* Jesse Fell, early experimenter with anthracite coal
* Pat Finn, game show host whose shows include Lifetime&#x27;s, The Family Channel&#x27;s, and PAX&#x27;s &quot;Shop &#x27;til You Drop&quot;
* Ham Fisher, cartoonist
* Red Davis, Third baseman for The New York Giants (baseball) 1941
* Tess Gardella, actress
* Billy Goeckel, baseball player
* Bob Good, U.S. congressman
* Kevin Gryboski, Retired Major League Baseball pitcher
* William Harmatz, jockey, winner of 1959 Preakness Stakes
* Laning Harvey, Pennsylvania state senator
* Mickey Haslin, Major League Baseball infielder
* George Washington Helme, businessman and founder of Helmetta, New Jersey
* Joe Hergert, former professional football player
* William Henry Hines, U.S. Representative for Pennsylvania&#x27;s 12th congressional district from 1893 to 1895
* Raye Hollitt, bodybuilder and actress
* Qadry Ismail, former NFL wide receiver on the Baltimore Ravens
* Raghib Ismail, former NFL player and Heisman Trophy runner-up
* Florence Foster Jenkins, unconventional operatic soprano, subject of film starring Meryl Streep
* Candy Jones, fashion model, writer, radio personality
* Dorothy Andrews Elston Kabis, Treasurer of the United States
* James Karen, actor
* Mary Holland Kinkaid, journalist
* Michael J. Kirwan, represented Youngstown, Ohio in Congress, 1938–1970
* Al Klawitter, Major League Baseball pitcher
* Franz Kline, abstract expressionist painter
* Mike Konnick, former MLB player
* Mary Jo Kopechne, passenger killed in car driven by Ted Kennedy at Chappaquiddick
* Harley Jane Kozak, actress and author
* Matthew Lesko, infomercial personality
* Edward B. Lewis, winner of the 1995 Nobel Prize in physiology and medicine
* Santo Loquasto, production designer
* Garrick Mallery, ethnologist
* Herman Mankiewicz, screenwriter of &quot;Citizen Kane&quot;
* Joseph L. Mankiewicz, Academy Award-winning director and producer
* Al Markim, actor (&quot;Tom Corbett, Space Cadet&quot;)
* Mary McDonnell, actress twice nominated for Academy Award
* Edward Peter McManaman, Roman Catholic bishop
* Edward Meneeley, painter
* Asher Miner, U.S. Army brigadier general and prominent businessman
* Albert Mudrian, author and magazine editor
* Leo C. Mundy, Pennsylvania state senator and physician
* Jozef Murgas, radio pioneer
* Joe Murray, left-handed pitcher for the Philadelphia A&#x27;s
* Claudette Nevins, actress
* Amedeo Obici, founder of Planters Peanuts
* Kid O&#x27;Hara, baseball player
* Rose O&#x27;Neill, cartoonist, illustrator, artist, and writer.
* Jerry Orbach, Tony Award-winning actor
* Phil Ostrowski, NFL player
* John Paluck, football player for Washington Redskins and Pro Bowl selection
* William Daniel Phillips, co-recipient of the 1997 Nobel Prize in Physics
* Mendy Rudolph, NBA referee from 1953 to 1975
* Sam Savitt, equestrian artist, author
* Michael Schoeffling, actor, played Jake Ryan in film &quot;Sixteen Candles&quot;
* Don Schwall, MLB pitcher
* M. Gerald Schwartzbach, California criminal defense attorney
* Greg Skrepenak, former NFL player, convicted felon
* Jonathan Slavin, character actor
* Ron Solt, former NFL player
* Jason Spisak, voice actor
* Jacob Sullum, journalist and author, featured in Academy Award-nominated documentary &quot;Super Size Me&quot;
* Bob Sura, basketball player, Houston Rockets
* Louis Teicher, pianist; member of the duo Ferrante &amp; Teicher
* Alexis Toth (St. Alexis of Wilkes-Barre), saint in the Eastern Orthodox Church
* Ty Tyson
* John Walsh, MLB third baseman
* Helen L. Webster (1853–1928), philologist and educator
* Michael Whalen, actor
* Ira W. Wood, represented from 1904 to 1913
* Hal Woodeshick, professional baseball player
* Tom Woodeshick, professional football player
* Frank Zane, bodybuilder, three-time Mr. Olympia, won Mr. America, Mr. Universe, Mr. World; donated gym at Wilkes University
== See also ==
* Giants Despair Hillclimb
* USS &quot;Wilkes-Barre&quot;

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==
* 
* Greater Wilkes-Barre Chamber of Commerce</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q745594" start="0" end="12" title="Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania" label="Wilkes-Barre"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="38" end="49" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q501292" start="53" end="81" title="Luzerne County, Pennsylvania" label="Luzerne County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q604264" start="127" end="141" title="Wyoming Valley" label="Wyoming Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058048" start="145" end="170" title="Northeastern Pennsylvania" label="Northeastern Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q271395" start="259" end="267" title="Scranton, Pennsylvania" label="Scranton"/>
<link wikidata="Q604264" start="276" end="340" title="Wyoming Valley" label="Scranton–Wilkes-Barre–Hazleton, PA Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="386" end="397" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925894" start="471" end="486" title="Delaware Valley" label="Delaware Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199458" start="488" end="506" title="Greater Pittsburgh" label="Greater Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q123202" start="512" end="525" title="Lehigh Valley" label="Lehigh Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705542" start="531" end="549" title="Harrisburg–Carlisle metropolitan statistical area" label="Greater Harrisburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q515" start="584" end="590" title="City" label="cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195043" start="608" end="615" title="borough" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745292" start="1118" end="1134" title="Pocono Mountains" label="Pocono Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376176" start="1152" end="1169" title="Endless Mountains" label="Endless Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q27538" start="1233" end="1250" title="Susquehanna River" label="Susquehanna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q182458" start="1680" end="1690" title="anthracite" label="anthracite"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1878" end="1890" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423570" start="1962" end="1980" title="Knox Mine disaster" label="Knox Mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q142811" start="2341" end="2350" title="Allentown, Pennsylvania" label="Allentown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="2371" end="2383" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2407" end="2420" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q604264" start="2480" end="2494" title="Wyoming Valley" label="Wyoming Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q253436" start="2516" end="2523" title="Shawnee" label="Shawnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="2528" end="2534" title="Lenape" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q951500" start="2622" end="2633" title="Connecticut Colony" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="2681" end="2693" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="2749" end="2765" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q692062" start="2918" end="2924" title="Yankee" label="Yankee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16003959" start="2957" end="2967" title="Mill Creek (Susquehanna River tributary)" label="Mill Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="3040" end="3051" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="3181" end="3189" title="Iroquois" label="Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="3249" end="3255" title="Lenape" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694203" start="3296" end="3307" title="Teedyuscung" label="Teedyuscung"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="3723" end="3734" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184277" start="3960" end="3981" title="Wilkes-Barre Township, Luzerne County, Pennsylvania" label="Wilkes-Barre Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q333127" start="4042" end="4053" title="John Wilkes" label="John Wilkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6076021" start="4058" end="4069" title="Isaac Barré" label="Isaac Barré"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="4093" end="4103" title="Parliament of Great Britain" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055643" start="4118" end="4134" title="colonial America" label="colonial America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163373" start="4353" end="4373" title="Pennamite-Yankee War" label="Pennamite-Yankee War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195929" start="4510" end="4539" title="Congress of the Confederation" label="Congress of the Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q494164" start="4751" end="4772" title="Northumberland County, Pennsylvania" label="Northumberland County"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="4786" end="4803" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2190013" start="4941" end="4958" title="Battle of Wyoming" label="Battle of Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471064" start="4988" end="5002" title="Fort Dickinson" label="Fort Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="5029" end="5045" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426614" start="5113" end="5132" title="Sullivan Expedition" label="Sullivan Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603807" start="5704" end="5716" title="State of Westmoreland" label="Westmoreland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058048" start="6072" end="6097" title="Northeastern Pennsylvania" label="Northeastern Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867077" start="6160" end="6189" title="Pennsylvania General Assembly" label="Pennsylvania General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851044" start="6310" end="6333" title="Chevalier de la Luzerne" label="Chevalier de la Luzerne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501917" start="6337" end="6351" title="French Royal Army (1652–1830)" label="French soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q193391" start="6356" end="6364" title="diplomat" label="diplomat"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="6414" end="6432" title="county seat" label="seat of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771" start="6575" end="6589" title="Louis Philippe I" label="Louis Philippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501684" start="6681" end="6694" title="French Azilum" label="French Asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q182458" start="6795" end="6810" title="anthracite" label="anthracite coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186317" start="6847" end="6857" title="Jesse Fell" label="Jesse Fell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111958" start="7226" end="7238" title="productivity" label="productivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743933" start="7397" end="7415" title="American Guide Series" label="Pennsylvania guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200079" start="7462" end="7491" title="Works Progress Administration" label="Works Progress Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="7536" end="7542" title="canals" label="canals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="7547" end="7556" title="railroads" label="railroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137767" start="7770" end="7776" title="Coal Region" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q131198610" start="8077" end="8094" title="Vulcan Iron Works (Wilkes-Barre)" label="Vulcan Iron Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q642212" start="8321" end="8330" title="F.W. Woolworth Company" label="Woolworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883277" start="8375" end="8389" title="Bell Telephone Company" label="Bell Telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555399" start="8418" end="8427" title="Lion Brewery, Inc." label="Stegmaier"/>
<link wikidata="Q380770" start="8624" end="8626" title="Fujita scale" label="F3"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081" start="8627" end="8634" title="tornado" label="tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q85720377" start="8638" end="8653" title="1890 Wilkes-Barre tornado" label="August 19, 1890"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137767" start="8848" end="8859" title="Coal Region" label="Coal Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q192571" start="8923" end="8934" title="child labor" label="child labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971463" start="9004" end="9034" title="National Child Labor Committee" label="National Child Labor Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q347194" start="9063" end="9073" title="Lewis Hine" label="Lewis Hine"/>
<link wikidata="Q23641162" start="9229" end="9245" title="child labor laws" label="child labor laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q25212623" start="9368" end="9386" title="Baltimore Mine Tunnel Disaster (Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania)" label="Baltimore Colliery"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="9560" end="9572" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423570" start="9583" end="9601" title="Knox Mine Disaster" label="Knox Mine Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201637" start="9806" end="9830" title="Planters" label="Planters Peanuts Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q213812" start="9975" end="9984" title="Babe Ruth" label="Babe Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801145" start="10032" end="10046" title="Artillery Park (baseball)" label="Artillery Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="10131" end="10147" title="cable television" label="cable television"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="10165" end="10186" title="HBO" label="Home Box Office (HBO)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455684" start="10247" end="10269" title="Service Electric" label="Service Electric Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411739" start="10485" end="10494" title="Time Inc." label="Time-Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q142811" start="10674" end="10683" title="Allentown, Pennsylvania" label="Allentown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923210" start="10701" end="10720" title="Blackout (broadcasting)" label="television blackout"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="10749" end="10752" title="National Basketball Association" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q138089" start="10796" end="10814" title="Philadelphia 76ers" label="Philadelphia 76ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536682" start="10953" end="10968" title="1982 Wilkes-Barre shootings" label="a mass shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711419" start="11269" end="11289" title="Hurricane Agnes" label="Tropical Storm Agnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q27538" start="11320" end="11337" title="Susquehanna River" label="Susquehanna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="11394" end="11399" title="levee" label="levee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="11782" end="11795" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q309202" start="11872" end="11882" title="Camp David" label="Camp David"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="12220" end="12243" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers" label="Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q187621" start="12535" end="12550" title="Hurricane Irene 2011" label="Hurricane Irene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="12569" end="12579" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471025" start="12743" end="12761" title="Tropical Storm Lee (2011)" label="Tropical Storm Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705856" start="12766" end="12781" title="Hurricane Katia (2011)" label="Hurricane Katia"/>
<link wikidata="Q743383" start="13152" end="13165" title="West Pittston, Pennsylvania" label="West Pittston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187496" start="13167" end="13175" title="Plymouth, Pennsylvania" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200735" start="13190" end="13205" title="Plains Township, Pennsylvania" label="Plains Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792053" start="13318" end="13336" title="Thomas M. Leighton" label="Thomas M. Leighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985020" start="13608" end="13622" title="Hotel Sterling" label="Hotel Sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002474" start="13694" end="13711" title="Wilkes University" label="Wilkes University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410887" start="13716" end="13735" title="King&amp;#x27;s College (Pennsylvania)" label="King&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q183048" start="13970" end="13980" title="Beach Boys" label="Beach Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="14580" end="14585" title="levee" label="levee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706573" start="14644" end="14669" title="Luzerne County Courthouse" label="Luzerne County Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985020" start="15634" end="15648" title="Hotel Sterling" label="Hotel Sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="15903" end="15921" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q27538" start="16025" end="16042" title="Susquehanna River" label="Susquehanna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q193110" start="16094" end="16104" title="floodplain" label="floodplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460082" start="16106" end="16115" title="Floodwall" label="Floodwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q142811" start="16797" end="16806" title="Allentown, Pennsylvania" label="Allentown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="16825" end="16837" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745292" start="16905" end="16921" title="Pocono Mountains" label="Pocono Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376176" start="16939" end="16956" title="Endless Mountains" label="Endless Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q123202" start="16988" end="17001" title="Lehigh Valley" label="Lehigh Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q27538" start="17020" end="17037" title="Susquehanna River" label="Susquehanna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050303" start="17247" end="17255" title="Downtown" label="Downtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q18142" start="17566" end="17575" title="high-rise" label="high-rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q174782" start="17589" end="17602" title="Town square" label="Public Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555399" start="18806" end="18824" title="Lion Brewery, Inc." label="Stegmaier Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184277" start="20195" end="20216" title="Wilkes-Barre Township, Luzerne County, Pennsylvania" label="Wilkes-Barre Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200735" start="20231" end="20246" title="Plains Township, Pennsylvania" label="Plains Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185052" start="20270" end="20278" title="Kingston, Pennsylvania" label="Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133659" start="20289" end="20301" title="Edwardsville, Pennsylvania" label="Edwardsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181138" start="20316" end="20326" title="Larksville, Pennsylvania" label="Larksville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5649461" start="20336" end="20352" title="Hanover Township, Luzerne County, Pennsylvania" label="Hanover Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876426" start="20367" end="20386" title="Bear Creek Township, Pennsylvania" label="Bear Creek Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="20426" end="20455" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="20492" end="20528" title="hot-summer humid continental climate" label="hot-summer humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="20576" end="20601" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q925615" start="21933" end="21947" title="hardiness zone" label="hardiness zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="23569" end="23580" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="23742" end="23747" title="White (U.S. census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="23756" end="23772" title="African American (U.S. census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="23780" end="23795" title="Native American (U.S. census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="23802" end="23807" title="Asian (U.S. census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="23815" end="23831" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="23867" end="23875" title="Hispanic (U.S. census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="23879" end="23885" title="Latino (U.S. census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="23939" end="23950" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="24207" end="24218" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="24231" end="24242" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="24459" end="24464" title="White (U.S. census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="24472" end="24488" title="African American (U.S. census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="24496" end="24511" title="Native American (U.S. census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="24519" end="24524" title="Asian (U.S. census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="24532" end="24548" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="24561" end="24572" title="Race (United States census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="24608" end="24616" title="Hispanic (U.S. census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="24620" end="24626" title="Latino (U.S. census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="24951" end="24963" title="Poverty threshold" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="24969" end="24986" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001535" start="25025" end="25031" title="Accent (dialect)" label="accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="25035" end="25051" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057961" start="25055" end="25085" title="Northeast Pennsylvania English" label="Northeast Pennsylvania English"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="25176" end="25184" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="25191" end="25200" title="Methodism" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="25207" end="25215" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="25222" end="25234" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="25241" end="25252" title="Pentecostalism" label="Pentecostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="25259" end="25266" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="25273" end="25285" title="Episcopalian" label="Episcopalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="25292" end="25299" title="Baptist" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="25306" end="25311" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="25322" end="25369" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="25404" end="25421" title="per capita income" label="income per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="25496" end="25512" title="Median income" label="Household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="25666" end="25683" title="unemployment rate" label="unemployment rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q217583" start="25998" end="26019" title="GUARD Insurance Group" label="GUARD Insurance Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749082" start="26024" end="26041" title="Lord &amp;amp; Taylor" label="Lord &amp;amp; Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="26136" end="26141" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="26206" end="26214" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="26397" end="26409" title="City Council" label="City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052894" start="26433" end="26455" title="single-member district" label="single-member district"/>
<link wikidata="Q501292" start="27063" end="27077" title="Luzerne County, Pennsylvania" label="Luzerne County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="27078" end="27088" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="27135" end="27156" title="county seat" label="administrative center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706573" start="27411" end="27428" title="Luzerne County Courthouse" label="county courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110093" start="27510" end="27531" title="Pennsylvania courts of common pleas" label="Court of Common Pleas"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="27630" end="27640" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16192228" start="27660" end="27669" title="List of Pennsylvania municipalities and counties with home rule charters, optional charters, or optional plans" label="home rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q665826" start="27990" end="28012" title="County commission" label="Board of Commissioners"/>
<link wikidata="Q946819" start="28073" end="28099" title="council–manager government" label="council–manager government"/>
<link wikidata="Q28873579" start="28132" end="28146" title="Luzerne County Council" label="county council"/>
<link wikidata="Q140686" start="28152" end="28165" title="chairperson" label="council chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="28282" end="28307" title="head of government" label="head of county government"/>
<link wikidata="Q30594764" start="28391" end="28398" title="Luzerne County Manager" label="manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q653368" start="28550" end="28567" title="district attorney" label="district attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q578478" start="28573" end="28580" title="sheriff" label="sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335964" start="28643" end="28662" title="Eddie Day Pashinski" label="Eddie Day Pashinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="28664" end="28665" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163792" start="28698" end="28735" title="Pennsylvania House of Representatives, District 121" label="Pennsylvania House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775450" start="28739" end="28750" title="Marty Flynn" label="Marty Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="28752" end="28753" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164127" start="28782" end="28807" title="Pennsylvania Senate, District 22" label="Pennsylvania State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q130963821" start="28830" end="28843" title="Rob Bresnahan" label="Rob Bresnahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="28845" end="28846" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163615" start="28901" end="28930" title="Pennsylvania&amp;#x27;s 8th congressional district" label="U.S. House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234544" start="28935" end="28949" title="Dave McCormick" label="Dave McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="28951" end="28952" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181500" start="28958" end="28972" title="John Fetterman" label="John Fetterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="28974" end="28975" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="29034" end="29045" title="U.S. Senate" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16903439" start="29117" end="29150" title="Wilkes-Barre Area School District" label="Wilkes-Barre Area School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q108378070" start="29191" end="29220" title="Wilkes-Barre Area High School" label="Wilkes-Barre Area High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138398" start="29253" end="29282" title="James M. Coughlin High School" label="James M. Coughlin High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512114" start="29284" end="29327" title="G. A. R. Memorial Junior Senior High School" label="G. A. R. Memorial Junior Senior High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366607" start="29333" end="29360" title="Elmer L. Meyers High School" label="Elmer L. Meyers High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885901" start="29363" end="29388" title="Holy Redeemer High School" label="Holy Redeemer High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="29394" end="29402" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q876314" start="29441" end="29460" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Scranton" label="Diocese of Scranton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727027" start="29562" end="29603" title="Geisinger Commonwealth School of Medicine" label="Geisinger Commonwealth School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410887" start="29627" end="29646" title="King&amp;#x27;s College (Pennsylvania)" label="King&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706571" start="29649" end="29681" title="Luzerne County Community College" label="Luzerne County Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6875342" start="29684" end="29707" title="Misericordia University" label="Misericordia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163303" start="29710" end="29733" title="Penn State Wilkes-Barre" label="Penn State Wilkes-Barre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002474" start="29736" end="29753" title="Wilkes University" label="Wilkes University"/>
<link wikidata="Q30268059" start="29900" end="29922" title="Osterhout Free Library" label="Osterhout Free Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q30268059" start="29954" end="29983" title="Luzerne County Library System" label="Luzerne County Library System"/>
<link wikidata="Q255637" start="30083" end="30126" title="Wilkes-Barre/Scranton International Airport" label="Wilkes-Barre/Scranton International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199511" start="30137" end="30154" title="Pittston Township, Pennsylvania" label="Pittston Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002450" start="30197" end="30232" title="Wilkes-Barre Wyoming Valley Airport" label="Wilkes-Barre Wyoming Valley Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131872" start="30236" end="30246" title="Forty Fort, Pennsylvania" label="Forty Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q933776" start="30264" end="30277" title="Interstate 81 in Pennsylvania" label="Interstate 81"/>
<link wikidata="Q934173" start="30354" end="30373" title="Interstate 476" label="Northeast Extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q933729" start="30430" end="30443" title="Interstate 80 in Pennsylvania" label="Interstate 80"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243887" start="30449" end="30478" title="North Cross Valley Expressway" label="North Cross Valley Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116332" start="30526" end="30548" title="Pennsylvania Route 115" label="Pennsylvania Route 115"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243887" start="30558" end="30580" title="Pennsylvania Route 309" label="Pennsylvania Route 309"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133183" start="30635" end="30641" title="Dallas, Pennsylvania" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q623935" start="30691" end="30712" title="Pennsylvania Turnpike" label="Pennsylvania Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q934173" start="30720" end="30739" title="Interstate 476" label="Northeast Extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="30802" end="30823" title="Public transportation" label="Public transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706577" start="30843" end="30882" title="Luzerne County Transportation Authority" label="Luzerne County Transportation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q271395" start="31015" end="31023" title="Scranton, Pennsylvania" label="Scranton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185835" start="31046" end="31054" title="Pittston, Pennsylvania" label="Pittston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177880" start="31064" end="31099" title="County of Lackawanna Transit System" label="Transit System of Lackawanna County"/>
<link wikidata="Q501350" start="31141" end="31158" title="Lackawanna County, Pennsylvania" label="Lackawanna County"/>
<link wikidata="Q42377159" start="31161" end="31176" title="Martz Trailways" label="Martz Trailways"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="31284" end="31297" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="31299" end="31311" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q139564" start="31313" end="31326" title="Atlantic City, New Jersey" label="Atlantic City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416891" start="31332" end="31352" title="Wind Creek Bethlehem" label="Wind Creek Bethlehem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31363" end="31369" title="Share taxi#United States" label="jitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q138391" start="31429" end="31437" title="Paterson, New Jersey" label="Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="31442" end="31455" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q490228" start="31517" end="31539" title="Lehigh Valley Railroad" label="Lehigh Valley Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053974" start="31541" end="31571" title="Central Railroad of New Jersey" label="Central Railroad of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183933" start="31577" end="31618" title="Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad" label="Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q444183" start="31626" end="31649" title="Erie Lackawanna Railway" label="Erie Lackawanna Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q384045" start="31652" end="31679" title="Delaware and Hudson Railway" label="Delaware and Hudson Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197895" start="31685" end="31706" title="Pennsylvania Railroad" label="Pennsylvania Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002451" start="31712" end="31745" title="Wilkes-Barre and Eastern Railroad" label="Wilkes-Barre and Eastern Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6468709" start="31755" end="31793" title="Lackawanna and Wyoming Valley Railroad" label="Lackawanna and Wyoming Valley Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057044" start="31852" end="31870" title="Interstate Express" label="Interstate Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920649" start="31988" end="32001" title="Black Diamond (train)" label="Black Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q85783749" start="32060" end="32070" title="Maple Leaf (LV train)" label="Maple Leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="32153" end="32162" title="streetcar" label="streetcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546944" start="32173" end="32183" title="Georgetown, Luzerne County, Pennsylvania" label="Georgetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188068" start="32187" end="32196" title="Nanticoke, Pennsylvania" label="Nanticoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187496" start="32221" end="32229" title="Plymouth, Pennsylvania" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321054" start="32276" end="32300" title="Norfolk Southern Railway" label="Norfolk Southern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q46974" start="32368" end="32392" title="Canadian Pacific Railway" label="Canadian Pacific Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706581" start="32402" end="32433" title="Luzerne and Susquehanna Railway" label="Luzerne and Susquehanna Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002474" start="32605" end="32622" title="Wilkes University" label="Wilkes University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151534" start="32625" end="32667" title="F.M. Kirby Center" label="F. M. Kirby Center for the Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6652217" start="32700" end="32730" title="Little Theatre of Wilkes-Barre" label="Little Theatre of Wilkes-Barre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706576" start="32781" end="32802" title="Luzerne County Historical Society" label="Luzerne County Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942842" start="32805" end="32837" title="Mohegan Sun Arena at Casey Plaza" label="Mohegan Sun Arena at Casey Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q6894122" start="32840" end="32860" title="Mohegan Pennsylvania" label="Mohegan Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337839" start="32903" end="32933" title="River Street Historic District (Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania)" label="River Street Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555399" start="32936" end="32953" title="Stegmaier Brewery" label="Stegmaier Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061743" start="32956" end="32976" title="Wilkes-Barre station" label="Wilkes-Barre station"/>
<link wikidata="Q8040364" start="32979" end="32995" title="Wyoming Monument" label="Wyoming Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769401" start="33017" end="33029" title="Times Leader" label="Times Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723138" start="33046" end="33070" title="The Citizens&amp;#x27; Voice" label="The Citizens&amp;#x27; Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q604264" start="33135" end="33149" title="Wyoming Valley" label="Wyoming Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="33157" end="33160" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564625" start="33172" end="33179" title="WBRE-TV" label="WBRE-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564751" start="33245" end="33252" title="WNEP-TV" label="WNEP-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="33257" end="33260" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564866" start="33263" end="33267" title="WYOU" label="WYOU"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="33272" end="33275" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956839" start="33278" end="33285" title="WVIA-TV" label="WVIA-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="33290" end="33293" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956006" start="33300" end="33304" title="WSWB" label="WSWB"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="33309" end="33311" title="The CW" label="CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564757" start="33331" end="33338" title="WOLF-TV" label="WOLF-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="33343" end="33346" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954724" start="33365" end="33369" title="WQMY" label="WQMY"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148579" start="33374" end="33385" title="MyNetworkTV" label="MyNetworkTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q629981" start="33477" end="33485" title="Arbitron" label="Arbitron"/>
<link wikidata="Q174908" start="33715" end="33728" title="Michael Moore" label="Michael Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q233139" start="33819" end="33844" title="Two Knights Defense" label="Two Knights&amp;#x27; Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="33875" end="33880" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q130585" start="33912" end="33924" title="Supernatural (U.S. TV series)" label="Supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q23831" start="34062" end="34072" title="The Office (American TV series)" label="The Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550804" start="34171" end="34201" title="Wilkes-Barre/Scranton Penguins" label="Wilkes-Barre/Scranton Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444182" start="34298" end="34327" title="Scranton/Wilkes Barre Yankees" label="Scranton/Wilkes Barre Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q185059" start="34383" end="34400" title="Days of Our Lives" label="Days of Our Lives"/>
<link wikidata="" start="34659" end="34674" title="On Patrol: Live" label="On Patrol: Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q94440577" start="34722" end="34736" title="Jane Alexander (politician)" label="Jane Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536682" start="34785" end="34802" title="1982 Wilkes-Barre shootings" label="George Emil Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q15497931" start="34819" end="34831" title="Hazel Barnes" label="Hazel Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301318" start="34847" end="34867" title="Douglas Carter Beane" label="Douglas Carter Beane"/>
<link wikidata="Q17626488" start="34882" end="34891" title="Al Bedner" label="Al Bedner"/>
<link wikidata="Q55432908" start="34906" end="34915" title="Ray Black" label="Ray Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q310765" start="34953" end="34963" title="David Bohm" label="David Bohm"/>
<link wikidata="Q792941" start="34985" end="35001" title="Benjamin Burnley" label="Benjamin Burnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q271984" start="35043" end="35060" title="Breaking Benjamin" label="Breaking Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15992825" start="35063" end="35075" title="Lillian Cahn" label="Lillian Cahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q56273715" start="35091" end="35102" title="Coach, Inc." label="Coach, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q455133" start="35132" end="35145" title="George Catlin" label="George Catlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q638558" start="35156" end="35170" title="Britton Chance" label="Britton Chance"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949419" start="35207" end="35225" title="Catherine Chandler" label="Catherine Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767076" start="35234" end="35249" title="Mark Ciavarella" label="Mark Ciavarella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740880" start="35270" end="35291" title="kids for cash scandal" label="kids for cash scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767105" start="35294" end="35304" title="Mark Cohen (photographer)" label="Mark Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334663" start="35328" end="35335" title="Ed Cole (baseball)" label="Ed Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146244" start="35369" end="35382" title="Colleen Corby" label="Colleen Corby"/>
<link wikidata="Q131465697" start="35406" end="35422" title="Michael Costello (racing driver)" label="Michael Costello"/>
<link wikidata="Q56432962" start="35440" end="35461" title="Mary Helen Peck Crane" label="Mary Helen Peck Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q206534" start="35503" end="35516" title="Stephen Crane" label="Stephen Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740375" start="35519" end="35529" title="Amasa Dana" label="Amasa Dana"/>
<link wikidata="Q21664375" start="35557" end="35577" title="Charles B. Dougherty" label="Charles B. Dougherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280545" start="35599" end="35612" title="Major general (United States)" label="major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640018" start="35631" end="35653" title="28th Infantry Division (United States)" label="28th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767418" start="35656" end="35665" title="Mark Duda" label="Mark Duda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6468687" start="35679" end="35697" title="Lackawanna College" label="Lackawanna College"/>
<link wikidata="Q16007790" start="35720" end="35754" title="Francis Dunn (American football)" label="Francis A. &amp;quot;Mother&amp;quot; Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q975275" start="35780" end="35795" title="Canton Bulldogs" label="Canton Bulldogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q108187170" start="35798" end="35819" title="Benjamin F. Evans Jr." label="Benjamin F. Evans Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="35833" end="35842" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="35843" end="35856" title="major general" label="major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="35923" end="35929" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171946" start="35932" end="35941" title="Pete Elko" label="Pete Elko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175381" start="35981" end="35991" title="David M. Evans" label="Dave Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369793" start="36053" end="36064" title="The Sandlot" label="The Sandlot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186317" start="36073" end="36083" title="Jesse Fell" label="Jesse Fell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501111" start="36127" end="36135" title="Pat Finn (game show host)" label="Pat Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319610" start="36172" end="36180" title="Lifetime (TV network)" label="Lifetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697087" start="36189" end="36207" title="The CBN Family Channel" label="The Family Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q210500" start="36220" end="36223" title="Ion Television" label="PAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501111" start="36237" end="36260" title="Shop &amp;#x27;til You Drop" label="Shop &amp;#x27;til You Drop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572551" start="36269" end="36279" title="Ham Fisher" label="Ham Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q6228829" start="36294" end="36303" title="Red Davis" label="Red Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368170" start="36305" end="36318" title="Third baseman" label="Third baseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024169" start="36327" end="36353" title="New York Giants (baseball)" label="New York Giants (baseball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705565" start="36361" end="36374" title="Tess Gardella" label="Tess Gardella"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912613" start="36386" end="36399" title="Billy Goeckel" label="Billy Goeckel"/>
<link wikidata="Q103850475" start="36419" end="36427" title="Bob Good" label="Bob Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396410" start="36448" end="36462" title="Kevin Gryboski" label="Kevin Gryboski"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010886" start="36504" end="36519" title="William Harmatz" label="William Harmatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856617" start="36544" end="36560" title="Preakness Stakes" label="Preakness Stakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q29855682" start="36563" end="36576" title="Laning Harvey" label="Laning Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6838655" start="36607" end="36620" title="Mickey Haslin" label="Mickey Haslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545968" start="36656" end="36679" title="George Washington Helme" label="George Washington Helme"/>
<link wikidata="Q955970" start="36708" end="36728" title="Helmetta, New Jersey" label="Helmetta, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6210290" start="36731" end="36742" title="Joe Hergert" label="Joe Hergert"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012045" start="36782" end="36801" title="William Henry Hines" label="William Henry Hines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298431" start="36895" end="36907" title="Raye Hollitt" label="Raye Hollitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872807" start="36935" end="36947" title="Qadry Ismail" label="Qadry Ismail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="36956" end="36959" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q276539" start="36981" end="36997" title="Baltimore Ravens" label="Baltimore Ravens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282964" start="37000" end="37013" title="Raghib Ismail" label="Raghib Ismail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="37022" end="37025" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035067" start="37037" end="37051" title="Heisman Trophy" label="Heisman Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q275982" start="37064" end="37087" title="Florence Foster Jenkins" label="Florence Foster Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q19955874" start="37133" end="37137" title="Florence Foster Jenkins (film)" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q873" start="37147" end="37159" title="Meryl Streep" label="Meryl Streep"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655230" start="37162" end="37173" title="Candy Jones" label="Candy Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298292" start="37218" end="37246" title="Dorothy Andrews Elston Kabis" label="Dorothy Andrews Elston Kabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q369142" start="37248" end="37278" title="Treasurer of the United States" label="Treasurer of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372953" start="37281" end="37292" title="James Karen" label="James Karen"/>
<link wikidata="Q39577438" start="37302" end="37322" title="Mary Holland Kinkaid" label="Mary Holland Kinkaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1597653" start="37337" end="37354" title="Michael J. Kirwan" label="Michael J. Kirwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704250" start="37410" end="37422" title="Al Klawitter" label="Al Klawitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q374492" start="37456" end="37467" title="Franz Kline" label="Franz Kline"/>
<link wikidata="Q177725" start="37469" end="37491" title="abstract expressionist" label="abstract expressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847547" start="37502" end="37514" title="Mike Konnick" label="Mike Konnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="37523" end="37526" title="MLB" label="MLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959515" start="37536" end="37552" title="Mary Jo Kopechne" label="Mary Jo Kopechne"/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="37588" end="37599" title="Ted Kennedy" label="Ted Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062779" start="37603" end="37617" title="Chappaquiddick Island" label="Chappaquiddick"/>
<link wikidata="Q540064" start="37620" end="37637" title="Harley Jane Kozak" label="Harley Jane Kozak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790858" start="37660" end="37673" title="Matthew Lesko" label="Matthew Lesko"/>
<link wikidata="Q274123" start="37701" end="37716" title="Edward B. Lewis" label="Edward B. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223675" start="37778" end="37792" title="Santo Loquasto" label="Santo Loquasto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523983" start="37816" end="37831" title="Garrick Mallery" label="Garrick Mallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q956533" start="37847" end="37864" title="Herman Mankiewicz" label="Herman Mankiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q24815" start="37888" end="37900" title="Citizen Kane" label="Citizen Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q51583" start="37909" end="37929" title="Joseph L. Mankiewicz" label="Joseph L. Mankiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q21997855" start="37977" end="37986" title="Al Markim" label="Al Markim"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37995" end="38031" title="Tom Corbett, Space Cadet#Television" label="&amp;quot;Tom Corbett, Space Cadet&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q117500" start="38035" end="38049" title="Mary McDonnell" label="Mary McDonnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16003724" start="38095" end="38117" title="Edward Peter McManaman" label="Edward Peter McManaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344433" start="38143" end="38158" title="Edward Meneeley" label="Edward Meneeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q109555901" start="38170" end="38181" title="Asher Miner" label="Asher Miner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181834" start="38239" end="38253" title="Albert Mudrian" label="Albert Mudrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q21258559" start="38284" end="38296" title="Leo C. Mundy" label="Leo C. Mundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q980550" start="38341" end="38353" title="Jozef Murgas" label="Jozef Murgas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211488" start="38371" end="38381" title="Joe Murray (baseball)" label="Joe Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870201" start="38411" end="38432" title="Philadelphia A&amp;#x27;s" label="Philadelphia A&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129135" start="38435" end="38451" title="Claudette Nevins" label="Claudette Nevins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3613906" start="38463" end="38475" title="Amedeo Obici" label="Amedeo Obici"/>
<link wikidata="Q6404522" start="38507" end="38522" title="Kid O&amp;#x27;Hara" label="Kid O&amp;#x27;Hara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442397" start="38542" end="38559" title="Rose O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Rose O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q421707" start="38608" end="38620" title="Jerry Orbach" label="Jerry Orbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="38622" end="38632" title="Tony Awards" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q17580358" start="38649" end="38663" title="Phil Ostrowski" label="Phil Ostrowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6251831" start="38678" end="38689" title="John Paluck" label="John Paluck"/>
<link wikidata="Q212654" start="38711" end="38730" title="Washington Redskins" label="Washington Redskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q786705" start="38735" end="38743" title="Pro Bowl" label="Pro Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q190756" start="38756" end="38779" title="William Daniel Phillips" label="William Daniel Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="38806" end="38828" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3854641" start="38831" end="38844" title="Mendy Rudolph" label="Mendy Rudolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="38846" end="38849" title="NBA" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2182752" start="38850" end="38857" title="Official (basketball)" label="referee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408120" start="38878" end="38888" title="Sam Savitt" label="Sam Savitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405656" start="38918" end="38937" title="Michael Schoeffling" label="Michael Schoeffling"/>
<link wikidata="Q572616" start="38977" end="38992" title="Sixteen Candles" label="Sixteen Candles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293486" start="39001" end="39012" title="Don Schwall" label="Don Schwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712611" start="39028" end="39050" title="M. Gerald Schwartzbach" label="M. Gerald Schwartzbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606254" start="39091" end="39105" title="Greg Skrepenak" label="Greg Skrepenak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="39114" end="39117" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q6274439" start="39144" end="39159" title="Jonathan Slavin" label="Jonathan Slavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q948329" start="39161" end="39176" title="character actor" label="character actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441455" start="39179" end="39187" title="Ron Solt" label="Ron Solt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="39196" end="39199" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354478" start="39209" end="39221" title="Jason Spisak" label="Jason Spisak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119329" start="39237" end="39249" title="Jacob Sullum" label="Jacob Sullum"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="39286" end="39299" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q738662" start="39328" end="39341" title="Super Size Me" label="Super Size Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333700" start="39350" end="39358" title="Bob Sura" label="Bob Sura"/>
<link wikidata="Q161345" start="39379" end="39394" title="Houston Rockets" label="Houston Rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743009" start="39397" end="39410" title="Ferrante &amp;amp; Teicher" label="Louis Teicher"/>
<link wikidata="Q747050" start="39464" end="39475" title="Alexis Toth" label="Alexis Toth"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="39519" end="39542" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7859648" start="39545" end="39553" title="Ty Tyson (baseball)" label="Ty Tyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6262878" start="39556" end="39566" title="John Walsh (baseball)" label="John Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q64329025" start="39588" end="39604" title="Helen L. Webster" label="Helen L. Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q10329473" start="39645" end="39659" title="Michael Whalen (actor)" label="Michael Whalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612382" start="39669" end="39680" title="Ira W. Wood" label="Ira W. Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125903" start="39714" end="39728" title="Hal Woodeshick" label="Hal Woodeshick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7818097" start="39761" end="39775" title="Tom Woodeshick" label="Tom Woodeshick"/>
<link wikidata="Q722212" start="39808" end="39818" title="Frank Zane" label="Frank Zane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5558530" start="39949" end="39973" title="Giants Despair Hillclimb" label="Giants Despair Hillclimb"/>
<link wikidata="Q24296258" start="39976" end="40004" title="USS Wilkes-Barre" label="USS &amp;quot;Wilkes-Barre&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64586" wikidata="Q1085130" url="?curid=64586" title="Defence of Iceland">
<text>[[Iceland]]&#x27;s defence forces consist of the Icelandic Coast Guard, which patrols Icelandic waters and monitors its airspace, and other services such as the National Commissioner&#x27;s National Security and the Special Unit of the National Police Commissioner. Iceland maintains no standing army, the only NATO member for which this is the case.

The Coast Guard consists of three ships and four aircraft and armed with small arms, naval artillery, and air defence radar stations. The Coast Guard also maintains the Iceland Air Defence System, formerly part of the disestablished Defence Agency, which conducts surveillance from the ground of Iceland&#x27;s air space.

Additionally, there is a Crisis Response Unit (ICRU), operated by the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, which is a small peacekeeping force that has been deployed internationally, since 2008. This unit also has an unarmed component.

There is a treaty with the United States, which until 2006 maintained the Naval Air Station Keflavik, regarding the defence of Iceland. The base, now operated by the Icelandic Coast Guard, has been regularly visited by the US military and other allied NATO members. In 2017 the United States announced its interest in renovating a hangar, in order to accommodate a Boeing P-8 Poseidon ASW aircraft at the air base.

There are also agreements concerning military and other security operations with Norway, Denmark and other NATO countries.

Iceland holds the annual NATO exercises entitled Northern Viking. The most recent exercises were held in 2022, as well as the EOD exercise &quot;Northern Challenge&quot;. In 1997 Iceland hosted its first Partnership for Peace (PfP) exercise, &quot;Cooperative Safeguard&quot;, which is the only multilateral PfP exercise so far in which Russia has participated. Another major PfP exercise was hosted in 2000. Iceland has also contributed ICRU peacekeepers to SFOR, KFOR and ISAF.

Iceland has never participated in a full-scale war or invasion. Furthermore, the constitution of Iceland has no mechanism to declare war.

== History ==


In the period from the settlement of Iceland, in the 870s, until it became part of the realm of the Norwegian King, military defences of Iceland consisted of multiple chieftains (&quot;Goðar&quot;) and their free followers (&quot;þingmenn&quot;, &quot;bændur&quot; or &quot;liðsmenn&quot;) organised according to the standard Nordic military doctrine of the time in expeditionary armies such as the &quot;leiðangr&quot;. These armies were divided into units according to the quality of the warriors and by birth. At the end of this period, the number of chieftains had diminished and their power had grown, to the detriment of their followers. This resulted in a long and bloody civil war known as Age of the Sturlungs. A typical battle involved fewer than 1000 men.

Amphibious operations were an important part of warfare in Iceland in this period, especially in the Westfjords, but large naval engagements were rare. The largest such engagement, known as Flóabardagi, involved a few dozen ships in Húnaflói (bay).

In the decades before the Napoleonic Wars, the few hundred militiamen in the southwest of Iceland were mainly equipped with rusty and mostly obsolete medieval weaponry, including 16th-century halberds. When British privateers arrived in 1808, after most of the Royal Dano-Norwegian Navy had been captured or destroyed in the battle of Copenhagen in 1807, the amount of gunpowder in Iceland was so small that the governor of Iceland, Frederich Christopher Trampe, Count of Trampe, could not offer any resistance.

In 1855, the Icelandic Army was re-established by Andreas August von Kohl, the sheriff in Vestmannaeyjar. In 1856, the king provided 180 rixdollars to buy guns, and a further 200 rixdollars the following year. The sheriff became the Captain of the new army, which become known as &quot;Herfylkingin&quot;, &quot;The Battalion&quot;. In 1860 von Kohl died, and Pétur Bjarnasen took over command. Nine years later Bjarnasen died without appointing a successor, and the army fell into disarray.
 
In 1918, Iceland regained sovereignty as a separate kingdom under the Danish king. Iceland established a Coast Guard shortly afterwards, but it was financially impossible to establish a standing army. The government hoped that a permanent neutrality would shield the country from invasion. But at the onset of Second World War, the government was concerned about a possible invasion, and decided to expand the Icelandic National Police (&quot;Ríkislögreglan&quot;) and its reserves into a military unit. Chief Commissioner of Police Agnar Kofoed Hansen had been trained in the Danish Army and he moved to train his officers. Weapons and uniforms were acquired, and they practised rifleshooting and military tactics near Laugarvatn. Hansen barely managed to train his 60 officers before the United Kingdom&#x27;s invasion of Iceland on 10 May 1940. Agnar wanted to expand the forces, but the Icelandic Minister of Justice rejected his proposal.

In mid-1941 while still neutral the United States took over the occupation of Iceland from the British but not with Iceland&#x27;s approval. The stationing of US forces in Iceland continued well after the war, eventually codified in the Agreed Minute. In 1949 Iceland was a founding member of NATO and was the sole member that did not have a standing army, joining NATO on the condition that it would not be expected to establish one. However, its strategic geographic position in the Atlantic made it an invaluable member. Expansion of forces by Iceland was therefore concentrated primarily in the Icelandic Coast Guard, which saw action in a series of confrontations with British fishing vessels and Royal Navy warships known as the Cod Wars. None of the Cod Wars meet any of the common thresholds for a conventional war and they may more accurately be described as militarised interstate disputes.

The Iceland Defense Force (IDF) was a military command of the United States Armed Forces from 1951 to 2006. The IDF, created at the request of NATO, came into existence when the United States signed an agreement to provide for the defense of Iceland. The IDF also consisted of civilian Icelanders and military members of other NATO nations. The IDF was downsized after the end of the Cold War and the U.S. Air Force maintained four to six interceptor aircraft at the Naval Air Station Keflavik, until they were withdrawn on 30 September 2006. Since May 2008, NATO nations have periodically deployed fighters to patrol Icelandic airspace under the Icelandic Air Policing mission.
During the Icesave dispute with the British and Dutch governments, Iceland made it clear that UK patrols in its airspace were not appropriate given the state of affairs and subsequently on 14 November 2008 the UK had to cancel its patrols and defense of the Icelandic airspace, which before the dispute had been scheduled to start in December 2008.

After withdrawal of US forces in 2006, Iceland reorganized some military infrastructure in the form of the Icelandic Defence Agency (&quot;Varnarmálastofnun Íslands&quot;) founded in 2008. under the Minister for Foreign Affairs. The Agency took over operations at Naval Air Station Keflavik, but was closed in 2011 in the wake of the economic crisis, with functions distributed to the existing organizations.
 The Icelandic Coast Guard now handles the military infrastructure in the country.

== Coast Guard ==
Shortly after Iceland reclaimed its sovereignty in 1918, the Icelandic Coast Guard was founded. Its first vessel, a former Danish research vessel, was armed with a 57 mm cannon. The Coast Guard is responsible for protecting Iceland&#x27;s sovereignty and vital interests including the most valuable natural resource—its fishing areas—as well as providing security, search, and rescue services to Iceland&#x27;s fishing fleet. In 1952, 1958, 1972, and 1975, the government progressively expanded Iceland&#x27;s exclusive economic zone to . This led to a conflict with the United Kingdom, among other states, known as the &quot;Cod Wars&quot;. The Icelandic Coast Guard and the Royal Navy confronted each other on several occasions during these years. Although few rounds were fired, there were many intense moments. Today the Coast Guard remains Iceland&#x27;s premier fighting force equipped with armed patrol vessels and aircraft and partaking in peacekeeping operations in foreign lands.

The Coast Guard has four vessels and four aircraft (one fixed wing and three helicopters) at their disposal.

=== Iceland Air Defence System ===
The Iceland Air Defence System or &quot;Íslenska Loftvarnarkerfið&quot; was founded in 1987, and operates four radar complexes, a software and support facility and a command and report centre. It is a part of the Coast Guard.

Iceland&#x27;s NATO allies also regularly deploy fighter aircraft to patrol the country&#x27;s airspace as part of the Icelandic Air Policing mission.

== Icelandic Crisis Response Unit ==
The Icelandic Crisis Response Unit (ICRU) (or &quot;Íslenska friðargæslan&quot; or &quot;The Icelandic Peacekeeping Guard&quot;) is an expeditionary peacekeeping force maintained by the Ministry for Foreign Affairs. It is manned by personnel from Iceland&#x27;s other services, armed or not, including the National Police, Coast Guard, emergency services and healthcare system. Because of the military nature of most of the ICRU&#x27;s assignments, all of its members receive basic infantry combat training. This training has often been conducted by the Norwegian Army, but the Coast Guard and the Special Forces are also assigned to train the ICRU.

Most of the ICRU&#x27;s camouflage and weaponry is procured from abroad, with some indigenous development. Some arms and uniforms are also borrowed from the Norwegian Defence Forces.

The formation and employment of the unit have met controversy in Iceland, especially by people on the left of the political scale. In October 2004, three ICRU personnel were wounded in a suicide bombing on Chicken Street in Kabul that killed a 13-year old Afghan girl and a 23-year old American woman. The incident resulted in severe criticism of the group&#x27;s commander, Colonel Hallgrímur Sigurðsson, as despite orders not to leave Kabul Airport unless absolutely necessary, he took the group to Chicken Street to shop carpets. Few weeks later, his command was passed to Lt. Colonel Garðar Forberg, followed by Colonel Lárus Atlason.

In 2008, the uniformed ICRU deployed personnel still armed for self-defense returned their weapons and changed to civilian clothing. The policy since 2008 is that, unless under special circumstances, ICRU personnel do not wear uniforms or carry weapons.

=== ICRU missions ===
The ICRU has been or is operating in:

* Military missions:
** within ISAF
** within NTM-1 (and the Coast Guard within Dancon/Irak)
** , within KFOR
* Civilian missions:
** within EUPM
** within the Mine Action Coordination Center for South Lebanon (MACC-SL)
** within SLMM

== List of small-arms used by Icelandic forces ==
* Glock 17 — Sidearm (Pistol)
* AG-3 — Battle Rifle
* Heckler &amp; Koch MP5 — Sub-Machine Gun
* Blaser R93 — Sniper Rifle
* Rheinmetall MG3 – General-Purpose Machine Gun

== See also ==
* List of countries without armed forces
* List of wars involving Iceland
* GIUK gap

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Birgir Loftsson, &quot;Hernaðarsaga Íslands : 1170–1581&quot;, Pjaxi. Reykjavík. 2006.
* Þór Whitehead, &quot;The Ally who came in from the cold : a survey of Icelandic Foreign Policy 1946–1956&quot;, Centre for International Studies. University of Iceland Press. Reykjavík. 1998.

== External links ==

* Icelandic Coast Guard
* Icelandic National Police
* Iceland Air Defence System
* Ministry of Justice and Ecclesiastical Affairs
* Ministry for Foreign Affairs</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1085130" start="0" end="11" title="Defence of Iceland" label="[[Iceland]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474813" start="49" end="70" title="Icelandic Coast Guard" label="Icelandic Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101758" start="161" end="182" title="Police commissioner" label="National Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481484" start="190" end="207" title="Icelandic Police" label="National Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033262" start="216" end="264" title="Viking Squad" label="Special Unit of the National Police Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365383" start="287" end="300" title="standing army" label="standing army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="311" end="315" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q12796" start="425" end="435" title="Firearm" label="small arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q511450" start="437" end="452" title="naval artillery" label="naval artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5985661" start="458" end="484" title="Iceland Air Defence System" label="air defence radar stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5985661" start="521" end="547" title="Iceland Air Defence System" label="Iceland Air Defence System"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="585" end="599" title="Iceland Defence Agency" label="Defence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550860" start="700" end="727" title="Iceland Crisis Response Unit" label="Crisis Response Unit (ICRU)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15983772" start="745" end="773" title="Ministry for Foreign Affairs (Iceland)" label="Ministry for Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354958" start="792" end="804" title="peacekeeping" label="peacekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="932" end="945" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481748" start="979" end="1005" title="Naval Air Station Keflavik" label="Naval Air Station Keflavik"/>
<link wikidata="Q611401" start="1270" end="1289" title="Boeing P-8 Poseidon" label="Boeing P-8 Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073579" start="1290" end="1293" title="Anti-submarine warfare" label="ASW"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="1402" end="1408" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="1410" end="1417" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q595841" start="1428" end="1442" title="Member states of NATO" label="NATO countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q25035998" start="1470" end="1484" title="List of NATO exercises" label="NATO exercises"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059114" start="1494" end="1509" title="Northern Viking" label="Northern Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q649416" start="1571" end="1574" title="Explosive Ordnance Disposal" label="EOD"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1590" end="1608" title="Northern Challenge Exercise" label="Northern Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q653277" start="1649" end="1670" title="Partnership for Peace" label="Partnership for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1693" end="1714" title="Cooperative Safeguard" label="Cooperative Safeguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q313440" start="1904" end="1908" title="Stabilisation Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="SFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q159470" start="1910" end="1914" title="Kosovo Force" label="KFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q155654" start="1919" end="1923" title="International Security Assistance Force" label="ISAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="1973" end="1976" title="war" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508765" start="2007" end="2030" title="constitution of Iceland" label="constitution of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15376278" start="2480" end="2500" title="Leidang" label="&amp;quot;leiðangr&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314899" start="2779" end="2799" title="Age of the Sturlungs" label="Age of the Sturlungs"/>
<link wikidata="Q348120" start="2849" end="2859" title="Amphibious warfare" label="Amphibious"/>
<link wikidata="Q727267" start="2950" end="2960" title="Westfjords" label="Westfjords"/>
<link wikidata="Q876274" start="2972" end="2988" title="naval engagement" label="naval engagement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031201" start="3039" end="3050" title="Flóabardagi" label="Flóabardagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546836" start="3082" end="3090" title="Húnaflói" label="Húnaflói"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="3125" end="3140" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q185623" start="3291" end="3298" title="halberd" label="halberd"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151032" start="3360" end="3385" title="Royal Dano-Norwegian Navy" label="Royal Dano-Norwegian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q376154" start="3424" end="3444" title="Battle of Copenhagen (1807)" label="battle of Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="3468" end="3477" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q423674" start="3532" end="3577" title="Frederich Christopher Trampe, Count of Trampe" label="Frederich Christopher Trampe, Count of Trampe"/>
<link wikidata="Q187251" start="3702" end="3716" title="Vestmannaeyjar" label="Vestmannaeyjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296536" start="3749" end="3759" title="Danish rigsdaler" label="rixdollars"/>
<link wikidata="Q62567" start="4149" end="4187" title="Kingdom of Iceland" label="separate kingdom under the Danish king"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4416" end="4432" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413838" start="4826" end="4836" title="Laugarvatn" label="Laugarvatn"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="4896" end="4910" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088915" start="4918" end="4937" title="invasion of Iceland" label="invasion of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5087" end="5100" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5115" end="5136" title="Allied occupation of Iceland#United States occupation" label="occupation of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693783" start="5288" end="5301" title="Agreed Minute" label="Agreed Minute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="5344" end="5348" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="5753" end="5763" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q940618" start="5786" end="5794" title="Cod Wars" label="Cod Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q940618" start="5808" end="5816" title="Cod Wars" label="Cod Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851939" start="5919" end="5949" title="militarised interstate dispute" label="militarised interstate dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656151" start="5957" end="5984" title="Iceland Defense Force" label="Iceland Defense Force (IDF)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="5991" end="5999" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008856" start="6000" end="6007" title="command (military formation)" label="command"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="6015" end="6041" title="United States Armed Forces" label="United States Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="6337" end="6345" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="6354" end="6368" title="U.S. Air Force" label="U.S. Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q320018" start="6392" end="6412" title="interceptor aircraft" label="interceptor aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481748" start="6420" end="6446" title="Naval Air Station Keflavik" label="Naval Air Station Keflavik"/>
<link wikidata="Q407735" start="6600" end="6622" title="Icelandic Air Policing" label="Icelandic Air Policing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656185" start="6643" end="6658" title="Icesave dispute" label="Icesave dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085130" start="7089" end="7113" title="Icelandic Defence Agency" label="Icelandic Defence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481748" start="7246" end="7272" title="Naval Air Station Keflavik" label="Naval Air Station Keflavik"/>
<link wikidata="Q940618" start="8119" end="8126" title="Cod War" label="Cod War"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="8740" end="8745" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="8759" end="8767" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="8905" end="8921" title="fighter aircraft" label="fighter aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q407735" start="8975" end="8997" title="Icelandic Air Policing" label="Icelandic Air Policing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481484" start="9351" end="9366" title="National Police of Iceland" label="National Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384177" start="9599" end="9613" title="Norwegian Army" label="Norwegian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q917374" start="9853" end="9877" title="Norwegian Defence Forces" label="Norwegian Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q217327" start="10067" end="10082" title="Suicide attack" label="suicide bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q108559237" start="10086" end="10100" title="Chicken Street" label="Chicken Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="10104" end="10109" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="10255" end="10262" title="Colonel" label="Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q744802" start="10317" end="10330" title="Kabul Airport" label="Kabul Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q155654" start="10867" end="10871" title="International Security Assistance Force" label="ISAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215627" start="10916" end="10927" title="Dancon/Irak" label="Dancon/Irak"/>
<link wikidata="Q111012363" start="10977" end="10981" title="European Union Police Mission" label="EUPM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779538" start="11066" end="11070" title="SLMM" label="SLMM"/>
<link wikidata="Q739882" start="11124" end="11132" title="Glock 17" label="Glock 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q211791" start="11154" end="11158" title="Heckler &amp;amp; Koch G3" label="AG-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q155901" start="11176" end="11198" title="Heckler &amp;amp; Koch MP5" label="Heckler &amp;amp; Koch MP5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054711" start="11219" end="11229" title="Blaser 93 Tactical" label="Blaser R93"/>
<link wikidata="Q842031" start="11247" end="11262" title="Rheinmetall MG3" label="Rheinmetall MG3"/>
<link wikidata="Q667685" start="11311" end="11349" title="List of countries without armed forces" label="List of countries without armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431096" start="11352" end="11382" title="List of wars involving Iceland" label="List of wars involving Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q922019" start="11385" end="11393" title="GIUK gap" label="GIUK gap"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64588" wikidata="Q5468496" url="?curid=64588" title="Foreign relations of Iceland">
<text>Iceland took control of its foreign affairs in 1918 when it became a sovereign country, the Kingdom of Iceland, in a personal union with the King of Denmark. As a fully independent state, Iceland could have joined the League of Nations in 1920, but chose not to do so for cost reasons. It negotiated with Denmark to initially carry out most of its foreign relations, while maintaining full control. Denmark appointed a diplomatic envoy (Ambassador) to Iceland in 1919 and Iceland reciprocated in 1920, opening an embassy in Copenhagen. Iceland established its own Foreign Service in April 1940 when Denmark became occupied by Nazi Germany and ties between the two countries were severed. The Republic of Iceland was founded in 1944. The Icelandic foreign service grew slowly in the post-WWII period, but increased rapidly after the mid-1990s. Iceland&#x27;s closest relations are with the Nordic states, the European Union and the United States. Iceland has been a member of the United Nations since 1946. Iceland was a founding member of the World Bank in 1946 and NATO in 1949. In terms of European integration, Iceland was a founding member of the OEEC (now OECD) in 1948 and the Nordic Council in 1952, it joined EFTA in 1970, was a founding member of the CSCE (now OSCE) in 1973 and the EEA in 1992 and joined Schengen in 1996.

From 1951 to 2006, there was an American military base and troop presence in Iceland. During the Cold War, Iceland had a close but contentious relationship with the United States, leading some scholars to describe Iceland as a &quot;rebellious ally&quot; and &quot;reluctant ally.&quot; Iceland repeatedly threatened to leave NATO or cancel the US defence agreement during the Cold War. As a consequence, the United States provided Iceland with extensive economic assistance and diplomatic support. Iceland hosted the historic 1986 Reagan-Gorbachev summit in Reykjavík, which set the stage for the end of the Cold War.

== Fishing rights ==

Iceland&#x27;s principal historical international disputes involved disagreements over fishing rights. Conflict with the United Kingdom led to the so-called Cod Wars in 1952–56 because of the extension of the fishing zone from 3 to 4 nautical miles (6 to 7 km), 1958–61 because of extending the fishing zone to 12 nautical miles (22 km) in 1972–73 because of its further extension to 50 nautical miles (93 km) and in 1975–76 because of its extension to 200 nautical miles (370 km). Disagreements with Norway and Russia over fishing rights in the Barents Sea were successfully resolved in 2000.

== Whaling ==

Certain environmentalists are concerned that Iceland left the International Whaling Commission (IWC) in June 1992 in protest of an IWC decision to refuse to lift the ban on whaling, after the IWC Scientific Committee had determined that the taking of certain species could safely be resumed. That year, Iceland established a separate commission – along with Norway, Greenland and the Faroe Islands – for the conservation, management, and study of marine mammals. Since then, Iceland has resumed whaling for scientific purpose and has rejoined the IWC (in October 2002). The Icelandic Fisheries Ministry issued a permit to hunt 39 whales for commercial purposes on 17 October 2006. 25 states delivered a formal diplomatic protest to the Icelandic government on 1 November concerning resumed commercial whaling. The protest was led by the United Kingdom and supported by others such as Finland and Sweden.

== Recognition of post-Soviet states ==

Iceland was the first country to recognize the regained independence of Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan from the USSR in 1990–1991. Similarly, it was the first country to recognize Montenegro&#x27;s independence from its former union with Serbia. Iceland was also the first country to recognize Croatia, having done so on 19 December 1991. Significantly, Iceland was also the first Western state to recognise Palestine when it did so in 2011. Iceland also is the greatest Nordic contributor per capita to NATO-led troops in Bosnia and Kosovo, to the police in Bosnia and to Bosnian/Kosovan reconstruction, resettlement and relief efforts.

==Membership in international organizations==
Iceland is a member of the following organisations: North Atlantic Treaty Organization; Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe; International Criminal Court; International Bank for Reconstruction and Development; International Development Association; International Finance Corporation; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; European Economic Area; European Free Trade Association; Council of Europe; International Criminal Police Organization; and the United Nations, since 19 November 1946, and most of its specialized agencies, including the International Monetary Fund, World Trade Organization, Food and Agriculture Organization, International Atomic Energy Agency, International Civil Aviation Organization, International Labour Organization, International Maritime Organization, International Telecommunication Union, United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization, Universal Postal Union, World Health Organization, World Meteorological Organization and the International Whaling Commission.

Iceland was given the opportunity to join the League of Nations in 1920, but opted not to, primarily due to limited administrative resources. Iceland joined the UN in 1945 but took until 1965 to establish a permanent mission.

In the IMF, Iceland is in the Nordic-Baltic constituency of the 24-member executive board of the IMF, along with Denmark, Finland, Norway, Sweden, Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia.

==International disputes==

===Rockall===

Iceland has an ongoing dispute with Denmark (on behalf of the Faroe Islands) on the one hand and with the UK and Ireland on the other hand, concerning claims to the continental shelf in the Hatton–Rockall area of the North Atlantic under the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (1982). Iceland&#x27;s claim covers virtually the entire area claimed by the other three countries, except for a small portion in the south-east corner of the Irish claim, while the Faroes claim most of the area claimed by the UK and Ireland. Negotiations continue between the four countries in the hope of making a joint proposal to the United Nations Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf by May 2009.

===Deposit insurance===

Following the collapse of Icesave sparking the 2008–2011 Icelandic financial crisis, the U.K. and the Netherlands offered to insure the deposits of the bank&#x27;s customers. They then sought repayment from Iceland, which held a referendum on the issue in 2010 and 2011, both of which failed. The two governments then said they would take the issue to European courts to seek redress they alleged is owed to them. In January 2013 the EFTA court cleared Iceland of all charges.

== European Union application ==

Iceland has had a close relationship with the European Union (EU) throughout its development, but has remained outside (instead, joining the European Free Trade Area or EFTA). In 1972, the two sides signed a free trade agreement and in 1994 Iceland joined the European Economic Area which let itself and other non-EU states have access to the EU&#x27;s internal market in exchange for Iceland contributing funds and applying EU law in relevant areas. The EU is Iceland&#x27;s most important trading partner with a strong trade surplus in 2008/9 in terms of goods, services and foreign direct investment. Iceland also participates in the Schengen Area (as well as relevant police and judicial cooperation) and has non-voting representation in some EU agencies.

However, after Iceland&#x27;s financial crash in 2008, it has sought membership of the EU and the euro. Iceland applied on 16 July 2009 and negotiations formally began 17 June 2011. After an agreement is concluded, the accession treaty must be ratified by every EU state and be subject to a national referendum in Iceland. Since the application was submitted, popular support has declined and contentious issues around Icelandic fisheries may derail negotiations. However the Icelandic government is confident an agreement can be reached based on the flexibility shown by the EU in its previous negotiations with Norway.

In 2014, Iceland froze their application to join the European Union.

== Agreed Minute ==
The Agreed Minute was a statute governing the nature of the U.S. military presence in Iceland. The Agreed Minute was last renegotiated in 2001. At the time, the U.S. Air Force committed itself to maintaining four to six interceptors at the Keflavík base, supported by a helicopter rescue squad. The Air Force, in order to cut costs, announced plans to remove the four remaining jets in 2003. The removal was then delayed to address Icelandic demands for continued presence of the jets. After an unfruitful series of negotiations and two reshuffles of the Icelandic government the issue lay dormant until early 2006 when the U.S. Air Force issued an official statement that withdrawal of the aircraft was already being prepared. U.S. officials have since then argued that Iceland is in no need of a military presence.

NATO allies since then conduct air policing after the U.S. Air Force withdrawal.

== Diplomatic relations ==
List of countries which Iceland maintains diplomatic relations with:
== Bilateral relations ==
Iceland&#x27;s first embassy was established in Copenhagen in 1920. The second and third embassies were opened in London and Sweden in 1940. That same year, a consulate-general was installed in New York (a year later, an embassy was opened in Washington D.C.). The Icelandic foreign service grew slowly (both in terms of missions and staff) in the post-WWII period, but increased rapidly after the mid-1990s. The Icelandic foreign service is vastly smaller than those of its Nordic neighbors.

===Africa===

=== Americas ===
=== Asia ===

=== Europe ===
=== Oceania ===
==See also==
* List of diplomatic missions in Iceland
* List of diplomatic missions of Iceland
* Ministry for Foreign Affairs (Iceland)
* Iceland - Establishment of Diplomatic Relations

== References ==
==Further reading==

* Baldur Thorhallson (ed.). 2018. &quot;Small States and Shelter Theory: Iceland’s External Affairs.&quot; Routledge.
* Baldur Thorhallsson (ed.). 2004. &quot;Iceland and European Integration: On the Edge&quot;. Routledge.
* Pétur J. Thorsteinsson. 1992. &quot;Utanríkisþjónusta Íslands og utanríkismál: Sögulegt Yfirlit&quot;. Rekjavík: Hið íslenska bókmenntafélag.
* Valur Ingimundarson. 2011. &quot;The Rebellious Ally: Iceland, the United States, and the Politics of Empire 1945–2006&quot;. Dordrecht Publishing.
* Valur Ingimundarson. 2002. &quot;Uppgjör við umheiminn&quot;. Reykjavík: Vaka-Helgafell.
* Valur Ingimundarson. 1996. &quot;Í eldlínu kalda stríðsins&quot;. Reykjavík: Vaka-Helgafell.

==External links==
*Icelandic Foreign Service Iceland&#x27;s embassies and missions abroad
*(in Icelandic) Historical overview by Iceland&#x27;s Ministry of Foreign Affairs
*Iceland&#x27;s Ministry of Foreign Affairs
* European Commission &gt; The EU&#x27;s relations with Iceland
** The Icelandic European Movement (favours Icelandic EU membership)
** Heimssýn, the cross-political organisation of Icelandic eurosceptics 
;Foreign representations in Iceland
*Canadian Embassy in Iceland
*United States Embassy in Reykjavík </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="0" end="7" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q62567" start="92" end="110" title="Kingdom of Iceland" label="Kingdom of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273134" start="141" end="156" title="King of Denmark" label="King of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="218" end="235" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="305" end="312" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="524" end="534" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q819136" start="614" end="622" title="Occupation of Denmark" label="occupied"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="626" end="638" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="889" end="902" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic states"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="904" end="922" title="European Union" label="the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="1066" end="1070" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="1217" end="1221" title="European Free Trade Association" label="EFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="1292" end="1295" title="European Economic Area" label="EEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969730" start="1315" end="1323" title="Schengen Area" label="Schengen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="1711" end="1719" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036702" start="1866" end="1889" title="Reykjavík Summit" label="Reagan-Gorbachev summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764" start="1893" end="1902" title="Reykjavík" label="Reykjavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="2063" end="2077" title="Exclusive economic zone" label="fishing rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q940618" start="2133" end="2140" title="Cod War" label="Cod War"/>
<link wikidata="Q45823" start="2522" end="2533" title="Barents Sea" label="Barents Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="2594" end="2611" title="environmentalism" label="environmentalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053889" start="2648" end="2680" title="International Whaling Commission" label="International Whaling Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="2952" end="2961" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="2970" end="2983" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448248" start="3160" end="3188" title="Ministry of Fisheries and Agriculture (Iceland)" label="Icelandic Fisheries Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q592753" start="3296" end="3314" title="demarche" label="diplomatic protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="3470" end="3477" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="3482" end="3488" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="3604" end="3613" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="3615" end="3621" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="3623" end="3630" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="3641" end="3648" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="3653" end="3663" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3673" end="3677" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="3741" end="3751" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="3799" end="3805" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="3855" end="3862" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211641" start="3959" end="3968" title="International recognition of the State of Palestine" label="recognise"/>
<link wikidata="Q219060" start="3969" end="3978" title="State of Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="4084" end="4090" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="4095" end="4101" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="4298" end="4332" title="North Atlantic Treaty Organization" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="4334" end="4386" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="4388" end="4416" title="International Criminal Court" label="International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q191384" start="4418" end="4471" title="International Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="International Bank for Reconstruction and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q827525" start="4473" end="4510" title="International Development Association" label="International Development Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q656801" start="4512" end="4545" title="International Finance Corporation" label="International Finance Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="4547" end="4601" title="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" label="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="4603" end="4625" title="European Economic Area" label="European Economic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="4627" end="4658" title="European Free Trade Association" label="European Free Trade Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="4660" end="4677" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="4679" end="4721" title="International Criminal Police Organization" label="International Criminal Police Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="4823" end="4850" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="4852" end="4876" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="4878" end="4911" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="Food and Agriculture Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="4913" end="4947" title="International Atomic Energy Agency" label="International Atomic Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="4949" end="4990" title="International Civil Aviation Organization" label="International Civil Aviation Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="4992" end="5025" title="International Labour Organization" label="International Labour Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q201054" start="5027" end="5062" title="International Maritime Organization" label="International Maritime Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="5064" end="5101" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="International Telecommunication Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="5103" end="5168" title="UNESCO" label="United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q17495" start="5170" end="5192" title="Universal Postal Union" label="Universal Postal Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="5194" end="5219" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q170424" start="5221" end="5254" title="World Meteorological Organization" label="World Meteorological Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053889" start="5263" end="5295" title="International Whaling Commission" label="International Whaling Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745501" start="5335" end="5361" title="Member states of the League of Nations" label="join the League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="5783" end="5790" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q134851" start="5912" end="5929" title="continental shelf" label="continental shelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q216996" start="5989" end="6031" title="United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea" label="UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (1982)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656185" start="6493" end="6500" title="Icesave" label="Icesave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137483" start="6514" end="6550" title="2008–2011 Icelandic financial crisis" label="2008–2011 Icelandic financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045069" start="6723" end="6727" title="Icelandic loan guarantees referendum, 2010" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077805" start="6732" end="6736" title="Icelandic loan guarantees referendum, 2011" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="7025" end="7039" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338737" start="7120" end="7144" title="European Free Trade Area" label="European Free Trade Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536928" start="7187" end="7207" title="free trade agreement" label="free trade agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="7239" end="7261" title="European Economic Area" label="European Economic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q955276" start="7322" end="7347" title="Internal Market (European Union)" label="EU&amp;#x27;s internal market"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="7556" end="7581" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign direct investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969730" start="7616" end="7629" title="Schengen Area" label="Schengen Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="7838" end="7842" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="8613" end="8627" title="U.S. Air Force" label="U.S. Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q320018" start="8672" end="8684" title="interceptors" label="interceptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481748" start="8692" end="8700" title="Naval Air Station Keflavik" label="Keflavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q407735" start="9301" end="9313" title="Icelandic Air Policing" label="air policing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616380" start="10059" end="10097" title="List of diplomatic missions in Iceland" label="List of diplomatic missions in Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982506" start="10100" end="10138" title="List of diplomatic missions of Iceland" label="List of diplomatic missions of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15983772" start="10141" end="10179" title="Ministry for Foreign Affairs (Iceland)" label="Ministry for Foreign Affairs (Iceland)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64591" wikidata="Q2997946" url="?curid=64591" title="Corridor">
<text>Corridor or The Corridor may refer to:

== Arts, entertainment, and media ==

===Films===
*&quot;The Corridor&quot; (1968 film), a 1968 Swedish drama film
*&quot;The Corridor&quot; (1995 film), a 1995 Lithuanian drama film
*&quot;The Corridor&quot; (2010 film), a 2010 Canadian horror film
*&quot;The Corridor&quot; (2013 film), a 2013 Iranian drama film
* &quot;Corridor&quot; (film), a 2013 horror short film

===Other uses in arts, entertainment, and media===
* &quot;Corridor&quot; (album), a 2009 album by Japanese pop singer Miki Imai
* &quot;Corridor&quot; (comics), the first Indian graphic novel, written by Sarnath Banerjee
* &quot;Corridor&quot; (short story collection), a short story collection by Alfian Sa&#x27;at, published in 1999
* &quot;The Corridor&quot; (opera), a 2009 chamber opera composed by Harrison Birtwistle
* Corridor Digital, an American production studio based in Los Angeles

==Passageways==
* A narrow hallway, or corridor, a passageway to provide access between rooms inside a building
*A passageway along a corridor coach
*Wildlife corridor

== Transportation ==
* Corridor (Via Rail), a rail network running from Quebec City to Windsor, Ontario, Canada
* Air corridor, a designated travel path for aircraft
* Transport corridor, a (generally linear) tract of land in which at least one main line for some mode of transport has been built
** Corridor, a highway that is part of the Appalachian Development Highway System in the United States
** Highway corridor, a general path that a highway follows
* Humanitarian corridor

== Other uses==
* Operation Corridor, a Serb military operation in Bosnia in 1992
* The Corridor, Bath, an early shopping arcade built in Bath, Somerset, England in 1825

== See also ==
* Cloister</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2997946" start="0" end="8" title="Corridor" label="Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997946" start="12" end="24" title="Corridor" label="The Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448857" start="91" end="127" title="The Corridor (1968 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Corridor&amp;quot; (1968 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198947" start="156" end="192" title="The Corridor (1995 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Corridor&amp;quot; (1995 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21528113" start="224" end="260" title="The Corridor (2010 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Corridor&amp;quot; (2010 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14755288" start="291" end="327" title="The Corridor (2013 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Corridor&amp;quot; (2013 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19363573" start="357" end="384" title="Corridor (film)" label="&amp;quot;Corridor&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172931" start="465" end="493" title="Corridor (album)" label="&amp;quot;Corridor&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172935" start="543" end="572" title="Corridor (comics)" label="&amp;quot;Corridor&amp;quot; (comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172934" start="636" end="681" title="Corridor (short story collection)" label="&amp;quot;Corridor&amp;quot; (short story collection)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727673" start="750" end="782" title="The Corridor (opera)" label="&amp;quot;The Corridor&amp;quot; (opera)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60774348" start="839" end="855" title="Corridor Digital" label="Corridor Digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135449" start="936" end="943" title="hallway" label="hallway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4247410" start="1043" end="1057" title="corridor coach" label="corridor coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q864912" start="1059" end="1076" title="Wildlife corridor" label="Wildlife corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172933" start="1101" end="1120" title="Corridor (Via Rail)" label="Corridor (Via Rail)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423981" start="1192" end="1204" title="Air corridor" label="Air corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834916" start="1246" end="1264" title="Transport corridor" label="Transport corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q800055" start="1418" end="1456" title="Appalachian Development Highway System" label="Appalachian Development Highway System"/>
<link wikidata="Q269949" start="1521" end="1528" title="highway" label="highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5939489" start="1539" end="1560" title="Humanitarian corridor" label="Humanitarian corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935145" start="1580" end="1598" title="Operation Corridor" label="Operation Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727672" start="1646" end="1664" title="The Corridor, Bath" label="The Corridor, Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430154" start="1750" end="1758" title="Cloister" label="Cloister"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64592" wikidata="Q1135449" url="?curid=64592" title="Hallway">
<text>A hallway (also passage, passageway, corridor or hall) is an interior space in a building that is used to connect other rooms. Hallways are generally long and narrow.

Hallways must be sufficiently wide to ensure buildings can be evacuated during a fire, and to allow people in wheelchairs to navigate them. The minimum width of a hallway is governed by building codes. Minimum widths in residences are in the United States. Hallways are wider in higher-traffic settings, such as schools and hospitals.

In 1597 John Thorpe is the first recorded architect to replace multiple connected rooms with rooms along a corridor each accessed by a separate door.

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1135449" start="2" end="9" title="Hallway" label="hallway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135449" start="16" end="23" title="Hallway" label="passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135449" start="25" end="35" title="Hallway" label="passageway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135449" start="37" end="45" title="Hallway" label="corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135449" start="49" end="53" title="Hallway" label="hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q191931" start="278" end="288" title="wheelchair" label="wheelchair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333573" start="354" end="367" title="building code" label="building code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701940" start="512" end="523" title="John Thorpe" label="John Thorpe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64594" wikidata="Q15147779" url="?curid=64594" title="You Can't Take It with You (play)">
<text>You Can&#x27;t Take It with You is a comedic play in three acts by George S. Kaufman and Moss Hart. The original production of the play premiered at the Chestnut Street Opera House in Philadelphia, on November 30, 1936. The production then transferred to Broadway&#x27;s Booth Theatre on December 14, 1936, where it played for 838 performances.

The play won the 1937 Pulitzer Prize for Drama, and was adapted for the screen as &quot;You Can&#x27;t Take It with You&quot; in 1938, which won the Academy Award for Best Picture and Best Director.

The play is popular among theater programs of high school institutions, and has been one of the 10 most-produced school plays every year since amateur rights became available in 1939.

==Plot==

=== Act One ===

The story takes place entirely in the large house of a slightly odd New York City family. Various characters in the lives of the Vanderhof-Sycamore-Carmichael clan are introduced in the first act.

The patriarch of the family, Grandpa Vanderhof, is a whimsical old man who keeps pet snakes and has never paid his income tax. His daughter is Penelope &quot;Penny&quot; Vanderhof, a writer of adventure- and sex-filled melodrama plays. Penny is married to Paul Sycamore, a tinkerer who manufactures fireworks in the basement with the help of his assistant, Mr. De Pinna, who used to be the family&#x27;s iceman. One of Paul and Penny&#x27;s two daughters is Essie Sycamore Carmichael, a childish candy maker who dreams of being a ballerina, even though she is a terrible dancer. Essie is married to Ed Carmichael, a xylophone player who lives with the family and helps distribute Essie&#x27;s candies. Ed is an amateur printer who prints any phrase that sounds catchy. Paul and Penny&#x27;s other daughter Alice Sycamore is quite obviously the only &quot;normal&quot; family member. She has an office job and is sometimes embarrassed by the eccentricities of her family, yet deep down, she still loves them. In addition, the Vanderhof-Sycamore-Carmichael clan employs a maid, Rheba, who is dating Donald, a handyman who performs odd jobs for the family.

Essie tells Grandpa Vanderhof that some letters have arrived for him from the &quot;United States Government&quot;, but that she misplaced them. Shortly afterwards, Alice comes home and announces that she has fallen in love with her co-worker, Tony Kirby, the son of the company&#x27;s executive. Before going upstairs to change clothes, Alice tells her family that Tony will be coming over shortly to take her on a date. The family members excitedly discuss Alice&#x27;s new relationship.

The doorbell rings. Penny answers the door and greets the man standing there, thinking he must be Tony, but the man clarifies that he is a tax investigator named Wilbur C. Henderson, and he is investigating Grandpa for his evasion of income tax. When Henderson asks Grandpa why he owed twenty-four years of back income tax, Grandpa states he never believed in it, and that the government wouldn&#x27;t know what to do with the money if he did pay it. Henderson becomes infuriated by Grandpa&#x27;s answers to his questions. Henderson spots Grandpa&#x27;s pet snakes, and runs out of the house in fear, but not before promising Grandpa that he will hear – one way or another – from the United States government.

The real Tony Kirby arrives, and Alice is nervous that her eccentric family will scare him away. As they attempt to leave, Mr. Boris Kolenkhov, Essie&#x27;s extremely eccentric Russian ballet instructor, arrives and chats with the family, complaining about the Revolution. During this discussion, Alice and Tony make their escape. The rest of the family sit down for dinner.

=== Act Two ===
The second act takes place several days later. Alice has invited Tony and his father and mother over for dinner the next evening, and it is the only thing on the entire family&#x27;s mind. Alice runs around the house telling her family to try to act as normal as possible. Penny has brought actress Gay Wellington over to read over Penny&#x27;s latest play, but Gay becomes very drunk, and passes out onto the living room couch after looking at the snakes.

Ed returns from distributing Essie&#x27;s candies, worried that he is being followed by someone. When Mr. De Pinna looks out the window, he sees no one other than a man walking away. Ed is still sent out by Essie to deliver more candies. Paul and Mr. De Pinna are downstairs the whole time making fireworks. Mr. De Pinna comes up from the basement carrying a painting that Penny had started of him as a discus thrower. Mr. De Pinna asks if Penny would finish it and she agrees. She leaves to put on her painting gear and Mr. De Pinna leaves to put on his costume.

At the same time, Mr. Kolenkhov arrives and begins Essie&#x27;s ballet lesson. Ed provides accompanying music on the xylophone. Rheba runs in and out of the kitchen cleaning. Grandpa takes this time to practice darts and feed the snakes. In the midst of all this hullabaloo, Tony appears in the doorway with Mr. Kirby and Mrs. Kirby. Before them is the entire eccentric spectacle. Apparently, Tony has forgotten for which night dinner was planned, and Alice is incredibly embarrassed.

Penny tells Alice not to worry, and that they can manage a nice dinner easily. She gives a list of things to Donald and tells him to run down to the store. Grandpa tries desperately to keep the party normal and under control for the sake of his granddaughter. Mr. Kirby reveals himself to be a very straitlaced fat-cat, who raises orchids as a hobby. Mr. Kirby investigates a child&#x27;s model and finds it is Paul&#x27;s &quot;hobby&quot;. Mrs. Kirby tells them that her true passion is spiritualism, which Penny derides as a &quot;fake&quot;. During a discussion of hobbies, Mr. Kolenkhov brings up that the Romans&#x27; hobby was wrestling, and demonstrates on Mr. Kirby by throwing him on the floor.

To pass the time after this awkward incident, Penny suggests they play a free association game. Alice imagines what is coming and immediately tries to quash the suggestions, but Penny shrugs her off and instructs everyone to write down &quot;the first thing that pops into their heads&quot; after she says certain words.

Penny offers the words &quot;potato&quot;, &quot;bathroom&quot;, &quot;lust&quot;, &quot;honeymoon&quot;, and &quot;sex&quot;. Penny reads Mr. Kirby&#x27;s list first, with reactions of, respectively: &quot;steak&quot;, &quot;toothpaste&quot;, &quot;unlawful&quot;, &quot;trip&quot;, and &quot;male&quot;. Mrs. Kirby&#x27;s list, however, causes much controversy. &quot;Starch&quot; is her response to potatoes, which is not that bad, but her response for &quot;bathroom&quot; is &quot;Mr. Kirby&quot;, and she covers it up with the fact that Mr. Kirby spends a lot of time in there &quot;bathing and shaving&quot;. Her response to &quot;lust&quot; is &quot;human&quot;, claiming it is a perfectly human emotion. Mr. Kirby disagrees, saying &quot;it is depraved&quot;. &quot;Honeymoon&quot;&#x27;s reply is &quot;dull&quot;, as Mrs. Kirby explains that there was &quot;nothing to do at night&quot;. The shocker comes when Mrs. Kirby says her reply to &quot;sex&quot; was &quot;Wall Street&quot;. She at first claims she doesn&#x27;t know what she meant by it, but once provoked she yells at Mr. Kirby &quot;You&#x27;re always talking about Wall Street, even when ...&quot; and then stops.

Wholly embarrassed and humiliated, Mr. Kirby and Mrs. Kirby order Tony home with them immediately but Tony refuses to go. Alice finally decides that their marriage will never work and ends their engagement, and also decides to resign her job at Kirby&#x27;s company. Before the Kirbys can leave, Department of Justice agents come through the door. The head agent tells them that Ed&#x27;s pamphlets from the candy boxes, on which he has printed anything that &quot;sounds nice&quot;, read &quot;DYNAMITE THE CAPITOL&quot;, &quot;DYNAMITE THE WHITE HOUSE&quot;, &quot;DYNAMITE THE SUPREME COURT&quot;, and &quot;GOD IS THE STATE, THE STATE IS GOD&quot;. Grandpa tries to explain to the head agent, but he informs them they are all under arrest.

The agents discover enormous amounts of gunpowder in the basement and think it is for dynamiting Washington, and one agent returns from the basement dragging Mr. De Pinna with him, who was in the basement the whole time. De Pinna desperately tries to explain to the agent that he had left his lit pipe downstairs and must go and get it, but the agent disregards him. Meanwhile, another agent brings down Gay Wellington from upstairs, singing drunkenly. At that point, the fireworks in the basement go off, lit by De Pinna&#x27;s untended pipe, and everyone (aside from Grandpa and Wellington) panics, leaving the whole house in an uproar as Act II ends.

=== Act Three ===
The next day, Donald and Rheba sit in the kitchen reading the paper, which focuses on the story of both families being arrested, with Mr. Kirby&#x27;s presence causing the story to make headlines. Also, Paul and Mr. De Pinna&#x27;s fireworks have been completely destroyed. Meanwhile, Alice has decided to leave for a prolonged trip to the Adirondack Mountains to think things over. When the family forgets to call for a cab, she finally shows her exasperation, angered that her family can&#x27;t be &quot;normal&quot; at all. Tony then arrives and tries to reason with Alice, but she refuses, heading upstairs with Tony following.

Soon, Mr. Kolenkhov appears with the Grand Duchess Olga Katrina, in all of her former glory. After discussing the sad fate of former Russian royalty now working menial jobs in New York, the Grand Duchess soon insists upon going into the kitchen to cook the dinner for the family.

Mr. Kirby arrives to pick up Tony and to settle his score with Grandpa. Soon, Mr. Kirby and Tony get into a heated argument, the pinnacle of which finds Tony admitting that he had purposely brought his family on the wrong night, the night before. He explains that he wanted each family to see each other as they really were, and that he sees the Sycamores as &quot;normal&quot;, that they are a family that loves and understands one another, saying that Mr. Kirby never had time to understand Tony. Grandpa tells Mr. Kirby that he&#x27;s happy with no longer working and getting to enjoy life every day, and that has made him happy ever since, though Mr. Kirby is not convinced, especially as Grandpa suspects that Mr. Kirby doesn&#x27;t like his job. Tony affirms this by pointing out that he found letters that Mr. Kirby had written to his father, expressing desires to be a trapeze artist and later a saxophone player, and that Mr. Kirby still has a saxophone in his closet. Grandpa tells Mr. Kirby that he should get to enjoy his life and riches now while he can, pointing out, &quot;you can&#x27;t take it with you&quot;. Tony agrees with this, deciding to leave the family business to do something he wants to do, and Mr. Kirby finally gives in, giving his blessings to Alice and Tony getting back together, which they do.

Essie then brings a letter to Grandpa that&#x27;s from the government. Grandpa had lied to the government that he was actually Martin Vanderhof Jr., and that the Martin Vanderhof the government was looking for was his father. This is corroborated because the family had buried the deceased milkman (who had lived with them prior to De Pinna) using Grandpa&#x27;s name, since they never knew the milkman&#x27;s real name. Grandpa&#x27;s trick works, as the government tells him that they now owe him a refund, instead of him owing them taxes.

The play comes to a conclusion as the family, along with Tony and Mr. Kirby, sit down to dinner with the Grand Duchess. Grandpa says a touching prayer, and then they dive into the food.

== Characters ==
; Penelope Sycamore: Usually goes by Penny, Penelope is the mother of Essie and Alice, wife of Paul, and daughter of Martin. She writes plays and paints as hobbies because it makes her happy, but is terrible at both. Penny is a loving mother and wife who is constantly concerned with the welfare of her family. Her main goal is to make sure everyone is happy, particularly her daughter Alice. She is a main character.
; Essie Carmichael: Wife of Ed, daughter of Penny and Paul Sycamore, Granddaughter of Martin, sister of Alice. She is childlike. As a hobby she makes candy that Ed sells. Essie dreams of being a ballerina. She has spent 8 years studying with Boris Kolenkhov, but is a terrible dancer.
; Rheba: The African-American maid and cook to the Sycamore family. She is treated almost like a part of the family. She is dating Donald. In the words of Mrs. Sycamore, &quot;The two of them are really cute together, something like Porgy and Bess.&quot;
; Paul Sycamore: Father of Essie and Alice, husband of Penny, son-in-law of Martin. He is a tinkerer who manufactures fireworks in the basement with the help of his assistant Mr. De Pinna. His hobby is playing with erector sets.
; Mr. De Pinna: The ice man who came inside to speak to Paul eight years before, and never left. He helps Mr. Sycamore build fireworks, and moonlights as a model in Mrs. Sycamore&#x27;s paintings. 
; Ed Carmichael: Husband of Essie, son-in-law of Paul and Penny. He is a xylophone player, and distributes Essie&#x27;s candies. Ed is an amateur printer who prints anything that sounds &#x27;catchy&#x27; to him. He prints up dinner menus for his family and communist pamphlets that he places in the boxes of Essie&#x27;s candy. He also likes to make masks.
; Donald Curry: The African-American boyfriend of Rheba, who seems to serve as volunteer handyman for the Sycamores.
; Martin Vanderhof: Referred to mostly as Grandpa in the play. Father-in-law to Paul, father of Penny, grandfather of Alice and Essie. He is an eccentric happy old man who has never paid his income tax because he doesn&#x27;t believe in it, as he feels that the government wouldn&#x27;t know what to do with the money if he paid it. Once a very successful businessman, he left his job 35 years prior for no reason other than to just relax. He lives his life by the philosophy &quot;don&#x27;t do anything that you&#x27;re not going to enjoy doing&quot;. He goes to circuses, commencements, throws darts, and collects stamps. He is a main character.
; Alice Sycamore: Fiancée of Tony Kirby, daughter of Paul and Penny, granddaughter of Martin, sister of Essie. She is the only &quot;normal&quot; member of the extended family. She has an office job, and is rather embarrassed by the eccentricities of her family when she has Tony and his parents at her house, yet she still loves them. She tends to be a pessimist.
; Wilbur C. Henderson: An employee of the IRS. He comes to collect the tax money owed by Grandpa, and can&#x27;t understand why the latter won&#x27;t pay income tax.
; Tony Kirby: Fiancé of Alice, son of Mr. and Mrs. Kirby. He sees how, even though the Sycamores appear odd, they are really the perfect family because they love and care about each other. His own family is very proper and has many issues none of them will admit. He is vice president of Kirby and Co. 
; Boris Kolenkhov: A Russian who escaped to America shortly before the Russian Revolution. He is very concerned with world politics, and the deterioration of Russia. He is the ballet instructor of Essie, aware that she is untalented at dancing, but knows that she enjoys dancing so he keeps working with her. He admires the ancient Greeks and the Romans, questions society, and is interested in world affairs.
; Gay Wellington: An actress whom Mrs. Sycamore meets on a bus and invites home to read one of her plays. She is an alcoholic, gets very drunk, and passes out shortly after arriving at the Sycamore&#x27;s home.
; Anthony W. Kirby: Husband of Mrs. Kirby, father of Tony. He is a very proper man who is president of Kirby and Co. and secretly despises his job. His hobby is raising expensive orchids. He is also a member of the Harvard Society, the Union Club, the National Geographic Society, and the Racquet Club.
; Miriam Kirby: Wife of Mr. Kirby, mother of Tony. She is an extremely prim and proper woman and is horrified by the goings-on in the Sycamore household. Her hobby is spiritualism.
; G-Man 1 (The Man), G-Man 2 (Jim), G-Man 3 (Mac): Three agents who come to investigate Ed because of the communist origin of some of the &#x27;catchy&#x27; quotes he printed and placed in Essie&#x27;s candy boxes, such as &quot;&quot;God is the State – the State is God&quot; and &quot;Dynamite the White House&quot;&quot;.
; The Grand Duchess Olga Katrina: She was one of the Grand Duchesses of Russia before the Revolution, another being her sister, the Grand Duchess Natasha. Since then she has been forced to flee to America where she has found work as a waitress in Childs Restaurant. The rest of her family has had a similar fate, such as her Uncle Sergei, the Grand Duke, who is now an elevator operator. She loves to cook as a hobby.

==Productions==
The play premiered at the Chestnut Street Opera House in Philadelphia on November 30, 1936. The production transferred to Broadway at the Booth Theatre on December 14, 1936, and ran there until September 3, 1938; it transferred to the Imperial Theatre, running from September 5, 1938, to October 29, 1938, and finally transferred to the Ambassador Theatre from October 31, 1938, to December 3, 1938, for a total of 838 performances. George S. Kaufman was the director.

The play was revived on Broadway with a production opening at the 
Plymouth Theatre on April 4, 1983, to December 10, 1983, and transferring to the Royale Theatre from December 13, 1983, to January 1, 1984, for a total of 312 performances. Directed by Ellis Rabb, the cast starred Jason Robards as Martin Vanderhof, Colleen Dewhurst as Olga, James Coco as Boris Kolenkhov and Elizabeth Wilson as Penelope Sycamore.

A 1985 revival starred Eddie Albert as Grandpa Vanderhof, Eva Gabor as Grand Duchess Olga Katrina and Jack Dodson as Paul Sycamore.

A two-act version was staged at the Royal Exchange Theatre Manchester from December 2011 to January 2012. It received excellent reviews and played to packed houses throughout.

A revival opened on Broadway at the Longacre Theater on August 26, 2014 (previews) and on September 28, 2014 (officially). Directed by Scott Ellis, the cast starred James Earl Jones as Martin Vanderhof, Rose Byrne as Alice Sycamore, Elizabeth Ashley as The Grand Duchess Olga, Annaleigh Ashford as Essie Carmichael (a role which earned her a Tony Award for Featured Actress in a Play), Johanna Day as Mrs. Kirby, Julie Halston as Gay Wellington, Byron Jennings as Mr. Kirby, Mark Linn-Baker as Paul Sycamore, Crystal Dickinson as Rheba, Patrick Kerr as Mr. De Pinna, Will Brill as Ed, Marc Damon Johnson as Donald Curry, Reg Rogers as Boris Kolenkhov, Fran Kranz as Tony Kirby, Kristine Nielsen as Penelope Sycamore, Karl Kenzler as Henderson, and the G-Men played by Nick Corley, Austin Durant, and Joe Tapper. Understudies include Corley, Barrett Doss, Durant, Ned Noyes, Pippa Pearthree, Tapper, and Charles Turner.

==Film, radio and TV adaptations==


The play was the basis for the 1938 film directed by Frank Capra. The film cast included James Stewart, Jean Arthur, Lionel Barrymore, Edward Arnold, Spring Byington, Ann Miller, Dub Taylor, Charles Lane, Mischa Auer, Eddie &#x27;Rochester&#x27; Anderson, and the uncredited Arthur Murray. It was awarded the Academy Award for Best Picture and Best Director of 1938. The film version has the same overall plot and themes as the play but includes new scenes, dialogue, and slightly different characterizations, such as a side plot about Kirby Sr.&#x27;s attempt to acquire the Vanderhof house for a real estate development, and removed the side plot of Grand Duchess Olga Katrina.

Two short-lived radio series based on the play aired in 1944 and 1951. The 1944 series, with Everett Sloane as Grandpa Vanderhof, ran on the Mutual network from August 27 to November 19 of that year. The 1951 series, with Walter Brennan as Grandpa, ran on the NBC network from May 13 to November 16 of that year.

CBS produced a notable television adaptation of the original play in 1979. It featured Art Carney as Grandpa, along with Jean Stapleton, Beth Howland, Blythe Danner, Robert Mandan, Harry Morgan, Barry Bostwick, Kenneth Mars, Howard Hesseman and Polly Holliday. A second television adaptation was produced in 1984 by Public Broadcasting Service. This version, featuring Jason Robards as Grandpa, was based on the Broadway revival and filmed at Royale Theatre, New York City and was included in Great Performances (November 21, 1984).

A syndicated situation comedy based on the play, produced by NBC, ran in the United States during the 1987–1988 season. Harry Morgan, who had played Mr. De Pinna in the 1979 telefilm, appeared in the series as Grandpa.

==References==
== Further reading ==

==External links==
* 
* Review by Brooks Atkinson of the original production
*1946 &quot;Theatre Guild on the Air&quot; radio adaptation at Internet Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25379" start="37" end="49" title="comedic play" label="comedic play"/>
<link wikidata="Q163662" start="67" end="84" title="George S. Kaufman" label="George S. Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q728876" start="89" end="98" title="Moss Hart" label="Moss Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q125475022" start="153" end="180" title="Chestnut Street Opera House" label="Chestnut Street Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="184" end="196" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="255" end="263" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527434" start="271" end="284" title="Booth Theatre" label="Booth Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q289214" start="368" end="392" title="Pulitzer Prize for Drama" label="Pulitzer Prize for Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q637835" start="434" end="465" title="You Can&amp;#x27;t Take It with You (film)" label="You Can&amp;#x27;t Take It with You"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="495" end="525" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Academy Award for Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="530" end="543" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="689" end="703" title="amateur rights" label="amateur rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q171692" start="960" end="969" title="patriarch" label="patriarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="1071" end="1081" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q191489" start="1175" end="1184" title="melodrama" label="melodrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q805221" start="1486" end="1495" title="ballerina" label="ballerina"/>
<link wikidata="Q165666" start="1572" end="1581" title="xylophone" label="xylophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500733" start="1675" end="1682" title="Printer (publisher)" label="printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563977" start="2397" end="2406" title="Senior management" label="executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="2836" end="2846" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="3575" end="3585" title="Bolshevik Revolution" label="Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="5546" end="5553" title="orchids" label="orchids"/>
<link wikidata="Q829348" start="5704" end="5716" title="Spiritualism (religious movement)" label="spiritualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42486" start="5849" end="5858" title="wrestling" label="wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054460" start="5994" end="6010" title="Free association (psychology)" label="free association"/>
<link wikidata="Q11690" start="7220" end="7231" title="Wall Street" label="Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="7729" end="7750" title="United States Department of Justice" label="Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="8218" end="8227" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="8275" end="8285" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q357546" start="9191" end="9211" title="Adirondack Mountains" label="Adirondack Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q47728" start="11998" end="12005" title="hobby" label="hobbies"/>
<link wikidata="Q47728" start="12394" end="12399" title="hobby" label="hobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q805221" start="12455" end="12464" title="ballerina" label="ballerina"/>
<link wikidata="Q833860" start="12575" end="12579" title="maid" label="maid"/>
<link wikidata="Q740920" start="12778" end="12792" title="Porgy and Bess" label="Porgy and Bess"/>
<link wikidata="Q127933" start="12918" end="12927" title="fireworks" label="fireworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q234852" start="12935" end="12943" title="basement" label="basement"/>
<link wikidata="Q47728" start="12993" end="12998" title="hobby" label="hobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2189033" start="13015" end="13026" title="erector set" label="erector set"/>
<link wikidata="Q127933" start="13154" end="13163" title="fireworks" label="fireworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500733" start="13373" end="13380" title="Printer (publisher)" label="printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="13893" end="13903" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054021" start="14277" end="14289" title="Graduation" label="commencement"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="14758" end="14761" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="IRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="15252" end="15274" title="the Russian Revolution" label="the Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="15517" end="15523" title="Greeks" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="15532" end="15538" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="15985" end="15992" title="orchids" label="orchids"/>
<link wikidata="Q167186" start="16058" end="16085" title="National Geographic Society" label="National Geographic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578143" start="16276" end="16288" title="Spiritualism (beliefs)" label="spiritualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="16396" end="16405" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q157195" start="16850" end="16858" title="waitress" label="waitress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098617" start="16862" end="16879" title="Childs Restaurant" label="Childs Restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q195651" start="16984" end="17001" title="elevator operator" label="elevator operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q47728" start="17026" end="17031" title="hobby" label="hobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q125475022" start="17076" end="17103" title="Chestnut Street Opera House" label="Chestnut Street Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527434" start="17188" end="17201" title="Booth Theatre" label="Booth Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006906" start="17285" end="17301" title="Imperial Theatre" label="Imperial Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741073" start="17387" end="17405" title="Ambassador Theatre (New York)" label="Ambassador Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549572" start="17587" end="17603" title="Gerald Schoenfeld Theatre" label="Plymouth Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892910" start="17668" end="17682" title="Royale Theatre" label="Royale Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365971" start="17772" end="17782" title="Ellis Rabb" label="Ellis Rabb"/>
<link wikidata="Q296630" start="17801" end="17814" title="Jason Robards" label="Jason Robards"/>
<link wikidata="Q253916" start="17836" end="17852" title="Colleen Dewhurst" label="Colleen Dewhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q769205" start="17862" end="17872" title="James Coco" label="James Coco"/>
<link wikidata="Q944952" start="17896" end="17912" title="Elizabeth Wilson" label="Elizabeth Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q313046" start="17959" end="17971" title="Eddie Albert" label="Eddie Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q235928" start="17994" end="18003" title="Eva Gabor" label="Eva Gabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673576" start="18282" end="18298" title="Longacre Theater" label="Longacre Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436288" start="18381" end="18392" title="Scott Ellis" label="Scott Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q203960" start="18411" end="18427" title="James Earl Jones" label="James Earl Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q228717" start="18449" end="18459" title="Rose Byrne" label="Rose Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q434678" start="18479" end="18495" title="Elizabeth Ashley" label="Elizabeth Ashley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767815" start="18523" end="18540" title="Annaleigh Ashford" label="Annaleigh Ashford"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="18588" end="18598" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q16195498" start="18632" end="18643" title="Johanna Day" label="Johanna Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q6308221" start="18659" end="18672" title="Julie Halston" label="Julie Halston"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18692" end="18706" title="Byron Jennings" label="Byron Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366440" start="18721" end="18736" title="Mark Linn-Baker" label="Mark Linn-Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897747" start="18783" end="18795" title="Patrick Kerr" label="Patrick Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q15727761" start="18867" end="18877" title="Reg Rogers" label="Reg Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2240987" start="18898" end="18908" title="Fran Kranz" label="Fran Kranz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11835718" start="18924" end="18940" title="Kristine Nielsen" label="Kristine Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q62959819" start="19087" end="19099" title="Barrett Doss" label="Barrett Doss"/>
<link wikidata="Q637835" start="19234" end="19243" title="You Can&amp;#x27;t Take It with You (film)" label="1938 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q51492" start="19256" end="19267" title="Frank Capra" label="Frank Capra"/>
<link wikidata="Q102462" start="19292" end="19305" title="James Stewart" label="James Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q229338" start="19307" end="19318" title="Jean Arthur" label="Jean Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q295593" start="19320" end="19336" title="Lionel Barrymore" label="Lionel Barrymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q522803" start="19338" end="19351" title="Edward Arnold (actor)" label="Edward Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q267803" start="19353" end="19368" title="Spring Byington" label="Spring Byington"/>
<link wikidata="Q241701" start="19370" end="19380" title="Ann Miller" label="Ann Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q611266" start="19382" end="19392" title="Dub Taylor" label="Dub Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q634150" start="19394" end="19406" title="Charles Lane (actor, born 1905)" label="Charles Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375447" start="19408" end="19419" title="Mischa Auer" label="Mischa Auer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751027" start="19421" end="19457" title="Eddie Anderson (comedian)" label="Eddie &amp;#x27;Rochester&amp;#x27; Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865273" start="19478" end="19491" title="Arthur Murray" label="Arthur Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="19512" end="19542" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Academy Award for Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="19547" end="19560" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q600233" start="19977" end="19991" title="Everett Sloane" label="Everett Sloane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034218" start="20025" end="20031" title="Mutual Broadcasting System" label="Mutual"/>
<link wikidata="Q219521" start="20106" end="20120" title="Walter Brennan" label="Walter Brennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q58037172" start="20144" end="20147" title="NBC Radio Network" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q182431" start="20285" end="20295" title="Art Carney" label="Art Carney"/>
<link wikidata="Q271856" start="20319" end="20333" title="Jean Stapleton" label="Jean Stapleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q434809" start="20335" end="20347" title="Beth Howland" label="Beth Howland"/>
<link wikidata="Q40064" start="20349" end="20362" title="Blythe Danner" label="Blythe Danner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4413076" start="20364" end="20377" title="Robert Mandan" label="Robert Mandan"/>
<link wikidata="Q355125" start="20379" end="20391" title="Harry Morgan" label="Harry Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q809019" start="20393" end="20407" title="Barry Bostwick" label="Barry Bostwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356690" start="20409" end="20421" title="Kenneth Mars" label="Kenneth Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q194881" start="20423" end="20438" title="Howard Hesseman" label="Howard Hesseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q289743" start="20443" end="20457" title="Polly Holliday" label="Polly Holliday"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="20514" end="20541" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="Public Broadcasting Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q296630" start="20567" end="20580" title="Jason Robards" label="Jason Robards"/>
<link wikidata="Q85777705" start="20691" end="20709" title="List of Great Performances episodes" label="Great Performances"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022969" start="20734" end="20761" title="You Can&amp;#x27;t Take It with You (TV series)" label="syndicated situation comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="20793" end="20796" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q355125" start="20852" end="20864" title="Harry Morgan" label="Harry Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="21130" end="21146" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64595" wikidata="Q257010" url="?curid=64595" title="Passage">
<text>Passage, The Passage or Le Passage may refer to:
==Arts and entertainment==
===Films===
* &quot;Passage&quot; (2008 film), a documentary about Arctic explorers
* &quot;Passage&quot; (2009 film), a short movie about three sisters
* Passage (2020 film), a Canadian documentary film,
* &quot;The Passage&quot; (1979 film), starring James Mason and Malcolm McDowell
* &quot;The Passage&quot; (1986 film), a French supernatural thriller film starring Alain Delon
* &quot;The Passage&quot; (2007 film), by Mark Heller
* &quot;The Passage&quot; (2011 film), by Roberto Minervini
* &quot;The Passage&quot; (2018 film), a short film directed by Kitao Sakurai

===Literature===
*&quot;The Passage&quot; (Palmer novel), a 1930 novel by Vance Palmer
* &quot;Le Passage&quot;, a 1954 French novel by Jean Reverzy
*&quot;Passage&quot; (Willis novel), a 2001 science fiction novel by Connie Willis
*&quot;Passage&quot; (Morley novel), a 2007 novel by John David Morley
*&quot;Passage&quot; (Bujold novel), a 2008 novel by Lois McMaster Bujold
*&quot;Le Passage&quot;, a 2009 novel by former French President Valéry Giscard d&#x27;Estaing
*&quot;The Passage&quot; (novel series), by Justin Cronin
**&quot;The Passage&quot; (Cronin novel), a 2010 novel by Justin Cronin

===Music===
* Passage, or section, a complete musical idea
* Passage (rapper), an alternative hip hop artist based in Oakland, California
* The Passage (band), a punk rock band from the UK

==== Albums ====
* &quot;Passage&quot; (Bloodrock album), 1972
* &quot;Passage&quot; (The Carpenters album), 1977
* &quot;Passage&quot; (The Tannahill Weavers album), 1983
* &quot;Passage&quot; (Samael album), 1996
* &quot;Passages&quot; (Ravi Shankar and Philip Glass album), 1990
* &quot;The Passage&quot; (Andy Narell album) or the title song, 2004
* &quot;The Passage&quot; (Boy Hits Car album), 2005
* &quot;The Passage&quot; (DGM album) or the title song, 2016
* &quot;Le Passage&quot; (album), a 2004 album by Jenifer Bartoli

====Songs====
* &quot;Passage&quot;, a song by Vienna Teng on her 2004 album &quot;Warm Strangers&quot;
* &quot;The Passage&quot;, a song by Bradley Joseph from the 1997 album &quot;Rapture&quot;

===Television===
* &quot;The Passage&quot; (&quot;Battlestar Galactica&quot;), a 2006 episode of the science fiction television series
* &quot;The Passage&quot; (TV series), a science fiction thriller TV series on Fox

===Other uses in arts and entertainment media===
* &quot;Passage&quot; (sculpture), an outdoor 2014 art installation
* &quot;Passage&quot; (video game), a 2007 computer game

==Geography==
* Le Passage, Isère, a commune in France
* Le Passage, Lot-et-Garonne, a commune in France
* Passage Island (disambiguation)
* Passage, 19th century English name for Pasaia, a town and municipality in Spain

==Topography==
* Passage, a distinct section of a cave
* Passage, or strait, a narrow channel of water that connects two larger bodies of water

==Other uses==
* Alley
* Passage (legislature), the process of approving a proposed law
* Passage (architecture), a long room or hall leading to other rooms
* Passage (department store), an upscale department store in Saint Petersburg, Russia
* Passage (dressage), a form of trained slow, animated trot performed by a horse
* The Passage (charity), a charity for homeless and vulnerable people in London

==See also==
* Passages (disambiguation)
* Passaging, in cell culture
* Rite of passage (disambiguation)
* Rites of passage (disambiguation)
* Safe Passage (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q257010" start="0" end="7" title="Passage" label="Passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q257010" start="9" end="20" title="Passage" label="The Passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q257010" start="24" end="34" title="Passage" label="Le Passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142454" start="90" end="121" title="Passage (2008 film)" label="&amp;quot;Passage&amp;quot; (2008 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055761" start="162" end="193" title="Passage (2009 film)" label="&amp;quot;Passage&amp;quot; (2009 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q108127912" start="231" end="250" title="Passage (2020 film)" label="Passage (2020 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q429423" start="283" end="318" title="The Passage (1979 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Passage&amp;quot; (1979 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3225276" start="364" end="399" title="The Passage (1986 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Passage&amp;quot; (1986 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756233" start="460" end="495" title="The Passage (2007 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Passage&amp;quot; (2007 film)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="514" end="549" title="The Passage (2011 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Passage&amp;quot; (2011 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17130637" start="554" end="571" title="Stop the Pounding Heart" label="Roberto Minervini"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="574" end="609" title="The Passage (2018 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Passage&amp;quot; (2018 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q63546532" start="636" end="649" title="Kitao Sakurai" label="Kitao Sakurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q23035240" start="669" end="707" title="The Passage (Palmer novel)" label="&amp;quot;The Passage&amp;quot; (Palmer novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q671168" start="787" end="799" title="Jean Reverzy" label="Jean Reverzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367818" start="801" end="835" title="Passage (Willis novel)" label="&amp;quot;Passage&amp;quot; (Willis novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16962851" start="884" end="918" title="Passage (Morley novel)" label="&amp;quot;Passage&amp;quot; (Morley novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142453" start="955" end="989" title="Passage (Bujold novel)" label="&amp;quot;Passage&amp;quot; (Bujold novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124" start="1093" end="1122" title="Valéry Giscard d&amp;#x27;Estaing" label="Valéry Giscard d&amp;#x27;Estaing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756239" start="1124" end="1162" title="The Passage (novel series)" label="&amp;quot;The Passage&amp;quot; (novel series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199882" start="1183" end="1221" title="The Passage (Cronin novel)" label="&amp;quot;The Passage&amp;quot; (Cronin novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115663" start="1280" end="1287" title="Section (music)" label="section"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142456" start="1315" end="1331" title="Passage (rapper)" label="Passage (rapper)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522181" start="1394" end="1412" title="The Passage (band)" label="The Passage (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142455" start="1463" end="1500" title="Passage (Bloodrock album)" label="&amp;quot;Passage&amp;quot; (Bloodrock album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269258" start="1509" end="1551" title="Passage (The Carpenters album)" label="&amp;quot;Passage&amp;quot; (The Carpenters album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q224645" start="1581" end="1602" title="The Tannahill Weavers" label="The Tannahill Weavers"/>
<link wikidata="Q549665" start="1618" end="1652" title="Passage (Samael album)" label="&amp;quot;Passage&amp;quot; (Samael album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142488" start="1661" end="1719" title="Passages (Ravi Shankar and Philip Glass album)" label="&amp;quot;Passages&amp;quot; (Ravi Shankar and Philip Glass album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756234" start="1728" end="1771" title="The Passage (Andy Narell album)" label="&amp;quot;The Passage&amp;quot; (Andy Narell album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756235" start="1798" end="1842" title="The Passage (Boy Hits Car album)" label="&amp;quot;The Passage&amp;quot; (Boy Hits Car album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q123684751" start="1851" end="1886" title="The Passage (DGM album)" label="&amp;quot;The Passage&amp;quot; (DGM album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3225274" start="1913" end="1943" title="Le Passage (album)" label="&amp;quot;Le Passage&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969578" start="2061" end="2075" title="Warm Strangers" label="Warm Strangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294384" start="2160" end="2167" title="Rapture (Bradley Joseph album)" label="Rapture"/>
<link wikidata="Q15703286" start="2194" end="2252" title="The Passage (Battlestar Galactica)" label="&amp;quot;The Passage&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Battlestar Galactica&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55533118" start="2312" end="2347" title="The Passage (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Passage&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21016097" start="2445" end="2476" title="Passage (sculpture)" label="&amp;quot;Passage&amp;quot; (sculpture)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055753" start="2513" end="2545" title="Passage (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Passage&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068856" start="2585" end="2602" title="Le Passage, Isère" label="Le Passage, Isère"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063389" start="2626" end="2652" title="Le Passage, Lot-et-Garonne" label="Le Passage, Lot-et-Garonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142460" start="2676" end="2707" title="Passage Island (disambiguation)" label="Passage Island (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q847127" start="2749" end="2755" title="Pasaia" label="Pasaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35509" start="2841" end="2845" title="cave" label="cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q37901" start="2860" end="2866" title="strait" label="strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251403" start="2953" end="2958" title="Alley" label="Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q686822" start="2961" end="2982" title="Passage (legislature)" label="Passage (legislature)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135449" start="3026" end="3048" title="Passage (architecture)" label="Passage (architecture)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495087" start="3095" end="3121" title="Passage (department store)" label="Passage (department store)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301584" start="3181" end="3199" title="Passage (dressage)" label="Passage (dressage)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756238" start="3262" end="3283" title="The Passage (charity)" label="The Passage (charity)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142486" start="3356" end="3381" title="Passages (disambiguation)" label="Passages (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q842756" start="3384" end="3393" title="Passaging" label="Passaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q287673" start="3413" end="3445" title="Rite of passage (disambiguation)" label="Rite of passage (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q287673" start="3448" end="3481" title="Rites of passage (disambiguation)" label="Rites of passage (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398494" start="3484" end="3513" title="Safe Passage (disambiguation)" label="Safe Passage (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64597" wikidata="Q84345" url="?curid=64597" title="Ludwig von Bertalanffy">
<text>Karl Ludwig von Bertalanffy (19 September 1901 – 12 June 1972) was an Austrian biologist known as one of the founders of general systems theory (GST). This is an interdisciplinary practice that describes systems with interacting components, applicable to biology, cybernetics and other fields. Bertalanffy proposed that the classical laws of thermodynamics might be applied to closed systems, but not necessarily to &quot;open systems&quot; such as living things. His mathematical model of an organism&#x27;s growth over time, published in 1934, is still in use today.

Bertalanffy grew up in Austria and subsequently worked in Vienna, London, Canada, and the United States.

== Biography ==
Ludwig von Bertalanffy was born and grew up in the little village of Atzgersdorf (now Liesing) near Vienna. Ludwig&#x27;s mother Caroline Agnes Vogel was seventeen when she married the thirty-four-year-old Gustav. Ludwig von Bertalanffy grew up as an only child educated at home by private tutors until he was ten and his parents divorced, both remarried outside the Catholic Church in civil ceremonies. When he arrived at his Gymnasium (a form of grammar school) he was already well habituated in learning by reading, and he continued to study on his own. His neighbour, the famous biologist Paul Kammerer, became a mentor and an example to the young Ludwig.

The Bertalanffy family had roots in the 16th century nobility of Hungary which included several scholars and court officials. His grandfather Charles Joseph von Bertalanffy (1833–1912) had settled in Austria and was a state theatre director in Klagenfurt, Graz and Vienna, which were important sites in imperial Austria. Ludwig&#x27;s father Gustav von Bertalanffy (1861–1919) was a prominent railway administrator. On his mother&#x27;s side Ludwig&#x27;s grandfather Joseph Vogel was an imperial counsellor and a wealthy Vienna publisher. 

In 1918, Bertalanffy started his studies at the university level in philosophy and art history, first at the University of Innsbruck and then at the University of Vienna. Ultimately, Bertalanffy had to make a choice between studying philosophy of science and biology; he chose the latter because, according to him, one could always become a philosopher later, but not a biologist. In 1926 he finished his PhD thesis (&quot;Fechner und das Problem der Integration höherer Ordnung&quot;, translated title: &quot;Fechner and the Problem of Higher-Order Integration&quot;) on the psychologist and philosopher Gustav Theodor Fechner. For the next six years he concentrated on a project of &quot;theoretical biology&quot; which focused on the philosophy of biology. He received his habilitation in 1934 in &quot;theoretical biology&quot;.

Bertalanffy was appointed Privatdozent at the University of Vienna in 1934. The post yielded little income, and Bertalanffy faced continuing financial difficulties. He applied for promotion to the status of associate professor, but funding from the Rockefeller Foundation enabled him to make a trip to Chicago in 1937 to work with Nicolas Rashevsky. He was also able to visit the Marine Biological Laboratory in Massachusetts.

Bertalanffy was still in the US when he heard of the Anschluss in March 1938. However, his attempts to remain in the US failed, and he returned to Vienna in October of that year. Within a month of his return, he joined the Nazi Party, which facilitated his promotion to professor at the University of Vienna in 1940. During the Second World War, he linked his &quot;organismic&quot; philosophy of biology to the dominant Nazi ideology, principally that of the Führerprinzip.

Following the defeat of Nazism, Bertalanffy found denazification problematic and left Vienna in 1948. He moved to the University of London (1948–49); the Université de Montréal (1949); the University of Ottawa (1950–54); the University of Southern California (1955–58); the Menninger Foundation (1958–60); the University of Alberta (1961–68); and the State University of New York at Buffalo (SUNY) (1969–72).

In 1972, he died from a heart attack.

===Family life===
Bertalanffy met his wife, Maria, in April 1924 in the Austrian Alps. They were hardly ever apart for the next forty-eight years. She wanted to finish studying but never did, instead devoting her life to Bertalanffy&#x27;s career. Later, in Canada, she would work both for him and with him in his career, and after his death she compiled two of Bertalanffy&#x27;s last works. They had a son, Felix D. Bertalanffy (1926-1999), who was a professor at the University of Manitoba and followed in his father&#x27;s footsteps by making his profession in the field of cancer research.

== Work ==
Today, Bertalanffy is considered to be a founder and one of the principal authors of the interdisciplinary school of thought known as general systems theory, which was pioneered by Alexander Bogdanov. According to Weckowicz (1989), he &quot;occupies an important position in the intellectual history of the twentieth century. His contributions went beyond biology, and extended into cybernetics, education, history, philosophy, psychiatry, psychology and sociology. Some of his admirers even believe that this theory will one day provide a conceptual framework for all these disciplines&quot;.

=== Individual growth model ===
The individual growth model published by Ludwig von Bertalanffy in 1934 is widely used in biological models and exists in a number of permutations.

In its simplest version the so-called Bertalanffy growth equation is expressed as a differential equation of length (&quot;L&quot;) over time (&quot;t&quot;):

formula_1

when formula_2 is the Bertalanffy growth rate and formula_3 the ultimate length of the individual. This model was proposed earlier by August Friedrich Robert Pūtter (1879-1929), writing in 1920.

The dynamic energy budget theory provides a mechanistic explanation of this model in the case of isomorphs that experience a constant food availability. The inverse of the Bertalanffy growth rate appears to depend linearly on the ultimate length, when different food levels are compared. The intercept relates to the maintenance costs, the slope to the rate at which reserve is mobilized for use by metabolism. The ultimate length equals the maximum length at high food availabilities.

=== Bertalanffy equation ===
The Bertalanffy equation describes the growth of a biological organism. It was presented by Ludwig von Bertalanffy in 1969.

formula_4

Here W is organism weight, t is the time, S is the area of organism surface, and V is a physical volume of the organism.

The coefficients formula_5 and formula_6 are (by Bertalanffy&#x27;s definition) the &quot;coefficient of anabolism&quot; and &quot;coefficient of catabolism&quot; respectively.

The solution of the Bertalanffy equation is the function:

formula_7

where formula_8 and formula_9 are constants.

Bertalanffy couldn&#x27;t explain the meaning of the parameters formula_10 (the coefficient of anabolism) and formula_6 (coefficient of catabolism) in his works, which prompted criticism from biologists. However, the Bertalanffy equation is a special case of the Tetearing equation, that is a more general equation of the growth of a biological organism. The Tetearing equation does provide a physical meaning of the coefficients formula_10 and formula_6.

===Bertalanffy module===
To honour Bertalanffy, ecological systems engineer and scientist Howard T. Odum named the storage symbol of his General Systems Language as the Bertalanffy module (see image right).

=== General system theory ===
In the late 1920s, the Soviet philosopher Alexander Bogdanov pioneered &quot;Tektology&quot;, whom Johann Plenge referred to as the theory of &quot;general systems&quot;. However, in the West, Bertalanffy is widely recognized for the development of a theory known as general system theory (GST). The theory attempted to provide alternatives to conventional models of organization. GST defined new foundations and developments as a generalized theory of systems with applications to numerous areas of study, emphasizing holism over reductionism, organism over mechanism.

Foundational to GST are the inter-relationships between elements which all together form the whole.

== Publications ==
* 1928, &quot;Kritische Theorie der Formbildung&quot;, Borntraeger. In English: &quot;Modern Theories of Development: An Introduction to Theoretical Biology&quot;, Oxford University Press, New York: Harper, 1933
* 1928, &quot;Nikolaus von Kues&quot;, G. Müller, München 1928.
* 1930, &quot;Lebenswissenschaft und Bildung&quot;, Stenger, Erfurt 1930
* 1937, &quot;Das Gefüge des Lebens&quot;, Leipzig: Teubner.
* 1940, &quot;Vom Molekül zur Organismenwelt&quot;, Potsdam: Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft Athenaion.
* 1949, &quot;Das biologische Weltbild&quot;, Bern: Europäische Rundschau. In English: &quot;Problems of Life: An Evaluation of Modern Biological and Scientific Thought&quot;, New York: Harper, 1952.
* 1953, &quot;Biophysik des Fliessgleichgewichts&quot;, Braunschweig: Vieweg. 2nd rev. ed. by W. Beier and R. Laue, East Berlin: Akademischer Verlag, 1977
* 1953, &quot;Die Evolution der Organismen&quot;, in &quot;Schöpfungsglaube und Evolutionstheorie&quot;, Stuttgart: Alfred Kröner Verlag, pp 53–66
* 1955, &quot;An Essay on the Relativity of Categories.&quot; &quot;Philosophy of Science&quot;, Vol. 22, No. 4, pp. 243–263.
* 1959, &quot;Stammesgeschichte, Umwelt und Menschenbild&quot;, Schriften zur wissenschaftlichen Weltorientierung Vol 5. Berlin: Lüttke
* 1962, &quot;Modern Theories of Development&quot;, New York: Harper
* 1967, &quot;Robots, Men and Minds: Psychology in the Modern World&quot;, New York: George Braziller, 1969 hardcover: , paperback: 
* 1968, &quot;General System Theory: Foundations, Development, Applications&quot;, New York: George Braziller, revised edition 1976: 
* 1968, &quot;The Organismic Psychology and Systems Theory&quot;, Heinz Werner lectures, Worcester: Clark University Press.
* 1975, &quot;Perspectives on General Systems Theory. Scientific-Philosophical Studies&quot;, E. Taschdjian (eds.), New York: George Braziller, 
* 1981, &quot;A Systems View of Man: Collected Essays&quot;, editor Paul A. LaViolette, Boulder: Westview Press, 

The first &quot;articles&quot; from Bertalanffy on general systems theory:
* 1945, &quot;Zu einer allgemeinen Systemlehre&quot;, &quot;Blätter für deutsche Philosophie&quot;, 3/4. (Extract in: Biologia Generalis, 19 (1949), 139-164).
* 1950, &quot;An Outline of General System Theory&quot;, &quot;British Journal for the Philosophy of Science&quot; 1, p. 114-129.
* 1951, &quot;General system theory – A new approach to unity of science&quot; (Symposium), &quot;Human Biology&quot;, Dec. 1951, Vol. 23, p. 303-361.

== See also ==

* Bowman–Heidenhain hypothesis
* Integrative level
* Population dynamics

==References==
== Further reading ==
* Sabine Brauckmann (1999). &quot;Ludwig von Bertalanffy (1901--1972)&quot;, ISSS Luminaries of the Systemics Movement, January 1999.
* Peter Corning (2001). &quot;Fulfilling von Bertalanffy&#x27;s Vision&quot;: The Synergism Hypothesis as a General Theory of Biological and Social Systems, ISCS 2001.
* Mark Davidson (1983). &quot;Uncommon Sense: The Life and Thought of Ludwig Von Bertalanffy&quot;, Los Angeles: J. P. Tarcher.
* Debora Hammond (2005). &quot;Philosophical and Ethical Foundations of Systems Thinking&quot;, tripleC 3(2): pp. 20–27.
* Ervin László eds. (1972). &quot;The Relevance of General Systems Theory: Papers Presented to Ludwig Von Bertalanffy on His Seventieth Birthday&quot;, New York: George Braziller, 1972.
* David Pouvreau (2013). &quot;Une histoire de la &#x27;systémologie générale&#x27; de Ludwig von Bertalanffy - Généalogie, genèse, actualisation et postérité d&#x27;un projet herméneutique&quot;, Doctoral Thesis (1138 pages), Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales (EHESS), Paris : http://tel.archives-ouvertes.fr/tel-00804157
* Thaddus E. Weckowicz (1989). Ludwig von Bertalanffy (1901-1972): A Pioneer of General Systems Theory, Center for Systems Research Working Paper No. 89-2. Edmonton AB: University of Alberta, February 1989.

==External links==

* International Society for the Systems Sciences&#x27; biography of Ludwig von Bertalanffy.
* http://isss.org/projects/primer International Society for the Systems Sciences&#x27; THE PRIMER PROJECT: INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMICS (organismics)
* Bertalanffy Center for the Study of Systems Science BCSSS in Vienna.
* Ludwig von Bertalanffy (1901-1972): A Pioneer of General Systems Theory working paper by T.E. Weckowicz, University of Alberta Center for Systems Research.
* Ludwig von Bertalanffy, General System Theory - Passages (1968)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q84345" start="0" end="27" title="Ludwig von Bertalanffy" label="Karl Ludwig von Bertalanffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="70" end="78" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q864503" start="79" end="88" title="biologist" label="biologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q269699" start="121" end="143" title="systems theory" label="general systems theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="255" end="262" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q123637" start="264" end="275" title="cybernetics" label="cybernetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q849392" start="334" end="356" title="laws of thermodynamics" label="laws of thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q62604060" start="468" end="486" title="Von Bertalanffy function" label="mathematical model"/>
<link wikidata="Q278900" start="778" end="785" title="Liesing" label="Liesing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="792" end="798" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542966" start="1119" end="1128" title="Gymnasium (Germany)" label="Gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q113522" start="1285" end="1298" title="Paul Kammerer" label="Paul Kammerer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41753" start="1597" end="1607" title="Klagenfurt" label="Klagenfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q13298" start="1609" end="1613" title="Graz" label="Graz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043282" start="1754" end="1767" title="Business administration" label="administrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q875788" start="2004" end="2027" title="University of Innsbruck" label="University of Innsbruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q59115" start="2128" end="2149" title="philosophy of science" label="philosophy of science"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="2154" end="2161" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q76881" start="2500" end="2522" title="Gustav Theodor Fechner" label="Gustav Theodor Fechner"/>
<link wikidata="Q308678" start="2671" end="2683" title="habilitation" label="habilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402736" start="2755" end="2767" title="Privatdozent" label="Privatdozent"/>
<link wikidata="Q165980" start="2775" end="2795" title="University of Vienna" label="University of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q862034" start="2978" end="3000" title="Rockefeller Foundation" label="Rockefeller Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="3031" end="3038" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q927125" start="3060" end="3077" title="Nicolas Rashevsky" label="Nicolas Rashevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q500632" start="3109" end="3137" title="Marine Biological Laboratory" label="Marine Biological Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="3141" end="3154" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="3210" end="3219" title="Anschluss" label="Anschluss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="3380" end="3390" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q706501" start="3617" end="3630" title="Führerprinzip" label="Führerprinzip"/>
<link wikidata="Q27617" start="3683" end="3697" title="denazification" label="denazification"/>
<link wikidata="Q170027" start="3751" end="3771" title="University of London" label="University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q392189" start="3787" end="3809" title="Université de Montréal" label="Université de Montréal"/>
<link wikidata="Q627969" start="3822" end="3842" title="University of Ottawa" label="University of Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="3858" end="3891" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735235" start="3907" end="3927" title="Menninger Foundation" label="Menninger Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q640694" start="3943" end="3964" title="University of Alberta" label="University of Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q681025" start="3984" end="4023" title="University at Buffalo, The State University of New York" label="State University of New York at Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191833" start="4552" end="4574" title="University of Manitoba" label="University of Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q269699" start="4823" end="4845" title="general systems theory" label="general systems theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q335142" start="4870" end="4888" title="Alexander Bogdanov" label="Alexander Bogdanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949037" start="4903" end="4912" title="Thaddus E. Weckowicz" label="Weckowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="5045" end="5052" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q123637" start="5072" end="5083" title="cybernetics" label="cybernetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8434" start="5085" end="5094" title="education" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="5096" end="5103" title="history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="5105" end="5115" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="5117" end="5127" title="psychiatry" label="psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="5129" end="5139" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="5144" end="5153" title="sociology" label="sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q189159" start="5320" end="5337" title="cell growth" label="individual growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623243" start="5338" end="5343" title="model (abstract)" label="model"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="5549" end="5570" title="differential equation" label="differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318973" start="5836" end="5864" title="dynamic energy budget theory" label="dynamic energy budget theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6086093" start="5929" end="5937" title="isomorph" label="isomorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q979486" start="7447" end="7461" title="Howard T. Odum" label="Howard T. Odum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376991" start="7494" end="7518" title="Energy Systems Language" label="General Systems Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q335142" start="7637" end="7655" title="Alexander Bogdanov" label="Alexander Bogdanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q89668" start="7694" end="7707" title="Johann Plenge" label="Johann Plenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q269699" start="7862" end="7883" title="Systems theory" label="general system theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q43229" start="7962" end="7974" title="organization" label="organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q192891" start="8114" end="8120" title="holism" label="holism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239" start="8140" end="8148" title="organism" label="organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q28325722" start="8757" end="8798" title="Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft Athenaion" label="Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft Athenaion"/>
<link wikidata="Q269699" start="10335" end="10357" title="general systems theory" label="general systems theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951288" start="10818" end="10846" title="Bowman–Heidenhain hypothesis" label="Bowman–Heidenhain hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48723685" start="10849" end="10866" title="Integrative level" label="Integrative level"/>
<link wikidata="Q904564" start="10869" end="10888" title="Population dynamics" label="Population dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173392" start="11063" end="11076" title="Peter Corning" label="Peter Corning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248142" start="11359" end="11373" title="Debora Hammond" label="Debora Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q964137" start="11480" end="11492" title="Ervin László" label="Ervin László"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949037" start="12000" end="12020" title="Thaddus E. Weckowicz" label="Thaddus E. Weckowicz"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64598" wikidata="Q584010" url="?curid=64598" title="Alan Bush">
<text>Alan Dudley Bush (22 December 1900 – 31 October 1995) was a British composer, pianist, conductor, teacher and political activist. A committed communist, his uncompromising political beliefs were often reflected in his music. He composed prolifically across a range of genres, but struggled through his lifetime for recognition from the British musical establishment, which largely ignored his works.

Bush, from a prosperous middle-class background, enjoyed considerable success as a student at the Royal Academy of Music (RAM) in the early 1920s, and spent much of that decade furthering his compositional and piano-playing skills under distinguished tutors. A two-year period in Berlin in 1929 to 1931, early in the Nazi Party&#x27;s rise to power, cemented Bush&#x27;s political convictions and moved him from the mainstream Labour Party to the Communist Party of Great Britain which he joined in 1935. He wrote several large-scale works in the 1930s, and was heavily involved with workers&#x27; choirs for whom he composed pageants, choruses and songs. His pro-Soviet stance led to a temporary ban on his music by the BBC in the early years of the Second World War, and his refusal to modify his position in the postwar Cold War era led to a more prolonged semi-ostracism of his music. As a result, the four major operas he wrote between 1950 and 1970 were all premiered in East Germany.

In his prewar works, Bush&#x27;s style retained what commentators have described as an essential Englishness, but was also influenced by the avant-garde European idioms of the inter-war years. During and after the war he began to simplify this style, in line with his Marxism-inspired belief that music should be accessible to the mass of the people. Despite the difficulties he encountered in getting his works performed in the West he continued to compose until well into his eighties. He taught composition at the RAM for more than 50 years, published two books, was the founder and long-time president of the Workers&#x27; Music Association, and served as chairman and later vice-president of the Composers&#x27; Guild of Great Britain. His contribution to musical life was slowly recognised, in the form of doctorates from two universities and numerous tribute concerts towards the end of his life. Since his death aged 94 in 1995, his musical legacy has been nurtured by the Alan Bush Music Trust, established in 1997.

==Life and career==
===Family background and early life===
Bush was born in Dulwich, South London, on 22 December 1900, the third and youngest son of Alfred Walter Bush and Alice Maud, née Brinsley. The Bushes were a prosperous middle-class family, their wealth deriving from the firm of industrial chemists founded by the composer&#x27;s great-grandfather, W. J. Bush. As a child Alan&#x27;s health was delicate, and he was initially educated at home. When he was eleven he began at Highgate School as a day pupil, and remained there until 1918. Both of his elder brothers served as officers in the First World War; one of them, Alfred junior, was killed on the Western Front in 1917. The other, Hamilton Brinsley Bush, went into the family business and ran twice as Liberal candidate for Watford in the 1950s. The end of the war in November 1918 meant that Alan narrowly avoided being called up for military service; meantime, having determined on a musical career, he had applied to and been accepted by the RAM, where he began his studies in the spring of 1918.

===Royal Academy and after===

At the RAM, Bush studied composition under Frederick Corder and piano with Tobias Matthay. He made rapid progress, and won various scholarships and awards, including the Thalberg Scholarship, the Phillimore piano prize, and a Carnegie award for composition. He produced the first compositions of his formal canon: Three Pieces for Two Pianos, Op. 1, and Piano Sonata in B minor, Op. 2, and also made his first attempt to write opera – a scene from Bulwer Lytton&#x27;s novel &quot;The Last Days of Pompeii&quot;, with a libretto by his brother Brinsley. The work, with Bush at the piano, received a single private performance with family members and friends forming the cast. The manuscript was later destroyed by Bush.

Among Bush&#x27;s fellow students was Michael Head. The two became friends, as a result of which Bush met Head&#x27;s 14-year-old sister Nancy. In 1931, ten years after their first meeting, Bush and Nancy would marry and begin a lifelong artistic partnership in which she became Bush&#x27;s principal librettist, as well as providing the texts for many of his other vocal works. 
In 1922 Bush graduated from the RAM, but continued to study composition privately under John Ireland, with whom he formed an enduring friendship. In 1925 Bush was appointed to a teaching post at the RAM, as a professor of harmony and composition, under terms that gave him scope to continue with his studies and to travel. He took further piano study from two pupils of Leschetizky, Benno Moiseiwitsch and Mabel Lander, from whom he learned the Leschetizky method. In 1926 he made his first of numerous visits to Berlin, where with the violinist Florence Lockwood he gave two concerts of contemporary, mainly British, music which included his own &quot;Phantasy&quot; in C minor, Op. 3. The skill of the performers was admired by the critics more than the quality of the music. In 1928 Bush returned to Berlin, to perform with the Brosa Quartet at the Bechstein Hall, in a concert of his own music which included the premieres of the chamber work &quot;Five Pieces&quot;, Op. 6 and the piano solo &quot;Relinquishment&quot;, Op. 11. Critical opinion was broadly favourable, the &quot;Berliner Zeitung am Mittag&quot; correspondent noting &quot;nothing extravagant but much of promise&quot;.

Among the works composed by Bush during this period were the Quartet for piano, violin, viola and cello, Op. 5; Prelude and Fugue for piano, Op. 9; settings of poems by Walter de la Mare, Harold Monro and W. B. Yeats; and his first venture into orchestral music, the Symphonic Impressions of 1926–27, Op. 8. In early 1929 he completed one of his best-known early chamber works, the string quartet &quot;Dialectic&quot;, Op. 15, which helped to establish Bush&#x27;s reputation abroad when it was performed at a Prague festival in the 1930s.

===Music and politics===
Bush had begun to develop an interest in politics during the war years. In 1924, rejecting his parents&#x27; conservatism, he joined the Independent Labour Party (ILP). The following year he joined the London Labour Choral Union (LLCU), a group of largely London-based choirs that had been organised by the socialist composer Rutland Boughton, with Labour Party support, to &quot;develop the musical instincts of the people and to render service to the Labour movement&quot;. Bush was soon appointed as Boughton&#x27;s assistant, and two years later, he succeeded Boughton as the LLCU&#x27;s chief musical adviser, remaining in this post until the body disbanded in 1940. 

Through his LLCU work, Bush met Michael Tippett, five years his junior, who shared Bush&#x27;s left-wing political perspective. In his memoirs Tippett records his first impressions of Bush: &quot;I learned much from him. His music at the time seemed so adventurous and vigorous&quot;. Tippett&#x27;s biographer Ian Kemp writes: &quot;Apart from Sibelius, the contemporary composer who taught Tippett as much as anyone else was his own contemporary Alan Bush&quot;.

After his 1928 concert tour in Berlin, Bush returned to the city to study piano under Artur Schnabel. He left the ILP in 1929, and joined the Labour Party proper, before taking extended leave from the RAM to begin a two-year course in philosophy and musicology at Berlin&#x27;s Friedrich-Wilhelm University. Here, his tutors included Max Dessoir and Friedrich Blume. Bush&#x27;s years in Berlin profoundly affected his political beliefs, and had direct influence on the subsequent character of his music. Michael Jones, writing in &quot;British Music&quot; after Bush&#x27;s death, records Bush&#x27;s concern at the rise of fascism and antisemitism in Germany. His association with like-minded musicians such as Hanns Eisler and Ernst Hermann Meyer, and writers such as Bertold Brecht, helped to develop his growing political awareness into a lifelong commitment to Marxism and communism. Bush&#x27;s conversion to full-blown communism was not immediate, but in 1935 he finally abandoned Labour and joined the British Communist Party.

Notwithstanding the uncompromising nature of his politics, Bush in his writings tended to express his views in restrained terms, &quot;much more like a reforming patrician Whig than a proletarian revolutionary&quot; according to Michael Oliver in a 1995 &quot;Gramophone&quot; article. Bush&#x27;s Grove Music Online biographers also observe that in the politicisation of his music, his folk idioms have more in common with the English traditions of Ralph Vaughan Williams than with the continental radicalism of Kurt Weill.

===1930s: emergent composer===
In March 1931 Bush and Nancy were married in London, before returning to Germany where Bush continued his studies. In April a BBC broadcast performance of his Dance Overture for Military Band, Op. 12a, received a mixed reception. Nancy Bush quotes two listeners&#x27; comments that appeared in the &quot;Radio Times&quot; on 8 May 1931. One thought that &quot;such a medley of fearful discords could never be called music&quot;, while another opined that &quot;[we] should not cry for more Mozart, Haydn or Beethoven if modern composers would all give us sheer beauty like this&quot;. 

At the end of summer 1931 the couple returned permanently to England, and settled in the village of Radlett, in Hertfordshire. In the following years three daughters were born. Bush resumed his RAM and LLCU duties, and in 1932 accepted a new appointment, as an examiner for the Associated Board of London&#x27;s Royal Schools of Music, a post which involved extensive overseas travel. These new domestic and professional responsibilities limited Bush&#x27;s composing activity, but he provided the music for the 1934 Pageant of Labour, organised for the London Trades Council and held at the Crystal Palace during October. Tippett, who co-conducted the event, later described it as a &quot;high water mark&quot; in Bush&#x27;s drive to provide workers&#x27; choirs with settings for left-wing texts. In 1936 Bush was one of the founders of the Workers&#x27; Musical Association (WMA), and became its first chairman.

In 1935 Bush began work on a piano concerto which, completed in 1937, included the unusual feature of a mixed chorus and baritone soloist in the finale, singing a radical text by Randall Swingler. Bush played the piano part when the work was premiered by the BBC Symphony Orchestra under Sir Adrian Boult on 4 March 1938. The largely left-wing audience responded to the work enthusiastically; Tippett observed that &quot;to counter the radical tendencies of the finale ... Boult forced the applause to end by unexpectedly performing the National Anthem&quot;. A performance of the concerto a year later, at the 1939 &quot;Festival of Music for the People&quot;, drew caustic comments from Neville Cardus in &quot;The Manchester Guardian&quot;. Cardus saw little direction and no humour in the music: &quot;Why don&#x27;t these people laugh at themselves now and then? Just for fun.&quot;

Bush provided much of the music, and also acted as general director, for the London Co-operative Societies&#x27; pageant &quot;Towards Tomorrow&quot;, held at Wembley Stadium on 2 July 1938. In the autumn of that year he visited both the Soviet Union and the United States. Back home in early 1939 he was closely involved in founding and conducting the London String Orchestra, which operated successfully until 1941 and again in the immediate postwar years. He also began to write a major orchestral work, his Symphony No. 1 in C. Amid this busy life Bush was elected a Fellow of the Royal Academy of Music.

===Second World War===
When war broke out in September 1939, Bush registered for military service under the National Service (Armed Forces) Act of 1939. He was not called up immediately, and continued his musical life, helping to form the WMA Singers to replace the now-defunct LLCU, and founding the William Morris Music Society. In April 1940 he conducted a Queen&#x27;s Hall concert of music by Soviet composers which included the British premieres of Shostakovich&#x27;s Fifth Symphony, and Khatchaturian&#x27;s Piano Concerto. William Glock in &quot;The Observer&quot; was disdainful, dismissing the Khatachurian concerto as &quot;sixth-rate&quot;, and criticising the inordinate length, as he saw it, of the symphony.

Bush was among many musicians, artists and writers who in January 1941 signed up to the communist-led People&#x27;s Convention, which promoted a six-point radical anti-war programme that included friendship with the Soviet Union and &quot;a people&#x27;s peace&quot;. The BBC advised him that because of his association with this movement, he and his music would no longer be broadcast. This action drew strong protests from, among others, E. M. Forster and Ralph Vaughan Williams. The ban was opposed by the prime minister, Winston Churchill, in the House of Commons, and proved short-lived; it was annulled following the German invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941.

In November 1941 Bush was conscripted into the army, and after initial training was assigned to the Royal Army Medical Corps. Based in London, he was given leave to perform in concerts, which enabled him to conduct the premiere of his First Symphony at a BBC Promenade Concert in the Royal Albert Hall on 24 July 1942. He also performed regularly with the London String Orchestra, and in 1944 was the piano soloist in the British premiere of Shostakovich&#x27;s Piano Quintet. His wartime compositions were few; among them were the &quot;Festal Day&quot; Overture, Op. 23, written for Vaughan Williams&#x27;s 70th birthday in 1942, and several songs and choruses including &quot;Freedom on the March&quot;, written for a British-Soviet Unity Demonstration at the Albert Hall on 27 June 1943.

Bush&#x27;s relatively calm war was marred by the death, in 1944, of his seven-year-old daughter Alice in a road accident. As the war in Europe drew to its end, Bush was posted to the Far East despite being well over the normal age limit for overseas service. The matter was raised in Parliament by the Independent Labour member D. N. Pritt, who enquired whether political factors were behind the decision. The posting was withdrawn; and Bush remained in London until his discharge in December 1945.

===Post-war: struggle for recognition and performance===
==== Persona non grata ====

Bush&#x27;s return to composing after the war led to what Richard Stoker, in the &quot;Oxford Dictionary of National Biography&quot;, calls &quot;his best period&quot;. However, Bush&#x27;s attempts to secure a place in the concert repertoire were frustrated. A contributory factor may have been what the critic Dominic Daula calls Bush&#x27;s &quot;intriguingly unique compositional voice&quot; that challenged critics and audiences alike. But the composer&#x27;s refusal to modify his pro-Soviet stance following the onset of the Cold War alienated both the public and the music establishment, a factor which Bush acknowledged 20 years later: &quot;People who were in a position to promote my works were afraid to do so. They were afraid of being labelled&quot;. Stoker comments that &quot;in a less tolerant country he would certainly have been imprisoned, or worse. But he was merely ignored, both politically, and, which is a pity, as a composer&quot;. Nancy Bush writes that the BBC considered him &quot;persona non grata&quot;, and imposed an almost complete though unofficial broadcast ban that lasted for some 15 years after the war.

As well as resuming his teaching routines, Bush embarked on a busy schedule of travel, mainly in Eastern Europe with the WMA choir. While in Czechoslovakia in August 1947, he and the WMA performed his unaccompanied chorus &quot;Lidice&quot; at the site of the village of that name, which had been destroyed by the Nazis in 1942 in a reprisal for the assassination of Reinhard Heydrich.

Among Bush&#x27;s earliest postwar works was the &quot;English Suite&quot;, performed by the revived London String Orchestra at the Wigmore Hall on 9 February 1946. The orchestra had suspended its operations in 1941; after the war, Bush&#x27;s failure to secure funding for it led to its closure, despite considerable artistic success. Critics noted in the work a change of idiom, away from the European avant-garde character of much of his prewar music and towards a simpler popular style. This change was acknowledged by Bush as he responded to the 1948 decree issued by Stalin&#x27;s director of cultural policy, Andrei Zhdanov, against formalism and dissonance in modern music – although the process of simplification had probably begun during the war years.

In 1948 Bush accepted a commission from the Nottingham Co-operative Society to write a symphony as part of the city&#x27;s quincentennial celebrations in 1949. According to Foreman, &quot;by any standards this is one of Bush&#x27;s most approachable scores&quot;, yet since its Nottingham premiere on 27 June 1949 and its London debut on 11 December 1952 under Boult and the London Philharmonic, the work has been rarely heard in Britain. His Violin Concerto, Op. 32, received its premiere on 25 August 1949, with Max Rostal as soloist. In this work Bush explained that &quot;the soloist represents the individual, the orchestra world society, and the work [represents] the individual&#x27;s struggles and of his final absorption into society&quot;. &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;″s critic observed that &quot;it was the orchestra, i.e. society, that after a strenuous opening gave up the struggle&quot;.

In 1947 Bush became chairman of the Composers&#x27; Guild of Great Britain for 1947–48. He also produced a full-length textbook, &quot;Strict Counterpoint in the Palestrina Style&quot; (Joseph Williams, London, 1948). On 15 December 1950 the WMA marked Bush&#x27;s 50th birthday with a special concert of his music at the Conway Hall.

====Opera ventures====

Since his youthful &quot;Last Days of Pompeii&quot;, Bush had not attempted to write opera, but he took up the genre in 1946 with a short operetta for children, &quot;The Press Gang (or the Escap&#x27;d Apprentice)&quot;, for which Nancy supplied the libretto. This was performed by pupils at St Christopher School, Letchworth, on 7 March 1947. The following year he began a more ambitious venture, a full-length grand opera recounting the story of Wat Tyler, who led the Peasants&#x27; Revolt of 1381. &quot;Wat Tyler&quot;, again to Nancy&#x27;s libretto, was submitted in 1950 to the Arts Council&#x27;s Festival of Britain opera competition, and was one of four prizewinners – Bush received £400. The opera was not taken up by any of the British opera houses, and was first staged at Leipzig Opera in 1953. It was well received, retained for the season and ran again in the following year; there was a further performance in Rostock in 1955. &quot;Wat Tyler&quot; did not receive its full British premiere until 19 June 1974, when it was produced at Sadler&#x27;s Wells; as of 2017, this remains the only professional staging of a Bush opera in Britain.

Bush&#x27;s second opera, &quot;Men of Blackmoor&quot;, composed in 1954–55 to Nancy&#x27;s libretto, is a story of Northumbrian miners in the early 19th century; Bush went down a mine as part of his research. It received its premiere at the German National Theatre, Weimar on 18 November 1956. Like &quot;Wat Tyler&quot; in Leipzig, the opera was successful; after the Weimar season there were further East German productions in Jena (1957), Leipzig (1959) and Zwickau (1960). In Britain there were student performances at Oxford in 1960, and Bristol in 1974. In December 1960 David Drew in the &quot;New Statesman&quot; wrote: &quot;The chief virtue of &quot;Men of Blackmoor&quot;, and the reason why it particularly deserves a [professional] performance at this historical point, is its unfailing honesty ... it is never cheap, and at its best achieves a genuine dignity.&quot;

For his third opera, Bush chose a contemporary theme – the struggle against colonial rule. He intended to collect appropriate musical material from British Guiana, but an attempt to visit the colony in 1957 was thwarted when its government refused him entry. The ban was rescinded the following year, and in 1959 Bush was able to gather and record a great deal of authentic music from the local African and Indian populations. The eventual result was &quot;The Sugar Reapers&quot;, premiered at Leipzig on 11 December 1966. &quot;The Times&quot; correspondent, praising the performance, wrote: &quot;One can only hope that London will soon see a production of its own&quot;. With Nancy, Bush wrote two more operettas for children: &quot;The Spell Unbound&quot; (1953) and &quot;The Ferryman&#x27;s Daughter&quot; (1961). His final opera, written in 1965–67, was &quot;Joe Hill&quot;, based on the life story of Joe Hill, an American union activist and songwriter who was controversially convicted of murder and executed in 1915. The opera, to a libretto by Barrie Stavis, was premiered at the German Berlin State Opera on 29 September 1970, and in 1979 was broadcast by the BBC.

===1953–1975===

During his involvement with opera, Bush continued to compose in other genres. His 1953 cantata &quot;Voice of the Prophets&quot;, Op. 41, was commissioned by the tenor Peter Pears and sung by Pears at its premiere on 22 May 1953. In 1959–60 he produced two major orchestral works: the &quot;Dorian Passacaglia and Fugue&quot;, Op. 52, and the Third Symphony, Op. 53, known as the &quot;Byron&quot; since it depicts musically scenes from the life of the poet. The symphony, a commission from East German Radio, was first performed at Leipzig on 20 March 1962. Colin Mason, writing in &quot;The Guardian&quot;, thought the work had a stronger socialist programme than the Nottingham symphony of 1949. The ending of the second movement, a long tune representing Byron&#x27;s speech against the extension of the death penalty was, Mason wrote, &quot;a splendid piece&quot;. The symphony was awarded that year&#x27;s Händel Prize in the city of Halle.

At the end of the 1960s Bush wrote, among other works, &quot;Time Remembered&quot;, Op. 67, for chamber orchestra, and &quot;Scherzo for Wind Orchestra and Percussion&quot;, Op. 68, based on an original Guyanese theme. In 1969 he produced the first of three song cycles, &quot;The Freight of Harvest&quot;, Op. 69 – &quot;Life&#x27;s Span&quot; and &quot;Woman&#x27;s Life&quot; would follow in 1974 and 1977. In the 1970s, while maintaining his teaching commitment to the RAM, he continued to perform in the concert hall as conductor and pianist. Bush was slowly being recognised for his achievements, even by those who had long cold-shouldered him. In 1968 he was awarded a Doctor of Music degree by the University of London, and two years later received an honorary doctorate from the University of Durham. On 6 December 1970, just before Bush&#x27;s 70th birthday, BBC Television broadcast a programme about his life and works, and on 16 February 1971 the RAM hosted a special (late) birthday concert, in which he and Pears performed songs from &quot;Voices of the Prophets&quot;. Bush featured in a further television programme, broadcast on 25 October 1975, in a series entitled &quot;Born in 1900&quot;.

===Final years===

In old age, Bush continued to lead an active and productive life, punctuated by periodic commemorations of his life and works. In November 1975 his 50 years&#x27; professorship at the RAM was marked in a concert there, and in January 1976 the WMA gave a concert to honour his recent 75th birthday. In 1977 he produced his last major piano work, the &quot;Twenty-four Preludes&quot;, Op. 84, of which he gave the first performance at the Wigmore Hall on 30 October 1977. A later reviewer described this piece as &quot;music I&#x27;d like to have playing beside me as I sprawled on the grass beneath the trees with an ice-cream, watching a county cricket match on a golden afternoon&quot;.

In 1978 Bush retired from the RAM after 52 years&#x27; service. His 80th birthday in December 1980 was celebrated at concerts in London, Birmingham and East Germany, and the BBC broadcast a special birthday musical tribute. In the same year he published &quot;In My Eighth Decade and Other Essays&quot;, in which he stated his personal creed that &quot;as a musician and as a man, Marxism is a guide to action&quot;, enabling him to express through music the &quot;struggle to create a condition of social organisation in which science and art will be the possession of all&quot;. In 1982 Bush visited the Lascaux caves in south-western France, and was inspired by the prehistoric cave paintings to write his fourth and final symphony, Op. 94, subtitled the &quot;Lascaux&quot;. This, his last major orchestral work, was premiered by the BBC Philharmonic Orchestra, under Edward Downes in Manchester, on 25 March 1986.

In the late 1980s Bush was increasingly hampered by failing eyesight. His last formal compositions appeared in 1988: &quot;Spring Woodland and Summer Garden&quot; for solo piano, Op. 124, and &quot;Summer Valley&quot; for cello and piano, Op. 125, although he continued to compose privately and play the piano. Nancy&#x27;s health meanwhile deteriorated, and she died on 12 October 1991. Bush lived on quietly at Radlett for another four years, able to recall the events of his youth but with no memory of the last fifty years and unaware of the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991. He died in Watford General hospital on 31 October 1995, after a short illness, at the age of 94.

==Music==
===General character===
Despite undergoing various changes of emphasis, Bush&#x27;s music retained a voice distinct from that of any of his contemporaries. One critic describes the typical Bush sound as &quot;Mild dominant discords, of consonant effect, used with great originality in uncommon progressions alive with swift, purposeful harmonic movement ... except in [Benjamin] Britten they are nowhere used with more telling expression, colour and sense of movement than in Bush&quot;.

John Ireland, Bush&#x27;s early mentor, instilled &quot;the sophisticated and restrained craftsmanship which marked Bush&#x27;s music from the beginning&quot;, introducing him to folksong and Palestrina, both important building blocks in the development of Bush&#x27;s mature style. Daula comments that &quot;Bush&#x27;s music does not [merely] imitate the sound-world of his Renaissance predecessors&quot;, but creates his unique fingerprint by &quot;[juxtaposing] 16th century modal counterpoint with late- and post-romantic harmony&quot;.

Bush&#x27;s music, at least from the mid-1930s, often carried political overtones. His obituarist Rupert Christiansen writes that, as a principled Marxist, Bush &quot;put the requirements of the revolutionary proletariat at the head of the composer&#x27;s responsibilities&quot;, a choice which others, such as Tippett, chose not to make. However, Vaughan Williams thought that, despite Bush&#x27;s oft-declared theories of the purposes of art and music, &quot;when the inspiration comes over him he forgets all about this and remembers only the one eternal rule for all artists, &#x27;To thine own self be true&#x27;.&quot;

===To 1945===
According to Duncan Hall&#x27;s account of the music culture of the Labour Movement in the inter-war years, Bush&#x27;s youthful music, composed before his Berlin sojourn, already demonstrated its essential character. His &quot;Dialectic for String Quartet&quot; (1929), Op. 15, created a strong impression when first heard in 1935, as &quot;a musical discourse of driving intensity and virile incident&quot;. Christiansen highlights its &quot;tightness and austerity&quot; in contrast to the more fashionable lyricism then prevalent in English music.

Bush&#x27;s years in Berlin brought into his music the advanced Central European idioms that characterise his major orchestral compositions of the period: the Piano Concerto (1935–37), and the First Symphony (1939–40). Nancy Bush describes the Piano Concerto as Bush&#x27;s first attempt to fuse his musical and political ideas. The symphony was even more overtly political, representing in its three movements greed (of the bourgeoisie), frustration (of the proletariat) and the final liberation of the latter, but not, according to Christiansen, &quot;in an idiom calculated to appeal to the masses&quot;.

Aside from these large-scale works, much of Bush&#x27;s compositional activity in the 1930s was devoted to pageants, songs and choruses written for his choirs, work undertaken with the utmost seriousness. In his introduction to a 1938 socialist song book, Bush wrote that &quot;socialists must sing what we mean and sing it like we mean it&quot;. Under Bush&#x27;s influence the &quot;music of the workers&quot; moved from the high aesthetic represented by, for example, Arthur Bourchier&#x27;s mid-1920s pamphlet &quot;Art and Culture in Relation to Socialism&quot;, towards an expression with broader popular appeal.

===Postwar and beyond===
Although Bush accepted Zhdanov&#x27;s 1948 diktat without demur and acted accordingly, his postwar simplifications had begun earlier and would continue as part of a gradual process. Bush first outlined the basis of his new method of composition in an article, &quot;The Crisis of Modern Music&quot;, which appeared in WMA&#x27;s &quot;Keynote&quot; magazine in spring 1946. The method, in which every note has thematic significance, has drawn comparison by critics with Schoenberg&#x27;s twelve-note system, although Bush rejected this equation.

Many of Bush&#x27;s best-known works were written in the immediate postwar years. Anthony Payne described the &quot;Three Concert Studies for Piano Trio&quot; (Op. 31) of 1947 as exceeding Britten in its inventiveness, &quot;a high-water mark in Bush&#x27;s mature art&quot;. The Violin Concerto (Op. 32, 1948) has been cited as &quot;a work as beautiful and refined as any in the genre since Walton&#x27;s&quot;. Foreman considers the concerto, which uses twelve-tone themes, to be the epitome of Bush&#x27;s thematic theory of composition, although Bush&#x27;s contemporary, Edmund Rubbra, thought it too intellectual for general audiences. The &quot;Dorian Passacaglia and Fugue&quot; for timpani, percussion and strings, (Op. 52, 1959), involves eight variations in the Dorian mode, followed by eight in other modes culminating in a final quadruple fugue in six parts. &quot;Musical Opinion&quot;″s critic praised the composer&#x27;s &quot;wonderful control and splendid craftsmanship&quot; in this piece, and predicted that it could become the most popular of all Bush&#x27;s orchestral works. 

The postwar period also saw the beginning of Bush&#x27;s 20-year involvement with grand opera, a genre in which, although he achieved little commercial recognition, he was retrospectively hailed by critics as a master of British opera second only to Britten. His first venture, &quot;Wat Tyler&quot;, was written in a form which Bush thought acceptable to the general British public; it was not his choice, he wrote, that the opera and its successors all found their initial audiences in East Germany. When eventually staged in Britain in 1974 the opera, although well received at Sadler&#x27;s Wells, seemed somewhat old-fashioned; Philip Hope-Wallace in &quot;The Guardian&quot; thought the ending degenerated into &quot;a choral union cantata&quot;, and found the music pleasant but not especially memorable. Bush&#x27;s three other major operas were all characterised by their use of &quot;local&quot; music: Northumbrian folk-song in the case of &quot;Men of Blackmoor&quot;, Guyanese songs and dances in &quot;The Sugar Reapers&quot;, and American folk music in &quot;Joe Hill&quot; – the last-named used in a manner reminiscent of Kurt Weill and the German opera with which Bush had become familiar in the early 1930s.

The extent to which Bush&#x27;s music changed substantially after the war was addressed by Meirion Bowen, reviewing a Bush concert in the 1980s. Bowen noted a distinct contrast between early and late works, the former showing primarily the influences of Ireland and of Bush&#x27;s European contacts, while in the later pieces the idiom was &quot;often overtly folklike and Vaughan Williams-ish&quot;. In general Bush&#x27;s late works continued to show all the hallmarks of his postwar oeuvre: vigour, clarity of tone and masterful use of counterpoint. The Lascaux symphony, written when he was 83, is the composer&#x27;s final major orchestral statement, and addresses deep philosophical issues relating to the origins and destiny of mankind.

===Assessment===
In the 1920s it appeared that Bush might emerge as Britain&#x27;s foremost pianist, after his studies under the leading teachers of the day, but he turned to composition as his principal musical activity. In Foreman&#x27;s summary he is &quot;a major figure who really straddles the century as almost no other composer does&quot;. He remained a pianist of consequence, with a strong and reliable, if heavy, touch.

Joanna Bullivant, writing in &quot;Music and Letters&quot;, maintains that in his music Bush subordinated all ideas of personal expression to the ideology of Marxism. The critic Hugo Cole thought that, as a composer, Bush came close to Paul Hindemith&#x27;s ideal: &quot;one for whom music is felt as a moral and social force, and only incidentally as a means of personal expression&quot;. The composer Wilfrid Mellers credits Bush with more than ideological correctness; while remaining faithful to his creed even when it was entirely out of fashion, he &quot;attempt[ed] to re-establish an English tradition meaningful to his country&#x27;s past, present and future&quot;. Hall describes Bush as &quot;a key figure in the democratisation of art in Britain, achieving far more in this regard than his pedagogic, utopian patrons and peers, the labour romantics.&quot;

The music critic Colin Mason described Bush&#x27;s music thus:His range is wide, the quality of his music consistently excellent. He has the intellectual concentration of Tippett, the easy command and expansiveness of Walton, the nervous intensity of Rawsthorne, the serene leisureliness of Rubbra ... He is surpassed only in melody, as are the others, by Walton, but not even by him in harmonic richness, nor by Tippett in contrapuntal originality and the expressive power of rather austere musical thought, nor by Rawsthorne in concise, compelling utterance and telling invention, nor by Rubbra in handling large forms well.

==Legacy==
Bush&#x27;s long career as a teacher influenced generations of English composers and performers. Tippett was never a formal pupil, but he acknowledged a deep debt to Bush. Herbert Murrill, a pupil of Bush&#x27;s at the RAM in the 1920s, wrote in 1950 of his tutor: &quot;[T]here is humility in his makeup, and I believe that no man can achieve greatness in the arts without humility ... To Alan Bush I owe much, not least the artistic strength and right to differ from him&quot;. Among postwar Bush students are the composers Timothy Bowers, Edward Gregson, David Gow, Roger Steptoe, E. Florence Whitlock, and Michael Nyman, and the pianists John Bingham and Graham Johnson. Through his sponsorship of the London String Quartet Bush helped launch the careers of string players such as Norbert Brainin and Emanuel Hurwitz, both of whom later achieved international recognition.

Bush&#x27;s music was under-represented in the concert repertoire in his lifetime, and virtually disappeared after his death. The 2000 centenary of his birth was markedly low key; the Prom season ignored him, although there was a memorial concert at the Wigmore Hall on 1 November, and a BBC broadcast of the Piano Concerto on 19 December. The centenary, albeit quietly observed, helped to introduce the name and music of Bush to a new generation of music lovers, and generated an increase in both performance and recordings. The centenary also heralded an awakening of scholarly interest in Bush, whose life and works were the subject of numerous PhD theses in the early 20th century. Scholars such as Paul Harper-Scott and Joanna Bullivant have obtained access to new material, including documents released since the collapse of the Soviet Union, and Bush&#x27;s MI5 file. This, says Bullivant, enables a more informed assessment of the interrelationships within Bush&#x27;s music and his communism, and of the inherent conflicting priorities.

In October 1997 family members and friends founded The Alan Bush Music Trust &quot;to promote the education and appreciation by the public in and of music and, in particular, the works of the British composer Alan Bush&quot;. The trust provides a newsletter, features news stories, promotes performances and recordings of Bush&#x27;s works, and through its website reproduces wide-ranging critical and biographical material.
It continues to monitor concert performances of Bush&#x27;s works, and other Bush-related events, at home and abroad.

At the time of Bush&#x27;s centenary, Martin Anderson, writing in the British Music Information Centre&#x27;s newsletter, summarised Bush&#x27;s compositional career:

Bush was not a natural melodist à la Dvorák, though he could produce an appealing tune when he set his mind to it. But he was a first-rate contrapuntist, and his harmonic world can glow with a rare internal warmth. It would be foolish to claim that everything he wrote was a masterpiece – and equally idiotic to turn our backs on the many outstanding scores still awaiting assiduous attention.

==Recordings==

Before Bush&#x27;s centenary year, 2000, the few available recordings of his music included none of the major works. In the 21st century much has been added, including recordings of Symphonies 1, 2 and 4, the Piano and Violin Concertos, many of the main vocal works, the Twenty-Four Preludes, and the complete organ works.

==Notes and references==
===Notes===
===Citations===
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

* &quot;Alan Bush: A Life&quot; (1983), documentary directed by Anna Ambrose, British Film Institute
* Wat Tyler libretto A photostat typescript of the Nancy Bush&#x27;s original libretto
* Violin Concerto, Six short pieces &amp; Dialectic – Claudio Records Review &amp; Track Listing
* Alan Bush manuscripts in the British Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q584010" start="0" end="16" title="Alan Bush" label="Alan Dudley Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="142" end="151" title="Communism" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144673" start="499" end="521" title="Royal Academy of Music" label="Royal Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="718" end="728" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="828" end="840" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q592068" start="848" end="880" title="Communist Party of Great Britain" label="Communist Party of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="1122" end="1125" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1152" end="1168" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="1224" end="1232" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="1378" end="1390" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969396" start="2094" end="2132" title="Composers&amp;#x27; Guild of Great Britain" label="Composers&amp;#x27; Guild of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q146766" start="2495" end="2502" title="Dulwich" label="Dulwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560910" start="2903" end="2918" title="Highgate School" label="Highgate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3019" end="3034" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="3082" end="3095" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q706644" start="3560" end="3576" title="Frederick Corder" label="Frederick Corder"/>
<link wikidata="Q607368" start="3592" end="3606" title="Tobias Matthay" label="Tobias Matthay"/>
<link wikidata="Q318462" start="3965" end="3978" title="Edward Bulwer-Lytton" label="Bulwer Lytton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218985" start="3998" end="4022" title="The Last Days of Pompeii" label="The Last Days of Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="4037" end="4045" title="libretto" label="libretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831029" start="4276" end="4288" title="Michael Head (composer)" label="Michael Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q505910" start="4706" end="4718" title="John Ireland (composer)" label="John Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q362340" start="4988" end="4999" title="Theodor Leschetizky" label="Leschetizky"/>
<link wikidata="Q817970" start="5001" end="5019" title="Benno Moiseiwitsch" label="Benno Moiseiwitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q21663792" start="5024" end="5036" title="Mabel Lander" label="Mabel Lander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857220" start="5449" end="5462" title="Antonio Brosa" label="Brosa Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q981086" start="5979" end="5996" title="Walter de la Mare" label="Walter de la Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q970245" start="5998" end="6010" title="Harold Monro" label="Harold Monro"/>
<link wikidata="Q40213" start="6015" end="6026" title="W. B. Yeats" label="W. B. Yeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507913" start="6514" end="6538" title="Independent Labour Party" label="Independent Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q673401" start="6703" end="6719" title="Rutland Boughton" label="Rutland Boughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="6726" end="6738" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q356499" start="7083" end="7098" title="Michael Tippett" label="Michael Tippett"/>
<link wikidata="Q213688" start="7603" end="7617" title="Artur Schnabel" label="Artur Schnabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q152087" start="7795" end="7823" title="Humboldt University of Berlin" label="Friedrich-Wilhelm University"/>
<link wikidata="Q76577" start="7851" end="7862" title="Max Dessoir" label="Max Dessoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q68618" start="7867" end="7882" title="Friedrich Blume" label="Friedrich Blume"/>
<link wikidata="Q78704" start="8230" end="8242" title="Hanns Eisler" label="Hanns Eisler"/>
<link wikidata="Q96997" start="8247" end="8266" title="Ernst Hermann Meyer" label="Ernst Hermann Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q38757" start="8288" end="8302" title="Bertold Brecht" label="Bertold Brecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q592068" start="8528" end="8551" title="Communist Party of Great Britain" label="British Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833239" start="8783" end="8797" title="Michael Oliver (writer, broadcaster)" label="Michael Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422837" start="8852" end="8870" title="Grove Music Online" label="Grove Music Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q207947" start="9004" end="9026" title="Ralph Vaughan Williams" label="Ralph Vaughan Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q55004" start="9067" end="9077" title="Kurt Weill" label="Kurt Weill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461827" start="9415" end="9426" title="Radio Times" label="Radio Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q19772" start="9798" end="9805" title="Radlett" label="Radlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="9810" end="9823" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q202902" start="10290" end="10304" title="The Crystal Palace" label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378822" start="10794" end="10810" title="Randall Swingler" label="Randall Swingler"/>
<link wikidata="Q372697" start="10903" end="10919" title="Sir Adrian Boult" label="Sir Adrian Boult"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004641" start="11304" end="11318" title="Neville Cardus" label="Neville Cardus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="11328" end="11351" title="The Manchester Guardian" label="The Manchester Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="11663" end="11678" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12075" end="12111" title="List of Royal Academy of Music people#Past and present Fellows of the Royal Academy of Music (FRAM)" label="Fellow of the Royal Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779710" start="12474" end="12491" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Hall" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q80135" start="12569" end="12581" title="Dmitri Shostakovich" label="Shostakovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q240279" start="12589" end="12603" title="Symphony No. 5 (Shostakovich)" label="Fifth Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q152293" start="12609" end="12622" title="Aram Khatchaturian" label="Khatchaturian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689121" start="12630" end="12644" title="Piano Concerto (Khachaturian)" label="Piano Concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303394" start="12646" end="12659" title="William Glock" label="William Glock"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="12669" end="12681" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165507" start="12941" end="12965" title="People&amp;#x27;s Convention 1940-41" label="People&amp;#x27;s Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q189119" start="13279" end="13292" title="E. M. Forster" label="E. M. Forster"/>
<link wikidata="Q207947" start="13297" end="13319" title="Ralph Vaughan Williams" label="Ralph Vaughan Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="13364" end="13381" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="13390" end="13406" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="13462" end="13497" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="German invasion of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q516446" start="13613" end="13637" title="Royal Army Medical Corps" label="Royal Army Medical Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="13797" end="13814" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q80135" start="13955" end="13967" title="Dmitri Shostakovitch" label="Shostakovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q334368" start="14635" end="14646" title="D. N. Pritt" label="D. N. Pritt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210343" start="14980" end="15019" title="Oxford Dictionary of National Biography" label="Oxford Dictionary of National Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="15425" end="15433" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="16178" end="16192" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154888" start="16297" end="16317" title="Lidice" label="village of that name"/>
<link wikidata="Q60039" start="16404" end="16421" title="Reinhard Heydrich" label="Reinhard Heydrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q781834" start="16556" end="16568" title="Wigmore Hall" label="Wigmore Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="16997" end="17003" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q207879" start="17040" end="17054" title="Andrei Zhdanov" label="Andrei Zhdanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469984" start="17064" end="17073" title="Formalism (music)" label="formalism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17078" end="17088" title="Consonance and dissonance#Dissonance" label="dissonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q215652" start="17702" end="17712" title="Max Rostal" label="Max Rostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="17944" end="17963" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969396" start="18131" end="18169" title="British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors" label="Composers&amp;#x27; Guild of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18417" end="18428" title="Conway Hall Ethical Society#Conway Hall" label="Conway Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592804" start="18748" end="18769" title="St Christopher School" label="St Christopher School"/>
<link wikidata="Q19801" start="18771" end="18781" title="Letchworth" label="Letchworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q311820" start="18904" end="18913" title="Wat Tyler" label="Wat Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q498871" start="18927" end="18948" title="Peasants&amp;#x27; Revolt" label="Peasants&amp;#x27; Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663784" start="19062" end="19081" title="Festival of Britain" label="Festival of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q267248" start="19243" end="19256" title="Leipzig Opera" label="Leipzig Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352949" start="19509" end="19528" title="Sadler&amp;#x27;s Wells" label="Sadler&amp;#x27;s Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q23079" start="19730" end="19742" title="Northumberland" label="Northumbrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150" start="20044" end="20048" title="Jena" label="Jena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778" start="20076" end="20083" title="Zwickau" label="Zwickau"/>
<link wikidata="Q734" start="20645" end="20659" title="Guyana" label="British Guiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q108377642" start="21365" end="21373" title="Joe Hill (opera)" label="Joe Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q346993" start="21408" end="21416" title="Joe Hill (activist)" label="Joe Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q312576" start="21597" end="21615" title="Berlin State Opera" label="Berlin State Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q449274" start="21862" end="21873" title="Peter Pears" label="Peter Pears"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="22135" end="22151" title="Lord Byron" label="life of the poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814" start="22634" end="22639" title="Halle (Saale)" label="Halle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287516" start="23318" end="23333" title="Doctor of Music" label="Doctor of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q170027" start="23348" end="23368" title="University of London" label="University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q458393" start="23430" end="23450" title="University of Durham" label="University of Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q172125" start="25168" end="25175" title="Lascaux" label="Lascaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q795551" start="25400" end="25426" title="BBC Philharmonic Orchestra" label="BBC Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q998576" start="25434" end="25447" title="Edward Downes" label="Edward Downes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="26028" end="26056" title="Dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="collapse of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q179277" start="26855" end="26865" title="Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina" label="Palestrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380266" start="27304" end="27323" title="Rupert Christiansen" label="Rupert Christiansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798060" start="29479" end="29495" title="Arthur Bourchier" label="Arthur Bourchier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899501" start="29676" end="29683" title="Zhdanov Doctrine" label="Zhdanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q154770" start="30123" end="30133" title="Arnold Schoenberg" label="Schoenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q221686" start="30141" end="30159" title="Twelve-tone technique" label="twelve-note system"/>
<link wikidata="Q328021" start="30282" end="30295" title="Anthony Payne" label="Anthony Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q958880" start="30777" end="30790" title="Edmund Rubbra" label="Edmund Rubbra"/>
<link wikidata="Q960729" start="30974" end="30985" title="Dorian mode" label="Dorian mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q15968103" start="31934" end="31953" title="Philip Hope-Wallace" label="Philip Hope-Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q59525802" start="33883" end="33892" title="Hugo Cole" label="Hugo Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q57244" start="33941" end="33955" title="Paul Hindemith" label="Paul Hindemith"/>
<link wikidata="Q378785" start="34108" end="34123" title="Wilfrid Mellers" label="Wilfrid Mellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608826" start="35385" end="35400" title="Herbert Murrill" label="Herbert Murrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q114736651" start="35739" end="35753" title="Timothy Bowers" label="Timothy Bowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q706212" start="35755" end="35769" title="Edward Gregson" label="Edward Gregson"/>
<link wikidata="Q110213209" start="35771" end="35780" title="David Gow (composer)" label="David Gow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358954" start="35782" end="35795" title="Roger Steptoe" label="Roger Steptoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q98854695" start="35797" end="35817" title="E. Florence Whitlock" label="E. Florence Whitlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q313639" start="35823" end="35836" title="Michael Nyman" label="Michael Nyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221918" start="35855" end="35867" title="John Bingham (pianist)" label="John Bingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541946" start="35872" end="35886" title="Graham Johnson (musician)" label="Graham Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q215654" start="35998" end="36013" title="Norbert Brainin" label="Norbert Brainin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369083" start="36018" end="36033" title="Emanuel Hurwitz" label="Emanuel Hurwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q37428217" start="36794" end="36811" title="Paul Harper-Scott" label="Paul Harper-Scott"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36816" end="36832" title="Joanna Bullivant" label="Joanna Bullivant"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64599" wikidata="Q754836" url="?curid=64599" title="Soil salinity">
<text>Soil salinity is the salt content in the soil; the process of increasing the salt content is known as salinization. Salts occur naturally within soils and water. Salination can be caused by natural processes such as mineral weathering or by the gradual withdrawal of an ocean. It can also come about through artificial processes such as irrigation and road salt.

==Natural occurrence==
Salts are a natural component in soils and water.
The ions responsible for salination are: Na+, K+, Ca2+, Mg2+ and Cl−.

Over long periods of time, as soil minerals weather and release salts, these salts are flushed or leached out of the soil by drainage water in areas with sufficient precipitation. In addition to mineral weathering, salts are also deposited via dust and precipitation. Salts may accumulate in dry regions, leading to naturally saline soils. This is the case, for example, in large parts of Australia. 

Human practices can increase the salinity of soils by the addition of salts in irrigation water. Proper irrigation management can prevent salt accumulation by providing adequate drainage water to leach added salts from the soil. Disrupting drainage patterns that provide leaching can also result in salt accumulations. An example of this occurred in Egypt in 1970 when the Aswan High Dam was built. The change in the level of ground water before the construction had enabled soil erosion, which led to high concentration of salts in the water table. After the construction, the continuous high level of the water table led to the salination of arable land.

==Sodic soils==
When the Na+ (sodium) predominates, soils can become sodic. The pH of sodic soils may be acidic, neutral or alkaline. 

Sodic soils present particular challenges because they tend to have very poor structure which limits or prevents water infiltration and drainage. They tend to accumulate certain elements like boron and molybdenum in the root zone at levels that may be toxic for plants. The most common compound used for reclamation of sodic soil is gypsum, and some plants that are tolerant to salt and ion toxicity may present strategies for improvement.

The term &quot;sodic soil&quot; is sometimes used imprecisely in scholarship. It&#x27;s been used interchangeably with the term alkali soil, which is used in two meanings: 1) a soil with a pH greater than 8.2, 2) soil with an exchangeable sodium content above 15% of exchange capacity. The term &quot;alkali soil&quot; is often, but not always, used for soils that meet both of these characteristics.

==Dry land salinity==
Salinity in drylands can occur when the water table is between two and three metres from the surface of the soil. The salts from the groundwater are raised by capillary action to the surface of the soil. This occurs when groundwater is saline (which is true in many areas), and is favored by land use practices allowing more rainwater to enter the aquifer than it could accommodate. For example, the clearing of trees for agriculture is a major reason for dryland salinity in some areas, since deep rooting of trees has been replaced by shallow rooting of annual crops.

==Salinity due to irrigation==
Salinity from irrigation can occur over time wherever irrigation occurs, since almost all water (even natural rainfall) contains some dissolved salts. When the plants use the water, the salts are left behind in the soil and eventually begin to accumulate. This water in excess of plant needs is called the leaching fraction. Salination from irrigation water is also greatly increased by poor drainage and use of saline water for irrigating agricultural crops.

Salinity in urban areas often results from the combination of irrigation and groundwater processes. Irrigation is also now common in cities (gardens and recreation areas).

==Consequences of soil salinity==
The consequences of salinity are
* Detrimental effects on plant growth and yield
* Damage to infrastructure (roads, bricks, corrosion of pipes and cables)
* Reduction of water quality for users, sedimentation problems, increased leaching of metals, especially copper, cadmium, manganese and zinc. 
* Soil erosion ultimately, when crops are too strongly affected by the amounts of salts.
* More energy required to desalinate

Salinity is an important land degradation problem. Soil salinity can be reduced by leaching soluble salts out of soil with excess irrigation water. Soil salinity control involves watertable control and flushing in combination with tile drainage or another form of subsurface drainage. A comprehensive treatment of soil salinity is available from the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization.

==Salt tolerance of crops==
High levels of soil salinity can be tolerated if salt-tolerant plants are grown. Sensitive crops lose their vigor already in slightly saline soils, most crops are negatively affected by (moderately) saline soils, and only salinity-resistant crops thrive in severely saline soils. The University of Wyoming and the Government of Alberta report data on the salt tolerance of plants.

Field data in irrigated lands, under farmers&#x27; conditions, are scarce, especially in developing countries. However, some on-farm surveys have been made in Egypt, India, and Pakistan. Some examples are shown in the following gallery, with crops arranged from sensitive to very tolerant.

Calcium has been found to have a positive effect in combating salinity in soils. It has been shown to ameliorate the negative effects that salinity has such as reduced water usage of plants.

Soil salinity activates genes associated with stress conditions for plants. These genes initiate the production of plant stress enzymes such as superoxide dismutase, L-ascorbate oxidase, and Delta 1 DNA polymerase. Limiting this process can be achieved by administering exogenous glutamine to plants. The decrease in the level of expression of genes responsible for the synthesis of superoxide dismutase increases with the increase in glutamine concentration.

==Regions affected==
From the FAO/UNESCO Soil Map of the World the following salinised areas can be derived.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==References==
==External links==
*Article on water and salt balances in the soil
*Download leaching model for saline soils
*Salt of the Earth Documentary produced by Prairie Public Television</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q754836" start="0" end="13" title="Soil salinity" label="Soil salinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="21" end="25" title="salt (chemistry)" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="41" end="45" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q754836" start="102" end="114" title="Soil salinity" label="salinization"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="216" end="234" title="mineral weathering" label="mineral weathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="337" end="347" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="352" end="361" title="Sodium_chloride#Road_salt" label="road salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="387" end="391" title="Salt (chemistry)" label="Salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="441" end="444" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="478" end="481" title="Sodium" label="Na+"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="483" end="485" title="Potassium" label="K+"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="487" end="491" title="Calcium" label="Ca2+"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="493" end="497" title="Magnesium" label="Mg2+"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="502" end="505" title="Chlorine" label="Cl−"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="552" end="559" title="weathering" label="weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404717" start="882" end="906" title="Salinity in Australia" label="large parts of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="1260" end="1265" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q38891" start="1283" end="1297" title="Aswan dam" label="Aswan High Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="1336" end="1348" title="ground water" label="ground water"/>
<link wikidata="Q889503" start="1385" end="1397" title="soil erosion" label="soil erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="1554" end="1565" title="arable land" label="arable land"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="1648" end="1650" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q565649" start="1673" end="1679" title="acidic soil" label="acidic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189711" start="1692" end="1700" title="alkaline soil" label="alkaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127330" start="1817" end="1835" title="water infiltration" label="water infiltration"/>
<link wikidata="Q618" start="1896" end="1901" title="boron" label="boron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053" start="1906" end="1916" title="molybdenum" label="molybdenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124578" start="1924" end="1933" title="Rhizosphere" label="root zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130322" start="2008" end="2019" title="Land reclamation" label="reclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="2037" end="2043" title="gypsum" label="gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2091" end="2103" title="ion toxicity" label="ion toxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189711" start="2273" end="2284" title="alkali soil" label="alkali soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309707" start="2569" end="2589" title="dryland salinity" label="Salinity in drylands"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="3185" end="3195" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508297" start="3477" end="3494" title="Leaching model" label="leaching fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7481320" start="3563" end="3571" title="drainage" label="drainage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915257" start="3576" end="3595" title="Biosalinity" label="use of saline water"/>
<link wikidata="Q889503" start="4139" end="4151" title="Soil erosion" label="Soil erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497778" start="4289" end="4305" title="land degradation" label="land degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776499" start="4347" end="4355" title="leaching (agriculture)" label="leaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q661665" start="4412" end="4433" title="Soil salinity control" label="Soil salinity control"/>
<link wikidata="Q12208418" start="4443" end="4461" title="watertable control" label="watertable control"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508297" start="4466" end="4474" title="leaching model" label="flushing"/>
<link wikidata="Q56875480" start="4495" end="4508" title="tile drainage" label="tile drainage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7481418" start="4528" end="4547" title="Drainage system (agriculture)" label="subsurface drainage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="4614" end="4628" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="4629" end="4662" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="Food and Agriculture Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="5582" end="5586" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="5686" end="5692" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q410776" start="5702" end="5722" title="superoxide dismutase" label="superoxide dismutase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168047" start="5724" end="5743" title="L-ascorbate oxidase" label="L-ascorbate oxidase"/>
<link wikidata="Q206286" start="5757" end="5771" title="DNA polymerase" label="DNA polymerase"/>
<link wikidata="Q181619" start="5838" end="5847" title="glutamine" label="glutamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708380" start="6331" end="6356" title="Prairie Public Television" label="Prairie Public Television"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64600" wikidata="Q347893" url="?curid=64600" title="Uriel da Costa">
<text>Uriel da Costa (; also Acosta or d&#x27;Acosta; c. 1585 – April 1640) was a Portuguese Sephardi philosopher who was born a New Christian but returned to Judaism, whereupon he questioned the Catholic and rabbinic orthodoxies of his time. This led him into conflict with both Christian and rabbinic institutions: his books were placed on the Index Librorum Prohibitorum and several Jewish authorities excommunicated him. His iconoclastic life culminated in suicide in c. 1640. 

==Life==
His short autobiography contains many details about his life, but over the past two centuries, documents uncovered in Portugal, Amsterdam, Hamburg, and elsewhere have changed and added much to the picture.

Da Costa was born in Porto with the name Gabriel Fiuza da Costa. His ancestors were &quot;Cristãos-novos&quot;, or New Christians, Jews forcibly converted to Catholicism by state edict at 1497. His father, Bento da Costa, was a well-off international merchant and tax-farmer. His mother, Branca, &quot;seems to have been a Judaizer&quot;, a false convert to Christianity.

Studying Catholic canon law at the University of Coimbra intermittently between 1600 and 1608, he began to read the Hebrew Bible and contemplate it seriously. Da Costa also held a benefice, an ecclesiastical office, in the Catholic Church. In his autobiography, da Costa depicted his family as devout Catholics. However, they had been subject to several investigations by the Portuguese Inquisition, suggesting they were Conversos, more or less close to Jewish customs. Gabriel explicitly supported the adherence to Mosaic prescriptions as well as traditional ones.

After his father died, the da Costa family fell into financial difficulty due to unpaid debts. In 1614, they escaped this predicament by leaving Portugal with a significant sum previously collected as tax farmers for Jorge de Mascarenhas. The family branched off, settling among two major Sephardic diaspora communities. Newly circumcised and with new Jewish names, two brothers migrated to Amsterdam, while two others went with their mother to Hamburg. Gabriel was among the Hamburg group, going by Uriel among his Jewish neighbours and using the alias Adam Romez for outside relations, presumably because he was wanted in Portugal. All resumed their international trade business. Upon arriving in Hamburg, da Costa quickly became disenchanted with the kind of Judaism he saw in practice. He came to believe that the rabbinic leadership was obsessed with ritualism and legalistic posturing. At this time, he composed his earliest known written work titled &quot;Propostas contra a Tradição&quot; (Propositions against the Tradition). In eleven short theses he called into question the disparity between certain Jewish customs and a literal reading of the Law of Moses, and more generally tried to prove from reason and scripture that this system of law is sufficient.

In 1616, the text was dispatched to the leaders of the prominent Jewish community in Venice. The Venetians ruled against it, prompting the Hamburg community to sanction da Costa with a &quot;herem&quot;, or excommunication. The &quot;Propositions&quot; are extant only as quotes and paraphrases in &quot;Shield and Buckler&quot; (), a lengthy rebuttal by Leon of Modena, written in response to religious queries about da Costa posed by the Hamburg Jewish authorities.

Da Costa&#x27;s early work thus resulted in official excommunication in Venice and Hamburg. It is not known what effect this had on his life. He barely mentioned it in his autobiography and continued his international business. In 1623, he moved to Amsterdam for unknown reasons. The leaders of the Amsterdam Sephardic community, troubled by the arrival of a known heretic, staged a hearing and sanctioned the excommunication previously set in place against da Costa.
]]

At about the same time (in Hamburg or Amsterdam) da Costa was working on a second treatise. Three chapters of this unpublished manuscript were stolen, and formed the target for a traditionalist rebuttal published by Semuel da Silva of Hamburg. Da Costa enlarged his book further, with the printed version containing responses to da Silva and revisions to the crux of his argument.

In 1623, da Costa published this book under the title of (Examination of Pharisaic Traditions) in Portuguese. The complete printed book was discovered in 1990 at the Danish Royal Library by H. P. Salomon; previously, only the three chapters had been known. The work runs to over 200 pages and is divided into two parts. In the first part, da Costa develops his earlier &quot;Propositions&quot;, considering Modena&#x27;s responses and corrections. In the second part, he adds novel views that the Hebrew Bible, especially the Torah, does not support the idea of immortality of the soul. Da Costa believed that this was not an idea deeply rooted in biblical Judaism but rather had been formulated primarily by Pharisaic rabbis and was a late addition to the Jewish principles of faith. The work also pointed to discrepancies between biblical Judaism and Rabbinic Judaism. He declared the latter an accumulation of mechanical ceremonies and ritual practices. He believed it was thoroughly devoid of spiritual and philosophical concepts. Da Costa was relatively early in arguing before a Jewish readership in favor of the mortality of the soul, and in appealing exclusively to direct reading of the bible. He cites neither rabbinic authorities nor philosophers of the Aristotelian and Neoplatonic traditions.

The book sparked a controversy among Jews in Amsterdam, whose leaders reported to the (Christian) city authorities that this was an attack on Christianity as well as on Judaism. The work was burned publicly, and da Costa fined a significant sum. By 1627, da Costa was a denizen of Utrecht, though the Amsterdam community still had an acrimonious relationship with him. For example, they asked a Venetian rabbi, Yaakov Ha-Levi, whether da Costa&#x27;s elderly mother was eligible for a burial plot in the Jewish cemetery. The following year, da Costa&#x27;s mother died, and he went back to Amsterdam. Ultimately, the loneliness was too much for him to handle. Around 1633, he accepted terms of reconciliation with the Jewish authorities, which he does not detail in his autobiography. He was thus reaccepted into the Jewish community.

Shortly after, da Costa was tried again; he encountered two Christians who expressed to him their desire to convert to Judaism and he dissuaded them from doing so. Based on this and earlier accusations regarding kashrut violations, he was excommunicated a second time. As he describes it, for seven years, he lived in virtual isolation, shunned by his family and embroiled in civil-financial disputes with them. In search of legal help, he returned to being &quot;an ape amongst the apes&quot;; he would follow established Jewish traditions and practices but with little real conviction. Seeking reconciliation, he first suffered punishment for his heretical views: he was publicly given 39 lashes at the Portuguese synagogue in Amsterdam, then forced to lie on the floor while the congregation trampled over him. This ordeal left him both demoralized and thirsty for revenge against the man (a cousin or nephew) who initiated his trial seven years previously and marked the final dramatic point of his autobiography. 

In a document titled &quot;Exemplar Humanae Vitae&quot; &quot;Example of a Human Life,&quot; da Costa tells the story of his life, intellectual development, and experiences as a victim of intolerance. Transmitted to print in Latin some decades after his death and only a few pages long, it also expresses rationalistic and skeptical views, including doubts about whether biblical law was divinely sanctioned or whether it was simply written down by Moses. Da Costa suggests that all religion is a human invention, and specifically rejects formalized, ritualized religion. He further sketches an idealized religion to be based only on natural law, as God has no use for empty ceremony, nor for violence and strife.

===Suicide===
Two reports agree that da Costa committed suicide in Amsterdam in 1640: Johannes Müller, a Protestant theologian of Hamburg gives the time as April, and Amsterdam Remonstrant preacher Philipp van Limborch adds that he set out to end the lives of both his brother (or nephew) and himself. Seeing his relative approach one day, he grabbed a pistol and pulled the trigger, but it misfired. Then he reached for another, turned it on himself, and fired, dying a reportedly terrible death.

==Influence==
 In his lifetime, &quot;Examination&quot; inspired not only da Silva&#x27;s answer, but also Menasseh ben Israel&#x27;s more lasting &quot;De Resurrectione Mortuorum&quot; (1636) directed against the &quot;Sadducees&quot;, and a listing in the Index of Prohibited Books.

After his death, da Costa&#x27;s name became synonymous with the &quot;Exemplar Humanae Vitae&quot;. Müller publicized da Costa&#x27;s excommunication, to make an anachronistic point that some Sephardic Jews of his days were Sadducees. Johann Helwig Willemer made the same point, and implied that this extreme heresy leads to suicide. Pierre Bayle reported the contents of the &quot;Exemplar&quot; quite fully, to demonstrate among other things that questioning religion without turning to revelation would bring one to miserable faithlessness.

The later Enlightenment saw da Costa&#x27;s rational religion more tolerantly. Herder eulogized him as a crusader of authentic belief. Voltaire noted that he left Judaism for philosophy. Reimarus embraced da Costa&#x27;s appeal to have legal status based on the Seven Laws of Noah, when he made an analogous argument that Christian states should be at least as tolerant toward modern Deists as ancient Israelites had been.

Internally to Judaism, da Costa has been regarded variously as a heretic or as a martyr against the intolerance of the Rabbinic establishment. He has also been seen as a precursor to Baruch Spinoza and to modern biblical criticism. Da Costa had a connection to the Spinoza family, through Baruch&#x27;s mother, Hanna, with both families coming from Porto, in northern Portugal, and might have known each other there. The Spinozas would have known of da Costa in the Jewish community of Amsterdam, of his troubles with the authorities, and his suicide. There is a 1901 imagined portrait of da Costa and the young Spinoza, but a Spinoza biographer, Steven Nadler describes the painting as &quot;overwrought&quot; and its depiction of Spinoza being instructed by da Costa as &quot;pure fantasy.&quot; Spinoza was just eight years old when da Costa committed suicide, and he might not have known then about his family&#x27;s connection to him. However, as an adolescent he likely learned the details of the public and family scandal.

Da Costa is also indicative of the difficulties faced by many New Christians seeking to return to their ancestral Jewish roots upon arriving in an organized Jewish community. As a Crypto-Jew in Iberia, he read the Bible and was impressed by it. Yet upon confronting an organized rabbinic community, he was not equally impressed by the established ritual and religious doctrine of Rabbinical Judaism, such as the Oral Law. As da Costa himself pointed out, traditional Pharisee and Rabbinic doctrine had been contested in the past by the Sadducees and the Karaites, respectively.

==Works based upon da Costa&#x27;s life==

* In 1846, in the midst of the liberal milieu that led to the Revolutions of 1848, the German writer Karl Gutzkow (1811–1878) wrote &quot;Uriel Acosta&quot;, a play about da Costa&#x27;s life. This would later become the first classic play to be translated into Yiddish, and it was a longtime standard of Yiddish theater; Uriel Acosta is the signature role of the actor Leo Rafalesco, birth name Leib Rafalovitch, of Sholem Aleichem&#x27;s &quot;Wandering Stars&quot;. The first translation into Yiddish was by Osip Mikhailovich Lerner, who staged the play at the Mariinski Theater in Odessa, Ukraine (then part of Imperial Russia) in 1881, shortly after the assassination of Tsar Alexander II. Abraham Goldfaden rapidly followed with a rival production, an operetta, at Odessa&#x27;s Remesleni Club. Georgian composer Tamara Vakhvakhishvili also composed music for the play.
* Israel Rosenberg promptly followed with his own translation for a production in Łódź (in modern-day Poland). Rosenberg&#x27;s production starred Jacob Adler in the title role; the play would remain a signature piece in Adler&#x27;s repertoire to the end of his stage career, the first of the several roles through which he developed the persona that he referred to as &quot;the Grand Jew&quot; (see also Adler&#x27;s &quot;Memoir&quot; in the References below).
* Hermann Jellinek (brother of Adolf Jellinek) wrote a book entitled &quot;Uriel Acosta&quot; (1848).
* Israel Zangwill used the life of Uriel da Costa as one of several fictionalized biographies in his book &quot;Dreamers of the Ghetto&quot;.
* Agustina Bessa-Luís, Portuguese writer (1922–2019), published in 1984 the novel &quot;Um Bicho da Terra&quot; (&quot;An Animal of the Earth&quot;) based on da Costa&#x27;s life.
* Ariel Magnus, Argentine writer, published in 2022 the novel (written in Spanish) &quot;Uriel y Baruch: El alma de la inmortalidad&quot; (&quot;Uriel and Baruch: The soul of immortality&quot; in English), where he recreates Uriel da Costa&#x27;s final moments adding the young Spinoza in the scene.

==Writings==
* (Propositions against the Tradition), ca. 1616. An untitled letter addressed at certain Rabbis, opposing their extra-biblical traditions.
* (Examination of Pharisaic Traditions), 1623. Here, Costa argues that the human soul is not immortal.
* (Latin for &quot;Example of a human life&quot;), 1640. Costa&#x27;s life, questions the authorship of Torah, and expresses trust in natural law.

==See also==
* Criticism of Judaism
* Criticism of the Talmud

== Notes ==

==References==
==Further reading==
* Adler, Jacob, &quot;A Life on the Stage: A Memoir&quot;, translated and with commentary by Lulla Rosenfeld, Knopf, New York, 1999, , pp. 200 &quot;et. seq&quot;.
* Israel, Jonathan I. &quot;Spinoza, Life &amp; Legacy&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press 2023. 
* Nadler, Steven, &quot;Spinoza: A Life&quot;, 2nd edition Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2022. 
* Nadler, Steven, &quot;Menasseh ben Israel, Rabbi of Amsterdam&quot;, New Haven, Yale University Press, 2018.
* Osier, Jean-Pierre. &quot;D&#x27;Uriel da Costa à Spinoza&quot;. Paris: Berg International 1983.
* Popkin, Richard H., &quot;Spinoza&quot;, Oxford, Oneworld Publications, 2004.
* (open access).
* Salomon, Herman Prins, and Sassoon, I.S.D., (trans. and intr.), &quot;Examination of Pharisaic Traditions&quot; – : &quot;Facsimile of the Unique Copy in the Royal Library of Copenhagen&quot;, Leiden, E. J. Brill, 1993.
* &quot;Tradizione e illuminismo in Uriel da Costa. Fonti, temi, questioni dell&quot;&#x27;, edited by O. Proietti e G. Licata, eum, Macerata 2016 Index

==External links==
* International committee Uriel da Costa 
* Bertao, David. Uriel da Costa The Tragic Life of Uriel Da Costa
* Who Was Uriel Da Costa? by Dr. Henry Henry Abramson</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q347893" start="0" end="14" title="Uriel da Costa" label="Uriel da Costa"/>
<link wikidata="Q347893" start="23" end="29" title="Uriel da Costa" label="Acosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q347893" start="33" end="46" title="Uriel da Costa" label="d&amp;#x27;Acosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="87" end="95" title="Sephardic Jews" label="Sephardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="96" end="107" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094510" start="123" end="136" title="New Christian" label="New Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="153" end="160" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366914" start="203" end="211" title="Rabbinic Judaism" label="rabbinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366914" start="288" end="296" title="Rabbinic Judaism" label="rabbinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q22765" start="340" end="367" title="Index Librorum Prohibitorum" label="Index Librorum Prohibitorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q806853" start="399" end="417" title="Herem (censure)" label="excommunicated him"/>
<link wikidata="Q36433" start="714" end="719" title="Porto" label="Porto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094510" start="808" end="822" title="New Christians" label="New Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q15138579" start="824" end="877" title="Persecution of Jews and Muslims by Manuel I of Portugal" label="Jews forcibly converted to Catholicism by state edict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379785" start="957" end="967" title="tax-farmer" label="tax-farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341605" start="1075" end="1093" title="Canon law of the Catholic Church" label="Catholic canon law"/>
<link wikidata="Q368643" start="1101" end="1122" title="University of Coimbra" label="University of Coimbra"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="1182" end="1194" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q965842" start="1442" end="1464" title="Portuguese Inquisition" label="Portuguese Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129467" start="1487" end="1495" title="Converso" label="Converso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188831" start="1582" end="1588" title="Mosaic authorship" label="Mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1850" end="1870" title=":pt:Jorge de Mascarenhas" label="Jorge de Mascarenhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="1922" end="1931" title="Sephardi Jews" label="Sephardic"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="1932" end="1940" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="2024" end="2033" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="2078" end="2085" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="2451" end="2456" title="rabbi" label="rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q189819" start="2489" end="2495" title="ritual" label="ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="2503" end="2513" title="Halakha" label="legalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q837443" start="2789" end="2801" title="Law of Moses" label="Law of Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3685619" start="2968" end="2994" title="History of the Jews in Venice" label="Jewish community in Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q110323805" start="3042" end="3059" title="Portuguese Jewish community in Hamburg" label="Hamburg community"/>
<link wikidata="Q806853" start="3088" end="3125" title="Herem (censure)" label="&amp;quot;herem&amp;quot;, or excommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652176" start="3258" end="3272" title="Leon of Modena" label="Leon of Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="3444" end="3450" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="3455" end="3462" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889997" start="3737" end="3744" title="Heresy in Judaism" label="heretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q867885" start="4392" end="4412" title="Royal Library, Denmark" label="Danish Royal Library"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4416" end="4429" title="H. P. Salomon" label="H. P. Salomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="4723" end="4735" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="4752" end="4757" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q193942" start="4788" end="4811" title="immortality of the soul" label="immortality of the soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q26403" start="4935" end="4944" title="Pharisees" label="Pharisaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152751" start="4983" end="5009" title="Jewish principles of faith" label="Jewish principles of faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366914" start="5079" end="5095" title="Rabbinic Judaism" label="Rabbinic Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627975" start="5150" end="5160" title="ceremony" label="ceremonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q168796" start="5223" end="5232" title="spirituality" label="spiritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q6190025" start="5570" end="5587" title="Jews in Amsterdam" label="Jews in Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q22702" start="5724" end="5739" title="book burning" label="burned publicly"/>
<link wikidata="Q191498" start="6581" end="6588" title="kashrut" label="kashrut"/>
<link wikidata="Q779753" start="7060" end="7066" title="Flagellation" label="lashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="7085" end="7094" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q13408093" start="7577" end="7588" title="Religious intolerance" label="intolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="7694" end="7707" title="rationalism" label="rationalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="7872" end="7880" title="religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q29524" start="8023" end="8034" title="natural law" label="natural law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8190" end="8205" title=":w:de:Johannes Müller (Pastor)" label="Johannes Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="8234" end="8241" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q284561" start="8281" end="8292" title="Remonstrants" label="Remonstrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q691944" start="8302" end="8322" title="Philipp van Limborch" label="Philipp van Limborch"/>
<link wikidata="Q733629" start="8710" end="8729" title="Menasseh Ben Israel" label="Menasseh ben Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q22765" start="8861" end="8886" title="Index Librorum Prohibitorum" label="Index of Prohibited Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q214816" start="9224" end="9236" title="Pierre Bayle" label="Pierre Bayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="9445" end="9458" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q155547" start="9514" end="9520" title="Johann Gottfried Herder" label="Herder"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="9570" end="9578" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q706888" start="9622" end="9630" title="Hermann Samuel Reimarus" label="Reimarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q847963" start="9697" end="9715" title="Seven Laws of Noah" label="Seven Laws of Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q620629" start="9819" end="9825" title="Deism" label="Deists"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="9924" end="9931" title="Heresy" label="heretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="9940" end="9946" title="martyr" label="martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366914" start="9978" end="9986" title="Rabbinic Judaism" label="Rabbinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35802" start="10042" end="10056" title="Baruch Spinoza" label="Baruch Spinoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q373665" start="10071" end="10089" title="biblical criticism" label="biblical criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615080" start="10506" end="10519" title="Steven Nadler" label="Steven Nadler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094510" start="10952" end="10965" title="New Christian" label="New Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468229" start="11070" end="11080" title="Crypto-Judaism" label="Crypto-Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="11084" end="11090" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621334" start="11302" end="11310" title="Oral Torah" label="Oral Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q26403" start="11357" end="11365" title="Pharisee" label="Pharisee"/>
<link wikidata="Q182682" start="11426" end="11435" title="Sadducees" label="Sadducees"/>
<link wikidata="Q208398" start="11444" end="11452" title="Karaite Judaism" label="Karaites"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="11543" end="11550" title="liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="11574" end="11593" title="Revolutions of 1848" label="Revolutions of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="11599" end="11605" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q76755" start="11613" end="11625" title="Karl Gutzkow" label="Karl Gutzkow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="11774" end="11781" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q494383" start="11817" end="11832" title="Yiddish theater" label="Yiddish theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q238090" start="11929" end="11944" title="Sholem Aleichem" label="Sholem Aleichem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7967216" start="11958" end="11973" title="Wandering Stars (Aleichem novel)" label="Wandering Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7106853" start="12023" end="12047" title="Osip Mikhailovich Lerner" label="Osip Mikhailovich Lerner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12076" end="12093" title="Mariinski Theater" label="Mariinski Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="12097" end="12103" title="Odessa" label="Odessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="12105" end="12112" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="12127" end="12142" title="Russian Empire" label="Imperial Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="12188" end="12192" title="Tsar" label="Tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q83171" start="12193" end="12205" title="Alexander II of Russia" label="Alexander II"/>
<link wikidata="Q330024" start="12207" end="12224" title="Abraham Goldfaden" label="Abraham Goldfaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q170384" start="12270" end="12278" title="operetta" label="operetta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12297" end="12311" title="Remesleni Club" label="Remesleni Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q4105352" start="12331" end="12353" title="Tamara Vakhvakhishvili" label="Tamara Vakhvakhishvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q6087180" start="12390" end="12406" title="Israel Rosenberg" label="Israel Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q580" start="12470" end="12474" title="Łódź" label="Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="12490" end="12496" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660878" start="12535" end="12546" title="Jacob Pavlovich Adler" label="Jacob Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611655" start="12854" end="12870" title="Hermann Jellinek" label="Hermann Jellinek"/>
<link wikidata="Q78889" start="12883" end="12897" title="Adolf Jellinek" label="Adolf Jellinek"/>
<link wikidata="Q113681" start="12956" end="12971" title="Israel Zangwill" label="Israel Zangwill"/>
<link wikidata="Q399018" start="13098" end="13117" title="Agustina Bessa-Luís" label="Agustina Bessa-Luís"/>
<link wikidata="Q470441" start="13278" end="13290" title="Ariel Magnus" label="Ariel Magnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="13811" end="13815" title="Soul (spirit)" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q193942" start="13823" end="13831" title="Immortality" label="immortal"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="13836" end="13841" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741215" start="13996" end="14016" title="Criticism of Judaism" label="Criticism of Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="14019" end="14042" title="Criticism of the Talmud" label="Criticism of the Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101078" start="14258" end="14277" title="Jonathan I. Israel" label="Israel, Jonathan I."/>
<link wikidata="Q7615080" start="14359" end="14373" title="Steven Nadler" label="Nadler, Steven"/>
<link wikidata="Q608773" start="15311" end="15325" title="Henry Abramson" label="Henry Abramson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64604" wikidata="Q154547" url="?curid=64604" title="Duchy">
<text>A duchy, also called a dukedom, is a country, territory, fief, or domain ruled by a duke or duchess, a ruler hierarchically second to the king or queen in Western European tradition.

There once existed an important difference between &quot;sovereign dukes&quot; and dukes who were ordinary noblemen throughout Europe. Some historic duchies were sovereign in areas that would become part of nation-states only during the modern era, such as happened in Germany (once a federal empire) and Italy (previously a unified kingdom). In contrast, others were subordinate districts of those kingdoms that had unified either partially or completely during the medieval era, such as France, Spain, Sicily, Naples, and the Papal States.

==Examples==
In France, several duchies existed in the medieval period, including Normandy, Burgundy, Brittany, and Aquitaine.

The medieval German stem duchies (, literally &quot;tribal duchy,&quot; the official title of its ruler being &quot;Herzog&quot; or &quot;duke&quot;) were associated with the Frankish Kingdom and corresponded with the areas of settlement of the major Germanic tribes. They formed the nuclei of the major feudal states that comprised the early era of the Holy Roman Empire of the German nation (961–1806; in German: &quot;Heiliges Römisches Reich Deutscher Nation&quot;). These were &quot;Schwaben&quot; (Swabia, mainly the present-day German state of Baden-Württemberg), &quot;Bayern&quot; (Bavaria), and &quot;Sachsen&quot; (Saxony) in pre-Carolingian times, to which &quot;Franken&quot; (Franconia, at present the northern part of the German state of Bavaria) and &quot;Lothringen&quot; (Lorraine, nowadays mostly part of France) were added in post-Carolingian times. As mentioned above, such a duke was styled &quot;Herzog&quot; (literally &quot;the one who is leading [the troops]&quot;).

In medieval England, duchies associated with the territories of Lancashire and Cornwall were created, with certain powers and estates of land accruing to their dukes. The Duchy of Lancaster was created in 1351 but became merged with the Crown when, in 1399, Henry Bolingbroke, Duke of Lancaster, ascended the throne of England as Henry IV. Nowadays, the Duchy of Lancaster always belongs to the sovereign and its revenue is the Privy Purse. The Duchy of Cornwall was created in 1337 and held successively by the Dukes of Cornwall, who were also heirs to the throne. Nowadays, the Duchy of Cornwall belongs to the sovereign&#x27;s heir apparent, if there is one: it reverts to the Crown in the absence of an heir apparent and is automatically conferred to the heir apparent upon birth. These duchies today have mostly lost any non-ceremonial political role, but generate their holders&#x27; private income. During the Wars of the Roses, the Duke of York made a successful entry into the City of York, by merely claiming no harm and that it was his right to possess &quot;his duchy of York.&quot; Any feudal duchies that made up the patchwork of England have since been absorbed into the Royal Family. Other than Cornwall and Lancaster, British royal dukedoms are titular and do not include landholdings. Non-royal dukedoms are associated with ducal property, but this is meant as the duke&#x27;s private property, with no other feudal privileges attached. At present, all independent (i.e., sovereign) duchies have disappeared.

==List of duchies==
===Baltic provinces and governorates===

* Duchy of Courland and Semigallia
* Duchy of Estonia (disambiguation)
* Duchy of Livonia
* United Baltic Duchy
* Duchy of Lithuania
* Grand Duchy of Lithuania

===Russia===
*Duchy of Moscow 

===Croatia===

* Lower Pannonia
* Duchy of Croatia
* Pagania
* Poljica duchy

===Denmark===

* Duchy of Schleswig
* Duchy of Holstein (formerly part of the Holy Roman Empire)

===England===

* Duchy of Cornwall
* Duchy of Lancaster

===France===

* Duchy of Anjou
* Duchy of Aquitaine
* Duchy of Berry
* Duchy of Bourbon
* Duchy of Brittany
* Duchy of Burgundy
*Duchy of Gascony
*Duchy of Guyenne
* Duchy of Normandy
* Duchy of Orléans
* Duchy of Lorraine

=== Georgia ===

* Duchy of Aragvi
* Duchy of Kldekari
* Duchy of Ksani
* Duchy of Tskhumi
* Duchy of Racha

===Holy Roman Empire===

* Duchy of Alsace (in English also &#x27;Alsatia&#x27;)
* Duchy of Austria (later Archduchy of Austria, in German: &quot;Erzherzogtum Österreich&quot;)
* Duchy of Bavaria
* Duchy of Bohemia
* Duchy of Brabant
* Duchy of Bremen
* Duchy of Brunswick
* Duchy of Carinthia
* Duchy of Carniola
* Duchy of Franconia
* Duchy of Gelders
* Duchy of Holstein
* Duchy of Jülich
* Duchy of Lauenburg
* Duchy of Limburg
* Duchy of Upper Lorraine
* Duchy of Lower Lorraine
* Duchy of Luxemburg (a Grand Duchy since 1815; see above)
* Duchy of Magdeburg
* Duchy of Mecklenburg
* Duchy of Oldenburg
* Duchy of Palatinate-Zweibrücken
* Duchy of Pomerania
* Duchy of Salzburg
* Duchy of Savoy
* Duchy of Saxe-Altenburg
* Duchy of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha
* Duchy of Saxe-Meiningen
* Duchy of Saxony
* Duchy of Styria
* Duchy of Swabia
* Duchy of Thuringia
* Duchy of Westphalia
* Duchy of Württemberg

The following duchies were part of the medieval Kingdom of Italy, which itself was part of the Holy Roman Empire:

* Duchy of Milan
* Duchy of Mantua
*Duchy of Sabbioneta
*Duchy of Montferrat
*Duchy of Guastalla
*Duchy of Modena and Reggio
*Duchy of Mirandola
*Duchy of Massa and Carrara

===Naples===

* Duchy of Acerenza
* Duchy of Apulia
* Duchy of Bari
* Duchy of Sora

===Papal States (Holy See)===

*Duchy of Ferrara
*Duchy of Romagna
*Duchy of Urbino
*Duchy of Camerino
*Duchy of Castro
*Duchy of Parma

===Poland===

* Duchy of Poland
*Duchy of Prussia
* Duchy of Warsaw

===Slovakia===
*Duchy of Nitra

===Spain===

* Dukedoms of Spain

===Sweden===

All provinces of Sweden have the right to have a ducal coronet in their arms. The king gives princes and princesses ducal titles &quot;of&quot; them. The current such royal duchies are:
*Västergötland
*Värmland
*Gästrikland and Hälsingland combined
*Östergötland
*Gotland
*Ångermanland
*Skåne
*Södermanland
*Dalarna
*Blekinge
*Halland
*Uppland

===Crusader states===
* Duchy of Athens
* Duchy of the Archipelago
* Duchy of Neopatras
* Duchy of Philippopolis

===Other current or historical duchies===
* Duchy of the Franks
* Duchy of Lower Pannonia
* Duchy of Gascony
* Duchy of Limburg
* Duchy of Livonia
* Duchy of Vasconia
* Duchy of Pakualaman
* Duchy of Mangkunegaran

==See also==

*Constitutional status of Cornwall
*Ducat
*Duchies in England
*Duchies in Sweden

===Fictional duchies===

* Underland, ruled by Underbeit, on &quot;The Venture Brothers&quot;
* Duchy of Atreides from the Dune series by Frank Herbert
*Soleanna from Sonic the Hedgehog
* Duchy of Dollet (from &quot;Final Fantasy VIII&quot;)
* Grand Duchy of Jeuno (from &quot;Final Fantasy XI&quot;)
* Duchy of Grand Fenwick
* Borogravia, Quirm (from the Discworld series)
*Duchy of Sto Helit, in the kingdom of Sto Lat (from the Discworld series)
* The Six Duchies (from The Farseer Trilogy and Tawny Man Trilogy by Robin Hobb)
* Zeon (from the Mobile Suit Gundam series, also sometimes translated as a Principality, as the Japanese language does not distinguish between the two)
* Erat, Asturia, Mimbre, Wacune (from the Belgariad series)
* Crydee, Yabon, Krondor, Olasko, Rillanon, Ran, Rodez, Salador, The Sunset Isles (from the Riftwar saga)
* Kolvir, ruled by main character Prince Corwin in The Chronicles of Amber
* Freid (from The Vision of Escaflowne series)
* Cagliostro from &quot;Lupin III: The Castle of Cagliostro&quot;
* Duchy of Nuts from &quot;Adventure Time with Finn &amp; Jake&quot;
* Duchy of Harrington from the Honorverse
*Duchy of Toussaint, from &quot;The Witcher&quot; series.
*Duchy of Serkonos, from &quot;Dishonored 2&quot;
*Duchy of Urnst, from the &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot; Greyhawk Campaign Setting.

==References==
==External links==

*The Duchy of Cornwall official site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q154547" start="2" end="7" title="Duchy" label="duchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q154547" start="23" end="30" title="Duchy" label="dukedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6256" start="37" end="44" title="country" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="57" end="61" title="fiefdom" label="fief"/>
<link wikidata="Q166886" start="84" end="88" title="duke" label="duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q166886" start="92" end="99" title="duchess" label="duchess"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097" start="138" end="142" title="king" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q19643" start="146" end="151" title="Queen regnant" label="queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="583" end="591" title="Kingdom (politics)" label="kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q842091" start="809" end="817" title="Duchy of Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712" start="819" end="827" title="Duchy of Burgundy" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="829" end="837" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179" start="843" end="852" title="Aquitaine" label="Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q617347" start="875" end="887" title="Stem duchy" label="stem duchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q14335563" start="971" end="977" title="Herzog" label="Herzog"/>
<link wikidata="Q146246" start="1030" end="1046" title="Frankish Kingdom" label="Frankish Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q133311" start="1115" end="1120" title="tribe" label="tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="1209" end="1247" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire of the German nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="1913" end="1923" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="1928" end="1936" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914544" start="2020" end="2038" title="Duchy of Lancaster" label="Duchy of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q161866" start="2179" end="2187" title="Henry IV of England" label="Henry IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376011" start="2277" end="2288" title="Privy Purse" label="Privy Purse"/>
<link wikidata="Q876107" start="2294" end="2311" title="Duchy of Cornwall" label="Duchy of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762318" start="2479" end="2492" title="heir apparent" label="heir apparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q442402" start="3339" end="3348" title="Westphalian sovereignty" label="sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q156038" start="3440" end="3472" title="Duchy of Courland and Semigallia" label="Duchy of Courland and Semigallia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226824" start="3475" end="3508" title="Duchy of Estonia (disambiguation)" label="Duchy of Estonia (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352878" start="3511" end="3527" title="Duchy of Livonia" label="Duchy of Livonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q376778" start="3530" end="3549" title="United Baltic Duchy" label="United Baltic Duchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270263" start="3552" end="3570" title="Duchy of Lithuania" label="Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="3573" end="3597" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3648" end="3662" title="Pannonian Slavs#Principality" label="Lower Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576305" start="3665" end="3681" title="Duchy of Croatia" label="Duchy of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965811" start="3684" end="3691" title="Narentines" label="Pagania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669475" start="3694" end="3707" title="Republic of Poljica" label="Poljica duchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q26167" start="3726" end="3744" title="Duchy of Schleswig" label="Duchy of Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q704288" start="3747" end="3764" title="Duchy of Holstein" label="Duchy of Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q876107" start="3824" end="3841" title="Duchy of Cornwall" label="Duchy of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914544" start="3844" end="3862" title="Duchy of Lancaster" label="Duchy of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q770768" start="3880" end="3894" title="Duke of Anjou" label="Duchy of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q429599" start="3897" end="3915" title="Duke of Aquitaine" label="Duchy of Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615263" start="3918" end="3932" title="Duke of Berry" label="Duchy of Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q836754" start="3935" end="3951" title="Duchy of Bourbon" label="Duchy of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352465" start="3954" end="3971" title="Duke of Brittany" label="Duchy of Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="3974" end="3991" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duchy of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295939" start="3993" end="4009" title="Duchy of Gascony" label="Duchy of Gascony"/>
<link wikidata="Q849324" start="4011" end="4027" title="Duchy of Guyenne" label="Duchy of Guyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q842091" start="4030" end="4047" title="Duchy of Normandy" label="Duchy of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q502190" start="4050" end="4066" title="Duke of Orléans" label="Duchy of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q155019" start="4069" end="4086" title="Duchy of Lorraine" label="Duchy of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249160" start="4107" end="4122" title="Duchy of Aragvi" label="Duchy of Aragvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920715" start="4125" end="4142" title="Duchy of Kldekari" label="Duchy of Kldekari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651064" start="4145" end="4159" title="Duchy of Ksani" label="Duchy of Ksani"/>
<link wikidata="Q48851492" start="4162" end="4178" title="Duchy of Tskhumi" label="Duchy of Tskhumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651039" start="4181" end="4195" title="Duchy of Racha" label="Duchy of Racha"/>
<link wikidata="Q95950649" start="4224" end="4239" title="Duchy of Alsace" label="Duchy of Alsace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624335" start="4280" end="4296" title="Duchy of Austria" label="Duchy of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q47261" start="4376" end="4392" title="Duchy of Bavaria" label="Duchy of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162698" start="4395" end="4411" title="Duchy of Bohemia" label="Duchy of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159856" start="4414" end="4430" title="Duchy of Brabant" label="Duchy of Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q694594" start="4433" end="4448" title="Duchy of Bremen" label="Duchy of Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q326029" start="4451" end="4469" title="Duchy of Brunswick" label="Duchy of Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q702224" start="4472" end="4490" title="Duchy of Carinthia" label="Duchy of Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360973" start="4493" end="4510" title="Duchy of Carniola" label="Duchy of Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q703265" start="4513" end="4531" title="Duchy of Franconia" label="Duchy of Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152420" start="4534" end="4550" title="Duchy of Gelders" label="Duchy of Gelders"/>
<link wikidata="Q704288" start="4553" end="4570" title="Duchy of Holstein" label="Duchy of Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q836937" start="4573" end="4588" title="Duchy of Jülich" label="Duchy of Jülich"/>
<link wikidata="Q313175" start="4591" end="4609" title="Duchy of Lauenburg" label="Duchy of Lauenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q697787" start="4612" end="4628" title="Duchy of Limburg" label="Duchy of Limburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q155019" start="4631" end="4654" title="Duchy of Upper Lorraine" label="Duchy of Upper Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q660393" start="4657" end="4680" title="Duchy of Lower Lorraine" label="Duchy of Lower Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719360" start="4683" end="4701" title="Duchy of Luxemburg" label="Duchy of Luxemburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q702012" start="4742" end="4760" title="Duchy of Magdeburg" label="Duchy of Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q109252949" start="4763" end="4783" title="Duchy of Mecklenburg" label="Duchy of Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q697084" start="4786" end="4804" title="Duchy of Oldenburg" label="Duchy of Oldenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q701983" start="4807" end="4838" title="Palatine Zweibrücken" label="Duchy of Palatinate-Zweibrücken"/>
<link wikidata="Q696640" start="4841" end="4859" title="Duchy of Pomerania" label="Duchy of Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q661340" start="4862" end="4879" title="Duchy of Salzburg" label="Duchy of Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q426025" start="4882" end="4896" title="Duchy of Savoy" label="Duchy of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q158151" start="4899" end="4922" title="Duchy of Saxe-Altenburg" label="Duchy of Saxe-Altenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462133" start="4925" end="4955" title="Duchy of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha" label="Duchy of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha"/>
<link wikidata="Q157710" start="4958" end="4981" title="Duchy of Saxe-Meiningen" label="Duchy of Saxe-Meiningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q164092" start="4984" end="4999" title="Duchy of Saxony" label="Duchy of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q580447" start="5002" end="5017" title="Duchy of Styria" label="Duchy of Styria"/>
<link wikidata="Q693980" start="5020" end="5035" title="Duchy of Swabia" label="Duchy of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311389" start="5038" end="5056" title="Duchy of Thuringia" label="Duchy of Thuringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q657241" start="5059" end="5078" title="Duchy of Westphalia" label="Duchy of Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227570" start="5081" end="5101" title="Duchy of Württemberg" label="Duchy of Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q153529" start="5220" end="5234" title="Duchy of Milan" label="Duchy of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q766501" start="5237" end="5252" title="Duchy of Mantua" label="Duchy of Mantua"/>
<link wikidata="Q43014" start="5254" end="5273" title="Duchy of Sabbioneta" label="Duchy of Sabbioneta"/>
<link wikidata="Q15604942" start="5275" end="5294" title="Duchy of Montferrat" label="Duchy of Montferrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q706596" start="5296" end="5314" title="Duchy of Guastalla" label="Duchy of Guastalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q252580" start="5316" end="5342" title="Duchy of Modena and Reggio" label="Duchy of Modena and Reggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615455" start="5344" end="5362" title="Duchy of Mirandola" label="Duchy of Mirandola"/>
<link wikidata="Q933592" start="5364" end="5390" title="Duchy of Massa and Carrara" label="Duchy of Massa and Carrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476118" start="5408" end="5425" title="Duchy of Acerenza" label="Duchy of Acerenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3715874" start="5428" end="5443" title="Duchy of Apulia" label="Duchy of Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20009900" start="5446" end="5459" title="Duchy of Bari" label="Duchy of Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738954" start="5462" end="5475" title="Duchy of Sora" label="Duchy of Sora"/>
<link wikidata="Q693570" start="5509" end="5525" title="Duchy of Ferrara" label="Duchy of Ferrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q24882751" start="5527" end="5543" title="Duke of Romagna" label="Duchy of Romagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q649202" start="5545" end="5560" title="Duchy of Urbino" label="Duchy of Urbino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829270" start="5562" end="5579" title="Duchy of Camerino" label="Duchy of Camerino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615411" start="5581" end="5596" title="Duchy of Castro" label="Duchy of Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q165040" start="5598" end="5612" title="Duchy of Parma" label="Duchy of Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q353227" start="5630" end="5645" title="Duchy of Poland (966–1025)" label="Duchy of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q153091" start="5647" end="5663" title="Duchy of Prussia" label="Duchy of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152115" start="5666" end="5681" title="Duchy of Warsaw" label="Duchy of Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q837326" start="5699" end="5713" title="Duchy of Nitra" label="Duchy of Nitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313167" start="5730" end="5747" title="Dukedoms of Spain" label="Dukedoms of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q193556" start="5767" end="5786" title="provinces of Sweden" label="provinces of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q213551" start="5950" end="5963" title="Västergötland" label="Västergötland"/>
<link wikidata="Q211638" start="5965" end="5973" title="Värmland" label="Värmland"/>
<link wikidata="Q183459" start="5975" end="5986" title="Gästrikland" label="Gästrikland"/>
<link wikidata="Q206564" start="5991" end="6002" title="Hälsingland" label="Hälsingland"/>
<link wikidata="Q214829" start="6013" end="6025" title="Östergötland" label="Östergötland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027830" start="6027" end="6034" title="Gotland" label="Gotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q209853" start="6036" end="6048" title="Ångermanland" label="Ångermanland"/>
<link wikidata="Q180756" start="6050" end="6055" title="Skåne" label="Skåne"/>
<link wikidata="Q626062" start="6057" end="6069" title="Södermanland" label="Södermanland"/>
<link wikidata="Q205218" start="6071" end="6078" title="Dalarna" label="Dalarna"/>
<link wikidata="Q675653" start="6080" end="6088" title="Blekinge" label="Blekinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q626045" start="6090" end="6097" title="Halland" label="Halland"/>
<link wikidata="Q203509" start="6099" end="6106" title="Uppland" label="Uppland"/>
<link wikidata="Q334714" start="6132" end="6147" title="Duchy of Athens" label="Duchy of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q777981" start="6150" end="6174" title="Duchy of the Archipelago" label="Duchy of the Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520008" start="6177" end="6195" title="Duchy of Neopatras" label="Duchy of Neopatras"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622095" start="6198" end="6220" title="Duchy of Philippopolis" label="Duchy of Philippopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q947869" start="6266" end="6285" title="Duke of the Franks" label="Duchy of the Franks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6288" end="6311" title="Pannonian Slavs#Principality" label="Duchy of Lower Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191085" start="6314" end="6330" title="Gascony" label="Duchy of Gascony"/>
<link wikidata="Q697787" start="6333" end="6349" title="Duchy of Limburg" label="Duchy of Limburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352878" start="6352" end="6368" title="Duchy of Livonia" label="Duchy of Livonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295939" start="6371" end="6388" title="Duchy of Vasconia" label="Duchy of Vasconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177663" start="6391" end="6410" title="Pakualaman" label="Duchy of Pakualaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157895" start="6413" end="6435" title="Mangkunegaran Palace" label="Duchy of Mangkunegaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164335" start="6452" end="6485" title="Constitutional status of Cornwall" label="Constitutional status of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q202018" start="6487" end="6492" title="Ducat" label="Ducat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311332" start="6494" end="6512" title="Duchies in England" label="Duchies in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311333" start="6514" end="6531" title="Duchies in Sweden" label="Duchies in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636213" start="6600" end="6620" title="The Venture Brothers" label="The Venture Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011049" start="6629" end="6646" title="House Atreides" label="Duchy of Atreides"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011049" start="6656" end="6667" title="Dune (franchise)" label="Dune series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934" start="6671" end="6684" title="Frank Herbert" label="Frank Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046812" start="6700" end="6718" title="Sonic the Hedgehog" label="Sonic the Hedgehog"/>
<link wikidata="Q245006" start="6749" end="6767" title="Final Fantasy VIII" label="Final Fantasy VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q678394" start="6810" end="6826" title="Final Fantasy XI" label="Final Fantasy XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040851" start="6836" end="6858" title="Duchy of Grand Fenwick" label="Duchy of Grand Fenwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q253295" start="6861" end="6871" title="Borogravia" label="Borogravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q253295" start="6873" end="6878" title="Quirm" label="Quirm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257270" start="6889" end="6898" title="Discworld" label="Discworld"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6984" end="6999" title="The Six Duchies" label="The Six Duchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512889" start="7006" end="7025" title="The Farseer Trilogy" label="The Farseer Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113889" start="7030" end="7047" title="Tawny Man Trilogy" label="Tawny Man Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q234403" start="7051" end="7061" title="Robin Hobb" label="Robin Hobb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134906" start="7065" end="7069" title="Zeon" label="Zeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134906" start="7080" end="7098" title="Mobile Suit Gundam" label="Mobile Suit Gundam"/>
<link wikidata="Q208500" start="7138" end="7150" title="Principality" label="Principality"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7223" end="7230" title="Arendia#Countries and cities" label="Asturia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287605" start="7232" end="7238" title="Mimbre" label="Mimbre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287605" start="7240" end="7246" title="Wacune" label="Wacune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287605" start="7257" end="7266" title="Belgariad" label="Belgariad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12777119" start="7277" end="7283" title="Crydee" label="Crydee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7285" end="7290" title="Yabon" label="Yabon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7301" end="7307" title="Olasko" label="Olasko"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7309" end="7317" title="Rillanon" label="Rillanon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7340" end="7356" title="The Sunset Isles" label="The Sunset Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q12777119" start="7367" end="7374" title="Riftwar" label="Riftwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053330" start="7432" end="7455" title="The Chronicles of Amber" label="The Chronicles of Amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q92560" start="7470" end="7494" title="The Vision of Escaflowne" label="The Vision of Escaflowne"/>
<link wikidata="Q608079" start="7505" end="7515" title="The Castle of Cagliostro" label="Cagliostro"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7527" end="7562" title="Lupin III: The Castle of Cagliostro" label="Lupin III: The Castle of Cagliostro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7571" end="7584" title="Duchy of Nuts" label="Duchy of Nuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q53093" start="7596" end="7631" title="Adventure Time with Finn &amp;amp; Jake" label="Adventure Time with Finn &amp;amp; Jake"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7640" end="7659" title="Duchy of Harrington" label="Duchy of Harrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052521" start="7669" end="7679" title="Honorverse" label="Honorverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11835640" start="7712" end="7723" title="The Witcher" label="The Witcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q20095751" start="7769" end="7781" title="Dishonored 2" label="Dishonored 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447657" start="7789" end="7803" title="Duchy of Urnst" label="Duchy of Urnst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="7820" end="7842" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447657" start="7849" end="7857" title="Greyhawk" label="Greyhawk"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64608" wikidata="Q205706" url="?curid=64608" title="Grand duke">
<text>Grand duke (feminine: grand duchess) is a European hereditary title, used either by certain monarchs or by members of certain monarchs&#x27; families. In status, a grand duke traditionally ranks in order of precedence below an emperor, king, grand prince, archduke, or prince-archbishop, and above a sovereign prince or sovereign duke. The title is used in some current and former independent monarchies in Europe, particularly:

* in present-day Luxembourg, the last surviving Grand Duchy
* historically by the sovereigns of former independent countries, such as Tuscany (from 1569 to 1860, now part of Italy)
* in Baden, Hesse, Oldenburg, Mecklenburg-Schwerin, Mecklenburg-Strelitz and Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach (officially simply the Grand Duchy of Saxony) – grand duchies from 1815 to 1918, and all now part of Germany
* formerly also in some countries in Northern Europe, such as the Grand Duchy of Finland or the Grand Duchy of Lithuania
* currently by claimants to the Russian Imperial Throne (eg. Grand Duke George Mikhailovich of Russia)

==Western and Central European==
The term &quot;grand duke&quot; as a monarch reigning over an independent state was a later invention (in Western Europe at first in 1569 for the ruler of Tuscany) to denote either a particularly mighty duke or a monarchy playing an important political, military and/or economic role, but not large enough to be a kingdom. It arose because the title of duke had gradually lost status and precedence during the Middle Ages by having been granted to rulers of relatively small fiefs (feudal territories), instead of the large tribal regions or even national territories to which the title was once attached.

One of the first examples occurred when Count Gonçalo I Mendes of Portucale (in northwest Portugal and considered as that country&#x27;s original nucleus) took, in 987, the personal title of (&quot;Grand Duke of the Portuguese&quot;) and rebelled against his feudal lord, King Bermudo II of León. He was defeated by the royal armies but nevertheless obtained a remarkable autonomy as a (Grand Duke), leading ultimately to Portuguese independence from the Spanish kingdom of Castille-León.

Another example was the line of self-proclaimed grand dukes (legally dukes) of Burgundy in the 15th century, when they ruled most of present-day northeastern France as well as almost the entire Low Countries. They tried—ultimately without success—to create from these territories under their control a new unified country between the Kingdom of France in the west and the Holy Roman Empire (mainly present-day Germany) in the east. Philip III, Duke of Burgundy (reigned 1419–67) assumed the subsidiary, legally void style and title of &quot;Grand Duke of the West&quot; in 1435, having previously brought the duchies of Brabant and Limburg as well as the counties of Holland, Zeeland, Friesland, Hainaut and Namur into his possession. His son and successor Charles the Bold (reigned 1467–77) continued to use the same style and title.

The title or grand duke (, in Lithuanian) has been used by the rulers of Lithuania, who after Jogaila also became kings of Poland. From 1573, both the Latin version and its Polish equivalent (literally &quot;grand prince&quot;), the monarchic title of the rulers of Lithuania as well as of (western) Russia, Prussia, Mazovia, Samogithia, Kiev, Volhynia, Podolia, Podlachia, Livonia, Smolensk, Severia and Chernigov (including hollow claims nurtured by ambition), were used as part of their full official monarchic titles by the Kings () of Poland during the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth.

The first monarchs ever officially titled grand duke were the Medici sovereigns of Tuscany, starting from the late 16th century. This official title was granted by Pope Pius V in 1569 to Cosimo I de&#x27; Medici.

Napoleon I awarded the title extensively: during his era, several of his allies (and &quot;de facto&quot; vassals) were allowed to assume the title of grand duke, usually at the same time as their inherited fiefs (or fiefs granted by Napoleon) were enlarged by annexed territories previously belonging to enemies defeated on the battlefield. After Napoleon&#x27;s downfall, the victorious powers who met at the Congress of Vienna, which dealt with the political aftermath of the Napoleonic Wars, agreed to abolish the Grand Duchies created by Bonaparte and to create a group of monarchies of intermediate importance with that title. Thus the 19th century saw a new group of monarchs titled grand duke in central Europe, especially in present-day Germany. The title was also used for the part of Poland granted to Prussia – the Grand Duchy of Posen – which was formally held in a personal union with Prussia (and so nominally separate) until its incorporation in 1848.

In the same century, the purely ceremonial version of the title grand duke in Russia (in fact the western translation of the Russian title &quot;grand prince&quot; granted to the siblings of the tsar) expanded massively because of the large number of progeny of the ruling House of Romanov during those decades.

In the German and Dutch languages, which have separate words for a prince as the issue (child) of a monarch (respectively , ) and for a sovereign prince (, ), there is also a clear linguistic difference between a sovereign grand duke reigning over a state of central and western Europe (, ) and a non-sovereign, purely ceremonial grand duke of either the Russian imperial family or other non-sovereign territories that are &quot;de facto&quot; dependencies of a major power (, ).

In 1582, King John III of Sweden added &quot;Grand Duke of Finland&quot; to the subsidiary titles of the Swedish kings, but without any political consequences, as Finland was already a part of the Swedish realm.

After the Russian conquests, the title continued to be used by the Russian emperors in their role as rulers of both (&quot;de facto&quot; non-sovereign) Lithuania (1793–1917) and the (equally non-sovereign) autonomous Finland (1809–1917). The Habsburg monarchy also instituted the similarly non-sovereign (Grand Principality of Transylvania) in 1765, and the (purely nominal) (Grand Duchy of Kraków) in 1846.

==Balkans==
===Byzantine grand dukes===

The Latin title &quot;dux&quot; (the etymological root of duke), which was phonetically rendered &quot;doux&quot; (δούξ) in Greek, was a common title for imperial generals in the Late Roman Empires (west and east), but note it was &quot;lower&quot; in rank than &quot;comes&quot; (the etymological root of count).

Under the latter, exclusively Byzantine theme system, the commander of a theme was often styled a &quot;doux&quot; instead of the earlier &quot;strategos&quot; from the 10th century on. The title of &quot;Grand Duke&quot; (&quot;megas doux&quot;) was created by Alexios I Komnenos and was conferred upon the commanding admiral of the Byzantine navy. As such, it was an actual office rather than a court rank (although it also became a grade in the court order of precedence under the Palaiologan emperors), and was always held by one individual.

===Bosnian grand dukes===

Grand Duke of Bosnia (; ) was a court title in the Kingdom of Bosnia, bestowed by the king to highest military commanders, usually reserved for most influential and most capable among highest Bosnian nobility. To interpret it as an office post rather than a court rank could be even more accurate. Unlike usage in Western Europe, Central Europe, or in various Slavic lands from Central to North-East Europe, where analogy between &quot;grand duke&quot; and &quot;grand prince&quot; was significant, with both titles corresponding to sovereign lower than king but higher than duke. In Bosnia, the title &quot;grand duke&quot; corresponded more to the Byzantine military title megas doux. It is possible to register some similarities with equivalent titles in neighboring Slavic lands, such as Serbia; however, in neighboring countries, the title &quot;duke&quot;, in Slavic &quot;vojvoda&quot;, also had military significance, but in that sense &quot;grand duke&quot; was specifically, even exclusively, Bosnian title.

==Eastern European==
===Ruthenian/Ukrainian grand dukes===

&quot;Grand duke&quot; is the traditional translation of the title &quot;Velyky Knyaz&quot; (Великий Князь), which from the 11th century was at first the title of the leading prince (&quot;Kniaz&quot;) of Kievan Rus&#x27;, then of several other East Slavic princes. The title of Grand Duke of Kiev was usually given by a father to his eldest son, and with his death passed to the next oldest sibling. This system didn’t last very long, and in 12th century multiple northern princes of the Rurikid Dynasty could compete for their dominance in Kiev. Some of them would prefer to establish themselves as grand dukes independently from Kiev.

Another translation of this title would be &quot;grand prince.&quot; While this term is a more precise translation, it is neither standard nor widely used in English. In German, however, grand duke was known as a &quot;Großfürst,&quot; and in Latin as &quot;magnus princeps&quot;.

With the decline of Kiev under the Mongols in the 13th century, Danylo of Galicia would be crowned as king of Ruthenia to show succession between Kiev and Galicia, while keeping the title of Grand Duke of Kiev. With the expansion of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania into Ukrainian lands, Lithuanian princes would take the title of Grand Dukes of Ruthenia, until their unification with Poland.

===Lithuanian grand dukes===

Throughout the history of Lithuania from 1230s to 1795, most of its leaders were referred to as Grand Duke of Lithuania, even when they jointly held the title King of Poland and other titles.
=== Russian grand dukes ===

From 1328 the &quot;Velikii Kniaz&quot; of Muscovy appeared as the grand duke for &quot;all of Russia&quot; until Ivan IV of Russia in 1547 was crowned as tsar. Thereafter the title was given to sons and grandsons (through male lines) of the Tsars and Emperors of Russia. The daughters and paternal granddaughters of Russian emperors, as well as the consorts of Russian grand dukes, were generally called &quot;grand duchesses&quot; in English.

From 1809 to 1917 the Emperor of Russia was also the Grand Duke of Finland, which he held as an autonomous state. Before the Russian conquest Finland had been held by the Kings of Sweden, first as a royal duchy, since 1581 with the King assuming the secondary title Grand Duke of Finland (Finnish: &quot;Suomen suuriruhtinas&quot;, Swedish: &quot;Storfurste av Finland&quot;).

==Grand prince==

Grand princes (or sometimes &quot;great princes&quot;) were medieval monarchs who usually ruled over several tribes and/or were feudal overlords of other princes. At the time, the title was usually translated as &quot;king&quot;, sometimes also as &quot;minor king&quot; or &quot;little king&quot; (). However, grand princes did not have the same monarchic precedence as later Western European kings, and thus they were considered lower in rank, particularly in later literature.

Grand princes reigned in Central and Eastern Europe, notably among Slavs and Lithuanians.

The title &quot;grand prince&quot; translates to () in Ukrainian and Russian. The Slavic word &quot;knjaz&quot; and the Lithuanian (today translated as &quot;priest&quot;) are cognates of the word &quot;king&quot; in its original meaning of &quot;ruler&quot;. Thus, the literal meaning of and &quot;Didysis kunigaikštis&quot; was more like &quot;great ruler&quot; than &quot;grand duke&quot;.

With the growing importance and size of their countries, those monarchs claimed a higher title, such as king or tsar (also spelled &quot;czar&quot; in English) which was derived from the Latin &quot;caesar&quot; (&quot;emperor&quot;) and based on the claim to be the legitimate successors of the Byzantine-East Roman Emperors. Grand Prince Ivan IV of Muscovy was the last monarch to reign without claiming any higher title, until he finally assumed the style Tsar of Russia in 1547.

The rulers of the Turkish vassal state of Transylvania () used the title of grand prince; this title was later assumed by the Habsburgs after their conquest of Hungary. The Polish kings of the Swedish House of Vasa also used the grand-princely title for their non-Polish territories.

In the late Middle Ages, the title &quot;grand prince/grand duke&quot; became increasingly a purely ceremonial courtesy title for close relatives of ruling monarchs, such as the Tsar of Russia, who granted his brothers the title Grand Duke of Russia ().

==Styles and forms of address==
Most often, a sovereign grand duke was styled as &quot;Royal Highness&quot; (abbreviated &quot;HRH&quot;), possibly because of the connection of many grand-ducal houses to royal ones or as the highest style beneath that of a king (sometimes styled &quot;Royal Highness&quot;). The heir to the throne (a hereditary grand duke) was sometimes styled as &quot;Royal Highness&quot;, otherwise as &quot;Grand Ducal Highness&quot; (HGDH). Junior members of the family also generally bore the lower title of prince or princess with the style of &quot;Grand Ducal Highness&quot;. However, in other grand duchies (e.g., Oldenburg), junior members of the family bore the title of duke or duchess, with the style of &quot;Highness&quot; (HH).

The Grand Ducal Family of Luxembourg styles all its members as &quot;Royal Highness&quot; since 1919, due to their being also cadet members of the Royal and Ducal House of Bourbon-Parma as male-line descendants of Prince Felix of Bourbon-Parma.

The Habsburg grand dukes of Tuscany, being members of the imperial family of Austria, were styled as &quot;Imperial and Royal Highness&quot; (HI&amp;RH).

Grand dukes and grand duchesses from Russia were styled as &quot;Imperial Highness&quot; (HIH), being members of the Russian Imperial Family.

== See also ==
* Veliki vojvoda
* Archduke
* Fürst
* List of grand duchesses of Russia
* List of grand dukes of Russia
* Nobility
* Royal and noble ranks

==References==

*WorldStatesmen - Finland
*Duke or Dux in Byzantium</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q205706" start="0" end="10" title="Grand duke" label="Grand duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q205706" start="22" end="35" title="Grand duke" label="grand duchess"/>
<link wikidata="Q5737899" start="51" end="67" title="hereditary title" label="hereditary title"/>
<link wikidata="Q116" start="92" end="99" title="monarch" label="monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479879" start="198" end="217" title="order of precedence" label="order of precedence"/>
<link wikidata="Q39018" start="227" end="234" title="emperor" label="emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097" start="236" end="240" title="king" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549319" start="242" end="254" title="grand prince" label="grand prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q154615" start="256" end="264" title="archduke" label="archduke"/>
<link wikidata="Q22881" start="269" end="286" title="Prince-bishop" label="prince-archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747456" start="310" end="316" title="prince" label="prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q166886" start="330" end="334" title="duke" label="duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="447" end="457" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q154849" start="564" end="571" title="Grand Duchy of Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q186320" start="616" end="621" title="Grand Duchy of Baden" label="Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q20135" start="623" end="628" title="Grand Duchy of Hesse" label="Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q693669" start="630" end="639" title="Grand Duchy of Oldenburg" label="Oldenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q158445" start="641" end="661" title="Grand Duchy of Mecklenburg-Schwerin" label="Mecklenburg-Schwerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q161215" start="663" end="683" title="Grand Duchy of Mecklenburg-Strelitz" label="Mecklenburg-Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q155570" start="688" end="708" title="Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach" label="Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach"/>
<link wikidata="Q27479" start="855" end="870" title="Northern Europe" label="Northern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q62633" start="884" end="906" title="Grand Duchy of Finland" label="Grand Duchy of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="914" end="938" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468206" start="1000" end="1040" title="Grand Duke George Mikhailovich of Russia" label="Grand Duke George Mikhailovich of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154849" start="1231" end="1238" title="Grand Duchy of Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250464" start="1390" end="1397" title="Realm" label="kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q166886" start="1429" end="1433" title="duke" label="duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1486" end="1497" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="1551" end="1555" title="fief" label="fief"/>
<link wikidata="Q617347" start="1594" end="1614" title="Stem duchy" label="large tribal regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078558" start="1729" end="1745" title="Gonçalo I Mendes" label="Gonçalo I Mendes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139807" start="1749" end="1758" title="County of Portugal" label="Portucale"/>
<link wikidata="Q342520" start="1960" end="1978" title="Bermudo II of León" label="Bermudo II of León"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712" start="2252" end="2260" title="Duchy of Burgundy" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q239337" start="2605" end="2633" title="Philip III, Duke of Burgundy" label="Philip III, Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q159856" start="2793" end="2800" title="Duchy of Brabant" label="Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q697787" start="2805" end="2812" title="Duchy of Limburg" label="Limburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q151120" start="2930" end="2946" title="Charles the Bold" label="Charles the Bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="3082" end="3091" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q54049" start="3103" end="3110" title="Jogaila" label="Jogaila"/>
<link wikidata="Q577867" start="3132" end="3138" title="Kingdom of Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="3567" end="3597" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q170022" start="3662" end="3668" title="Medici" label="Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q154849" start="3683" end="3690" title="Grand Duchy of Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q131945" start="3764" end="3775" title="Pope Pius V" label="Pope Pius V"/>
<link wikidata="Q48547" start="3787" end="3811" title="Cosimo I de&amp;#x27; Medici, Grand Duke of Tuscany" label="Cosimo I de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="3814" end="3824" title="Napoleon I" label="Napoleon I"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="3905" end="3913" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="4225" end="4243" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="4627" end="4634" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783098" start="4641" end="4661" title="Grand Duchy of Posen" label="Grand Duchy of Posen"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="4693" end="4707" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q635253" start="4755" end="4772" title="Province of Posen" label="its incorporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="4978" end="4982" title="tsar" label="tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q52944" start="5591" end="5609" title="John III of Sweden" label="John III of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257510" start="5622" end="5643" title="Grand Duke of Finland" label="Grand Duke of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12375230" start="5740" end="5747" title="Swedish Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q129797" start="5943" end="5952" title="Russian Partition" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q62633" start="5997" end="6015" title="Grand Duchy of Finland" label="autonomous Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="6033" end="6050" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113481" start="6096" end="6130" title="Principality of Transylvania (1711–1867)" label="Grand Principality of Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q688918" start="6167" end="6188" title="Grand Duchy of Kraków" label="Grand Duchy of Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q829120" start="6263" end="6266" title="dux" label="dux"/>
<link wikidata="Q166886" start="6299" end="6303" title="duke" label="duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071047" start="6509" end="6514" title="comes" label="comes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519259" start="6547" end="6552" title="count" label="count"/>
<link wikidata="Q379817" start="6596" end="6608" title="Theme (Byzantine district)" label="theme system"/>
<link wikidata="Q335954" start="6700" end="6709" title="strategos" label="strategos"/>
<link wikidata="Q41600" start="6818" end="6836" title="Alexios I Komnenos" label="Alexios I Komnenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018759" start="6890" end="6904" title="Byzantine navy" label="Byzantine navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053276" start="7040" end="7060" title="Palaiologan era" label="Palaiologan emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980623" start="7181" end="7198" title="Kingdom of Bosnia" label="Kingdom of Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q136578" start="7805" end="7815" title="megas doux" label="megas doux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549319" start="8282" end="8294" title="Velikiy Kniaz" label="Velyky Knyaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747456" start="8384" end="8390" title="prince" label="prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q273613" start="8398" end="8403" title="Kniaz" label="Kniaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108445" start="8414" end="8430" title="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097003" start="8488" end="8506" title="Grand Duke of Kiev" label="Grand Duke of Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q210398" start="8698" end="8713" title="Rurikid Dynasty" label="Rurikid Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="9091" end="9096" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q58607" start="9194" end="9211" title="Danylo of Galicia" label="Danylo of Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437518" start="9232" end="9248" title="king of Ruthenia" label="king of Ruthenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="9367" end="9391" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q215063" start="9565" end="9585" title="history of Lithuania" label="history of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639920" start="9646" end="9669" title="Grand Duke of Lithuania" label="Grand Duke of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q193360" start="9709" end="9723" title="King of Poland" label="King of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q170770" start="9814" end="9821" title="Grand Duchy of Moscow" label="Muscovy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996" start="9885" end="9902" title="Ivan IV of Russia" label="Ivan IV of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q209715" start="9915" end="9922" title="Coronation" label="crowned"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="9926" end="9930" title="tsar" label="tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="10250" end="10256" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257510" start="10270" end="10291" title="Grand Duke of Finland" label="Grand Duke of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q166886" start="10416" end="10427" title="royal duchy" label="royal duchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q419722" start="10748" end="10756" title="overlord" label="overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q116" start="10831" end="10835" title="Monarch" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="11361" end="11368" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="11691" end="11695" title="tsar" label="tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996" start="11919" end="11937" title="Ivan IV of Russia" label="Ivan IV of Muscovy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370489" start="12038" end="12052" title="Tsar of Russia" label="Tsar of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q210601" start="12264" end="12277" title="House of Vasa" label="House of Vasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622769" start="12577" end="12597" title="Grand Duke of Russia" label="Grand Duke of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5767753" start="12674" end="12680" title="style (manner of address)" label="styled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252328" start="12690" end="12704" title="Royal Highness" label="Royal Highness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3613184" start="13032" end="13052" title="Grand Ducal Highness" label="Grand Ducal Highness"/>
<link wikidata="Q693669" start="13245" end="13254" title="Grand Duchy of Oldenburg" label="Oldenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001476" start="13371" end="13403" title="Grand Ducal Family of Luxembourg" label="Grand Ducal Family of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q895187" start="13514" end="13552" title="House of Bourbon-Parma" label="Royal and Ducal House of Bourbon-Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q445045" start="13581" end="13610" title="Prince Felix of Bourbon-Parma" label="Prince Felix of Bourbon-Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q645719" start="13617" end="13625" title="House of Habsburg-Lorraine" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3613185" start="13720" end="13747" title="Imperial and Royal Highness" label="Imperial and Royal Highness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351551" start="13833" end="13850" title="Imperial Highness" label="Imperial Highness"/>
<link wikidata="Q112707" start="13885" end="13908" title="Russian Imperial Family" label="Russian Imperial Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q16889066" start="13928" end="13942" title="Veliki vojvoda" label="Veliki vojvoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q154615" start="13945" end="13953" title="Archduke" label="Archduke"/>
<link wikidata="Q18244" start="13956" end="13961" title="Fürst" label="Fürst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980463" start="13964" end="13997" title="List of grand duchesses of Russia" label="List of grand duchesses of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622769" start="14000" end="14029" title="List of grand dukes of Russia" label="List of grand dukes of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="14032" end="14040" title="Nobility" label="Nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q355567" start="14043" end="14064" title="Royal and noble ranks" label="Royal and noble ranks"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="64610" wikidata="Q103651" url="?curid=64610" title="Glenn Miller">
<text>Alton Glen &quot;Glenn&quot; Miller (March 1, 1904 – December 15, 1944) was an American big band conductor, arranger, composer, trombone player, and recording artist before and during World War II, when he was an officer in the US Army Air Forces. His civilian band, Glenn Miller and his Orchestra, was one of the most popular and successful bands of the 20th century and the big band era. 

Glenn Miller and his Orchestra was the best-selling recording band from 1939 to 1942. Miller&#x27;s civilian band did not have a string section as his military unit did, but it did have a slap bass in the rhythm section. It was also a touring band that played multiple radio broadcasts nearly every day. Their best-selling records include Miller&#x27;s theme song&quot;Moonlight Serenade&quot;and the first gold record ever made, &quot;Chattanooga Choo Choo&quot; which was a song in the soundtrack of Miller&#x27;s first film &quot;Sun Valley Serenade&quot; and was the number one song in the United States on December 7, 1941. The following tunes are also on that best-seller list: &quot;In the Mood&quot;, &quot;Pennsylvania 6-5000&quot; (printed as &quot;Pennsylvania Six-Five Thousand&quot; on record labels), &quot;A String of Pearls&quot;, &quot;Moonlight Cocktail&quot;, &quot;At Last&quot;, &quot;(I&#x27;ve Got a Gal In) Kalamazoo&quot;, &quot;American Patrol&quot;, &quot;Tuxedo Junction&quot;, &quot;Elmer&#x27;s Tune&quot;, &quot;Little Brown Jug&quot;, and &quot;Anvil Chorus&quot;. 

Including &quot;Chattanooga Choo Choo&quot;, five songs played by Miller and His Orchestra were number one hits for most of 1942 and can be found on the list of &quot;Billboard&quot; number-one singles of 1942. In four years, Miller scored 16 number one records and 69 top 10 hits, more than Elvis Presley (40) and the Beatles (35) in their careers. His musical legacy includes multiple recordings in the Grammy Hall of Fame. His work has been performed by swing bands, jazz bands, and big bands worldwide for over 75 years.

Miller is considered to be the father of the modern US military bands. In 1942, he volunteered to join the US military. He entertained troops during World War II, and ended up in the US Army Air Forces. Their workload was just as heavy as the civilian band&#x27;s had been. With a full string section added to a big band, the Major Glenn Miller Army Air Forces Orchestra was the forerunner of many US military big bands.

Miller went missing in action (MIA) on December 15, 1944, on a flight over the English Channel from England to France. In keeping with standard operating procedure for the US military services, Miller was officially declared dead a year and a day later. An Army investigation led to an official finding of death (FOD) for Miller, Norman Baessell, and John Morgan, all of whom died on the same flight. All three officers are listed on the Tablets of the Missing at Cambridge American Cemetery and Memorial in Cambridge, England. Since his body was not recoverable, Miller was allowed to have a memorial headstone placed at the US Army-operated Arlington National Cemetery in Arlington, Virginia. In February 1945, he was posthumously awarded the Bronze Star Medal.

==Early life and career==
The son of Mattie Lou (née Cavender) Miller and Lewis Elmer Miller, Alton Glen Miller was born in Clarinda, Iowa. He added the second n to &quot;Glenn&quot; during high school. Like his father (Lewis Elmer) and his siblings (Elmer Deane, John Herbert and Emma Irene), Miller went by his middle name, Glenn. As Dennis Spragg of the Glenn Miller Archives confirms, &quot;Miller&#x27;s use of his first name, Alton, was necessary for legal and military purposes, which is logically why it shows up in formal documents such as his military documents, driver’s licenses, tax returns, etc.&quot; He is listed as Alton G. Miller in the Army Air Forces section of the Tablets of the Missing in Cambridge American Cemetery and Memorial in Cambridge, England. His name is engraved as Major Alton Glenn Miller, US Army (Air Corps) on his Government-issued (G.I.) memorial headstone in Memorial Section H at Arlington National Cemetery in Arlington, Virginia. His last military unit has a memorial tree in section 13 on Wilson Drive. The American Holly was dedicated on December 15, 1994, the 50th anniversary of Miller&#x27;s death, for the veterans of the Major Glenn Miller Army Air Forces Orchestra.

He attended grade school in North Platte in western Nebraska. In 1915, his family moved to Grant City, Missouri. Around this time, he had made enough money from milking cows to buy his first trombone and played in the town orchestra. He played cornet and mandolin, but he switched to trombone by 1916.

In 1918, Miller and his family moved to Fort Morgan, Colorado, where he went to Fort Morgan High School. In the fall of 1919, he joined the F.M.H.S. Maroons, the high school football team that won the Northern Colorado American Football Conference in 1920. He was named Best Left End in Colorado in 1921. For two years, Miller was one of the editors of his own high school yearbook, &quot;Memories&quot;. In each of the yearbooks he edited, his name was spelled both Glen with one n, and Glenn with a double n.

During his senior year, he became so interested in dance band music that he formed a band with some classmates. The high school orchestra was an after school activity, but he played there too. For a time, classes in harmony, piano, violin, and music appreciation were full, but classes were discontinued. However, by the time he graduated from high school in 1921, he had decided to become a professional musician. He missed his own graduation because he was performing out of town. His mother gladly received his diploma for him.

In 1923, Miller entered the University of Colorado at Boulder, where he joined Sigma Nu fraternity. He spent most of his time away from school, attending auditions and playing any gigs he could get, including with Boyd Senter&#x27;s band in Denver. After failing three out of five classes, he dropped out of school to pursue a career in music. He failed Harmony.

In New York City, he studied the Schillinger system with Joseph Schillinger, under whose tutelage he composed &quot;Miller&#x27;s Tune&quot;. Miller arranged that tune for big band and renamed it. It became his signature theme, &quot;Moonlight Serenade&quot;.

In 1926, Miller toured with several groups, landing a good spot in Ben Pollack&#x27;s group in Los Angeles. He also played for Victor Young, which allowed him to be mentored by other professional musicians. In the beginning, he was the main trombone soloist of the band, but when Jack Teagarden joined Pollack&#x27;s band in 1928, Miller found that his solos were cut drastically. He realized that his future was in arranging and composing.

He had a songbook published in Chicago in 1928 entitled &quot;125 Jazz Breaks for Trombone&quot; by the Melrose Brothers. During his time with Pollack, he wrote several arrangements. He wrote his first composition, &quot;Room 1411&quot;, with Benny Goodman, and Brunswick Records released it as a 78 rpm record under the name &quot;Benny Goodman&#x27;s Boys&quot;.

In 1928, when the band arrived in New York City, he sent for and married his college sweetheart, Helen Burger. He was a member of Red Nichols&#x27; orchestra (Red Nichols and his Five Pennies) in 1930, and because of Nichols, he played in the pit bands of two Broadway shows, &quot;Strike Up the Band&quot; and &quot;Girl Crazy&quot;. That band included Benny Goodman and Gene Krupa.

During the late 1920s and early 1930s, Miller worked as a freelance trombonist in several bands. On a March 21, 1928, Victor Records session, he played alongside Tommy Dorsey, Benny Goodman, and Joe Venuti in the All-Star Orchestra directed by Nat Shilkret. He arranged and played trombone on several significant Dorsey brothers sessions for OKeh Records, including &quot;The Spell of the Blues&quot;, &quot;Let&#x27;s Do It&quot;, and &quot;My Kinda Love&quot;, all with Bing Crosby on vocals. On November 14, 1929, vocalist Red McKenzie hired Miller to play on two records: &quot;Hello, Lola&quot; and &quot;If I Could Be With You One Hour Tonight&quot;. Beside Miller were saxophonist Coleman Hawkins, clarinetist Pee Wee Russell, guitarist Eddie Condon, and drummer Gene Krupa.

In the early to mid-1930s, Miller worked as a trombonist, arranger, and composer for the Dorsey Brothers, first, when they were a Brunswick studio group and later, when they formed an ill-fated orchestra. Miller composed the songs &quot;Annie&#x27;s Cousin Fanny&quot;, &quot;Dese Dem Dose&quot;, &quot;Harlem Chapel Chimes&quot;, and &quot;Tomorrow&#x27;s Another Day&quot; for the Dorsey Brothers Band in 1934 and 1935.

In 1935, he assembled an American orchestra for British bandleader Ray Noble, developing the arrangement of lead clarinet over four saxophones that became a characteristic of his big band. Members of the Noble band included Claude Thornhill, Bud Freeman, and Charlie Spivak.

Miller made his first movie appearance in &quot;The Big Broadcast of 1936&quot; as a member of the Ray Noble Orchestra performing &quot;Why Stars Come Out at Night&quot;. The film included performances by Dorothy Dandridge and the Nicholas Brothers, who would appear with Miller again in two movies for Twentieth Century Fox in 1941 and 1942.

In 1937, Miller compiled several arrangements and formed his first band. After failing to distinguish itself from the many bands of the time, it broke up after its last show at the Ritz Ballroom in Bridgeport, Connecticut on January 2, 1938.

Benny Goodman said in 1976:
==Success from 1938 to 1942==
Discouraged, Miller returned to New York. He realized that he needed to develop a unique sound and decided to make the clarinet play a melodic line with a tenor saxophone holding the same note, while three other saxophones harmonized within a single octave. George T. Simon discovered a saxophonist named Wilbur Schwartz. Miller hired Schwartz but had him play lead clarinet instead of the saxophone. According to Simon, &quot;Willie&#x27;s tone and way of playing provided a fullness and richness so distinctive that none of the later Miller imitators could ever accurately reproduce the Miller sound.&quot; With this new sound combination, Miller found a way to differentiate his band&#x27;s style from that of many bands that existed in the late 1930s.

Miller talked about his style in the May 1939 issue of &quot;Metronome&quot; magazine. &quot;You&#x27;ll notice today some bands use the same trick on every introduction; others repeat the same musical phrase as a modulation into a vocal ... We&#x27;re fortunate in that our style doesn&#x27;t limit us to stereotyped intros, modulations, first choruses, endings, or even trick rhythms. The fifth sax, playing the clarinet most of the time, lets you know whose band you&#x27;re listening to. And that&#x27;s about all there is to it.&quot;

===Bluebird Records and Glen Island Casino===

In September 1938, the Miller band began recording for Bluebird, a subsidiary of RCA Victor. Cy Shribman, a prominent East Coast businessman, financed the band. In the spring of 1939, the band&#x27;s fortunes improved with a date at the Meadowbrook Ballroom in Cedar Grove, New Jersey, and more dramatically at the Glen Island Casino in New Rochelle, New York. According to author Gunther Schuller, the Glen Island performance attracted &quot;a record-breaking opening-night crowd of 1800...&quot;

The band&#x27;s popularity grew. In 1939, &quot;Time&quot; magazine noted: &quot;Of the 12 to 24 discs in each of today&#x27;s 300,000 U.S. jukeboxes, from two to six are usually Glenn Miller&#x27;s.&quot; In 1940, the band&#x27;s version of &quot;Tuxedo Junction&quot; sold 115,000 copies in the first week. Miller&#x27;s success in 1939 culminated with an appearance at Carnegie Hall on October 6, with Paul Whiteman, Benny Goodman, and Fred Waring also on the schedule.

From December 1939 to September 1942, Miller&#x27;s band performed three times a week during a quarter-hour broadcast for Chesterfield cigarettes on CBS radio—for the first 13 weeks with the Andrews Sisters and then on its own.

On February 10, 1942, RCA Victor presented Miller with the first gold record for &quot;Chattanooga Choo Choo&quot;. The Miller orchestra performed &quot;Chattanooga Choo Choo&quot; with his singers Gordon &quot;Tex&quot; Beneke, Paula Kelly and the Modernaires. Other singers with this orchestra included Marion Hutton, Skip Nelson, Ray Eberle and (to a smaller extent) Kay Starr, Ernie Caceres, Dorothy Claire and Jack Lathrop. Pat Friday dubbed for Lynn Bari by singing her part in the Glenn Miller Orchestra in their two films, &quot;Sun Valley Serenade&quot; and &quot;Orchestra Wives&quot;, with Lynn Bari lip-synching.

===Motion pictures===
Miller and his band appeared in two Twentieth Century Fox films. In 1941&#x27;s &quot;Sun Valley Serenade&quot; they were major members of the cast, which also featured comedian Milton Berle, and Dorothy Dandridge with the Nicholas Brothers in the show-stopping song-and-dance number, &quot;Chattanooga Choo Choo&quot;. The Miller band returned to Hollywood to film 1942&#x27;s &quot;Orchestra Wives&quot;, featuring Jackie Gleason playing a part as the group&#x27;s bassist. Though contracted to do a third movie for Fox, &quot;Blind Date&quot;, Miller entered the US Army and this film was never made.

==Critical reaction==

In 2004, Miller orchestra bassist Trigger Alpert explained the band&#x27;s success: &quot;Miller had America&#x27;s music pulse... He knew what would please the listeners.&quot; Although Miller was popular, many jazz critics had misgivings. They believed that the band&#x27;s endless rehearsals—and, according to critic Amy Lee in &quot;Metronome&quot; magazine, &quot;letter-perfect playing&quot;—removed feeling from their performances. They also felt that Miller&#x27;s brand of swing shifted popular music from the hot jazz of Benny Goodman and Count Basie to commercial novelty instrumentals and vocal numbers. After Miller died, the Miller estate maintained an unfriendly stance toward critics who derided the band during his lifetime.

Miller was often criticized for being too commercial. His answer was, &quot;I don&#x27;t want a jazz band.&quot; Many modern jazz critics harbor similar antipathy. In 1997, on a website administered by &quot;JazzTimes&quot; magazine, Doug Ramsey considers him overrated. &quot;Miller discovered a popular formula from which he allowed little departure. A disproportionate ratio of nostalgia to substance keeps his music alive.&quot;

Jazz critics Gunther Schuller (1991) and Gary Giddins (2004) have defended Miller from criticism. In an article written for &quot;The New Yorker&quot; magazine in 2004, Giddins said these critics erred in denigrating Miller&#x27;s music, and that the popular opinion of the time should hold greater sway. &quot;Miller exuded little warmth on or off the bandstand, but once the band struck up its theme, audiences were done for: throats clutched, eyes softened. Can any other record match &#x27;Moonlight Serenade&#x27; for its ability to induce a Pavlovian slaver in so many for so long?&quot; Schuller notes, &quot;[The Miller sound] was nevertheless very special and able to penetrate our collective awareness that few other sounds have...&quot; He compares it to &quot;Japanese Gagaku [and] Hindu music&quot; in its purity. Schuller and Giddins do not take completely uncritical approaches to Miller. Schuller says that Ray Eberle&#x27;s &quot;lumpy, sexless vocalizing dragged down many an otherwise passable performance.&quot; But Schuller notes, &quot;How much further [Miller&#x27;s] musical and financial ambitions might have carried him must forever remain conjectural. That it would have been significant, whatever form(s) it might have taken, is not unlikely.&quot;

==Reaction from musical peers==

Louis Armstrong thought enough of Miller to carry around his recordings, transferred to seven-inch tape reels when he went on tour. &quot;[Armstrong] liked musicians who prized melody, and his selections ranged from Glenn Miller to Jelly Roll Morton to Tchaikovsky.&quot; Jazz pianist George Shearing&#x27;s quintet of the 1950s and 1960s was influenced by Miller: &quot;with Shearing&#x27;s locked hands style piano (influenced by the voicing of Miller&#x27;s saxophone section) in the middle [of the quintet&#x27;s harmonies]&quot;. 

Frank Sinatra and Mel Tormé held the orchestra in high regard. Tormé credited Miller with giving him helpful advice when he first started his singing and songwriting career in the 1940s. Tormé met Miller in 1942, the meeting facilitated by Tormé&#x27;s father and Ben Pollack. Tormé and Miller discussed &quot;That Old Black Magic&quot;, which was just emerging as a new song by Johnny Mercer and Harold Arlen. Miller told Tormé to pick up every song by Mercer and study it and to become a voracious reader of anything he could find, because &quot;all good lyric writers are great readers.&quot; In an interview with George T. Simon in 1948, Sinatra lamented the inferior quality of music he was recording in the late &#x27;40s, in comparison with &quot;those great Glenn Miller things&quot; from eight years earlier. Frank Sinatra&#x27;s recording sessions from the late 1940s and early 1950s use some Miller musicians. Trigger Alpert, a bassist from the civilian band, Zeke Zarchy for the Army Air Forces Orchestra and Willie Schwartz, the lead clarinetist from the civilian band back up Sinatra on many recordings.

It was a surprise that clarinetist Buddy DeFranco took on the job of leading the Glenn Miller Orchestra in the late 1960s and early 1970s. De Franco was already a veteran of bands like Gene Krupa and Tommy Dorsey in the 1940s. He was also a major exponent of modern jazz in the 1950s. He never saw Miller as leading a swinging jazz band, but DeFranco is extremely fond of certain aspects of the Glenn Miller style. &quot;I found that when I opened with &#x27;Moonlight Serenade&#x27;, I could see men and women weeping as the music carried them back to years gone by.&quot; De Franco says, &quot;the beauty of Glenn Miller&#x27;s ballads ... caused people to dance together.&quot;

==Major Glenn Miller Army Air Forces Orchestra: 1942–1946==
At the peak of his civilian career in 1942, Miller decided to join the armed forces, which meant forsaking an income of about $20,000 per week from his civilian band, Glenn Miller and his Orchestra (equivalent to $330,000 per week in 2022). At 38, married and needing corrective eyeglasses, Miller was classified 3-A for the draft and unlikely to be called to service.

He first applied for a commission in the US Navy but was turned down. At the time, the Navy was dealing with a scandal concerning celebrity commissions in exchange for draft avoidance. This had nothing to do with Miller, but it prevented the Navy from acting on his application.

Miller then applied to the US Army with whom he had privately explored the possibility of enlisting. During a March 1942 visit to Washington, Miller had met with officials of the Army Bureau of Public Relations and Army Air Forces. On August 12, 1942, Miller sent a three-page letter to General Charles Young of the Army Service Forces, outlining his interest in &quot;streamlining modern military music&quot; and to express his &quot;sincere desire to do a real job for the Army that is not actuated by any personal draft problem.&quot; General Young forwarded Miller&#x27;s letter to Gen. Brehon Somervell, commander of Army Service Forces who approved Miller&#x27;s application. The Army notified Miller of his commission on September 8, 1942. He received a one-month delay to settle his business affairs.

Miller made his final commercial broadcast for Chesterfield Cigarettes on September 24, 1942. At the end of the program, he introduced competitor Harry James as his successor on the series, a gesture that a grateful James never forgot. On September 26, Miller made his final civilian broadcast on the Blue Network Coca Cola Victory parade of Spotlight Bands. Glenn Miller and his Orchestra gave their final performance at Central Theater in Passaic, New Jersey on September 27, 1942.

On October 7, 1942, Miller reported to the Seventh Service Command at Omaha as a captain in the Army Specialist Corps. Following a one-month ASC training course at Fort Meade, Maryland, he transferred to the Army Air Forces (AAF) on November 25, 1942, by order of General Henry Harley &quot;Hap&quot; Arnold. Miller was initially assigned to the AAF Southeast Flying Training Command at Maxwell Field, Alabama for orientation as assistant special service officer, traveling to different AAF training bases in the region to learn the mission of the training command. There, he appeared on the nationwide NBC &quot;Army Hour&quot; broadcast, originated from WSFA, Montgomery. He also appeared over WAPI radio Birmingham, performing with the Rhythmaires, a 15-piece base band.

Effective January 1, 1943, Miller was assigned to the headquarters of the AAF Technical Training Command (TTC) at Knollwood Field, Southern Pines, North Carolina. Reporting to Gen. Walter R. Weaver, Miller became director of bands for the AAFTTC. Miller&#x27;s recommendation for an AAFTTC bands program was approved. Detached to the AAF Training Center at Atlantic City, New Jersey, Miller screened personnel for assignment to various AAF base bands across the nation and recruited many for an elite unit that he would direct himself. The AAF had established its First Radio Production Unit and Orchestra to broadcast from Hollywood, commanded by Maj. Eddie Dunstedter with musical director M/Sgt. Felix Slatkin. Miller would form and direct the Second AAF Radio Production Unit and Orchestra, broadcasting and recording from New York. Miller&#x27;s unit was authorized on March 20, 1943, and billeted at the AAF Training School at Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut. Its personnel were a talented mix of jazz musicians from major big bands and musicians from leading symphony orchestras. Miller would successfully attempt to fuse jazz, popular music and light classics, including strings, which was an evolutionary step beyond his civilian band.

Broadcasting and recording from New York, the Miller unit broadcast &quot;I Sustain the Wings&quot;. This weekly series was first carried by CBS starting on June 5, 1943, and then by NBC from September 18, 1943, through June 10, 1944. Miller&#x27;s unit was succeeded on the series by the AAFTC orchestra directed by M/Sgt. Harry Bluestone, when the Miller band deployed overseas. After Miller died in December 1944, the Miller unit resumed the &quot;I Sustain The Wings&quot; series when they returned from the European Theater in August 1945. The Miller unit also recorded V-Discs at RCA Victor studios, and recorded broadcasts for the Office of War Information and Armed Forces Radio Service, including “Music from America” and “Uncle Sam Presents.&quot;

In addition to the full concert orchestra, Miller&#x27;s AAF Training Command organization included a marching band for base activities and a jazz band led by T/Sgt. Ray McKinley, the popular civilian bandleader and drummer. Initially designated the 418th AAF Band, Miller&#x27;s unit was redesignated the Second AAF Radio Production Unit on December 6, 1943. At that time, base band duties transferred to the 708th AAF Band, a unit of standby musicians separate from the radio orchestra. Miller&#x27;s marching band became famous by using jeeps with drums and string bass aboard for public performances. Miller also famously got into a musical argument with Army purists by performing marching arrangements of jazz, including &quot;The Saint Louis Blues&quot; and &quot;Blues in the Night&quot;, as opposed to traditional Sousa military marches. The AAF endorsed Miller&#x27;s modern approach.

On May 24, 1944, Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower sent a cable to Washington requesting transfer of the Miller AAF unit for the purposes of radio broadcasting and morale. With the impending D-Day invasion of northwest Europe, the Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary Force (SHAEF) was establishing a combined allied radio broadcasting service. Eisenhower cited the Miller organization as the &quot;only organization capable of performing the mission required.&quot; The Army Air Forces approved the deployment under the condition that the unit remain under AAF control. Miller and radio producer Sgt. Paul Dudley flew to London on June 19 and the band followed aboard the RMS &quot;Queen Elizabeth&quot;, which was serving as a troopship.

Upon arrival in London, the unit was initially billeted at Sloane Court, Chelsea. This was a temporary assignment because Miller had previously arranged for permanent quarters in Bedford. Because of the V-1 flying bomb assault that was underway, SHAEF determined it better to house the band where the BBC had moved operations during the Blitz of 1940–41. In Bedford, the Miller unit would use facilities developed for Sir Adrian Boult and the BBC Symphony. Prior to the band&#x27;s arrival, Miller met with SHAEF and BBC officials to coordinate broadcasting plans, including the BBC Director of the new Allied Expeditionary Forces Programme (AEFP), Maurice Gorham, SHAEF Director of Broadcasting, American Col. Edward Kirby, and deputy director of SHAEF Broadcasting, British Lt. Col. David Niven (the famous actor). They became Miller&#x27;s chain of command.

His distinguished orchestra was attached to SHAEF in London, and was quartered at Milton Ernest near Bedford, England. When the band arrived in London, they were quartered in a BBC Radio office at 25 Sloane Court. Unfortunately, this was in the middle of &quot;Buzz Bomb Alley&quot;, an area of sleepless nights because of the constant barrage of German flying V-1 bombs. Miller arranged for new quarters and transportation to move to Bedford on July 2, 1944. The next morning, a buzz bomb landed in front of their old quarters, destroyed the building, and killed more than 100 people, which included WACs among the seventy-five American personnel lost. None were Miller band members. Miller told Lieutenant Don Haynes, &quot;As long as [the Miller Luck] stays with us, we have nothing to worry about.&quot;

On July 9, 1944, Miller&#x27;s 51-piece orchestra and production personnel started broadcasting a series of musical programs over the AEFP under BBC technical supervision. The programs included: &quot;The American Band of the AEF&quot; (full orchestra), &quot;Swing Shift&quot; (T/Sgt. Ray McKinley dance orchestra), &quot;Uptown Hall&quot; (Sgt. Mel Powell jazz quartet), &quot;Strings with Wings&quot; (Sgt. George Ockner, concertmaster and the string section), &quot;Song by Sgt. Johnny Desmond&quot; (vocalist with orchestra directed by M/Sgt. Norman Leyden) and &quot;Piano Parade&quot; (piano solos by Pvt. Jack Rusin and Sgt. Mel Powell). The orchestra also appeared for the Office of War Information&#x27;s Voice of America European outlet. The American Broadcasting Station in Europe (ABSIE) broadcast daily to occupied Europe and Germany. One of its German language programs was &quot;Music for the Wehrmacht&quot;, in which Miller made announcements in phonetic German scripts with a German-speaking announcer named &quot;Ilse&quot;, who was actually ABSIE announcer Gloria Wagner. Sgt. Johnny Desmond sang vocals in German on this series.

In England, the band kept an extensive schedule of personal appearances at primarily American air bases. Visiting American celebrities Bing Crosby and Dinah Shore appeared on their radio programs. Shore joined Miller for a recording session at Abbey Road Studios, where the orchestra recorded their ABSIE German language programs.

Military service personnel of all ranks enjoyed the band. Their concert at Eighth Air Force Headquarters at Wycombe Abbey, England, was filmed by American Forces Network on July 29, 1944.  General James H. Doolittle, Commanding General of the Eighth Air Force, showed his appreciation as he famously announced, &quot;Captain Miller, next to a letter from home, your band is the greatest morale booster in the European Theater.&quot; This film is now in the care of the National Archives. (RG 342-USAF-49520 (film), NARA; Eighth Air Force, 520.071, A5835, AFHRA).

During November 1944, Miller and Niven sought and received approval to move the unit from England to France. By this time, SHAEF had relocated to Versailles. It was determined that reliable radio broadcasting could be accomplished from Paris and that the Miller orchestra could be seen in person at Paris-area hospitals and by ground troops on leave from the front lines. The move was set for mid-December. As a precaution, the Miller organization had to prerecord eighty hours of broadcasts prior to moving, in addition to their normal schedule. Meanwhile, preparations in France were behind schedule. On December 11, 1944, Niven ordered Miller to replace his executive officer, Lt. Donald Haynes, to fly ahead and complete arrangements before the entire group came across.

==Death==
The AAF band completed their pre-recordings and regular broadcasts on Tuesday, December 12, 1944, and prepared for the anticipated move to France. As per Niven&#x27;s order, Miller was booked on a scheduled Air Transport Command passenger flight from London-Bovingdon to Paris-Orly on Thursday, December 14.

Miller was on standby for an earlier flight on December 13, but it was canceled due to bad weather in France. His reservation on December 14 was also canceled. Miller was frustrated and impatient, fearing that arrangements would not be made in time to accommodate the movement of his unit to France. On a telephone call to Haynes, he learned that a mutual acquaintance, Lieutenant Colonel Norman Baessell of the Eighth Air Force Service Command at Milton Ernest, was flying to France on December 15. It was to be aboard a Noorduyn UC-64A Norseman assigned to him and piloted by Flight Officer John Stuart Morgan. Baessell invited Miller to join them.

Miller&#x27;s travel orders did not authorize him to board a &quot;casual&quot; flight and he did not report his intentions to his chain of command, so SHAEF was in the dark concerning Miller&#x27;s whereabouts. Although AAF and RAF combat missions flew that day, as well as numerous transport planes, the RAF Training Unit at RAF Twinwood Farm, near Bedford, had stood down, but the aerodrome was open. At 13:45 Morgan landed at Twinwood, boarded Baessell and Miller, and took off at 13:55. The UC-64 and its occupants were never seen again. The next morning, the Battle of the Bulge began. The Eighth Air Force and SHAEF did not realize that the UC-64 with Miller aboard was missing until three days later, on Monday, December 18, 1944.

Upon realizing the airplane and Miller were missing, Major General Orvil Anderson, Deputy Commander for Operations of the Eighth Air Force, who was married to Miller&#x27;s cousin Maude Miller Anderson, ordered a search and investigation. Meanwhile, Miller&#x27;s unit had flown safely from England to France aboard three C-47 transports and prepared to begin their broadcasting and concert duties. Since they were scheduled for a Christmas Day broadcast from Paris to England and via shortwave to the United States, news of Miller&#x27;s whereabouts would have to be released. AAF Headquarters in Washington, D.C. notified Miller&#x27;s wife, Helen, of his disappearance on December 23, 1944, with an in-person visit to their home by two senior officers and a telephone call from Gen. H. H. Arnold. On December 24, 1944, at 18:00 BST, SHAEF announced Miller&#x27;s disappearance to the press, stressing that no members of his unit were with him aboard the missing airplane.

The Major Glenn Miller Army Air Forces Orchestra appeared as scheduled on December 25, 1944, conducted by Jerry Gray. The unit continued to broadcast and appear throughout Europe through V-E Day and until August 1945. It received a Unit Citation from Gen. Eisenhower. Returning home, the unit resumed its &quot;I Sustain the Wings&quot; series over NBC.

On November 13, 1945, the AAF Band appeared at the National Press Club for its final concert, which was attended by President Harry Truman and Canadian Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King. When the band appeared to the strains of Miller&#x27;s theme &quot;Moonlight Serenade&quot;, the president stood and led the audience in a spontaneous round of applause. The band was congratulated for a job &quot;well done&quot; in person by General Eisenhower and General Arnold.

Their last performance was the &quot;I Sustain the Wings&quot; broadcast at Bolling Field, Washington, D.C., on NBC radio on November 17, 1945. Its personnel were gradually discharged, and the unit was disestablished in January 1946.

===Condolences===
Helen Miller accepted her husband&#x27;s Bronze Star Medal at a ceremony at Miller&#x27;s New York business office on March 23, 1945 (&quot;Glenn Miller Declassified&quot;, p. 304). When Miller was officially declared dead in December 1945, Helen received a formal letter of condolence and appreciation from Gen. H. H. Arnold. (&quot;Glenn Miller Declassified&quot;, pp. xv–xvi) When Major General Anderson returned from Europe, he visited Helen Miller and informed her of the inquiry findings. (&quot;Glenn Miller Declassified&quot;, p. 322).

On January 20, 1945, an Eighth Air Force Board of Inquiry in England determined that the UC-64 airplane went down over the English Channel due to a combination of human error, mechanical failure and weather. Remains of the UC-64 and its passengers have never been found. (pp. 269–338). The three officers were officially declared dead on the standard year and a day after they disappeared. This was published in a 1946 Army publication showing that Miller has a Finding of Death (FOD). He was missing in action (MIA) on December 15, 1944, and his remains were not recoverable.

===Names on tablets of the missing===
Miller&#x27;s name is engraved as Alton G. Miller on the &quot;Tablets of the Missing&quot; at the Cambridge American Cemetery and Memorial run by the American Battle Monuments Commission in Cambridge, England. The names of Flight Officer John R. S. Morgan and Lieutenant Colonel Norman Baessell are also carved there. Many Americans who died in the Second World War in Europe are buried there. On behalf of Miller&#x27;s family and the Glenn Miller Birthplace Society, an Air Force wreath ceremony was conducted there on the 50th anniversary of their deaths, December 15, 1994. A moment of silence was held there and at Arlington National Cemetery.

===Memorial headstone===
At his daughter&#x27;s request nearly 50 years later, an official, government-issued memorial headstone was placed for Major Alton Glenn Miller, US Army (Air Corps), in memorial section H at the Army-run Arlington National Cemetery, Arlington, Virginia in 1992. A trombone, 464-A, and the words &quot;Bronze Star Medal&quot; are carved on the back of the white marble marker.

===Memorial Tree – An American Holly===
A living memorial to the entire unit can be seen from Miller&#x27;s marble memorial. Using military date style, the &quot;Major Glenn Miller Army Air Forces Orchestra in service from 20 March 1943 – 15 January 1946&quot; is carved in the black granite marker in front of an American Holly tree. The marker has etchings of a trombone and the patches of Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary Force (SHAEF) and the Army Air Forces (AAF) on it. Before it was carved in stone, the military band&#x27;s title was verified by Norman Leyden who was an arranger and clarinetist in the Major Glenn Miller Army Air Forces Orchestra. The name was also confirmed by Kathy Shenkle (Air Force, Army, and Arlington National Cemetery historian), C.F. Alan Cass, curator of the Glenn Miller Archives at the University of Colorado at Boulder, the Glenn Miller Birthplace Society president, and other historians and band members for the US Army and US Air Force.

Located in Section 13 along Wilson Drive, the tree was dedicated on the 50th anniversary of Miller&#x27;s death, December 15, 1994. The American Holly is meant to remind visitors of the tune &quot;American Patrol&quot;. &quot;Taps&quot; was sounded at the wreath ceremony, memorial service and tree dedication. A moment of silence took place both at Arlington, Virginia, and in Cambridge, England. The Secretary of the Air Force was the main speaker. Attendees included Sergeant Emanuel Wishnow (viola), other unit veterans, Miller&#x27;s family, military service members, US senators, Glenn Miller Archives founder and curator C.F. Alan Cass, and members of the Glenn Miller Birthplace Society. The Jazz Ambassadors of the US Army Field Band performed at the luncheon at Fort Myer that followed the ceremony. One of Miller&#x27;s trombones was displayed on stage. The Airmen of Note and the Army Blues had performances elsewhere during the day. The US Air Force Band (with their orchestra) played a 50th anniversary memorial concert that night and on tour for the next year. The Coast Guard Band and Marine Corps Band commanders joined the other bands in sending written greetings. On the 75th anniversary on December 15, 2019, Ms. Kathy Shenkle represented them all at a wreath ceremony there with wreaths provided by Wreaths Across America.

=== Investigation into disappearance ===
A document concerning the military career and disappearance of Miller appeared during 2017 in the book &quot;Glenn Miller Declassified&quot; by Dennis M. Spragg, director of the Glenn Miller Archives. On behalf of the Glenn Miller Estate and with the full cooperation of American and British authorities, all relevant and many new documents concerning the circumstances of the accident were discovered and published, including the inquiry findings of January 20, 1945. According to the book, Miller had no other duties than as a musical and broadcasting officer, and his high profile and schedule ruled out any clandestine role as later speculated by sensationalists. The book concludes that he was not the victim of foul play or friendly fire.

In 2019, the International Group for Historic Aircraft Recovery (TIGHAR) was reported to be investigating a report that Miller&#x27;s airplane was possibly discovered many miles west of its required flight path but nothing further has been reported or found. Given modern technology, a well-funded and patient exploration could possibly find and identify the debris of the airplane along the required air transport corridor between Langney Point (Beachy Head) and St. Valery, France.

==Civilian band legacy==
Miller and his music became an institution as Miller wished. His music is still played worldwide by professional and amateur musicians every day, including BBC radio.

The Miller estate authorized an official Glenn Miller legacy or ghost band in 1946, the Glenn Miller Orchestra. This band was led by Tex Beneke, former tenor saxophonist and a singer for the civilian band. It had a makeup similar to the Army Air Forces Band: It included a large string section, and at least initially, about two-thirds of the musicians were alumni of either the civilian or AAF orchestras. The orchestra&#x27;s official public début was at the Capitol Theatre on Broadway, where it opened for a three-week engagement on January 24, 1946. Future television and film composer Henry Mancini was the band&#x27;s pianist and one of the arrangers. This ghost band played to very large audiences all across the United States, including a few dates at the Hollywood Palladium in 1947, where the original Miller band played in 1941. A website concerning the history of the Hollywood Palladium noted &quot;[even] as the big band era faded, the Tex Beneke and Glenn Miller Orchestra concert at the Palladium resulted in a record-breaking crowd of 6,750 dancers.&quot; By 1949, economics dictated that the string section be dropped. This band recorded for RCA Victor, just as the original Miller band did. Beneke was struggling with how to expand the Miller sound and also how to achieve success under his own name. What began as the &quot;Glenn Miller Orchestra Under the Direction of Tex Beneke&quot; finally became &quot;The Tex Beneke Orchestra&quot;. By 1950, Beneke and the Miller estate parted ways. The break was acrimonious, although Beneke is now listed by the Miller estate as a former leader of the Glenn Miller Orchestra, and his role is now acknowledged on the orchestra&#x27;s website.

When Miller was alive, many bandleaders such as Bob Chester imitated his style. By the early 1950s, various bands were again copying the Miller style of clarinet-led reeds and muted trumpets, notably Ralph Flanagan, Jerry Gray, and Ray Anthony. This, coupled with the success of &quot;The Glenn Miller Story&quot; (1954), inspired Helen Miller to invite Ray McKinley, who had assumed leadership of the Miller band in 1945, to form a new band called the Glenn Miller Orchestra. McKinley recruited Will Bradley as featured trombonist, and they remained with the Miller band until 1966. 

Around the world, the Glenn Miller Orchestra continues to tour today. In the United States, the leader since 2021 has been saxophonist Erik Stabnau. In the United Kingdom, the director is Ray McVay. In Europe, the leader has been Wil Salden since 1990. In Scandinavia, the director has been Jan Slottenäs since 2010.

==Major Glenn Miller Army Air Forces Orchestra legacy==
The Major Glenn Miller Army Air Forces Orchestra&#x27;s long-term legacy has carried on with the Airmen of Note, a band within the United States Air Force Band. &quot;The Airmen of Note is the premier jazz ensemble of the United States Air Force. Stationed at Joint Base Anacostia-Bolling in Washington, D.C., it is one of six musical ensembles that form The US Air Force Band.&quot; Created in 1950 to continue the tradition of Major Glenn Miller&#x27;s Army Air Forces dance band, the current band consists of 18 active-duty musicians, including one vocalist. This band was created in 1950 from smaller groups within the Bolling Air Force Base in Washington, DC, and continues to play jazz music for the Air Force community and the general public. The legacy also continues through The United States Air Forces in Europe Band, stationed at Ramstein Air Base, Germany. Today, every branch of the US armed forces has a big band component. This includes: The Ambassadors in US Army Air Forces Europe, The US Army Band&#x27;s Army Blues, the US Army Field Band&#x27;s Jazz Ambassadors, and the US Navy Commodores. The US Coast Guard has one musical organization to perform all types of music. That includes a Coast Guard musical unit called the Guardians. The Coast Guard Band and Yale University bands performed a joint concert for the 75th anniversary of Miller&#x27;s death. The military bands consist of units such as concert bands, marching bands, jazz orchestras, small combos, and elements that play swing, rock, country, and bluegrass. Miller is considered to be the father of all modern United States military bands.

Miller &quot;was a stickler for details and accuracy and always the truth. How delighted he would have been with Ed Polic&#x27;s superbly documented report&quot; wrote George Simon as he recommended, &quot;The Glenn Miller Army Air Force Band: Sustineo Alas / I Sustain the Wings&quot; to readers of the &quot;American Reference Books Annual&quot;. In 1314 pages, Polic covers a &quot;small but significant period of Glenn Miller&#x27;s life and music, from his enlistment in 1942 and the beginning of his [Army Air Forces Orchestra (band for short)] in 1943, through its end in late 1945, giving an overall history of the band and a detailed recounting of the day-by-day activities of the band.&quot;

==Posthumous events==
Numerous archives, museums and memorials in the United States and England are devoted to Miller. Herb Miller, Miller&#x27;s brother, led his own band in the United States and England until the late 1980s.

In 1953, Universal-International pictures released &quot;The Glenn Miller Story&quot;, starring James Stewart; Ray Eberle, Marion Hutton, and Tex Beneke neither appear in nor are referred to in it.

Annual festivals celebrating Miller&#x27;s legacy are held in two of the towns most associated with his youth, Clarinda, Iowa, and Fort Morgan, Colorado.

Since 1975, the Glenn Miller Birthplace Society has held its annual Glenn Miller Festival in Clarinda, Iowa. The festival&#x27;s highlights include performances by the official Glenn Miller Orchestra under the direction of Nick Hilscher, and many other civilian and military jazz bands. It also includes visits to the restored Miller home, the Glenn Miller Birthplace Museum, historical displays from the Glenn Miller Archives at the University of Colorado, lectures and presentations about Miller&#x27;s life, and a scholarship competition for young classical and jazz musicians.
In 1989, Miller&#x27;s daughter bought the house where Miller was born in Clarinda. The Glenn Miller Foundation was created to oversee its restoration. It is now part of the Glenn Miller Birthplace Museum. The Glenn Miller Birthplace Society celebrated when the US Postal Service issued a Glenn Miller postage stamp in 1996.

Every summer since 1996, the city of Fort Morgan, Colorado, has hosted a public event called the Glenn Miller SwingFest. Miller graduated from Fort Morgan High School, where he played football and other sports, was on the yearbook staff, was in the orchestra, and formed his own band with classmates. Events include musical performances and swing dancing, community picnics, lectures, and fundraising for scholarships to attend the School for the Performing Arts, a nonprofit dance, voice, piano, percussion, guitar, violin, and drama studio program in Fort Morgan. Each year, about 2,000 people attend this summer festival, which serves to introduce younger generations to the music Miller made famous, as well as the style of dance and dress popular in the big-band era.

The Glenn Miller Archives at the University of Colorado at Boulder houses many of Miller&#x27;s recordings, gold records and other memorabilia. It is also open to scholarly research and the general public. Formed by Alan Cass, the Glenn Miller Archives includes the original manuscript of Miller&#x27;s theme song, &quot;Moonlight Serenade&quot;.

In 1957, a Student Union Building was completed at the University of Colorado&#x27;s Boulder campus and the ballroom was named the Glenn Miller Ballroom.

In 2002, the Glenn Miller Museum opened to the public at the former RAF Twinwood Farm, in Clapham, Bedfordshire, England.

Miller&#x27;s name is engraved as Alton G. Miller on the &quot;Tablets of the Missing&quot; at the Cambridge American Cemetery and Memorial run by the American Battle Monuments Commission in Cambridge, England, United Kingdom. The names of Flight Officer John R. S. Morgan and Lieutenant Colonel Norman Baessell are also carved there.

Miller&#x27;s government-issued, white marble, memorial headstone is located in Memorial Section H (# 464-A) by Wilson Drive at Arlington National Cemetery, Arlington, Virginia. The Major Glenn Miller Army Air Forces Orchestra Memorial American Holly can be seen from there.

A Miller fan, Peter Cofrancesco, bought a gravesite at Grove Street Cemetery in New Haven, Connecticut, and placed a black granite cenotaph there.  He has no relationship to Major Miller&#x27;s family.  Here is the inscription along with corrections that could be made if it is ever replaced or moved to a non-grave location.  An etching of Major Miller in uniform / IN MEMORY / Major A. [ Alton] Glenn Miller / 0505273 / US Army Air Force [Forces] - W. W. II / Born- Clarinda, Iowa -  /  March 1, 1904 / Missing in Action [ / Died] / Europe, December 15, 1944 / 1943-1944 / 418th A.A.F.T.T.C. Band- [AKA Major Glenn Miller Army Air Forces Orchestra] / Yale University- New Haven, CT. / I SUSTAIN THE WINGS / Sustineo Alas.

Miller was awarded a Star for Recording on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6915 Hollywood Boulevard in Hollywood, California. The headquarters of the United States Air Forces in Europe Band at Ramstein Air Base, Germany, is named Glenn Miller Hall.

On June 25, 1999, the Nebraska State Highway Commission unanimously agreed to name Nebraska Highway 97 between North Platte, where Miller attended elementary school, and Tryon, where the Miller family briefly lived, as Glenn Miller Memorial Highway.

==Arranging staff and compositions==

Miller had a staff of arrangers who wrote originals such as &quot;String of Pearls&quot; (written and arranged by Jerry Gray) or took originals such as &quot;In The Mood&quot; (writing credit given to Joe Garland and arranged by Eddie Durham) and &quot;Tuxedo Junction&quot; (written by bandleader Erskine Hawkins and arranged by Jerry Gray) and arranged them for the Miller band to either record or broadcast. Miller&#x27;s staff of arrangers in his civilian band, who handled the bulk of the work, were Jerry Gray (a former arranger for Artie Shaw), Bill Finegan (a former arranger for Tommy Dorsey), Billy May and to a much smaller extent, George Williams, who worked very briefly with the band as well as Andrews Sisters arranger Vic Schoen

According to arranger and conductor Norman Leyden, he and others did arrangements &quot;for Miller in the service, including Jerry Gray, Ralph Wilkinson, Mel Powell, and Steve Steck.&quot; In 1943, Miller wrote &quot;Glenn Miller&#x27;s Method for Orchestral Arranging&quot;, published by his own company the Mutual Music Society in New York, a 116-page book with illustrations and scores that explains how he wrote his musical arrangements.

==Discography==
==Awards, decorations and honors==
===Military awards and decorations===
Miller, US Army (Air Corps) earned a Bronze Star Medal, World War II Victory Medal; American Campaign Medal; European, African and Middle Eastern Campaign Medal; and Marksman Badge with Carbine and Pistol Bars.


====Bronze Star Medal Citation====

===Grammy Hall of Fame===
Miller had three recordings that were posthumously inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame, which is a special Grammy award established in 1973 to honor recordings that are at least 25 years old and that have &quot;qualitative or historical significance.&quot;

==See also==

* Declared death &quot;in absentia&quot;
* Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award
* Kalamazoo, Michigan
* List of people who disappeared mysteriously at sea
* List of swing musicians
* Role of music in World War II
==References==
==Further reading==
* Chattanooga Choo Choo-The Life and Times of the World-famous Glenn Miller Orchestra by Richard Grudens 2004 
* 
* 
* Newton, Wesley Phillips. &quot;Launching a legend: Maxwell Field and Glenn Miller&#x27;s Army Air Forces Band.&quot; &quot;Alabama Review&quot; 53.4 (2000): 271–96.
* Polic, Edward F. &quot;The Glenn Miller Army Air Force Band: Sustineo Alas / I Sustain the Wings&quot; (2 Volumes), Metuchen, N.J.: [New Brunswick, N.J.]: Scarecrow Press; Institute of Jazz Studies, Rutgers University. 1989. .
* 
* 

==External links==
* https://www.arlingtoncemetery.mil/ – official US Army website for Arlington National Cemetery.
* Glenn Miller Memorial Headstone Photo at https://ancexplorer.army.mil/publicwmv/index.html#/arlington-national/search/results/1/CgZtaWxsZXISBWFsdG9uGgVnbGVubg--/ 
* https://www.arlingtoncemetery.mil/Explore/Find-a-Grave – official Arlington National Cemetery grave locator where you select smart phone or web for which app to use to look up the name. Alton Glenn Miller is the name to use for his memorial headstone in Memorial Section H.
* The Major Glenn Miller Army Air Forces Orchestra American Holly is Memorial tree number 78 in the file at this link / document https://www.arlingtoncemetery.mil/Portals/0/Docs/Memorial%20Trees%20Updated%209-5-2014.pdf?ver=2020-08-27-190631-920 
* The Glenn Miller Birthplace Society , which organizes the annual Glenn Miller Birthplace Festival in Clarinda, Iowa
* Glenn Miller Archives  – official repository for the legacy and property of Alton Glenn Miller, University of Colorado Boulder
* Glenn Miller recordings at the Discography of American Historical Recordings.
* Glenn Miller Glenn Miller Resources from Glenn Miller&#x27;s biographer and Glenn Miller Archives and Glenn Miller Birthplace Society historian Dennis M. Spragg
* Recordings Miller made for Brunswick records as a sideman in the late 1920s and early 1930s
* Glenn&#x27;s Swing Orchestra  – tribute to Glenn Miller (&quot;in French language&quot;)
* &quot;The Disappearance of Glenn Miller&quot;  – documentary in the PBS Series &quot;History Detectives&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q103651" start="0" end="10" title="Glenn Miller" label="Alton Glen"/>
<link wikidata="Q103651" start="17" end="22" title="Glenn Miller" label="Glenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q103651" start="29" end="35" title="Glenn Miller" label="Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q207378" start="88" end="96" title="big band" label="big band"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="184" end="196" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="228" end="246" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="US Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446255" start="267" end="297" title="Glenn Miller Orchestra" label="Glenn Miller and his Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364980" start="580" end="589" title="Slapping (music)" label="slap bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456785" start="597" end="611" title="rhythm section" label="rhythm section"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630719" start="761" end="779" title="Moonlight Serenade" label="Moonlight Serenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q280512" start="828" end="849" title="Chattanooga Choo Choo" label="Chattanooga Choo Choo"/>
<link wikidata="Q366244" start="925" end="944" title="Sun Valley Serenade" label="Sun Valley Serenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="1003" end="1019" title="Attack on Pearl Harbor" label="December 7, 1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413725" start="1082" end="1093" title="In the Mood" label="In the Mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163635" start="1107" end="1126" title="Pennsylvania 6-5000 (song)" label="Pennsylvania 6-5000"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659865" start="1213" end="1231" title="A String of Pearls (song)" label="A String of Pearls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907838" start="1245" end="1263" title="Moonlight Cocktail" label="Moonlight Cocktail"/>
<link wikidata="Q752942" start="1277" end="1284" title="At Last" label="At Last"/>
<link wikidata="Q4503673" start="1298" end="1332" title="(I&amp;#x27;ve Got a Gal In) Kalamazoo" label="(I&amp;#x27;ve Got a Gal In) Kalamazoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744664" start="1346" end="1361" title="American Patrol" label="American Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542477" start="1375" end="1390" title="Tuxedo Junction" label="Tuxedo Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366465" start="1404" end="1421" title="Elmer&amp;#x27;s Tune" label="Elmer&amp;#x27;s Tune"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431155" start="1435" end="1451" title="Little Brown Jug (song)" label="Little Brown Jug"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777980" start="1469" end="1481" title="Anvil Chorus" label="Anvil Chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541317" start="1644" end="1700" title="List of Billboard number-one singles of 1942" label="list of &amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; number-one singles of 1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="1783" end="1796" title="Elvis Presley discography" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="1806" end="1817" title="The Beatles discography" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q81180" start="1896" end="1915" title="Grammy Hall of Fame" label="Grammy Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="2200" end="2218" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="US Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344557" start="2451" end="2468" title="missing in action" label="missing in action"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="2518" end="2533" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q954555" start="2903" end="2943" title="Cambridge American Cemetery and Memorial" label="Cambridge American Cemetery and Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q928314" start="3184" end="3201" title="Bronze Star Medal" label="Bronze Star Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q931656" start="3328" end="3342" title="Clarinda, Iowa" label="Clarinda, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q216344" start="4126" end="4153" title="Arlington National Cemetery" label="Arlington National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q958166" start="4514" end="4534" title="Grant City, Missouri" label="Grant City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q989941" start="4766" end="4777" title="Fort Morgan, Colorado" label="Fort Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q111941823" start="4806" end="4829" title="Fort Morgan High School" label="Fort Morgan High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q736674" start="5798" end="5820" title="University of Colorado Boulder" label="University of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q192517" start="5824" end="5831" title="Boulder, Colorado" label="Boulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483553" start="5849" end="5857" title="Sigma Nu" label="Sigma Nu"/>
<link wikidata="Q374236" start="6167" end="6185" title="Schillinger system" label="Schillinger system"/>
<link wikidata="Q510906" start="6191" end="6209" title="Joseph Schillinger" label="Joseph Schillinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q816581" start="6462" end="6473" title="Ben Pollack" label="Ben Pollack"/>
<link wikidata="Q365199" start="6522" end="6534" title="Victor Young" label="Victor Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q504485" start="6675" end="6689" title="Jack Teagarden" label="Jack Teagarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824132" start="6899" end="6927" title="125 Jazz Breaks for Trombone" label="125 Jazz Breaks for Trombone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366246" start="7058" end="7067" title="Room 1411" label="Room 1411"/>
<link wikidata="Q46755" start="7080" end="7093" title="Benny Goodman" label="Benny Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q994175" start="7099" end="7116" title="Brunswick Records" label="Brunswick Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q495464" start="7333" end="7344" title="Red Nichols" label="Red Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623800" start="7479" end="7509" title="Strike Up the Band (musical)" label="&amp;quot;Strike Up the Band&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q15743033" start="7520" end="7530" title="Girl Crazy" label="Girl Crazy"/>
<link wikidata="Q319980" start="7575" end="7585" title="Gene Krupa" label="Gene Krupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470329" start="7706" end="7720" title="Victor Records" label="Victor Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q313529" start="7750" end="7762" title="Tommy Dorsey" label="Tommy Dorsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344139" start="7783" end="7793" title="Joe Venuti" label="Joe Venuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625070" start="7832" end="7844" title="Nat Shilkret" label="Nat Shilkret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757254" start="7930" end="7942" title="OKeh Records" label="OKeh Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q72984" start="8060" end="8071" title="Bing Crosby" label="Bing Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1600338" start="8114" end="8126" title="Red McKenzie" label="Red McKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q217812" start="8276" end="8291" title="Coleman Hawkins" label="Coleman Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q718419" start="8305" end="8320" title="Pee Wee Russell" label="Pee Wee Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282743" start="8332" end="8344" title="Eddie Condon" label="Eddie Condon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661714" start="8456" end="8475" title="the Dorsey Brothers" label="the Dorsey Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769204" start="8608" end="8633" title="Annie&amp;#x27;s Cousin Fanny" label="Annie&amp;#x27;s Cousin Fanny"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263840" start="8647" end="8660" title="Dese Dem Dose" label="Dese Dem Dose"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008550" start="8674" end="8694" title="Harlem Chapel Chimes" label="Harlem Chapel Chimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17026243" start="8712" end="8739" title="Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s Another Day (1935 song)" label="Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s Another Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q953019" start="8861" end="8870" title="Ray Noble (musician)" label="Ray Noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097191" start="9018" end="9034" title="Claude Thornhill" label="Claude Thornhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q711163" start="9036" end="9047" title="Bud Freeman" label="Bud Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645829" start="9053" end="9067" title="Charlie Spivak" label="Charlie Spivak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279080" start="9118" end="9143" title="The Big Broadcast of 1936" label="The Big Broadcast of 1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q229251" start="9275" end="9292" title="Dorothy Dandridge" label="Dorothy Dandridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786868" start="9297" end="9318" title="the Nicholas Brothers" label="the Nicholas Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="9373" end="9394" title="Twentieth Century Fox" label="Twentieth Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9595" end="9608" title="Ritz Ballroom, Bridgeport#Glenn Miller" label="Ritz Ballroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414932" start="9870" end="9885" title="tenor saxophone" label="tenor saxophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8000237" start="10020" end="10035" title="Wilbur Schwartz" label="Wilbur Schwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q885977" start="11115" end="11123" title="Bluebird Records" label="Bluebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="11141" end="11151" title="RCA Victor" label="RCA Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052498" start="11321" end="11344" title="Cedar Grove, New Jersey" label="Cedar Grove, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567832" start="11375" end="11393" title="Starin&amp;#x27;s Glen Island" label="Glen Island Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q704154" start="11441" end="11457" title="Gunther Schuller" label="Gunther Schuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542477" start="11807" end="11822" title="Tuxedo Junction" label="Tuxedo Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q200959" start="11931" end="11944" title="Carnegie Hall" label="Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q470182" start="11964" end="11977" title="Paul Whiteman" label="Paul Whiteman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452550" start="11998" end="12009" title="Fred Waring" label="Fred Waring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070786" start="12155" end="12178" title="Chesterfield cigarettes" label="Chesterfield cigarettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q972398" start="12224" end="12239" title="Andrews Sisters" label="Andrews Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="12327" end="12338" title="gold record" label="gold record"/>
<link wikidata="Q280512" start="12349" end="12370" title="Chattanooga Choo Choo" label="Chattanooga Choo Choo"/>
<link wikidata="Q488352" start="12460" end="12489" title="Tex Beneke" label="Gordon &amp;quot;Tex&amp;quot; Beneke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977603" start="12491" end="12502" title="Paula Kelly (singer)" label="Paula Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751891" start="12511" end="12522" title="Modernaires" label="Modernaires"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765247" start="12567" end="12580" title="Marion Hutton" label="Marion Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q465281" start="12595" end="12605" title="Ray Eberle" label="Ray Eberle"/>
<link wikidata="Q469125" start="12632" end="12641" title="Kay Starr" label="Kay Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356908" start="12643" end="12656" title="Ernie Caceres" label="Ernie Caceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q96755215" start="12658" end="12672" title="Dorothy Claire" label="Dorothy Claire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143467" start="12691" end="12701" title="Pat Friday" label="Pat Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q366244" start="12799" end="12818" title="Sun Valley Serenade" label="Sun Valley Serenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900559" start="12835" end="12850" title="Orchestra Wives" label="Orchestra Wives"/>
<link wikidata="Q274262" start="12863" end="12872" title="Lynn Bari" label="Lynn Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q366244" start="12996" end="13015" title="Sun Valley Serenade" label="Sun Valley Serenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q558933" start="13088" end="13100" title="Milton Berle" label="Milton Berle"/>
<link wikidata="Q229251" start="13106" end="13123" title="Dorothy Dandridge" label="Dorothy Dandridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786868" start="13133" end="13150" title="Nicholas Brothers" label="Nicholas Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q264731" start="13276" end="13287" title="1942 in film" label="1942&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900559" start="13294" end="13309" title="Orchestra Wives" label="Orchestra Wives"/>
<link wikidata="Q454200" start="13327" end="13341" title="Jackie Gleason" label="Jackie Gleason"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453223" start="13572" end="13586" title="Trigger Alpert" label="Trigger Alpert"/>
<link wikidata="Q46755" start="14069" end="14082" title="Benny Goodman" label="Benny Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q107008" start="14087" end="14098" title="Count Basie" label="Count Basie"/>
<link wikidata="Q472673" start="14489" end="14498" title="JazzTimes" label="JazzTimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494861" start="14756" end="14768" title="Gary Giddins" label="Gary Giddins"/>
<link wikidata="Q42985" start="15262" end="15271" title="Ivan Pavlov" label="Pavlovian"/>
<link wikidata="Q718540" start="15496" end="15502" title="Gagaku" label="Gagaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779" start="16026" end="16041" title="Louis Armstrong" label="Louis Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q317128" start="16258" end="16275" title="Jelly Roll Morton" label="Jelly Roll Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="16279" end="16290" title="Tchaikovsky" label="Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q349346" start="16311" end="16326" title="George Shearing" label="George Shearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099684" start="16418" end="16436" title="locked hands style" label="locked hands style"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="16563" end="16576" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q470848" start="16581" end="16590" title="Mel Tormé" label="Mel Tormé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405967" start="16873" end="16893" title="That Old Black Magic" label="That Old Black Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q363698" start="16942" end="16955" title="Johnny Mercer" label="Johnny Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q448644" start="16960" end="16972" title="Harold Arlen" label="Harold Arlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q493004" start="17717" end="17731" title="Buddy DeFranco" label="Buddy DeFranco"/>
<link wikidata="Q19665809" start="17763" end="17785" title="Glenn Miller Orchestra (1946-present)" label="Glenn Miller Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446255" start="18591" end="18621" title="Glenn Miller Orchestra" label="Glenn Miller and his Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q85851884" start="20412" end="20435" title="Seventh Service Command" label="Seventh Service Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q42723391" start="20465" end="20486" title="Army Specialist Corps" label="Army Specialist Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q436102" start="20633" end="20676" title="Henry H. Arnold" label="General Henry Harley &amp;quot;Hap&amp;quot; Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q181917" start="25577" end="25588" title="David Niven" label="David Niven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191294" start="25831" end="25840" title="BBC Radio" label="BBC Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q270921" start="28022" end="28038" title="Eighth Air Force" label="Eighth Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q535726" start="30128" end="30152" title="Noorduyn Norseman" label="Noorduyn UC-64A Norseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q647033" start="30410" end="30415" title="SHAEF" label="SHAEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275644" start="30585" end="30602" title="RAF Twinwood Farm" label="RAF Twinwood Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q208257" start="30609" end="30616" title="Bedford" label="Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q151018" start="30823" end="30842" title="Battle of the Bulge" label="Battle of the Bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105210" start="31065" end="31079" title="Orvil A. Anderson" label="Orvil Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q128633" start="32496" end="32523" title="William Lyon Mackenzie King" label="William Lyon Mackenzie King"/>
<link wikidata="Q954555" start="34320" end="34360" title="Cambridge American Cemetery and Memorial" label="Cambridge American Cemetery and Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q647033" start="35716" end="35721" title="Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force" label="SHAEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="35731" end="35746" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052494" start="35838" end="35851" title="Norman Leyden" label="Norman Leyden"/>
<link wikidata="Q216344" start="36008" end="36035" title="Arlington National Cemetery" label="Arlington National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q14811107" start="36489" end="36493" title="Taps (bugle call)" label="Taps"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048977" start="38404" end="38458" title="the International Group for Historic Aircraft Recovery" label="the International Group for Historic Aircraft Recovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838913" start="39137" end="39147" title="ghost band" label="ghost band"/>
<link wikidata="Q488352" start="39206" end="39216" title="Tex Beneke" label="Tex Beneke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035943" start="39534" end="39549" title="Capitol Theatre (New York City)" label="Capitol Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q185928" start="39664" end="39677" title="Henry Mancini" label="Henry Mancini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4244839" start="39838" end="39857" title="Hollywood Palladium" label="Hollywood Palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q887844" start="40828" end="40839" title="Bob Chester" label="Bob Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129608" start="40980" end="40994" title="Ralph Flanagan" label="Ralph Flanagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687824" start="40996" end="41006" title="Jerry Gray (arranger)" label="Jerry Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971146" start="41012" end="41023" title="Ray Anthony" label="Ray Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q355592" start="41134" end="41146" title="Ray McKinley" label="Ray McKinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q19665809" start="41233" end="41255" title="Glenn Miller Orchestra (1956–present)" label="Glenn Miller Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q364003" start="41276" end="41288" title="Will Bradley" label="Will Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q19665809" start="41388" end="41410" title="Glenn Miller Orchestra (1956–present)" label="Glenn Miller Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889207" start="41867" end="41899" title="the United States Air Force Band" label="the United States Air Force Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q891455" start="42363" end="42385" title="Bolling Air Force Base" label="Bolling Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q161348" start="42582" end="42599" title="Ramstein Air Base" label="Ramstein Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="44305" end="44328" title="Universal-International" label="Universal-International"/>
<link wikidata="Q698962" start="44353" end="44375" title="The Glenn Miller Story" label="The Glenn Miller Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q102462" start="44392" end="44405" title="James Stewart" label="James Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446255" start="44827" end="44849" title="Glenn Miller Orchestra" label="Glenn Miller Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275644" start="46902" end="46919" title="RAF Twinwood Farm" label="RAF Twinwood Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520409" start="46924" end="46945" title="Clapham, Bedfordshire" label="Clapham, Bedfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q954555" start="47056" end="47096" title="Cambridge American Cemetery and Memorial" label="Cambridge American Cemetery and Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q216344" start="47421" end="47448" title="Arlington National Cemetery" label="Arlington National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="48341" end="48363" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687824" start="48945" end="48955" title="Jerry Gray (arranger)" label="Jerry Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691431" start="49032" end="49043" title="Joe Garland" label="Joe Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q727693" start="49060" end="49072" title="Eddie Durham" label="Eddie Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542477" start="49084" end="49099" title="Tuxedo Junction (song)" label="Tuxedo Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q355481" start="49129" end="49144" title="Erskine Hawkins" label="Erskine Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q862093" start="49383" end="49395" title="Bill Finegan" label="Bill Finegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q713273" start="49434" end="49443" title="Billy May" label="Billy May"/>
<link wikidata="Q972398" start="49540" end="49555" title="Andrews Sisters" label="Andrews Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7924906" start="49565" end="49575" title="Vic Schoen" label="Vic Schoen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052494" start="49613" end="49626" title="Norman Leyden" label="Norman Leyden"/>
<link wikidata="Q19902667" start="49794" end="49845" title="Glenn Miller&amp;#x27;s Method for Orchestral Arranging" label="Glenn Miller&amp;#x27;s Method for Orchestral Arranging"/>
<link wikidata="Q81180" start="50453" end="50472" title="Grammy Hall of Fame Award" label="Grammy Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q693726" start="50660" end="50698" title="Declared death in absentia" label="Declared death &amp;quot;in absentia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q935843" start="50701" end="50734" title="Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award" label="Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50737" end="50756" title="Kalamazoo, Michigan#Popular culture" label="Kalamazoo, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q65070295" start="50759" end="50809" title="List of people who disappeared mysteriously at sea" label="List of people who disappeared mysteriously at sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642019" start="50812" end="50835" title="List of swing musicians" label="List of swing musicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q12411681" start="50838" end="50867" title="Role of music in World War II" label="Role of music in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q736674" start="52443" end="52473" title="University of Colorado Boulder" label="University of Colorado Boulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q42800691" start="52507" end="52552" title="Discography of American Historical Recordings" label="Discography of American Historical Recordings"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="52972" end="52975" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q15036166" start="52989" end="53007" title="History Detectives" label="History Detectives"/>
</links>
</doc>
